COMPLETE PHILOSOPHICAL AND
  THEOLOGICAL TREATISES
            of
  ANSELM of CANTERBURY



          Translated
              by
     JASPER HOPKINS
           and
   HERBERT RICHARDSON




  The Arthur J. Banning Press
          Minneapolis
      In the notes to the translations the numbering of the Psalms
      accords with the Douay version and, in parentheses, with the
      King James (Authorized) version. A reference such as “S II,
      264:18” indicates “F. S. Schmitt’s edition of the Latin texts, Vol.
      II, p. 264, line 18.” This online translation of the Proslogion is
      taken from A New, Interpretive Translation of St. Anselm’s Monolo-
      gion and Proslogion (Minneapolis: Banning Press, 1986). The
      Latin text, collated by Hopkins and published in the foregoing
      work, is not here reprinted.




Library of Congress Control Number: 00-133229

ISBN 0-938060-37-6

Printed in the United States of America

Copyright © 2000 by The Arthur J. Banning Press, Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55402. All rights reserved.
                         PROSLOGION

                             PREFACE 1

Upon the insistent adjurations of certain brothers I wrote a work—
as an example of meditating about the rational basis of faith—in
the role of someone who by arguing silently with himself investi-
gates what he does not yet know. Afterwards, considering this
[work] to be composed of a chain of many arguments, I began to
ask myself whether perhaps a single consideration could be found
which would require nothing other than itself for proving itself
and which would suffice by itself to demonstrate (1) that God truly
[i.e., really] exists and (2) that He is the Supreme Good (needing
no one else, yet needed by all [else] in order to exist and to fare
well) and whatever [else] we believe about the Divine Substance.
I often and eagerly directed my thinking to this [goal]. At times
what I was in quest of seemed to me to be apprehensible; at times
it completely eluded the acute gaze of my mind. At last, despair-
ing, I wanted to desist, as though from pursuit of a thing which
was not possible to be found. But just when I wanted completely
to exclude from myself this thinking—lest by occupying my mind
in vain, it would keep [me] from other [projects] in which I could
make headway—just then it began more and more to force itself
insistently upon me, unwilling and resisting [as I was]. Then one
day when I was tired as a result of vigorously resisting its en-
treaties, what I had despaired of [finding] appeared in my strife-
torn mind in such way that I eagerly embraced the [line-of-]think-
ing which I, as one who was anxious, had been warding off. Sup-
posing, then, that if what I rejoiced to have discovered were writ-
ten down it would please its readers, I wrote the following work
on this [subject], and on various others, in the role of someone en-
deavoring to elevate his mind toward contemplating God and in
the role of someone seeking to understand what he believes. And
I deemed neither this present [writing] nor the one mentioned
above to be worthy to be called a treatise or to be something to
which the name of the author should be prefixed; and, neverthe-
less, I thought that they should not be circulated without titles, by
1
The Proslogion was composed at the Monastery of Bec around 1077-1078.

                                  88
                          Proslogion Preface                        89


which in some way they would issue to anyone into whose hands
they came an invitation to read them. Hence, I gave a title to each,
so that the first was called An Example of Meditating about the Ra-
tional Basis of Faith and the second was called Faith Seeking Un-
derstanding. But after several people had already copied both
[works] under these [respective] titles, I was urged by several to
prefix my name to these [writings—urged] especially by Hugh, the
reverend archbishop of Lyon, who was serving as apostolic legate
in Gaul and who on the basis of his apostolic authority directed
me to do this. In order for the [affixing of my name] to be done
more fittingly, I retitled the former [writing] Monologion, i.e., a so-
liloquy, and the present [writing] Proslogion, i.e., an address.

                        CHAPTER-TITLES

1. Arousal of the mind for contemplating God.
2. God truly [i.e., really] exists.
3. [God] cannot be thought not to exist.
4. How the Fool said in his heart that which cannot be thought.
5. God is whatever it is better to be than not to be. Alone exist-
   ing through Himself, He makes all other things from nothing.
6. How God is able to perceive even though He is not something
   corporeal.
7. How He is omnipotent even though He cannot do many things.
8. How He is merciful and impassible.
9. How He who is completely and supremely just spares those who
   are evil. He is justly merciful to them.
10. How He justly punishes and justly spares those who are evil.
11. How “all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth,” and yet,
    “the Lord is just in all His ways.”
12. God is the life by which He lives, and similarly for similar
    [attributes].
13. How He alone is unlimited and eternal, although other spir-
    its are [also] unlimited and eternal.
14. How and why God is both seen and not seen by those who
    seek Him.
15. He is greater than can be thought.
16. This is the inaccessible light in which He dwells.
17. Harmony, fragrance, succulence, softness, and beauty are
90                               Proslogion 1


    present in God in their own ineffable manner.
18. There are no parts in God or in the eternity which He is.
19. He is not in place or in time; but all things are in Him.
20. He is before and beyond all things—even eternal things.
21. Whether this [eternity] is one aeon or more than one.
22 He alone is what He is and who He is.
23. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are equally this
    [supreme] good. It is the one necessary [Being], which is every
    good, complete good, and the only good.
24. A conjecture about what kind of good this is and about how
    great it is.
25. The kinds and the quantity of goods for those who enjoy this
    [Good].
26. Whether this is the full joy which the Lord promises.

                          PROSLOGION

                         CHAPTER ONE
           Arousal of the mind for contemplating God.
Come now, insignificant man, leave behind for a time your pre-
occupations; seclude yourself for a while from your disquieting
thoughts. Turn aside now from heavy cares, and set aside your
wearisome tasks. Make time for God, and rest a while in Him.
Enter into the inner chamber of your mind; shut out everything
except God and what is of aid to you in seeking Him; after clos-
ing the chamber door, seek Him out.1 Speak now, my whole heart;
speak now to God: I seek Your countenance; Your countenance, 0
Lord, do I seek.2 So come now, Lord my God, teach my heart
where and how to seek You, where and how to find You. If You
are not here, 0 Lord, where shall I seek You who are absent? But
if You are everywhere, why do I not behold You as present? But
surely You dwell in light inaccessible.3 Yet, where is light inacces-
sible? Or how shall I approach unto light inaccessible? Or who will
lead me to and into this [light] so that in it I may behold You?
Furthermore, by what signs, by what facial appearance shall I seek
You? Never have I seen You, 0 Lord my God; I am not acquaint-
ed with Your face. What shall this Your distant exile do? What shall
1                                 2                      3
See Matthew 6:6. Isaiah 26:20.     Psalms 26:8 (27:8).   I Timothy 6:16.
                              Proslogion 1                               91


he do, 0 most exalted Lord? What shall Your servant do, an-
guished out of love for You and cast far away from Your face? 1He
pants to see You, but Your face is too far removed from him. He
desires to approach You, but Your dwelling place is inaccessible.
He desires to find You but does not know Your abode. He longs
to seek You but does not know Your countenance. 0 Lord, You are
my God, and You are my Lord; yet, never have I seen You. You
have created me and created me anew and have bestowed upon
me whatever goods I have; but I am not yet acquainted with You.
Indeed, I was made for seeing You; but not yet have I done that
for which I was made.
   0 the unhappy fate of man when he lost that [end] for which
he was made! 0 that hard and ominous fall! Alas, what he lost and
what he found, what vanished and what remained! He lost the hap-
piness for which he was made and found an unhappiness for which
he was not made. That without which nothing is happy vanished,
and there remained what through itself is only unhappy. Man then
ate the bread-of-angels 2 for which he now hungers; and now he
eats the bread-of-sorrows,3 which then he did not know. Alas, the
common mourning of men, the universal lament of the sons of
Adam! Adam burped with satiety; we sigh with hunger. He
abounded; we go begging. He happily possessed and unhappily de-
serted; we unhappily lack and unhappily desire, while, alas, re-
maining empty. Why did he not, when easily able, keep for us that
of which we were so gravely deprived? Why did he block off from
us the light and enshroud us in darkness? Why did he take away
from us life and inf lict death? Wretched [creatures that we are],
expelled from that home, impelled to this one!, cast down from
that abode, sunken to this one! [We have been banished] from our
homeland into exile, from the vision of God into our own blind-
ness, from the delight of immortality into the bitterness and hor-
ror of death. 0 miserable transformation from such great good
into such great evil! What a grievous loss, a heavy sorrow, an un-
mitigated plight!
   But, alas, unhappy me, one of the other unhappy sons of Eve
who are far removed from God: what did I set out to do?, what
have I achieved? For what was I striving?, where have I arrived?

1                       2                       3
Psalms 50:13 (51:11).   Psalms 77:25 (78:25).   Psalms 126: 2 (127:2).

                                   91
92                            Proslogion 1


To what was I aspiring?, for what do I sigh? I sought after good
things1 and, behold, [here is] turmoil.2 I was striving unto God but
collided with myself. I was seeking rest in my inner recesses but
found tribulation and grief 3 in my inmost being. I wanted to laugh
from joy of mind but am constrained to cry out from groaning
of heart.4 I hoped for gladness, but, lo, as a result, my sighs in-
crease! 0 Lord, how long? How long, 0 Lord, will You forget us?
How long will You turn away Your face from us? 5 When will You
look upon us and hear us? When will You enlighten our eyes6 and
show us Your face?7 When will You restore Yourself to us? Look
upon us, 0 Lord; hear us, enlighten us, reveal Yourself unto us.
Restore unto us Yourself—without whom we fare so badly—so that
we may fare well. Have compassion upon the efforts and attempts
which we, who can do nothing without You, direct toward You. [As]
You summon us, [so] aid us,8 I beseech [You], 0 Lord, that I may
not despair with sighing but may revive in hoping. I beseech You,
0 Lord: my heart is made bitter by its own desolation; sweeten it
by Your consolation. I beseech You, 0 Lord, that having begun in
hunger to seek You, I may not finish without partaking of You. I
set out famished; let me not return still unfed. I came as one who
is poor to one who is rich, as one who is unhappy to one who is
merciful; let me not return empty and spurned. And if before I
eat I sigh,9 grant at least after the sighs that which I may eat. 0
Lord, bent over [as I am] I can look only downwards; straighten
me so that I can look upwards. Having mounted above my head,
my iniquities cover me over; and as a heavy burden they weigh
me down.10 Deliver me [from them]; unburden me, so that the
abyss of iniquities does not engulf me.11 Permit me, at least from
afar or from the deep, to look upwards toward Your light. Teach
me to seek You, and reveal Yourself to me as I seek; for unless
You teach [me] I cannot seek You, and unless You reveal Yourself
I cannot find You. Let me seek You in desiring You; let me desire
You in seeking You. Let me find [You] in loving [You]; let me love
[You] in finding [You].
   0 Lord, I acknowledge and give thanks that You created in me
1
  Psalms 121:9 (122:9). 2Jeremiah 14:19. 3Psalms 114:3 (116:3). 4Psalms
37:9 (38:8). 5Psalms 6:4 & 12:1 (6:3 & 13:1). 6Psalms 12:4 (13:3). 7Psalms
79:4 & 8 (80:3 & 7). 8Psalms 78:9 (79:9). 9Job 3:24. 10Psalms 37:5 (38:4).
11
   Psalms 68:16 (69:15).
                             Proslogion 1 & 2                                93


Your image so that I may remember, contemplate, and love You.
But [this image] has been so effaced by the abrasion of trans-
gressions, so hidden from sight by the dark billows of sins, that un-
less You renew and refashion it, it cannot do what it was created
to do. 0 Lord, I do not attempt to gain access to Your loftiness,
because I do not at all consider my intellect to be equal to this
[task]. But I yearn to understand some measure of Your truth,
which my heart believes and loves. For I do not seek to understand
in order to believe, but I believe in order to understand. For I be-
lieve even this: that unless I believe, I shall not understand.1

                           CHAPTER TWO
                      God truly [i.e., really] exists.
Therefore, 0 Lord, You who give understanding to faith, grant me
to understand—to the degree You know to be advantageous—that
You exist, as we believe, and that You are what we believe [You to
be]. Indeed, we believe You to be something than which nothing
greater can be thought. Or is there, then, no such nature [as You],
for the Fool has said in his heart that God does not exist? 2 But
surely when this very same Fool hears my words “something than
which nothing greater can be thought,” he understands what he
hears. And what he understands is in his understanding, even if
he does not understand [i.e., judge] it to exist. For that a thing is
in the understanding is distinct from understanding that [this]
thing exists. For example, when a painter envisions what he is
about to paint: he indeed has in his understanding that which he
has not yet made, but he does not yet understand that it exists. But
after he has painted [it]: he has in his understanding that which
he has made, and he understands that it exists. So even the Fool
is convinced that something than which nothing greater can be
thought is at least in his understanding; for when he hears of this
[being], he understands [what he hears], and whatever is under-
stood is in the understanding. But surely that than which a greater
cannot be thought cannot be only in the understanding. For if it
were only in the understanding, it could be thought to exist also
in reality—something which is greater [than existing only in the
1                                                         2
  Isaiah 7:9 (Old Latin translation of the Septuagint).       Psalms 13:1 & 52:1
(14:1 & 53:1).
94                           Proslogion 2 - 4


understanding]. Therefore, if that than which a greater cannot be
thought were only in the understanding, then that than which a
greater cannot be thought would be that than which a greater can
be thought! But surely this [conclusion] is impossible. Hence, with-
out doubt, something than which a greater cannot be thought ex-
ists both in the understanding and in reality.

                        CHAPTER THREE
                [God] cannot be thought not to exist.
Assuredly, this [being] exists so truly [i.e., really] that it cannot
even be thought not to exist. For there can be thought to exist
something which cannot be thought not to exist; and this thing is
greater than that which can be thought not to exist. Therefore, if
that than which a greater cannot be thought could be thought not
to exist, then that than which a greater cannot be thought would
not be that than which a greater cannot be thought—[a conse-
quence] which is contradictory. Hence, something than which a
greater cannot be thought exists so truly that it cannot even be
thought not to exist. And You are this [being], 0 Lord our God.
Therefore, 0 Lord my God, You exist so truly that You cannot even
be thought not to exist. And this is rightly the case. For if any
mind could think of something better than You, the creature
would rise above the Creator and would sit in judgment over the
Creator—something which is utterly absurd. Indeed, except for
You alone, whatever else exists can be thought not to exist. There-
fore, You alone exist most truly of all and thus most greatly of all;
for whatever else exists does not exist as truly [as do You] and thus
exists less greatly [than do You]. Since, then, it is so readily clear
to a rational mind that You exist most greatly of all, why did the
Fool say in his heart that God does not exist?1—why [indeed] ex-
cept because [he is] foolish and a fool!

                         CHAPTER FOUR
    How the Fool said in his heart that which cannot be thought.
Yet, since to speak in one's heart and to think are the same thing,
how did [the Fool] say in his heart that which he was unable to think,

1
 Psalms 13:1 & 52:1 (14:1 & 53:1).
                          Proslogion 4 & 5                          95


or how was he unable to think that which he did say in his heart?
Now, if he truly [i.e., really]—rather, since he truly—both thought
[what he did] because he said [it] in his heart and did not say [it] in
his heart because he was unable to think [it], then it is not the case
that something is said in the heart, or is thought, in only one way.
For in one way a thing is thought when the word signifying it is
thought, and in another way [it is thought] when that which the
thing is is understood. Thus, in the first way but not at all in the
second, God can be thought not to exist. Indeed, no one who un-
derstands that which God is can think that God does not exist, even
though he says these words [viz., “God does not exist”] in his heart
either without any signification or with some strange signification.
For God is that than which a greater cannot be thought. Anyone
who rightly understands this, surely understands that that [than
which a greater cannot be thought] exists in such way that it can-
not even conceivably not exist. Therefore, anyone who understands
that God is such [a being] cannot think that He does not exist.
   Thanks to You, good Lord, thanks to You—because what at first
I believed through Your giving, now by Your enlightening I un-
derstand to such an extent that [even] if I did not want to believe
that You exist, I could not fail to understand [that You exist].

                         CHAPTER FIVE
              God is whatever it is better to be than
            not to be. Alone existing through Himself,
             He makes all other things from nothing.
What, then, are You, 0 Lord God, than whom nothing greater can
be thought? What indeed are You except that which—as highest of
all things, alone existing through Himself—made all other things
from nothing? For whatever is not this is less great than can be
thought. But this [less greatness] cannot be thought of You. There-
fore, what good is lacking to the Supreme Good, through whom
every good exists? Consequently, You are just, truthful, blessed,
and whatever it is better to be than not to be. For it is better to
be just than not-just, blessed than not-blessed.

                        CHAPTER SIX
                   How God is able to perceive
           even though He is not something corporeal.
96                        Proslogion 6 & 7


Now, since to be able to perceive and to be omnipotent, merciful,
and impassible is better than not to be [any of these], how are You
able to perceive if You are not something corporeal, or how are
You omnipotent if You cannot do all things, or how are You both
merciful and impassible? For if only corporeal things are able to
perceive (inasmuch as the senses have to do with a body and are
in a body), how are You able to perceive, since You are not some-
thing corporeal but are Supreme Spirit, which is better than what
is corporeal? But if perceiving is only knowing or only for the sake
of knowing (for anyone who perceives knows in accordance with
the characteristic capabilities of the respective senses—e.g., colors
[are known] through sight, f lavors through taste), then whatever
in some way knows is not unsuitably said in some way to perceive.
Therefore, 0 Lord, even though You are not something corpore-
al, truly You are supremely able to perceive in the sense that You
know supremely all things—not [in the sense that You know] in
the way that an animal does, by means of bodily senses.

                     CHAPTER SEVEN
               How He is omnipotent even though
                  He cannot do many things.
But how are You also omnipotent if You cannot do all things? Or
how can You do all things if You are not able to be corrupted or
to tell a lie or to make what is true be false—for example, [to
make] what has already happened not to have happened—and,
likewise, many [other] things? Or is the “ability” to do these things
not power but lack of power? For anyone who is able to do these
things is able to do what is disadvantageous to himself and what
he ought not to do. And the more he is able to do these things,
the more powerful are adversity and perversity over him and the
less powerful he is against them. Therefore, anyone who in this
way is able, is able not by a power but by a lack of power. For it
is not the case that he is said to be able because he himself is able;
rather, [he is said to be able] because his own lack of power caus-
es something else to be powerful over him—or [for some other
reason coinciding] with some other way of speaking (even as we
say many things improperly—for example, when we substitute “to
be” for “not to be” and substitute “to do” for “not to do” or for
                          Proslogion 7 - 9                        97


“to do nothing”). For we often say to someone who denies that
something is the case, “It's as you say [it] is,” although we would
say more properly, “It's not, as you say it's not.” Likewise, we say,
“This man is sitting even as that man is [also] doing” or “ This man
is resting even as that man is [also] doing”—although sitting is
not doing anything and resting is doing nothing. So, then, when
someone is said to have the power to do or to experience what is
not advantageous to himself or what he ought not [to do or to ex-
perience], by “power” a powerlessness is understood. For the more
he has the [alleged] ability, the more powerful are adversity and
perversity over him and the more powerless he is against them.
Therefore, 0 Lord God, You are more truly omnipotent because
You are not at all powerful through powerlessness and because
nothing is powerful over You.

                     CHAPTER EIGHT
               How He is merciful and impassible.
But how are you both merciful and impassible? For if You are im-
passible You have no compassion. And if You do not have com-
passion, You do not have a heart sorrowful out of compassion for
the wretched—the very thing which being merciful is. And if You
are not merciful, from where is there such great consolation for
the wretched? How, then, are You and are You not merciful, 0
Lord, except because You are merciful from our point of view but
are not merciful in Yourself ? Indeed, You are [merciful] accord-
ing to our experience but are not [merciful] according to Your ex-
perience. For when You behold us in our wretched condition, we
experience the effect of Your mercy; but You do not experience
any emotion. And so, You are merciful because You save [us]
wretched [creatures] and spare [us] who have sinned against You;
and You are not merciful, because You do not experience com-
passion for wretchedness.

                      CHAPTER NINE
         How He who is completely and supremely just
    spares those who are evil. He is justly merciful to them.
But how is it that You spare those who are evil if You are com-
pletely and supremely just? For how is it that He who is completely
98                         Proslogion 9


and supremely just does something which is not just? Or what jus-
tice is there in giving eternal life to one deserving eternal death?
Why, then, good God—good to those who are good and to those
who are evil—why do You save those who are evil, if [to do] this
is not just and if You do not do anything that is not just? Inas-
much as Your goodness is incomprehensible, is this [reason] hid-
den in the inaccessible light in which You dwell? 1 Truly, in the
deepest and inmost seat of Your goodness is hidden a fount from
which the stream of Your mercy f lows. For although You are com-
pletely and supremely just, nevertheless because You are com-
pletely and supremely good You are also beneficent to those who
are evil. For You would be less good if You were beneficent to none
of those who are evil. For someone who is good both to those who
are good and to those who are evil is better than someone who is
good only to those who are good. And someone who is good by
virtue of both punishing and sparing those who are evil is better
than someone who is good by virtue merely of punishing [them].
Therefore, You are merciful because You are completely and
supremely good. Now, although we do perhaps discern why You
reward with good things those who are good and with evil things
those who are evil, surely we are completely baff led as to why You,
who are completely just and in need of no one else, give good
things to those who are evil and guilty in Your sight. 0 God, the
depth of Your goodness! We see why You are merciful, and yet we
do not fully see why. We see from where the stream [of Your
mercy] f lows, and yet we do not see the Fount itself from which
it f lows. For that You are gracious to those who sin against You
comes from the abundance of Your goodness; and in the depth
of Your goodness lies hidden the reason why You are this. For al-
though out of goodness You reward with good things those who
are good and with evil things those who are evil, the principle of
justice seems to require this. But when You give good things to
those who are evil, we know that He who is supremely good willed
to do this, but we wonder why He who is supremely just was able
to will this.
    0 mercy, from what rich sweetness and sweet richness You f low
forth unto us! 0 immensity of divine goodness, with what affection

1
I Timothy 6:16.
                             Proslogion 9                           99


sinners ought to love You! For You save those-who-are-just, since
justice accompanies [them]; but You free those-who-are-evil, even
though justice condemns [them]. Those who are just [You save]
through the aid of their merits; those who are evil [You free] in
spite of their demerits. [You save] the just by taking account of
the good things, which You have given them; [You free] those-who-
are-evil by overlooking the evil things, which You hate. 0 immense
goodness, which so exceeds all understanding, let there come
upon me that mercy which proceeds from Your so great richness!
Let there f low into me [the mercy] which f lows out of You! Spare
[me] out of mercy; do not punish [me] out of justice! For although
it is difficult to understand how Your mercy is compatible with
Your justice, it is necessary to believe that what f lows forth from
goodness is not at all opposed to justice. (Without justice, good-
ness is not goodness—indeed, [goodness] is truly concordant with
justice.) Assuredly, if you are merciful because You are supremely
good, and if You are supremely good only because You are
supremely just, then truly You are merciful because You are
supremely just. Help me, 0 just and merciful God, whose light I
seek; help me to understand what I am saying. Truly, then, You
are merciful because You are just.
    Is Your mercy, then, begotten from Your justice? Do You, then,
spare evil ones out of justice? If so, 0 Lord, if so, then teach me
how so. Is it because it is just for You to be so good that You can-
not be understood to be any better and [because it is just for You]
to work so powerfully that You cannot be thought [to work] more
powerfully? For what is more just than this? But surely this would
not be the case if You were good only by way of retributing and
not [also] by way of sparing—and if You were to make good men
only from those who are not good instead of also from those who
are evil. And so, in this way, it is just that You spare those who
are evil and that You make good men from evil ones. Finally, that
which is not done justly ought not to be done; and what ought
not to be done is done unjustly. Therefore, if You were not justly
merciful to those who are evil, it would be the case that You ought
not to be merciful [to them]; and if You ought not to be merciful,
then You are unjustly merciful. Now, if it is blasphemous to say
this, then it is right to believe that You are justly merciful to those
who are evil.
100                      Proslogion 10 & 11


                        CHAPTER TEN
                How He justly punishes and justly
                   spares those who are evil.
Yet, it is also just that You punish those who are evil. For what is
more just than for those who are good to receive good things and
for those who are evil to receive bad things? But, then, how is it
just for You to punish those who are evil and likewise just for You
to spare them? Do You justly punish them in one respect and just-
ly spare them in another? For when You punish those who are evil,
it is just [for You to do so] because [punishment] besuits their mer-
its. But when You spare them, it is just [for You to do so], not be-
cause [sparing them] besuits their merits but because it befits Your
goodness. For in sparing them, You are just in Yourself but are not
just from our viewpoint, even as You are merciful from our view-
point but are not merciful in Yourself. For in saving us whom You
could justly damn, You are just not because You requite us as we
deserve but because You do what befits You as supremely good,
even as You are merciful not because You experience any emotion
but because we experience the effect [of Your mercy]. So, then,
without inconsistency, You both punish justly and spare justly.

                     CHAPTER ELEVEN
      How “all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth,”
          and yet, “the Lord is just in all His ways.”
But, 0 Lord, is it not also just, in accordance with Yourself, for
You to punish those who are evil? To be sure, it is just that You
be so just that You cannot be thought to be more just. But You
would not at all be this if You rewarded only those who are good
with good things but not those who are evil with bad things. For
someone who rewards according to their merits both those who
are good and those who are evil is more just than someone who
rewards only those who are good. Thus, 0 just and beneficent God,
in accordance with Yourself it is just both when You punish and
when You spare. Truly, then, "all the ways of the Lord are mercy
and truth,” and yet, “the Lord is just in all His ways.”1 And, as-
suredly, [these two statements hold true] without inconsistency, be-
cause it is not just that those whom You will to punish should be
1
Psalms 24:10 & 144:17 (25:10 & 145:17).
                         Proslogion 11 - 13                        101


saved nor just that those whom You will to spare should be con-
demned. For only what You will is just, and only what You do not
will is not just. So, then, Your mercy is begotten from Your jus-
tice, because it is just for You to be good to such an extent that
You are good even in sparing. And perhaps this is why He who is
supremely just can will good things for those who are evil. But if
we can somehow grasp why You can will to save those who are evil,
surely we cannot at all comprehend why from among those who
are similarly evil You save some and not others because of Your
supreme goodness, and condemn some and not others because of
Your supreme justice.
   So, then, truly You are able to perceive and are omnipotent,
merciful, and impassible—as well as living, wise, good, blessed,
eternal, and what-ever it is better to be than not to be.

                      CHAPTER TWELVE
                God is the life by which He lives,
               and similarly for similar [attributes].
But, surely, whatever You are You are through no other than
through Yourself. Therefore, You are the life by which You live,
the wisdom by which You are wise, the goodness by which You are
good both to those who are good and to those who are evil, and
similarly for similar [attributes].

                     CHAPTER THIRTEEN
        How He alone is unlimited and eternal, although
         other spirits are [also] unlimited and eternal.
Now, anything which is at all confined by place or by time is less
great than that which is not at all subject to the law of place or of
time. Therefore, since it is not the case that anything is greater than
You, no place or time restricts You, but You exist everywhere and
always. Because this can be said of You alone, You alone are un-
limited and eternal. How, then, are other spirits, as well, said to
be unlimited and eternal? To be sure, You alone are eternal because
You alone of all things do not begin to exist, even as You do not
cease to exist. Yet, how are You alone unlimited? Is a created spir-
it, although unlimited in comparison with something corporeal,
limited in comparison with You? Assuredly, that which while exist-
102                        Proslogion 13 & 14


ing somewhere as a whole is not able at the same time to exist else-
where is limited in every respect—something which is seen to be
the case with corporeal objects only. And what exists at once every-
where as a whole is unlimited—something which is understood to
be the case with You alone. But that which while existing some-
where as a whole is able at the same time to exist as a whole else-
where, but not everywhere, is both limited and unlimited—some-
thing which is known to be the case with created spirits. For ex-
ample, if the soul were not present as a whole in each of the mem-
bers of its body, the soul as a whole would not experience feeling
in each of them. Therefore, 0 Lord, You are uniquely unlimited and
eternal; and yet, other spirits are also unlimited and eternal.

                       CHAPTER FOURTEEN
                 How and why God is both seen and
                  not seen by those who seek Him.
My soul, have you found that which You were seeking? You were
seeking God, and you have found that He is something highest of
all—than which nothing better can be thought. [And you have
found that] this [Being] is life itself, light, wisdom, goodness, eter-
nal blessedness, and blessed eternity and that this [Being] exists
everywhere and always. Now, if you have not found your God, then
how is He this [Being] which you have found and which with such
certain truth and true certainty you have understood Him to be?
On the other hand, if you have found [Him], then why is it that
you do not experience what you have found? 0 Lord God, why
does my soul not experience You if it has found You? Has it not
found Him whom it has found to be light and truth? For how has
it understood this except by seeing light and truth? Was it able to
understand anything at all about You except through Your light
and Your truth? 1 Therefore, if [my soul] saw light and truth, it
saw You. If it did not see You, it did not see light and truth. Or
[is it rather the case that] light and truth are what it saw but [that]
it has not yet seen You, because it saw You to some extent but did
not see You as You are? 2
    0 Lord my God, my Creator and Renewer, tell my yearning soul

1                      2
 Psalms 42:3 (43:3).   See I John 3:2.
                            Proslogion 14 - 16                     103


what else You are other than what it has seen, so that it may see
clearly what it longs [to see. My soul] strains to see more; but be-
yond what it has already seen it sees only darkness. Or better, it
does not see darkness, which is not present in You;1 rather, it sees
that it can see no farther because of its own darkness. Why is this,
0 Lord? Why is this? Is the eye of the soul darkened as a result of
its own weakness, or is it dazzled by Your brilliance? Surely, the
soul's eye is both darkened within itself and dazzled by You. Sure-
ly, it is darkened because of its own shortness of vision and is over-
whelmed by Your immensity; truly, it is restricted because of its
own narrowness and is overcome by Your vastness. For how great
that Light is from which shines everything true that illumines the
rational mind! How vast that Truth is in which resides everything
that is true and outside of which there is only nothing and what is
false! How immense [that Truth] is which beholds in one spectrum
all created things and beholds by whom, through whom, and in
what manner [all things] were created from nothing! What purity,
what simplicity, what assurance and splendor are present there!
Surely, [these] surpass what can be understood by any creature.

                          CHAPTER FIFTEEN
                   He is greater than can be thought.
Therefore, 0 Lord, not only are You that than which a greater can-
not be thought, but You are also something greater than can be
thought. For since there can be thought to exist something of this
kind, if You were not this [Being] then something greater than You
could be thought—[a consequence] which is impossible.

                       CHAPTER SIXTEEN
         This is the inaccessible light in which He dwells.
Truly, 0 Lord, this is the inaccessible light in which You dwell.2 For,
truly, there is not anything else which can penetrate this [light],
so that it sees You therein. Truly, the reason I cannot stand to look
at this [light] is that it is too resplendent for me. Nevertheless,
whatever I see I see by means of this [light]—even as a frail eye
sees what it does by means of sunlight, which it cannot stand to

1                  2
 See I John 1:5.    I Timothy 6:16.
104                       Proslogion 16 - 18


look at in the sun itself. My understanding is not able to com-
prehend this light, which shines forth too brilliantly. [My under-
standing] does not grasp it; and the eye of my soul cannot bear
to gaze at length upon it. [My soul's eye] is dazzled by its splen-
dor, overcome by its vastness, overwhelmed by its immensity, con-
founded by its capacity. 0 supreme and inaccessible Light, 0 com-
plete and blessed Truth, how distant You are from me, who am
so near for You! How far removed You are from my sight, though
I am so present to Yours! You are everywhere present as a whole;
and yet, I do not see You. In You I move, and in You I exist;1 and
yet, I cannot approach You. You are within me and round about
me; and yet, I do not experience You.

                    CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
      Harmony, fragrance, succulence, softness, and beauty
       are present in God in their own ineffable manner.
Amidst Your blessedness and light, 0 Lord, You are still hidden
from my soul. Therefore, my soul still dwells in darkness and in
its own unhappiness. For it looks in all directions but does not
see Your beauty. It listens but does not hear Your harmony. It fills
its nostrils but does not smell Your fragrance. It tastes but does
not savor Your succulence. It feels but does not detect Your soft-
ness. For in Your ineffable manner, 0 Lord God, You have these
[features] within You; and You have bestowed them, in their own
perceptible manner, upon the things created by You. But the sens-
es of my soul have been stiffened and deadened and impaired by
the oldtime infirmity of sin.

                    CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
    There are no parts in God or in the eternity which He is.
And, behold, once again confusion! 2 Behold, once again sorrow
and grief beset me as I seek joy and gladness.3 My soul hoped for
fullness; and, lo, once again it is overwhelmed with need. I de-
sired to eat; and, lo, the more I hunger! I tried to mount upward
to the divine light, but I lapsed downward into my own darkness.
Indeed, not only did I fall into darkness but I feel enshrouded by

1             2                 3
Acts 17:28.   Jeremiah 14:19.   See Psalms 50:10 (51:8).
                             Proslogion 18                          105


it. I fell before my mother conceived me.1 Surely, I was conceived
in darkness and born surrounded by it. Surely, once long ago we
all fell in him 2 in whom we all sinned. In him (who easily pos-
sessed but evilly lost for himself and for us) we all lost that which
when we desire we do not know how to seek, when we seek we do
not find, when we find is not what we are seeking. Help me, 0
Lord, because of Your goodness.3 “I have sought Your counte-
nance; Your countenance, 0 Lord, will I seek. Do not turn Your
face from me.” 4 Raise me out of myself and unto You. Cleanse,
heal, focus, illumine 5 the eye of my mind so that it may behold
You.6 Let my soul muster its strength and with all its understand-
ing strive once more unto You, 0 Lord. What are You, 0 Lord?
    What are You? What shall my heart understand You to be? Sure-
ly, You are life, wisdom, truth, goodness, blessedness, eternity—
You are every true good. These are many things; and my limited
understanding cannot in a single view behold so many at one time
in order to delight in all together. How is it, then, 0 Lord, that
You are all these things? Are they Your parts, or, instead, is each
one of them the whole of what You are? For whatever is composed
of parts is not absolutely one but is in a way many and is differ-
ent from itself and can be divided actually or conceivably (intel-
lectu). But these [consequences] are foreign to You, than whom
nothing better can be thought. Hence, there are no parts in You,
0 Lord. Nor are You more than one thing. Rather, You are some-
thing so one and the same with Yourself that in no respect are
You dissimilar to Yourself. Indeed, You are Oneness itself, divisi-
ble in no respect (nullo intellectu). Therefore, life and wisdom and
the other [characteristics] are not parts of You but are all one
thing; and each one of them is the whole of what You are and the
whole of what all the others are. Thus, since neither You nor the
eternity which You are has any parts, nowhere and never is there
a part of You or of Your eternity; rather, You exist everywhere as
a whole, and Your eternity exists always as a whole.

                     CHAPTER NINETEEN
     He is not in place or in time; but all things are in Him.

1
 Psalms 50:7 (51:5). 2Romans 5:12. 3See Psalms 24:7 (25:7).   4
                                                              Psalms 26:9
(27:9). 5Psalms 12:4 (13:3). 6Canticle of Canticles 6:12.
106                     Proslogion 19 & 20


But if through Your eternity You were, You are, and You will be,
and if (1) being past is not being future and (2) being present
is not being past or being future, how is it that Your eternity
exists always as a whole? Or does none of Your eternity pass
away, so that it no longer is? And is none of it going to be—as
if it not yet were? Then, in no case were You yesterday or will
You be tomorrow; instead, yesterday, today, and tomorrow You
are. Or better, You do not exist yesterday or today or tomorrow,
but You simply are—[existing] beyond all time. For yesterday,
today, and tomorrow are nothing other than [distinctions] in
time. Now, although without You nothing would exist, You are
not in place or in time, but all things are in You. For You are
not contained by anything, but, rather, You contain all [other]
things.

                       CHAPTER TWENTY
      He is before and beyond all things—even eternal things.
Therefore, You fill and encompass all things; You are before and
beyond all things. Indeed, You are before all things because before
they were made You already are.1 But how is it that You are be-
yond all things? For how are You beyond those things which will
have no end? Is it because they cannot at all exist without You,
whereas You would not at all be less great even if they returned
to nothing? For in this way You are beyond them in a certain re-
spect. Is it also because they can be thought to have an end, where-
as You [can] not at all [be thought to have an end]? For, indeed,
they do in this respect have a kind of end, whereas You [do] not
in any respect [have an end]. Now, surely what in no respect has
an end is beyond that which in some respect has an end. Do You
also surpass all things—even eternal things—in that both Your
eternity and theirs is present to You as a whole, whereas they do
not yet have that [part] of their eternity which is yet to come, even
as they no longer have that [part] which is already past? Indeed,
then, You are always beyond them because You are always [whol-
ly] present to Yourself and because there is always present to You
that [part of their eternity] to which they have not yet come.

1
Psalms 89:2 (90:2).
                         Proslogion 21 - 23                      107


                  CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
     Whether this [eternity] is one aeon or more than one.

Is, then, this [eternity of Yours] one aeon or more than one? For
just as the aeon of times contains all things temporal, so Your eter-
nity contains even the aeons of times. Indeed, Your eternity is one
aeon on account of its indivisible oneness, but it is more than one
aeon on account of its endless immensity. Moreover, although You
are so great, 0 Lord, that all things are filled with Your presence
and exist in You, nevertheless You are so free from all spatial de-
termination that in You there is neither center nor half nor any
part.
                     CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
               He alone is what He is and who He is.
Therefore, 0 Lord, You alone are what You are, and You are who
You are. For anything having parts distinct from its whole, and any-
thing in which there is something mutable, is not altogether what
it is. And what (1) began to exist from not-being, (2) can be
thought not to exist, (3) returns to not-being unless it exists
through something else, (4) has a past which it no longer is, and
(5) has a future which it not yet is—this does not exist in the prop-
er and unqualified sense [of "existing"] But You are what You are,
because whatever You once or in any respect are, this You are al-
ways and as a whole.
    And in a proper and unqualified sense You are who You are,1
because You have neither a past nor a future, but only a present,
and because You cannot be thought ever not to exist. And You are
life and light and wisdom and blessedness and eternity and many
such good things. Nevertheless, You are only one supreme good,
altogether sufficient unto Yourself, needing no one [else] but need-
ed by all [other] things in order to exist and to fare well.

                 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
     The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are equally
     this [supreme] good. It is the one necessary [Being],
    which is every good, complete good, and the only good.
You, God the Father, are this [supreme] good; and Your Word,
1
Exodus 3:14.
108                      Proslogion 23 & 24


i.e., Your Son, is this [supreme good]. For in the Word by which
You speak of Yourself there cannot be anything other than what
You are or anything greater or lesser than You. For Your Word is
as true as You are truthful; and so, just as are You, it is Truth it-
self—not [a truth that is] other than You. You are so simple [in
nature] that from You cannot be begotten anything other than
what You are. The one Love common to You and to Your Son,
viz., the Holy Spirit who proceeds from You both, is [also] this
[same supreme good]. For this Love is not unequal to You or to
Your Son; for You love Yourself and Your Son, and He loves Him-
self and You, in proportion to Your greatness and His. And what
is not unequal to You and to Him is not something other than
You and Him; nor can there proceed from Supreme Simplicity any-
thing which is other than what the one from whom it proceeds
is. But that which each of them (considered distinctly) is, this the
Trinity—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—is as a whole and all to-
gether. For each, considered distinctly, is nothing other than a
supremely simple oneness and a supremely singular simplicity
which cannot be made multiple and cannot be different things.
    Now, one thing is necessary,1 viz., the one necessary [Being] in
which there is every good—yea, which is every good, one good,
complete good, and the only good.

                    CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
               A conjecture about what kind of good
                  this is and about how great it is.
And now, my soul, arouse and elevate your whole understanding;
ponder as best you can what kind of good this is and how great
it is. For if the individual good things are enjoyable, ref lect at-
tentively upon how enjoyable is that Good which contains the joy-
fulness of all good things. [This is] not the kind [of joyfulness] that
we have experienced in created things but rather is as different
[therefrom] as the Creator is different from the creature. For if
created life is good, how good is that Life which creates! If creat-
ed security (salus) is enjoyable, how enjoyable is the Salvation
(salus) which creates all security! If wisdom in regard to the knowl-
edge of created things is lovable, how lovable is the Wisdom which
1
 Luke 10:42.
                          Proslogion 24 & 25                        109


created all things from nothing! In short, if there are many great
joys in enjoyable things, how rich and how great is the joy [to be
found] in Him who made these enjoyable things!

                   CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
               The kinds and the quantity of goods
                for those who enjoy this [Good].
0 what he shall have who will enjoy this Good, and what he shall
not have! Surely, he shall have whatever he shall want and shall not
have what he shall not want. Indeed, he shall there possess the
goods of the body and of the soul—[goods] of such kind as the
eye has not seen nor the ear heard nor the human heart con-
ceived.1 0 insignificant man, why then do you go from one good
to another in quest of what is good for your soul and good for your
body? Love the one Good in which are all goods, and it shall suf-
fice [you]. Desire the simple Good which itself is every good, and
it shall be enough [for you]. For what do you love, 0 my f lesh?
What do you desire, 0 my soul? It is there; all that both of you
love is there, all that you desire. If beauty delights [you]: the just
shall shine forth as the sun.2 If [you take delight in] the swiftness,
strength, or freedom of a body which nothing can resist: [the just] shall
be like the angels of God 3 because their bodies are sown as f lesh-
ly but will arise as spiritual 4—[bodies spiritual], of course, in
power not in nature. If a long and sound life [delights you]: a sound
eternity and an eternal soundness is there, because the just shall
live forever 5 and the salvation of the just comes from the Lord.6
If [you delight in] fullness: [the just] shall be filled when the glory
of God is manifested.7 If intoxication: they shall be intoxicated from
the abundance of the house of God.8 If melody: there choirs of an-
gels sing to God without end. If any pleasure whatsoever that is
not impure: God shall grant to them to drink from the torrent of
His pleasure.9 If wisdom: the wisdom of God shall manifest itself
unto them.10 If friendship: they shall love God more than them-
selves and shall love one another as themselves;11 and God [shall
love] them more than they [love] themselves. For through Him

1
 I Corinthians 2:9. 2Matthew 13:43 3Matthew 22:30. 4I Corinthains 15:44.
5
 Wisdom 5:16. 6Psalms 36:39 (37:39). 7Psalms 16:15 (17:15). 8Psalms 35:9
(36:8). 9Psalms 35:9 (36:8). 10See John 14:21. 11See Matthew 22:37-39.
110                            Proslogion 25


they [shall love] Him and themselves and one another; but He
[loves] Himself and them through Himself. If [you delight in] uni-
son: they shall all have one will, because they shall have no will
except the will of God. If power: they shall be all-powerful in will,
even as God is all-powerful in will. For just as God is able to do
through Himself that which He wills, so they shall be able to do
through Him that which they shall will. For just as they shall will
nothing other than what He [shall will], so He shall will whatever
they shall will. And what He shall will cannot fail to occur. If honor
and riches [delight you]: God shall set His good and faithful ser-
vants over many things;1 indeed, they shall be, as well as be called,
sons of God 2 and gods.3 And where His Son shall be, there they
too shall be; indeed, [they are] heirs of God and joint-heirs with
Christ.4 If true security: surely, they shall be certain that they shall
never in any way lack these many goods—or, rather, this [one]
Good—even as they shall be certain (1) that they shall not lose it
of their own free wills, (2) that God, who loves them, shall not
rend it away from them against their wills while they are loving
Him, and (3) that nothing more powerful than God shall separate
them from God against their wills.5
   But where a good of such quality and of such magnitude is pre-
sent, how rich and how intense is the [corresponding] joy! 0
human heart, heart beset with need, heart versed in tribulations—
yea, overwhelmed with tribulations—how much you would rejoice
were you to abound in all these [goods]! Ask your inmost self
whether it can contain its own joy over its own so great happi-
ness. Now, surely, if someone else whom you loved in every respect
as you do yourself were also to have the same [kind of] happiness,
then your own joy would be doubled; for you would rejoice for him
no less than for yourself. And if two or three or many more [per-
sons] were to have the same [kind of joy], you would rejoice for
each of them as much as for yourself—assuming that you loved
each as you do yourself Therefore, in the case of that perfect love
on the part of countless blessed angels and men, where no one
[of them] will love the other less than himself, each [of them] will
rejoice for each of the others no differently than for himself. If,
then, the heart of man shall scarcely [be able to] contain its own
1                          2              3                  4
 See Matthew 25:21 & 23.   Matthew 5:9.    See John 10:34.   Romans 8:17.
5
 Romans 8:38-39.
                         Proslogion 25 & 26                           111


joy over its own so great good, how shall it be able to contain so
many [other] very great joys?
    Surely, each person rejoices in another's good [fortune] to the
extent that he loves this other. Therefore, in that perfect happi-
ness, just as each [person] will love God incomparably more than
himself and all those who are with himself, so [each] will rejoice
inestimably more over the blessedness of God than over either his
own blessedness or that of all the others who are with himself. But
if [each of the just] shall love God—with all his heart, all his mind,
and all his soul,1 but in such way that his whole heart, whole mind,
and whole soul will not suffice [to fill up the measure of God's]
worthiness to be loved—surely, with all his heart, all his mind, and
all his soul [each] shall so rejoice that his whole heart, whole mind,
and whole soul will not be able to contain the fullness of [that]
joy.
                       CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
       Whether this is the full joy which the Lord promises.
My Lord and my God, my hope and my heart's joy, tell my soul
whether this is the joy about which You speak to us through Your
Son, [who said]: ask and you shall receive, so that your joy may
be full.2 For I have found an abundant joy—even a superabundant
joy. Indeed, when the heart, the mind, the soul—when the whole
man—is filled with that joy, there will still remain joy without limit.
Therefore, the whole of that joy will not enter into those who are
rejoicing; instead, all those who are rejoicing will enter into Your
joy. Speak, 0 Lord, and tell Your servant in his heart whether this
is the joy into which Your servants will enter when they will enter
into the joy of their Lord.3 Now, surely, no eye has seen, no ear
has heard—nor has there entered into the heart of man—that joy
with which Your elect ones will rejoice.4 Therefore, I have not yet
said or thought, 0 Lord, how much Your blessed ones will rejoice.
Surely, they will rejoice in the degree that they will love. And they
will love in the degree that they will know. How much will they
know You in that day, 0 Lord? How much will they love You? Sure-
ly, in this life no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor has there en-
tered into the heart of man how much they will know and love You

1                 2             3                4
 Matthew 22:37.   John 16:24.   Matthew 25:21.   I Corinthians 2:9.
112                              Proslogion 26


in the next life.
    0 God, I pray, let me know and love You, so that I may rejoice
in You. And if I cannot in this life [know, love, and rejoice in You]
fully, at least let me advance day by day until the point of fullness
comes. Let knowledge of You progress in me here and be made
full [in me] there. Let love for You grow [in me here] and be
[made] full [in me] there, so that here my joy may be great with
expectancy and there may be full in realization. 0 Lord, You com-
mand—or, rather, You counsel—[us] to ask through Your Son; and
You promise [that we shall] receive, so that our joy may be full.1
0 Lord, I ask for what You counsel through our marvelous Coun-
selor; 2 may I receive what You promise through Your Truth, so that
my joy may be full. 0 God of Truth, I ask; may I receive, so that
my joy may be full. Until then, may my mind meditate upon [what
You have promised]; may my tongue speak of it. May my heart love
it; may my mouth proclaim it. May my soul hunger for it; may my
f lesh thirst for [it];3 may my whole substance desire [it] until such
time as I enter into the joy of my Lord,4 the trine and one God,
blessed forever.5 Amen.




1              2             3                         4                5
 John 16:24.   Isaiah 9:6.   See Psalms 62:2 (63:1).   Matthew 25:21.   Ro-
mans 1:25.
