COMPLETE PHILOSOPHICAL AND
  THEOLOGICAL TREATISES
            of
  ANSELM of CANTERBURY



          Translated
              by
     JASPER HOPKINS
           and
   HERBERT RICHARDSON




  The Arthur J. Banning Press
          Minneapolis
      In the notes to the translations the numbering of the Psalms
      accords with the Douay version and, in parentheses, with the
      King James (Authorized) version. A reference such as “S II,
      264:18” indicates “F. S. Schmitt’s edition of the Latin texts, Vol.
      II, p. 264, line 18.”




Library of Congress Control Number: 00-133229

ISBN 0-938060-37-6

Printed in the United States of America

Copyright © 2000 by The Arthur J. Banning Press, Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55402. All rights reserved.
              Preface [to the Three Dialogues
               on Truth, Freedom, and Evil]
At different times in the past I wrote three treatises pertaining to
the study of Sacred Scripture. They are similar in having been writ-
ten in dialogue form; the person inquiring is designated “the Stu-
dent,” and the person answering, “the Teacher.” Because a fourth
[treatise]—which begins with the words “De Grammatico,” and
which I also published in dialogue form and regard as not with-
out use to those who need to be introduced to dialectic—pertains
to a different study from these three, I do not wish to number it
with them.
   One of the three is On Truth: [it asks] what truth is, in what
things truth is usually said to be, and what justice is. A second trea-
tise is on Freedom of Choice: [it asks] what freedom of choice is,
whether a man always has it, and how many distinctions of free-
dom there are with respect to having or not having uprightness-
of-will. (Freedom of choice was given to rational creatures in order
that they might keep uprightness-of-will.) In this treatise I show
only the natural strength of the will for keeping the uprightness
which it has received; I do not show how in order to keep up-
rightness the will needs the accompaniment of grace. But the third
treatise deals with the question of how, since God did not give
the Devil the perseverance which he was not able to have without
God's giving, it could have been sin for the Devil not to stand
steadfast in the truth. For if God had given him perseverance, he
would have had it—just as the good angels had it because God
gave it to them. And although in this work I spoke about the con-
firmation of the good angels, I entitled the treatise The Fall of the
Devil; for what I said about the good angels was incidental, but
what I wrote about the evil angels was essential to the theme.
   Although these three treatises are not connected through any
continuation of text, their subject-matter and similarity of discus-
sion require that they be placed together in the order in which I
have mentioned them. Thus, although certain rash individuals
have transcribed them in another order before they were com-
pleted, I want them ordered as I have listed them here.

                                                             [Anselm]

                                 163
164                               On Truth 1


                           CHAPTER-TITLES
                                       for
                              DE VERITATE

1. Truth has no beginning or end.
2. The truth of signification and the two truths of a statement.
3. The truth of thought.
4. The truth of the will.
5. The truth of natural action and non-natural action.
6. The truth of the senses.
7. The truth in the being of things.
8. The various meanings of “ought” and “ought not,” “to be able”
   and “not to be able.”
9. Every action signifies either what is true or what is false.
10. The Supreme Truth.
11. The definition of “truth.”
12. The definition of “justice.”
13. Truth is one in all true things.

                               ON TRUTH1
                                 (De Veritate)

                            CHAPTER ONE
                     Truth has no beginning or end.
   Student. Since we believe that God is truth,2 and since we say
that truth is in many other things, I would like to know whether
in whatever things it is said to be we ought to affirm that truth is
God. For in your Monologion, by appealing to the truth of a state-
ment, you too demonstrate that the Supreme Truth has no be-
ginning and no end:
        Let anyone who can, try to conceive of when it began to be true,
      or was ever not true, that something was going to exist. Or [let him
      try to conceive of] when it will cease being true and will not be true
      that something has existed in the past. Now, if neither of these things
      can be conceived, and if both statements can be true only if there is
      truth, then it is impossible even to think that truth has a beginning
      or an end. Indeed, suppose that truth had had a beginning, or sup-
1                                                     2
 Composed at Bec, probably between 1080-1085.             See John 14:6.
                              On Truth 1 & 2                                    165


    pose that it would at some time come to an end: then even before
    truth had begun to be, it would have been true that there was no
    truth; and even after truth had come to an end, it would still be true
    that there would be no truth. But it could not be true without truth.
    Hence, there would have been truth before truth came to be, and
    there would still be truth after truth had ceased to be. But these con-
    clusions are self-contradictory. Therefore, whether truth is said to have
    a beginning or an end, or whether it is understood not to have a be-
    ginning or an end, truth cannot be confined by any beginning or end.
You make this argument in your Monologion. Therefore, I hope to
learn from you the definition of “truth.”
   Teacher. I do not recall having arrived at a definition of “truth”;
but if you wish, let us inquire as to what truth is by [examining]
the various things in which we say there is truth.
   S. If I cannot do anything else, I will at least help by being a
good listener.
                        CHAPTER TWO
  The truth of signification and the two truths of a statement.
    T. Then, let us first ask what truth in a statement is since quite
frequently we call a statement true or false.
    S. You conduct the investigation, and I will heed whatever you
find out.
    T. When is a statement true?
    S. When what it states, whether affirmatively or negatively, is
the case. I mean what it states even when it denies that what-is-
not is; for even then it expresses what is the case (quemadmodum
res est).
    T. Then, does it seem to you that the thing stated is the truth
of the statement?
    S. No.
    T. Why not?
    S. Because nothing is true except by participating in truth; and
so, the truth of something true is in that true thing. But the thing
stated is not in the true statement, and thus must not be called
its truth; rather, it must be called the cause of the statement's
truth. Therefore, it seems to me that the truth of the statement
must be sought only in the statement itself.
    T. Consider, then, whether the truth you are looking for is ei-
ther the statement itself or its signification or something in its def-
166                          On Truth 2


inition.
    S. I do not think it is.
    T. What is your reason?
    S. Because if the truth of the statement were any of these, then
the statement would always be true. For the statement's definition
remains the same irrespective of whether what it states is or is not
the case. In fact, the statement, its signification, and the other
things remain the same.
    T. Then, as you see it, what is truth in the statement?
    S. All I know is that when the statement signifies that what-is
is, then it is true and truth is in it.
    T. What is an affirmation designed to do?
    S. To signify that what-is is.
    T. Then, this is what an affirmation ought to do?
    S. Certainly.
    T. So when an affirmative statement signifies that what-is is, it
signifies what it ought to.
    S. Obviously.
    T. But when it signifies what it ought to, it signifies rightly, or
correctly.
    S. That's right.
    T. And when it signifies correctly, its signification is correct.
    S. No doubt about it.
    T. Therefore, when it signifies that what-is is, its signification
is correct.
    S. This follows.
    T. Moreover, when it signifies that what-is is, its signification
is true.
    S. Yes, its signification is both correct and true when it signi-
fies that what-is is.
    T. So for an affirmation to be correct is the same as for it to
be true, namely, for it to signify that what-is is.
    S. Yes, these are the same.
    T. Therefore, the affirmation's truth is simply its rightness, or
correctness (rectitudo).
    S. I now see clearly that truth is this rightness.
    T. This conclusion also applies when the statement signifies
that what-is-not is not.
    S. I understand what you mean. But teach me how to reply, if
                            On Truth 2                            167


someone should maintain that even when a statement signifies that
what-is-not is, it signifies what it ought to. For the statement has
received the capability of signifying both that what-is is and that
what-is-not is. For if it had not received the capability of signify-
ing that what-is-not is, then it would not signify this. Hence, even
when it signifies that what-is-not is, it signifies what it ought to.
But if by signifying what it ought to the statement is correct and
true, as you have argued, then it is true even when it states that
what-is-not is.
    T. Admittedly, we are not accustomed to call the statement true
when it signifies that what-is-not is; nevertheless it has a truth and
a correctness because it does what it ought. But when it signifies
that what-is is, it does what it ought in two respects: for it signi-
fies (1) what it has received the capability of signifying and (2)
what it is designed to signify. Now, a statement is usually said to
be correct and true in accordance with the latter correctness and
truth, by which it signifies that what-is is; [and we do] not [ordi-
narily call a statement correct and true] in accordance with the for-
mer correctness and truth, by which it signifies that even what-is-
not is. For the statement [does what it] ought more with respect
to what it is designed to signify than with respect to what it is not
designed to signify. Indeed, it has received the capability of sig-
nifying that a thing is, when it is not, or is not, when it is, only
because it was not able to be restricted to signifying that this thing
is, when it is, or that it is not, when it is not.
    Therefore, a statement has one correctness and truth because
it signifies what it is designed to signify; and it has another cor-
rectness and truth because it signifies what it has received the ca-
pability of signifying. The first of these correctnesses, or truths,
belongs variably to the statement; but the second belongs to it in-
variably. The statement does not always have the first kind of
truth; but it always possesses the second. The first kind of truth
belongs to the statement accidentally and depends upon its usage,
whereas the second kind of truth belongs to it naturally. For ex-
ample, when I say “It is day” in order to signify that what-is is, I
use the signification of this statement correctly because the state-
ment is designed for this [viz., for signifying that what-is is]; and
so it is said to signify correctly on this occasion. But when by
means of the same statement I signify that what-is-not is, I do not
168                       On Truth 2 & 3


use the signification of the statement correctly, because the state-
ment is not designed for signifying this; and so, its signification
is said not to be correct on this occasion.
    Now, in some statements these two truths, or correctnesses, are
inseparable, as when we say “A man is an animal” or “A man is not
a stone.” For the affirmative statement always signifies that what-
is is, and the negative statement always signifies that what-is-not is
not. Moreover, we cannot use the affirmation to signify that what-
is-not is (for a man is always an animal); nor can we use the nega-
tion to signify that what-is is not (because a man is never a stone).
    We began by inquiring about that truth which a statement has
in accordance with someone’s using the statement correctly, for
in accordance with that [truth] our common way of speaking
judges the statement to be true. Later we shall speak about that
truth which a statement cannot fail to have.
    S. Return, then, to the issue with which you began. For you have
distinguished to my satisfaction the two truths of a statement—
provided you will show that a statement has a kind of truth when
it lies, as you maintain.
    T. For the time being let these things suffice regarding the
truth of signification, with which we have begun. For the same
notion of truth which we have examined in spoken statements
must be examined in all the signs which are formed in order to
signify that something is or is not—for example, in written char-
acters or in sign-language with the fingers.
    S. Proceed, then, to these other topics.

                        CHAPTER THREE
                       The truth of thought.
   T. We call a thought true when there is what we—either on the
basis of reason or on some other basis—suppose there to be. And
[we call a thought] false when there is not [what we suppose there
to be].
   S. This is our custom.
   T. Then, what does truth in a thought seem to you to be?
   S. According to the reasoning evidenced in the case of state-
ments, the truth of thought is best called its rightness, or cor-
rectness (rectitudo). For to the end that we might think that what-
                              On Truth 3 - 5                       169


is is and that what-is-not is not, we have been given the capability
of thinking that something is or is not. Thus, whoever thinks that
what-is is thinks what he ought to; and so, his thinking is correct.
Accordingly, if our thought is correct and true simply because we
think that what-is is, or that what-is-not is not, then the truth of
thought is simply its rightness, or correctness.
    T. Your thinking is correct.

                          CHAPTER FOUR
                         The truth of the will.
    T. But when Truth itself [viz., God] says that the Devil “did not
stand in the truth,” 1 He declares that truth is also in the will. For
it was only with respect to his will that the Devil was in the truth
and deserted the truth.
    S. I believe this. For he deserted the truth only by sinning; and
if he had always willed what he ought to have willed, then he never
would have sinned.
    T. Tell me, then, what you understand truth in his will to be.
    S. It is only rightness, or uprightness [rectitudo]. For as long as
the Devil willed what he ought to have willed—namely, the end for
which he had received a will—he was in the truth and in up-
rightness; and when he willed what he ought not to have willed,
he deserted truth and uprightness. So truth in his will can only
be understood to be uprightness, since truth and uprightness in
the Devil's will each consisted only in his willing what he ought
to have willed.
    T. You understand well.

                        CHAPTER FIVE
       The truth of natural action and non-natural action.
   T. But we must no less believe that truth is also in actions—
just as the Lord says, “He who does evil hates the light” and “He
who does the truth comes to the light.” 2
   S. I see what you mean.
   T. Then, if you can, consider what truth in actions is.
   S. Unless I am mistaken, truth in actions must be considered

1             2
 John 8:44.   John 3:20-21.
170                              On Truth 5


along the same lines as the truth we have already recognized in
other things.
    T. That's right. For if to do evil and to do the truth are oppo-
sites—as the Lord indicates when He says: “He who does evil hates
the light” and “He who does the truth comes to the light”—then
doing the truth is the same thing as doing good. For doing good
and doing evil are opposites. Therefore, if doing the truth and
doing good have the same opposite, their significations are not dif-
ferent. But everyone admits that whoever does what he ought does
what is good and what is right. So it follows that to do what is right
is to do the truth. For it is evident that to do the truth is to do
what is good and that to do what is good is to do what is right.
Therefore, nothing is clearer than that the truth of an action is
its rightness [rectitudo].
    S. I see no respect in which your reasoning is shaky.
    T. Consider whether every action which does what it ought is
appropriately said to do the truth. For there are rational actions,
such as giving alms, and there are non-rational actions—such as
the action of fire, which heats. Now, is it appropriate to say that
fire does the truth?
    S. If fire has received the power to heat from Him from whom
it has its being,1 then when it heats it does what it ought. There-
fore, I do not see anything inappropriate [in saying] that fire does
what is true and what is right when it does what it ought.
    T. That's the way it seems to me too. Hence, we can note that
there is a necessary and a non-necessary rightness, or truth, of
action. For of necessity fire does what is right and true when it
heats; but out of no necessity a man does what is right and true
when he does what is good. However, when the Lord said, “He
who does the truth comes to the light,” He wanted us to under-
stand the verb “to do” not only as standing for what is properly
called a doing, but also as a substitute for every other verb. For
He excludes from this truth, or light, neither the man who un-
dergoes persecution for the sake of justice nor the man who is when
and where he ought to be, nor the man who is standing or sitting
when he ought to—and the like. For no one denies that such per-

1
 Regarding the expression “ab eo a quo habet esse accepit,” see also DLA 10 (S I,
222:22) and DCD 1 (S I, 235:4-5)
                                On Truth 5 & 6                     171


sons do what is good. And when the apostle says that each man
shall receive [recompense] “in accordance with what he has
done,” 1 we must understand this phrase to indicate all that we
commonly call doing good and doing evil.
    S. Even our ordinary way of speaking calls enduring and many
other things doings which are not [properly] doings. So unless I
am wrong, we can also number among right actions upright will-
ing, whose truth we discussed before dealing with the truth of ac-
tion.
    T. You are not mistaken. For he who wills what he ought is said
to do what is right and good; and he is included among those who
do the truth. But since we are speaking of truth by analyzing it,
and since the Lord seems to be speaking especially of that truth
which is in the will when He says that the Devil “did not stand in
the truth,” 2 I wanted to examine separately what truth in the will
is.
    S. I am glad you did.
    T. Since, then, it is evident that there is both a natural and a
non-natural truth of action, that truth of a statement which (as we
have seen) cannot be separated from it must be classified as nat-
ural. For just as when fire heats it does the truth because it has
received [the power to heat] from Him from whom it has its being,
so also the statement “It is day” does the truth when it signifies
that it is day (whether it is daytime or not) since it has received the
nature to do this.
    S. Now for the first time I see the truth in a false statement.

                               CHAPTER SIX
                            The truth of the senses.
   T. Do you think that we have discovered all the abodes of truth,
leaving aside consideration of the Supreme Truth?
   S. I recall now a certain truth which I do not find among those
you have dealt with.
   T. What is it?
   S. There is truth in the bodily senses—but not always, for at
times they deceive us. For sometimes when I am looking at an ob-
ject through a glass, my sight deceives me, because sometimes it
1                       2
 II Corinthians 5:10.   John 8:44.
172                          On Truth 6


reports to me that the object I see beyond the glass is the same
color as the glass; yet, it really is a different color. And sometimes
my sight causes me to believe that the glass is the color of the ob-
ject on the other side of it, even though it is not that color. And
there are many other cases in which sight and the other senses
deceive.
    T. This truth or falsity, it seems to me, is not in the senses but
in the judgment (opinione). For the outer sense does not lie to the
inner sense, but the latter deceives itself. This fact is sometimes
easy to recognize, at other times difficult. For example, when a
boy is afraid of the statue of an open-mouthed dragon, we easily
recognize that sight does not cause this fear (for sight reports to
the boy nothing other than it reports to aged people); rather, the
fear is caused by the childish inner sense, which does not yet know
how to discern well between a real object and its likeness. The
same thing happens when we see a person who resembles some-
one else and we mistake him for the one he resembles—or, again,
when someone who hears what is not a man's voice thinks it to
be a man's voice. The inner sense also causes these mistakes.
    Now, what you say about glass happens the way it does because
when sight passes through a body which has the color of air, it is
no more prevented from receiving the likeness of the color it sees
beyond the glass than when it passes through the air. [And this is
always the case] except insofar as the body it passes through is
denser or darker than air. For example, [this is the case] when
sight passes through glass of its own color—i.e., glass which has
no color admixed to its own—or when it passes through very clear
water or through a crystal or through something having a similar
color. But when sight passes through some other color (for ex-
ample, through glass not of its own color [i.e., not of the natural
color of glass] but to which another color is added), it receives the
color which it first encounters. Thus, after sight has received one
color, then depending upon the extent to which it has been mod-
ified by this color, it receives either partially or not at all whatev-
er other color it encounters. Therefore, sight reports the color it
has apprehended first, and reports it either by itself or in combi-
nation with the color it meets subsequently. For if sight is modi-
fied by the first color up to its full capacity for receiving color,
then it cannot at the same time sense another color. But if sight
                           On Truth 6 & 7                           173


is affected by the first color less than exhausts its capacity to sense
color, then it can still sense another color.
    For example, if sight passes through a certain body, say glass,
which is so perfectly red that sight is fully modified by this red-
ness, then it is unable to be modified by another color at the same
time. But if sight finds and first encounters a lesser degree of red-
ness than exhausts its capacity to sense color, then (being not yet
full, so to speak) it will be able to receive an additional color, to
the degree that its capacity has not been exhausted by the first
color. Accordingly, someone who is unaware of this fact thinks that
sight reports that all the things it perceives after receiving the first
color are either partially or entirely the same color as the first.
Thereby the inner sense imputes its own failure to the outer sense.
    Similarly, when an unbroken stick, partly in water, partly not,
is thought to be broken, or when we think that our sight sees our
real faces in a mirror, and when sight and the other senses seem
to report to us many things as being other than they really are—
the fault is not with the senses, which report what they are able
to, since they have received thus to be able; rather, [the fault] must
be attributed to the soul's judgment [iudicium], which does not
clearly discern what the senses can and ought to do. I do not think
that time need be spent in showing this [in any more detail], since
for our purposes it would be more tedious than profitable. Let it
suffice to say only that whatever the senses are seen to report,
whether they do so as a result of their nature or of some other
cause [for example, because of a tinted glass], they do what they
ought. Therefore, they do what is right and true, and their truth
falls within the classification of truth in actions.
    S. Your answer has satisfied me. I do not wish for you to dwell
longer on the topic of the senses.

                       CHAPTER SEVEN
                 The truth in the being of things.
   T. Leaving out of consideration the Supreme Truth, consider
now whether we must understand truth to be in anything other
than the things we have already examined.
   S. What could that be?
   T. Do you think that there is anything, at any time or place,
174                        On Truth 7 & 8


which is not in the Supreme Truth, or has not received from the
Supreme Truth what it is, insofar as it is, or is able to be other than
what it is in the Supreme Truth?
    S. No, we must not think so.
    T. Therefore, whatever is is truly—insofar as it is what it is in
the Supreme Truth.
    S. You can conclude unreservedly that everything which is is
truly since it is nothing other than what it is there.
    T. Thus, there is truth in the being of all that exists, because
all things are what they are in the Supreme Truth.
    S. I see that in the being of things there is truth to such an ex-
tent that no falsehood can be there, since what falsely exists does
not exist.
    T. That's a good answer. But, tell me, ought anything to be dif-
ferent from what it is in the Supreme Truth?
    S. No.
    T. So if all things are what they are in the Supreme Truth, then
without doubt they are what they ought to be.
    S. Yes, all things are what they ought to be.
    T. But whatever is what it ought to be, is rightly.
    S. No other conclusion is possible.
    T. Therefore, everything which is is rightly.
    S. Nothing follows more consistently.
    T. So if truth and rightness are in the being of things because
these things are what they are in the Supreme Truth, then as-
suredly the truth of things is rightness [rectitudo].
    S. Nothing is clearer with respect to the logic of the argument.

                      CHAPTER EIGHT
       The various meanings of “ought” and “ought not,”
               “to be able” and “not to be able.”
   S. But how can we say truthfully that whatever is ought to be,
since there are many evil deeds which certainly ought not to be?
   T. Why should it be strange that the same thing both ought to
be and ought not to be?
   S. How can this be so?
   T. I know you believe that nothing at all is except by God's caus-
ing it or permitting it.
                             On Truth 8                            175


    S. Nothing is more certain to me.
    T. Would you dare to suggest that God unwisely or evilly caus-
es or permits something?
    S. I would say, rather, that [He causes or permits] something
only wisely and well.
    T. Would you say that what such great Goodness and Wisdom
causes or permits ought not to be?
    S. What intelligent person would dare to suppose this?
    T. Therefore, both what happens by God's causing and what
happens by His permitting ought to be.
    S. What you say is evident.
    T. Tell me also, do you think that the effect of an evil will ought
to be?
    S. This is the same as asking whether an evil deed ought to be;
and no one with any sense would concede this.
    T. Nevertheless, God permits some men to do evilly what they
will evilly.
    S. Would that He permitted it less often!
    T. So the same thing both ought and ought not to be. It ought
to be since it is permitted wisely and well by God, without whose
permission it could not have happened. Yet, with respect to him
by whose evil will it is committed (concipitur), it ought not to be.
In this way, then, the Lord Jesus ought not to have undergone
death because He alone [among men] was innocent; and no one
ought to have inf licted death upon Him; nevertheless, He ought
to have undergone death because He wisely and graciously and
usefully willed to undergo it. For in many ways the same thing ad-
mits in different respects of opposites. This is frequently the case
in regard to an action [actio]—for instance, a beating [percussio].
For “beating” is predicable both of one who gives it [i.e., of an
agent] and of one who gets it [i.e., of a patient]. Hence, [in dif-
ferent respects] it can be called both an action and a passion. Nev-
ertheless, according to their grammatical form “actio” and “per-
cussio” (and likewise any other words which have passive forms but
active meanings) seem to pertain more to a patient than to an
agent. Indeed, with reference to acting, it seems more proper to
say “agentia” or “percutientia”; and with reference to undergoing,
it seems more proper to say “actio” and “percussio.” For “agentia”
and “percutientia” are derived from “agens” and “percutiens,” even
176                         On Truth 8


as “providentia” is derived from “providens,” and as “continentia”
from “continens”; all of these forms (viz., “agens,” “percutiens,”
“providens,” and “continens”) are active. But “actio” and “percussio”
are derived from “actus” and “percussus,” which are passives. Now—
to take one example that holds true of the other terms as well—
just as giving a beating (percutiens) always occurs in connection
with getting a beating [percussus] and getting a beating always oc-
curs in connection with giving a beating, so giving a beating and
getting a beating cannot occur separately: one and the same thing
is signified by different words in accordance with its different as-
pects. Hence, beating (percussio) is said to consist of both giving a
beating [percutiens] and getting a beating [percussus].
    Thus, depending upon whether agent and patient are subject to
the same or to opposite judgments, the two aspects of the action
will be judged to be alike or opposite. Therefore, (1) when the one
who gives a beating does so rightly and the one who gets that beat-
ing does so rightly—for example, when a sinner is corrected by
someone whose prerogative it is—both aspects of the action are
right because in both respects a beating ought to be. And (2)
when, on the contrary, a just man is beaten by an unjust man, nei-
ther aspect of the action is right because the just man ought not
to get a beating nor ought the unjust man to give a beating, for
in neither respect ought a beating to occur. But (3) when a sin-
ner is beaten by one whose prerogative it is not, then a beating
both ought and ought not to be, since the sinner ought to get a
beating but the other man ought not to give a beating; and so the
action cannot be denied to be both right and not right. But if you
consider whether in accordance with the judgment of Supernal
Wisdom and Goodness there ought not to be a beating in the one
respect only or in both respects (viz., with respect to the agent
and with respect to the patient), would you or anyone else dare
to deny that what such great Wisdom and Goodness permits ought
to be?
    S. Let him deny it who dares; but I do not dare.
    T. If you also consider something from the standpoint of the
nature of things—for example, the driving of iron nails into the
body of the Lord—would you say that His frail f lesh ought not to
have been penetrated or that, once penetrated by sharp iron, it
ought not to have felt pain?
177                        On Truth 8 & 9                            177


   S. I would be speaking against nature.
   T. Therefore, it is possible that with respect to nature there
ought to be either an action or a passion which, with respect to
the agent or the patient, ought not to be, since neither the agent
ought to do it nor the patient to undergo it.
   S. I cannot deny any of this.
   T. So you see that it very often can happen that the same ac-
tion both ought and ought not to be, though in different respects.
   S. You present this so clearly that I cannot help seeing it.
   T. But I want you to be aware as well that “ought” and “ought
not” are sometimes said improperly—as , for example, when I say
that I ought to be loved by you. For if I truly ought, then I am in-
debted to repay what I owe, and am at fault if I am not loved by
you.
   S. It follows.
   T. But when I ought to be loved by you, then payment should
be exacted not from me but from you.
   S. I must concede it.
   T. So when I say that I ought to be loved by you this means
not that I owe something but that you owe me love. Likewise, when
I say that I ought not to be loved by you, what is meant is only
that you ought not to love me.
   This same mode of speaking also occurs in conjunction with
the notions of ability and inability. We say, for instance, “Hector
was able to be overpowered by Achilles” and “Achilles was not able
to be overpowered by Hector.” Yet, ability was not in the one who
was able to be overpowered but was in the one who was able to
overpower; and inability was not in him who was not able to be
overpowered but was in him who was not able to overpower.
   S. What you say pleases me. Indeed, I think it useful to know.
   T. You think correctly.

                          CHAPTER NINE
      Every action signifies either what is true or what is false.
   T. But let us return to [the topic of ] the truth of signification.
I began with this topic in order to lead you from the more famil-
iar to the less familiar. For everyone speaks about the truth of sig-
nification, but few consider the truth which is in the being of
178                         On Truth 9


things.
    S. I have been aided by your having led me in this sequence.
    T. Let us see, then, how extensive the truth of signification is.
For there is a true or a false signification not only in those things
which we ordinarily call signs but also in all the other things which
we have discussed. For since someone should do only what he
ought to do, then by the very fact that someone does something,
he says and signifies that he ought to do it. Now, if [morally speak-
ing] he ought to do what he does, he speaks the truth. But if
[morally speaking] he ought not [to do what he does], he speaks
a lie.
    S. Although I seem to understand, show me more clearly what
you mean, because I have not heard this before.
    T. Suppose you were in a place where you knew there to be ed-
ible herbs and poisonous ones, but you did not know how to tell
them apart; suppose too that with you was another person, whose
ability to discriminate between the two you trusted. Now, suppose
that you asked him which ones were edible and which were poi-
sonous, and that he told you that the one kind was edible but him-
self ate the other kind. Which would you believe the more: his
word or his deed?
    S. I would believe his deed more than his word.
    T. Therefore, by his action more than by his word he would be
telling you about which herbs were edible.
    S. Yes, that's right.
    T. So, then, if you did not know that one should not lie, and
if someone lied in your presence, then even were he to say to you
that he ought not to lie, his telling you by his deed that he ought
to lie would outweigh his telling you by his word that he ought
not to lie. Similarly, when someone thinks or wills something: if
you did not know whether he ought to think or will it, then if you
could see his thought and will, by his act of thinking and of will-
ing he would signify to you that he ought to think and will this
thing. Now if, [morally speaking], this person ought [to be think-
ing and willing this, then by his thinking and willing] he would
be telling the truth; and if, [morally speaking], he ought not [to
be thinking and willing this], then he would be lying.
    There is also a similarly true or a false signification in the ex-
istence of things, since by the very fact that they are, they declare
                         On Truth 9 & 10                          179


that they ought to be.
   S. I now see clearly what I had not noticed before.
   T. Let us go on to the remaining topics.
   S. Lead the way. I will follow.

                        CHAPTER TEN
                       The Supreme Truth.
   T. You will not deny that the Supreme Truth is rightness [recti-
tudo], will you?
   S. Indeed not. I cannot call it anything else.
   T. Consider the following: Although all the different right-
nesses which were mentioned earlier are rightnesses because the
things they are in either are what they ought to be or else do what
they ought to do, nevertheless it is not the case that the Supreme
Truth is rightness because it is under any indebtedness. For all other
things are indebted to it; it does not owe anything to anyone. It
has no other reason for being what it is except that it is.
   S. I understand.
   T. Do you also see how this Rightness is the cause of all other
truths and rightnesses, and how nothing is the cause of it?
   S. Yes, I do. And I notice among these other truths and right-
nesses that some are only effects, whereas some are both causes
and effects. For example, although the truth which is in the exis-
tence of things is the effect of the Supreme Truth, it is the cause
of the truth of thought and of the truth which is in statements; but
these two truths are not causes of any truth.
   T. That's a keen observation. On the basis of it you can now
understand how in my Monologion I proved by means of the truth
of a statement that the Supreme Truth has neither beginning nor
end. For when I asked “When was it ever not true that something
was going to exist?” I did not mean to suggest (1) that the state-
ment which asserted that something was going to exist was itself
without a beginning or (2) that the truth of this statement was
God. I meant to say only that, given the statement, we cannot un-
derstand there to be a time when truth would not have been in
it—so that from the fact that we do not understand there to be a
time when this truth could have failed to be in it (given the state-
ment in which truth could be), we should understand that that
180                      On Truth 10 & 11


other Truth, which is the first cause of the statement's truth, was
without beginning. Indeed, the truth of the statement could not
always be unless its cause always were. For the statement which
says that something is going to exist is true only if something is,
in fact, going to exist. And something is going to exist only if it
exists in the Supreme Truth.
    We must understand in a similar way the other statement, which
says that something has existed in the past. For if truth could in
no respect fail to be in this statement (given the statement), then
it follows that that Truth which is the supreme cause of this state-
ment's truth cannot be understood to have an end. For it is true
to say that something has existed, because thus in fact it has; and
something has existed because thus it exists in the Supreme Truth.
    Therefore, if it was never able not to be true that something
was going to exist, and never will be able not to be true that some-
thing has existed, then it is impossible that the Supreme Truth had
a beginning or will have an end.
S. I do not see any possible objection to your reasoning.

                       CHAPTER ELEVEN
                     The definition of “truth.”
   T. Let us return to the investigation of truth which we began.
   S. All that [we were just discussing] is pertinent to investigat-
ing truth. But nonetheless, return to whatever you wish.
   T. Tell me, then, whether you think that there is still another
rightness in addition to those rightnesses we have examined.
   S. There are no other rightnesses than those—except for the
rightness which is in corporeal things, such as the rightness, or
straightness, (rectitudo) of a stick. But this is quite different from
the other kinds.
   T. In what way does this rightness seem to you to differ from
the others?
   S. Because it can be apprehended by bodily sight, whereas ra-
tional ref lection apprehends the others.
   T. Cannot reason understand and apprehend the straightness
of material objects separably from the objects? Or if there is doubt
about whether the surface (linea) of an absent object is straight
and it can be shown that no part of it is curved, then does not
                          On Truth 11 & 12                          181


reason infer that the surface must be straight?
    S. Yes. But the same rightness which is thus known by reason
is perceived in the object by sight, whereas the other kinds of right-
ness can be perceived only by the mind.
    T. Therefore, unless I am mistaken we can define “truth” as
“rightness perceptible only to the mind.”
    S. I see that he who says this, is in no way mistaken. Without
doubt, this definition of “truth” contains neither more nor less
than is appropriate (expediat), since “rightness” distinguishes it
from everything which is not called rightness, and “perceptible
only to the mind” distinguishes it from visible rightness.

                       CHAPTER TWELVE
                     The definition of “justice.”
   S. But since you have taught me that all truth is rightness and
since rightness seems to me to be the same thing as justice, teach
me also what I may understand justice to be. For it seems that
whatever it is for a thing to be right is also what it is for that thing
to be just, and that, conversely, whatever it is for a thing to be just
is what it is for that thing to be right. For example, it seems to be
both just and right for fire to be hot and for each person to reci-
procate another's love. For if (as I believe) whatever ought to be,
rightly and justly is, and if nothing else rightly and justly is except
what ought to be, then justice can be only rightness. Indeed, al-
though it is not the case that the Supreme and Simple Nature is
just or right because it ought [to be or to do] anything, neverthe-
less rightness and justice are assuredly identical in it.
   T. Therefore, if justice is nothing other than rightness, you have
the definition of “justice.” And since we are speaking about the
rightness which is perceptible only to the mind—“truth,” “right-
ness,” and “justice” are definable in terms of one another. As a
result, if someone knows what one of them is but does not know
what the other two are, he can infer from his knowledge of one
to a knowledge of the others. In fact, if anyone knows one of them,
he cannot keep from knowing the other two.
   S. What then? Shall we call a stone just because it does what it
ought when it seeks to move downwards—even as we call a man
just when he does what he ought?
182                         On Truth 12


    T. No, we usually do not call anything just on the basis of this
kind of justice.
    S. Why, then, is a man any more just than is a stone, if both
behave justly?
    T. Don't you think that the activity of a man differs in some
respect from the activity of a stone?
    S. I know that a man acts freely but that a stone acts by nature
and not freely.
    T. This is why we do not call a stone just; for if a thing which
does what it ought does not will what it does, then it is not just.
    S. Shall we say, then, that a horse is just when it wills to eat,
because it willingly does what it ought?
    T. I did not say that something is just which willingly does what
it ought; rather, I said that whatever does not do willingly what it
ought is not just.
    S. Tell me, then, who or what is just.
    T. As I see it, you are asking for a definition of that justice
which is praiseworthy, even as its opposite, viz., injustice, is blame-
worthy.
    S. That's the justice I am seeking.
    T. It is evident that this justice is not in any nature which does
not know rightness. For whatever does not will rightness does not
merit to be praised for having it, even if it does have it. But that
which does not know rightness is not able to will it.
    S. That's true.
    T. Therefore, the rightness which brings praise to a thing which
has rightness is present only in a rational nature, which alone per-
ceives the rightness we are talking about.
    S. It follows.
    T. Therefore, since all justice is rightness, the justice which
makes the one who keeps it worthy of praise is present only in ra-
tional natures.
    S. It cannot be otherwise.
    T. Then where do you think this justice is to be found in man,
who is rational?
    S. It is nowhere except either in his will or in his knowledge or
in his action.
    T. What if someone understands rightly or acts rightly but does
not will rightly: will anyone praise him on account of justice?
                             On Truth 12                            183


    S. No.
    T. Therefore, this justice is not rightness of knowledge or right-
ness of action but is rightness of will.
    S. It shall be either this or nothing.
    T. Do you think that the justice we are seeking has been ade-
quately defined?
    S. You decide.
    T. Do you think that whoever wills what he ought wills rightly
and has rightness, or uprightness, of will?
    S. If someone unknowingly wills what he ought—for example,
if someone wills to lock out another who, without his knowledge,
wants to kill a third party inside the house—he does not have the
uprightness-of-will that we are seeking, whether or not he has
some kind of uprightness-of-will.
    T. What do you say about a person who knows that he ought
to will what he does will?
    S. It can happen that he knowingly wills what he ought [to will]
and yet does not want to be under the obligation [of so willing].
For example, when a robber is compelled to return the stolen
money, it is evident that he does not want [velle] to be under this
obligation, since he is compelled to will (velle) to return the money
because he ought to. He is not at all entitled to be praised on ac-
count of this rightness.
    T. Anyone who feeds a poor hungry man on account of his own
vainglory does want to be under the obligation to will what he
wills. And indeed, he is praised because he wills to do what he
ought [to will to do]. So what is your judgment about him?
    S. His rightness must not be praised; and so, it does not mea-
sure up to the justice we are seeking. But show now what does
measure up.
    T. Even as every will wills something, so it also wills for the sake
of something. And just as we must consider what it wills, so we
must also notice why it wills. For a will ought to be upright in will-
ing what it ought and, no less, in willing for the reason it ought.
Therefore, every will has both a what and a why. Indeed, whatso-
ever we will, we will for a reason.
    S. We all recognize this in ourselves.
    T. But in order for a man's will to be praiseworthy, for what rea-
son do you think he ought to will what he does will? What he must
184                          On Truth 12


will is clear, since whoever does not will what he ought to will is
not just.
    S. And it seems no less clear to me that in order for a man's
will to be just, he must will for the reason he ought, even as he
must will what he ought.
    T. You understand well that these two things are necessary for
a will to be just: willing what it ought [to will] and willing for the
reason it ought [to will]. But tell me whether these two things are
sufficient [for the will's being just].
    S. Why wouldn't they be?
    T. When someone wills what he ought to will and does so be-
cause he is compelled [to will it], and is compelled [to will it] be-
cause he ought to will it, is he not in a certain sense willing what
he ought [to will] for the reason he ought [to will]?
    S. I cannot deny it. But whereas he wills in one manner, a just
man wills in another manner.
    T. Distinguish these two manners.
    S. When a just man wills what he ought [to will], then—inso-
far as he is to be called just—he keeps uprightness-of-will only for
its own sake. By contrast, someone who wills what he ought to
will but does so only if compelled to or only if induced by exter-
nal rewards, does not keep uprightness-of-will for its own sake but
keeps it for the sake of something else—if he should at all be said
to keep it.
    T. Then, that will is just which keeps its uprightness on account
of that uprightness itself.
    S. Either that will is just or no will is.
    T. Therefore, justice is uprightness (rectitudo)-of-will kept for its
own sake.
    S. Yes, this is the definition of “justice” I was seeking.
    T. See whether something in this definition ought perhaps to
be amended.
    S. I do not see anything in it to be improved.
    T. Nor do I. For there is no justice which is not rightness (rec-
titudo); and no rightness other than uprightness (rectitudo)-of-will
is called, in and of itself, justice. For rightness-of-action is called
justice, but only when that action is performed by means of a just
will. However, even if what we rightly will is impossible to be
done, nevertheless uprightness-of-will does not at all lose the
                            On Truth 12                            185


name “justice.”
    Now, as regards the word “kept,” someone will perhaps say: “If
uprightness-of-will is to be called justice only when it is kept, then
uprightness-of-will is not justice from the moment this uprightness
is possessed; and we do not receive justice when we receive up-
rightness-of-will, but we make this uprightness become justice by
keeping it. For we receive and have uprightness-of-will before we
keep it. We do not receive it and have it for the first time because
we keep it, but we begin to keep it because we have received it
and already have it.”
    But to these inferences we can reply that at one and the same
time we receive the willing it and the having it. For we have up-
rightness only by willing it; and if we will it, then by this very act
we have it. However, just as we simultaneously have it and will it,
so we simultaneously will it and keep it; for just as we do not keep
it except when we will it, so there is no time when we will it and
do not keep it. Now, as long as we will it we keep it; and as long
as we keep it we will it. Therefore, since our willing it and having
it occur at the same time, and since our willing it and keeping it
do not occur at different times, then it necessarily follows that we
receive simultaneously the having of it and the keeping of it. And
just as we have it as long as we keep it, so we keep it as long as
we have it. These assertions involve no contradiction.
    Of course, the receiving of this uprightness is by nature prior
to having it or willing it (since having it or willing it is not the
cause of receiving it, but receiving it makes possible both the hav-
ing and the willing it); and yet receiving, having, and willing occur
simultaneously (for we begin to receive and to have and to will
this uprightness at the same time; and as soon as uprightness is
received, it is both had and willed). Similarly, having uprightness
and willing it occur simultaneously [with keeping it], even though
they are by nature prior to keeping. Therefore, we receive justice
through receiving simultaneously the having, the willing, and the
keeping of uprightness-of-will. And as soon as we have and will this
uprightness-of-will, this uprightness is to be called justice.
    The phrase “for its own sake,” which we included [in our def-
inition of “justice,”] is so essential that this very uprightness is in
no respect justice unless it is kept for its own sake.
    S. I can think of no objections to this.
186                               On Truth 12


    T. Do you think that this definition can be applied to the
Supreme Justice—insofar, that is, as we are able to speak about a
thing of which nothing, or almost nothing, can properly be said?
    S. Since in God's divinity, power is not other than the divinity
itself, we speak of the power of His divinity or of His divine power
or of His powerful divinity. Similarly, although God's will is not
one thing and His uprightness another, nevertheless it is not un-
suitable for us to speak of His uprightness of will or of His vol-
untary uprightness or of His right will. But if we say that God's up-
rightness is kept for its own sake, then we seem not to be able to
say this as suitably about anyone else's uprightness. For just as
nothing else keeps God's uprightness, but it keeps itself, and just
as it keeps itself through nothing other than through itself, so it
keeps itself for the sake of nothing but itself.
    T. Then, we can say with certainty that justice is uprightness-
of-will which is being kept for its own sake.
    Now, since [in Latin] we do not have a present passive partici-
ple of the verb “servatur” (“is being kept”), we can use the perfect
passive participle of this verb in order to express present time.
    S. We have the well-known practice of using perfect passive par-
ticiples as substitutes for present passive participles, which Latin
does not have. Similarly, Latin lacks perfect participles of active
and neuter verbs; and for these past participles which are lacking
we use present participles. For example, I might say about some-
one, “Only compelled (coactus) does he teach what he learned
studying and reading (studens et legens)”; that is, “Only when he is
compelled does he teach what he learned while he studied and
read.”
    T. Then we did well to say that justice is uprightness-of-will kept
(servatam) for its own sake, i.e., which is being kept (servatur) for
its own sake. Accordingly, men who are just are sometimes called
upright in heart (i.e., upright in will); and sometimes they are sim-
ply called upright, without the qualifying phrase “in heart,” since
no one is understood to be upright except one who has an upright
will. For example: “Glory, all of you who are upright in heart,” 1
and also "The upright shall see and shall rejoice.” 2
    S. With your definition of “justice” you have satisfied even chil-

1                        2
 Psalms 31:11 (32:11).       Psalms 106:42 (107:42).
                          On Truth 12 & 13                          187


dren. Let us go on to other matters.

                      CHAPTER THIRTEEN
                   Truth is one in all true things.
    T. Let us go back to [the notion of ] rightness, or truth. Since
we are talking about rightness perceptible only to the mind, “right-
ness,” or “truth,” signifies a single thing which is the genus of jus-
tice. Let us ask whether there is only one truth in all the things
in which we say there is truth, or whether there is more than one
truth, even as there is more than one thing in which we know
truth to be.
    S. I very much desire to know the answer to this.
    T. It is evident that regardless of what thing truth is in, truth
is nothing other than rightness (rectitudo).
    S. I do not doubt this.
    T. Then, if in accordance with the many things there were many
truths, there would also be many rightnesses.
    S. This is equally certain.
    T. And if there had to be as many different rightnesses as there
are different kinds of things, then surely these rightnesses would
exist in accordance with these various things; and just as the things
in which there is rightness vary, so there would have to be a vari-
ety of rightnesses.
    S. By means of one thing in which we say that there is rightness,
show me what I may understand about other things [in which we
also say that there is rightness].
    T. I mean that if the rightness of signification [i.e., correctness]
were different from the rightness of the will [i.e., uprightness] sim-
ply because the former rightness is in the signification and the
latter in the will, then the former rightness would exist on account
of signification and would be changed in accordance with it.
    S. But isn't this the case? For when what is is signified to be,
or when what-is-not is signified not to be, then the signification
is correct, or right, and (assuredly) rightness exists, without which
the signification could not be right. But if what-is-not is signified
to be, or if what is is signified not to be, or if nothing at all is sig-
nified, then there will be no rightness-of-signification, which exists
only in the signification. Hence, this rightness has its existence
188                          On Truth 13


through the signification and is changed with the signification—
just as color has its existence and non-existence through a mater-
ial object. For as long as the material object exists it is necessary
that its color exist; but when the material object perishes, it is im-
possible for its color to remain.
    T. No. Rightness does not belong to signification as color be-
longs to a material object.
    S. Show me the difference.
    T. If no one wishes to signify by means of any sign what should
be signified, then will there be any signification by means of signs?
    S. No .
    T. And so, it will not be right for what-ought-to-be-signified to
be signified?
    S. [On the contrary], it will not therefore be less right and right-
ness will no less demand this.
    T. Therefore, when the signification does not exist, that right-
ness does not perish by which it is right that there be signified
what should be signified and by which it is demanded that there
be signified what should be signified.
    S. If that rightness had perished, then it would not have been
right [for what-ought-to-be-signified to be signified], and rightness
would not have demanded this.
    T. Don't you think that when what ought to be signified is sig-
nified, the signification is right on account of and in accordance
with this very rightness?
    S. Indeed, I cannot think differently. For if the signification
were right by virtue of some other rightness, then were the above-
mentioned rightness to perish, nothing would prevent the signifi-
cation from being right. But no signification is right which signi-
fies what is not right to be signified or which signifies what right-
ness does not demand [that it signify.
    T. Therefore, no signification is right by virtue of any other
rightness than that which remains when the signification perish-
es.
    S. Clearly not.
    T. Therefore, don't you see that rightness is in the significa-
tion not because rightness begins to be when what is is signified
to be or when what-is-not is signified not to be, but because the
signification is made in accordance with a rightness which always
                           On Truth 13                           189


exists? [Don't you see too that] rightness is absent from significa-
tion not because rightness perishes when the signification is not
as it ought to be or when there is no signification but because the
signification lacks this rightness which never perishes?
    S. I see this so clearly that I cannot fail to see it.
    T. Then, the rightness in terms of which the signification is
called correct, or right, neither exists through nor changes with
the signification, regardless of how the signification changes.
    S. Nothing is now clearer to me.
    T. Can you prove that color is related to a material object sim-
ilarly to how rightness is related to signification?
    S. I am now more prepared to prove that they are related very
dissimilarly.
    T. I think you now know what must be thought about the will
and its rightness, and about the other things which ought to have
rightness.
    S. I see perfectly that your reasoning proves that rightness re-
mains unchangeable, regardless of how these other things are.
    T. So what conclusion do you think follows regarding these
rightnesses? Are they different from one another, or is there one
and the same rightness of all things?
    S. I conceded previously that if there is more than one right-
ness simply because there is more than one thing in which right-
ness is seen to be, then it necessarily follows that these rightness-
es exist and change in accordance with those things. But this was
proven not at all to happen. Therefore, it is not the case that there
is more than one rightness simply because there is more than one
thing in which there is rightness.
    T. Do you have any other reason for supposing that there is a
plurality of rightnesses except that there is a plurality of things?
    S. Just as I recognize that the argument from a plurality of
things is faulty, so I see that no other argument can be found.
    T. Therefore, the rightness of all things is one and the same.
    S. Yes, I have to agree.
    T. Moreover, if it is only when things are in accordance with
what they ought to be that rightness is in those things which ought
to have it, and if for them to be right is only [for them to be in
accordance with what they ought to be], then it is evident that the
rightness of all these things is only one.
190                         On Truth 13


    S. It cannot be denied.
    T. Therefore, truth is one in all these things.
    S. This is also impossible to be denied. But nevertheless, if truth
assumes no diversity as a result of the [plurality of things], show
me why we say “the truth of this thing” or “the truth of that
thing,” as if we were distinguishing different truths. For many per-
sons will be quite reluctant to concede that there is no difference
between the truth of the will and what is called the truth of ac-
tion, or [the truth of] one of the other things.
    T. Truth is improperly said to be “of this thing” or “of that
thing.” For truth does not have its being in or from or through the
things in which it is said to be. But when these things are in ac-
cordance with truth, which is always present to things which are
as they ought to be, then we say “the truth of this thing” or “the
truth of that thing” (for example, “the truth of the will” or “the
truth of action”). Similarly, we say “the time of this thing” or “the
time of that thing,” although there is one and the same time for
all things which exist together at the same time. And if this thing
did not exist or if that thing did not exist, time would nonethe-
less remain the same; for we say “the time of this thing” or “the
time of that thing” not because time is in these things but because
these things are in time. Now, when considered in itself, time is
not called the time of anything; but when we consider things
which are in time, we say “the time of this thing” or “the time of
that thing.” Similarly, Supreme Truth, existing in and of itself, is
not the truth of anything; but when something accords with
Supreme Truth, then we speak of the truth, or rightness, of that
thing.
