PENGUIN         CLASSICS
THE BOOK OF CHUANG TZU

MARTIN PALMER is Director of the International
Consultancy on Religion, Education and Culture
(ICOREC). A student of Chinese for over twenty years, he
has translated many Chinese classics and folk religion
texts, as well as having commented upon the major
religious traditions of China in print and also on radio and
television. As Director of ICOREC he works as a religious
adviser to the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) around
the world, directing religion-based environmental
programmes. Currently he is working with the China Taoist
Association on a project to protect the main Taoist Sacred
Mountains of China.

ELIZABETH BREUILLY is a member of ICOREC. She
specializes in educational books and in assisting faith
groups in articulating their fundamental teachings clearly to
non-specialist audiences.

CHANG WEI MING, a practising lawyer, was Martin
Palmer’s first teacher of Chinese. Her interest in Chinese
philosophy has been an abiding passion for many years.
JAY RAMSAY has collaborated with Martin Palmer on a
number of translations of Chinese texts, bringing his gifts
as a poet to bear upon the translations. He is the founder of
the Chrysalis poetry project.
The Book of Chuang Tzu


Translated by MARTIN PALMER
With ELIZABETH BREUILLY, CHANG WAI MING and
JAY RAMSAY




PENGUIN BOOKS
PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL,
England
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York,
New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite
700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a
division of Penguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road,
Camberwell,
Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia
Group Pty Ltd)
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Mairangi Bay,
Auckland 1310, New Zealand
(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee
Avenue,
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London
WC2R 0RL, England
www.penguin.com
First published by Arkana 1996
Published in Penguin Books 2006
3
Copyright © ICOREC, 1996
Illustrations copyright © Circa Photo Library, 1996
All rights reserved
The moral right of the translators has been asserted
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold
subject
to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent,
re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the
publisher’s
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than
that in
which it is published and without a similar condition
including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser
For Vicky with all my heart
Contents




Preface
Introduction
1 Wandering Where You Will
2 Working Everything Out Evenly
3 The Nurturing of Life
4 Out and About in the World
5 Signs of Real Virtue
6 The Great and Original Teacher
7 Dealing with Emperors and Kings
8 Webbed Toes
9 Horses’ Hooves
10 Broken Suitcases
11 Leaving the World Open
12 Heaven and Earth
13 Heaven’s Tao
14 Does Heaven Move?
15 Rigid and Arrogant
16 The Deceived and Ignorant Ones
17 Season of Autumn Floods
18 Perfect Happiness
19 Grasping the Purpose of Life
20 The Huge Tree
21 Tien Tzu Fang
22 The Shores of the Dark Waters
23 Keng Sang Chu
24 Hsu Wu Kuei
25 Travelling to Chu
26 Affected from Outside
27 Supposed Words
28 Abdication
29 Robber Chih
30 The Lover of Swords
31 The Old Fisherman
32 Lieh Yu Kou
33 Governing the World
Index
Preface




             Translating an author as rich, diverse and as
intense as Chuang Tzu is an immense undertaking. There
are few full translations of Chuang Tzu, so I felt that there
was space for another, especially one aimed at a more
popular market. For this reason, there are one or two ways
in which this translation differs from others.
  Firstly, I have adopted a simplified form of romanization
of Chinese names. There are two commonly used systems:
Wade-Giles and Pinyin. The differences can be seen in the
way they spell the capital of China: Peking (Wade-Giles) or
Beijing (Pinyin). In many instances, Pinyin gives a more
accurate phoneticization of the Chinese – as in ‘Beijing’.
But in Pinyin, ‘Chuang Tzu’ becomes ‘Zhuang Zi’ – which is
not as close to the original as the Wade-Giles. In using
Wade-Giles, I have opted for a more familiar system for
the average reader. However, to help the flow of reading, I
have dropped the diacritical marks, and capitalized all parts
of the name. Thus, in chapter 5, I have changed the name of
the man with the terrible appearance from Ai T’ai-t’o to Ai
Tai To. In chapter 4, the minister, Ch’u Po-yu, becomes Chu
Po Yu. I hope purists will forgive me this in the interests of
greater ease for readers.
   Secondly, I have dropped some of the more obscure
names which are given and only make a great deal of sense
if one is able to see the puns in Chinese. For example, the
last paragraph of chapter 18 in the Chinese contains
detailed names for every bug and insect. I have dropped all
but the most necessary because they get very confusing!
   Thirdly, in the first seven chapters, we have marked out
the text to show that it does not flow sequentially. The first
seven chapters in particular contain self-contained stories
and discussions. Trying to read Chuang Tzu sequentially is a
mistake. The text is a collection, not a developing
argument. In the first seven chapters, we have indicated this
with clear breaks.
   Approaching a text as ancient and as fascinating as
Chuang Tzu, any translator needs all the help possible!
Having translated a number of ancient Chinese texts in the
last few years (The Tao Te Ching, the I Ching) I feel
relatively at home in the linguistic and cultural world of
China between the sixth and third centuries BC. But I was
delighted to have three guides who either in part or in
whole had made the journey into the Chuang Tzu and lived
to tell the tale. In confirming or debating my own
translations, I turned to these three other translators for
inspiration or for argument. The three translators are, first
and foremost, the excellent translator of the first seven
chapters, Fung Yu-Lan, professor of Chinese in the USA
and China during most of this century. His excellent
translation A Taoist Classic Chuang-Tzu is published by
the Foreign Languages Press, Beijing, from an original
edition first published in 1931. It is masterful.
   The second translator, who has translated the whole text,
is Burton Watson of the Columbia University translation
program. His The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu,
published by Columbia University Press in 1968 and still in
print, is a joy to read. Clear and informative, it provides the
most readable translation I have come across. I owe a great
debt to Burton Watson, even if at times I differ from some
of his usage and interpretations.
   Finally, that master of translation – not necessarily for
the ease of his translation but for the depth of his work –
James Legge. Produced in the 1880s, his The Writings of
Kwang Tze is a rich resource for any translator. It is to be
found in volumes 39 and 40 of Sacred Books of the East,
edited by Max Muller, Oxford University Press, 1891.
   Apart from these books, I owe an immense debt of
gratitude to colleagues. The Taoist scholars at the White
Cloud Temple in Beijing, home of the China Taoist
Association, taught me a great deal about how to read
Chuang Tzu. To my old friend and first mentor in Chinese,
Chang Wai Ming, I owe more than I can say. Over twenty
years ago she taught me to love and enjoy the Chinese
language and culture and I have never looked back. Her
intensity of love for her own culture and language is truly
infectious.
   Jay Ramsay cannot read a word of Chinese – thank
goodness! He thus makes a perfect sparring partner. As a
poet he has a sense for English which challenges and thrills
me as a writer. As someone who has entered into the
Chinese world through the translations we have done
together, he has a sense of Chinese symbolism and
literature which is quite extraordinary. I owe him a great
deal for making the most of my turns of phrase.
   Elizabeth Breuilly is really the main other translator.
Like Jay she knows no Chinese but she has a rigorous and
vigorous understanding of English. She took sheets of
barely legible scrawl sent back from all round the world – I
translate as I travel – and turned it into readable English.
She has given untold hours to this, as has Jo Edwards, who
put most of it on disk. I cannot say how grateful I am to
both of them for their work and for enjoying the old rogue
Chuang Tzu as much as I have.
                                Martin Palmer
                                 August 1995
Introduction




             When the School of Taoism first began to look
for its roots, sometime around 100 BC, it identified three
great founder teachers. These were, and still are, Lao Tzu,
Chuang Tzu and Lieh Tzu.
  Taoism is the search for the Tao, the Way of Nature
which, if you could become part of it, would take you to the
edge of reality and beyond. One of the core teachings of
Taoism is that:
              The Tao that can be talked about is not the
              true Tao.
              The name that can be named is not the
              eternal Name.1
  In the light of this, perhaps it should not cause too much
surprise to discover that, of these three founder-figures,
only one can be definitely rooted in a given time and place!
For Lao Tzu may well never have existed, and even if he
did, he certainly didn’t write the Tao Te Ching, the book
usually ascribed to him as author. Lieh Tzu may also be a
fictional figure. Again, even if he did exist, the book which
bears his name contains few of his actual words and was
probably composed some six hundred or more years after
his supposed lifetime.
   Which leaves us with Chuang Tzu. Of all the figures
whom Taoism claims as its own from the extraordinary
period of intellectual ferment of the sixth to third centuries
BC, only Chuang Tzu emerges from the mists as a
discernible figure. And the figure who does emerge is one
of the most intriguing, humorous, enjoyable personalities
in the whole of Chinese thought and philosophy.
   The only ‘historical details’ we have of Chuang Tzu’s life
come from the first great historian of China, Ssu Ma Chien
(died c. 85 BC). In his Historical Records, he tried to trace
the histories of Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu. He virtually gives
up on Lao Tzu, lamenting that he found it almost
impossible to discover any facts or details about him.
   With Chuang Tzu he had more success. He says that
Chuang Tzu was born in the town of Meng, which is thought
to be somewhere in the present-day provinces of Anhui or
Henan. His personal name was Chuang Chou, and it is as
Chuang Chou that he is usually referred to in the book
which we know as Chuang Tzu. The title ‘Tzu’ found in the
names of the three founder-figures is an honorific title
meaning ‘Master’. In the text as translated here I have
changed ‘Chuang Chou’ to ‘Chuang Tzu’ to avoid confusion.
   Ssu Ma Chien goes on to say that Chuang Tzu worked as
a minor official at Chi Yuan, which can be translated as ‘The
Lacquer Garden’. Quite what this means is unclear. Was this
just a name of a place, in the same way that Salford means
‘The Ford by the Willows’, or was it actually an area of
natural beauty? As with so much in the early histories of
Taoism, we don’t know.
   The historian says that Chuang Tzu lived at the same time
as Prince Hui of Liang (370–319 BC) and Prince Hsuan of
Chi (319–301 BC). He also says that Prince Wei of Chu
(338–327 BC) visited him. This puts him firmly into the
last half of the fourth century and leads Needham to give
his dates as 369–286 BC.2 For once, we can be fairly sure
about the approximate dates of such a figure.
   Ssu Ma Chien continues his account by noting that
Chuang Tzu was noted for his erudition, which was eclectic
but rooted in the sayings of Lao Tzu, of which more later.
He says that, because of this, Chuang Tzu’s writings were
largely imaginative or allegorical – a fact which is most
definitely borne out by even a cursory glance at his book. It
is also noted that his surviving writings in the first century
BC were over 100,000 words in length.
   Ssu Ma Chien then discusses three specific chapters of
the book, chapters 31, 29 and 10, in that order, and claims
they were written explicitly to refute the arguments of the
Confucians and to ‘glorify the mysteries of Lao Tzu’. It is
then noted that some of the characters in his writings are
figments of his imagination but that such was his erudition
and skill in public debate that not even the greatest scholars
of his time could defend themselves against his pitiless
attacks on both the Confucians and the followers of Mo
Tzu. Ssu Ma Chien goes on to state that Chuang Tzu’s
writings and teachings were like a tidal wave which
swamped everything and could not be stemmed, and his
work so free-flowing that no ruler has ever been able to
encapsulate it or harness it to specific statecraft – unlike
the Lao Tzu, which has often been subtitled ‘A Manual of
Leadership’.
   To illustrate this and to highlight Chuang Tzu’s own sense
of personal freedom from the niceties of power or the
temptations of title – a theme which he often explores –
Ssu Ma Chien relates a story which is actually recorded in
the book itself:
Someone offered Chuang Tzu a court post. Chuang Tzu
answered the messenger, ‘Sir, have you ever seen a
sacrificial ox? It is decked in fine garments and fed on
fresh grass and beans. However, when it is led into the
Great Temple, even though it most earnestly might wish to
be a simple calf again, it’s now impossible.’ (Chapter 32,
this translation)
In the version told by Ssu Ma Chien, Chuang Tzu goes on:
Go away! Don’t mess with me! I would rather enjoy myself
in the mud than be a slave to the ruler of some kingdom. I
shall never accept such an office, and so I shall remain free
to do as I will.
This exchange captures to perfection the spirit of Chuang
Tzu which emerges from his writings. For unlike the Tao Te
Ching, which tells no stories, contains no anecdote or
personal details about anyone, the Chuang Tzu is full of
stories, personalities, characters and incidents. It is a bag
of tricks, knaves, sages, jokers, unbelievably named people
and uptight Confucians! And through it strides the
occasionally glimpsed figure of Chuang Tzu himself,
leaving a trail of humour, bruised egos and damaged
reputations.
  There are two particular insights which the book affords
us of the personality and personal history of Chuang Tzu
himself, which bring him vividly to life in a way unusual for
philosophers. The first is his great friendship and rivalry
with the philosopher Hui Tzu. The two represented
different strands of philosophy but were close enough to
enjoy the delights of sparring. In particular, Hui Tzu took
exception to one of Chuang Tzu’s key points, that meaning
depends entirely upon the context and that there is no such
thing as a ‘fact’ which stands apart from the context of the
speaker. The most famous example of this comes at the end
of chapter 17:
Chuang Tzu and Hui Tzu were walking beside the weir on
the River Hao, when Chuang Tzu said, ‘Do you see how the
fish are coming to the surface and swimming around as
they please? That’s what fish really enjoy.’
   ‘You’re not a fish,’ replied Hui Tzu, ‘so how can you say
you know what fish enjoy?’
   Chuang Tzu said: ‘You are not me, so how can you know I
don’t know what fish enjoy?’
   Hui Tzu said: ‘I am not you, so I definitely don’t know
what it is you know. However, you are most definitely not a
fish and that proves that you don’t know what fish really
enjoy.’
   Chuang Tzu said: ‘Ah, but let’s return to the original
question you raised, if you don’t mind. You asked me how I
could know what it is that fish really enjoy. Therefore, you
already knew I knew it when you asked the question. And I
know it by being here on the edge of the River Hao.’
The intensity of this friendship of rivalry is poignantly
captured in a story told in chapter 24:
Chuang Tzu was following a funeral when he passed by the
grave of Hui Tzu. He looked round at those following him
and said, ‘The man of Ying had on the end of his nose a
piece of mud as small as a fly’s wing. He sent for the
craftsman Shih to cut it off. Shih swirled his axe around and
swept it down, creating such a wind as it rushed past that it
removed all trace of the mud from the man of Ying, who
stood firm, not at all worried. The ruler Yuan of Sung heard
of this and called craftsman Shih to visit him.
   ‘ “Would you be so kind as to do this for me?” he said.
  ‘Craftsman Shih replied, “Your servant was indeed once
able to work like that, but the type of material I worked
upon is long since dead.”
  ‘Since the Master has died, I have not had any suitable
material to work upon. I have no one I can talk with any
longer.’
This sad story brings me to the second detail which we can
glean about Chuang Tzu from the book. Unlike perhaps our
standard vision of the philosopher-sage of Taoism, whom
we associate with remote mountains and an ascetic
lifestyle, Chuang Tzu was married and brought up a family,
though one does get the impression that, perhaps luckily
for them, the bulk of the responsibility for rearing the
children fell to his wife. These details come out in a story
told in chapter 18:
Chuang Tzu’s wife died and Hui Tzu came to console him,
but Chuang Tzu was sitting, legs akimbo, bashing a battered
tub and singing.
   Hui Tzu said, ‘You lived as man and wife, she reared your
children. At her death surely the least you should be doing
is to be on the verge of weeping, rather than banging the tub
and singing: this is not right!’
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘Certainly not. When she first died, I
certainly mourned just like everyone else! However, I then
thought back to her birth and to the very roots of her being,
before she was born. Indeed, not just before she was born
but before the time when her body was created. Not just
before her body was created but before the very origin of
her life’s breath. Out of all of this, through the wonderful
mystery of change she was given her life’s breath. Her
life’s breath wrought a transformation and she had a body.
Her body wrought a transformation and she was born. Now
there is yet another transformation and she is dead. She is
like the four seasons in the way that spring, summer,
autumn and winter follow each other. She is now at peace,
lying in her chamber, but if I were to sob and cry it would
certainly appear that I could not comprehend the ways of
destiny. This is why I stopped.’
What is so wonderfully typical of these stories is the way
Chuang Tzu uses incidents around him to deliver himself of
a philosophical reflection or comment. Unlike the Tao Te
Ching, which simply gives a saying or proverb and then
comments upon it in a somewhat dry fashion, Chuang Tzu
teaches through narrative, humour and detail. At times when
translating this book, I was swept along by the desire to find
out what happened next, or what point he was going to draw
out of some incident. It must also be one of the few books
written well over two thousand years ago that can make a
translator burst out laughing aloud!
   All of which brings me to the vexed question which has
dominated the study of Chuang Tzu for centuries. Which
parts of the book can be ascribed to Chuang Tzu himself
and which come from different, later pens? The custom in
many cultures of the past was to ascribe a book to a great
figure from the past. By doing so you were not necessarily
trying to claim that they had written every word. But neither
were you too worried if people thought so, so long as they
read it! Indeed Chuang Tzu himself comments upon the
tendency to claim that one’s own words are those of some
great figure of the past as a way of gaining an audience. He
saw nothing inherently wrong in this (see the opening of
chapter 27).
   So it was that around sayings or writings of a key figure,
other writings which were felt to complement or expand
those of the Master would be gathered. Eventually these
would be edited and the entire collection known as the
writings of, for example, Lao Tzu or Chuang Tzu. A similar
process took place in Judaism at roughly the same time.
Thus, for example, the five books of the Torah (Genesis to
Deuteronomy) were ascribed to Moses, despite the fact
that they record his death!
   That this happened to the book we know as Chuang Tzu
is without doubt. We even know who did the final editing
job which produced the text as we have it with three
sections. It was Kuo Hsiang, who died in 312 AD. He
divided the text into three parts:
   Chapters 1–7: The Inner Chapters. Traditionally believed
to have been written by Chuang Tzu;
   Chapters 8–22: The Outer Chapters. Traditionally seen
as being the product of the Yangist school of philosophy.
   Chapters 23–33: Miscellaneous Chapters. A catch-bag
of odds and ends.
  It is thought that Kuo Hsiang edited his text down from a
collection of fifty-three chapters, so what we have is a
reduction from an even wider collection of material.
  Almost from Kuo Hsiang’s time onwards, the debate has
raged about which bits Chuang Tzu wrote and which bits he
did not. It has become customary to hold chapters 1–7 as
being from Chuang Tzu. Yet some would maintain that when
Kuo Hsiang spoke of ‘Inner Chapters’, he wasn’t giving
them any greater authority, but simply stating that their
titles came from their content, whereas the next fifteen
chapters take their titles from the first words of each
chapter – from their outer skin as it were.
   It is interesting that of the three chapters which Ssu Ma
Chien specifically highlights in his life of Chuang Tzu,
written some two hundred years after Chuang Tzu and some
four hundred years before Kuo Hsiang, one appears in the
miscellaneous section and two in the Outer Chapters. None
appears in the Inner Chapters. This alone should caution us
against making easy or simplistic judgements based upon
the present order of the chapters. Personally speaking,
having now worked my way through the whole text in
Chinese, I would find it very hard to cut up the book into
bits that are obviously from Chuang Tzu himself and bits
that are obviously not. Rather, I believe that we have a great
deal of material which comes from Chuang Tzu or which
was directly inspired by Chuang Tzu’s life and teachings.
For example, the story of Chuang Tzu and the fish comes
from chapter 17 and the tale of passing Hui Tzu’s grave
comes from chapter 24. Neither of these are allowed as
authentic Chuang Tzu chapters by certain purists, yet they
breathe the very spirit of Chuang Tzu just as much as, for
example, the famous ‘butterfly passage’ of chapter 2.
   There is a considerable industry in the remote and
dustier shelves of Chinese studies, which engages itself in
detailed and unending debate about which sections are
genuine or not. But ironically, it seems that the author can
speak more clearly to us if we do not concern ourselves
with his existence or his authorship. For in the end, it really
does not matter which bits come from the pen or life of
Chuang Tzu and which are additions. The book simply
should not be viewed as one consistent discourse. It is a
catch-bag, an anthology of stories and incidents, thoughts
and reflections which have gathered around the name and
personality of Chuang Tzu. Trying to read the book through
logically will only produce faint, ghostly laughter. And the
one who will be laughing at you from afar will be the spirit
of Chuang Tzu. For if there is one constant theme in the
book, it is that logic is nonsense and that eclecticism is all,
if you wish to open yourself to the Tao and the Te – the
Way and the Virtue of all.
   The Book of Chuang Tzu is like a travelogue. As such, it
meanders between continents, pauses to discuss diet, gives
exchange rates, breaks off to speculate, offers a bus
timetable, tells an amusing incident, quotes from poetry,
relates a story, cites scripture. To try and make it read like a
novel or a philosophical handbook is simply to ask it, this
travelogue of life, to do something it was never designed to
do. And always listen out for the mocking laughter of
Chuang Tzu. This can be heard most when you start to make
grand schemes out of the bits, or wondrous philosophies
out of the hints and jokes. For ultimately this is not one
book but a variety of voices swapping stories and bouncing
ideas off each other, with Chuang Tzu striding through the
whole, joking, laughing, arguing and interrupting. This is
why it is such an enjoyable book to enter, almost anywhere,
as if dipping into a cool river in the midst of summer.
   So you will find no great theories set out in this
Introduction as to what Chuang Tzu means. Rather I want to
try and set him, his terminology and some of his ideas into
context and at times draw out certain comparisons with our
own times.
   To begin with, we must avoid calling Chuang Tzu a Taoist.
He wasn’t. There were no ‘Taoists’ in his day. There were
thinkers who explored the notion of the Tao – the Way of
Nature which, if you could become part of it, would carry
you in its flow to the edge of reality and beyond, into the
world of nature. Most of the great philosophers of the time
struggled with the notion of the Tao, not least of them Kung
Fu Tzu (better known in the West as Confucius). As is
obvious from the number of times he crops up in the
Chuang Tzu, Kung Fu Tzu was fascinated by the Tao.
Indeed, he appears more often in the Chuang Tzu than
either Lao Tzu or Chuang Tzu himself – albeit often in the
role of a butt for Chuang Tzu’s humour. But the point
remains that, in his own writings, Kung Fu Tzu talks more
about the Tao than the Tao Te Ching does, page for page.
  What marks out the three books of the Tao Te Ching,
Chuang Tzu and Lieh Tzu from, for example, the writings
of Kung Fu Tzu is their insistence on experiencing the Tao
as a path to walk, rather than as a term to be explained.
Experience is all.
   For example, take the story which Chuang Tzu tells in the
first half of chapter 17, concerning the Lord of the Yellow
River and the god of the North Ocean, Jo. The Yellow River
has flooded because of the autumn rains, and the god of the
Yellow River believes he is the greatest, mightiest being in
the world – until he flows into the North Ocean. Then he
realizes that he is puny in comparison to the North Ocean.
Jo of the North Ocean replied, ‘A frog in a well cannot
discuss the ocean, because he is limited by the size of his
well. A summer insect cannot discuss ice, because it knows
only its own season. A narrow-minded scholar cannot
discuss the Tao because he is constrained by his teachings.
Now you have come out of your banks and seen the Great
Ocean. You now know your own inferiority, so it is now
possible to discuss great principles with you.’
In other words, the god Jo of the North Ocean can now
begin to teach the Lord of the Yellow River because the
Lord has experienced the limits of his own knowledge.
   This approach – that the Tao which can be talked about is
not the true Tao – marks out those writers whom later
generations titled as Taoists. It is captured in the famous
phrase ‘wu-wei’, which I have usually translated here as
‘actionless action’. This is beautifully captured in what
seems to be a direct quote from Chuang Tzu found in
chapter 13:
              Chuang Tzu said,
              ‘My Master Teacher! My Master Teacher!
              He judges all life but does not feel he is
              being judgemental;
              he is generous to multitudes of generations
              but does not think this benevolent;
              he is older than the oldest
              but he does not think himself old;
              he overarches Heaven and sustains Earth,
              shaping and creating endless bodies
              but he does not think himself skilful.
              This is what is known as Heavenly
              happiness.’
Further on in the same chapter he spells out wu-wei even
more clearly:
               ‘Heaven produces nothing,
               yet all life is transformed;
               Earth does not support,
               yet all life is sustained;
               the Emperor and the king take actionless
               action,
               yet the whole world is served.’
Wu-wei also encompasses the approach of Chuang Tzu to
official status and power. He rejects anything which
elevates one aspect of life over another. To him, all are
equal, and he brings this out in various ways, such as the
stories of Robber Chih. For example, at the end of chapter
8 he tells of Po Yi, a former king, who abdicated in favour
of his brother and later died of starvation rather than serve
an unjust ruler. For this he was held up by Confucians and
others as a model of righteousness. Robber Chih, an
invented figure, is used by Chuang Tzu at various places
through the book as an example of utter greed, cruelty and
ruthlessness. Yet in this text Chuang Tzu puts the two men
side by side:
Po Yi died for the sake of fame at the bottom of Shou Yang
mountain, Robber Chih died for gain on top of the Eastern
Heights. These two both died in different ways but the fact
is, they both shortened their lives and destroyed their
innate natures. Yet we are expected to approve of Po Yi and
disapprove of Robber Chih – strange, isn’t it?
The term ‘innate nature’ is a key one in Chuang Tzu.
‘Hsing’, as it is pronounced phonetically, is used
throughout the text to indicate that which is naturally the
way a given species or part of creation either simply is in
its givenness, or how it reacts to life. In contrast to this
innate nature, this hsing, which I sometimes have put as
true nature, Chuang Tzu presents the artifices and ways of
‘civilization’ as contrary and destructive to the innate
nature. Thus at the start of chapter 9 we have:
Horses have hooves so that they can grip on frost and snow,
and hair so that they can withstand the wind and cold. They
eat grass and drink water, they buck and gallop, for this is
the innate nature of horses. Even if they had great towers
and magnificent halls, they would not be interested in them.
However, when Po Lo [a famous trainer of horses] came on
the scene, he said, ‘I know how to train horses.’ He branded
them, cut their hair and their hooves, put halters on their
heads, bridled them, hobbled them and shut them in stables.
Out of ten horses at least two or three die…
   The potter said, ‘I know how to use clay, how to mould it
into rounds like the compass and into squares as though I
had used a T-square.’ The carpenter said, ‘I know how to use
wood: to make it bend, I use the template; to make it
straight, I use the plumb line.’ However, is it really the
innate nature of clay and wood to be moulded by compass
and T-square, template and plumb line? It is true,
nevertheless, that generation after generation has said, ‘Po
Lo is good at controlling horses, and indeed the potter and
carpenter are good with clay and wood.’ And the same
nonsense is spouted by those who rule the world.
From that point on in chapter 9, Chuang Tzu launches into
one of his characteristic attacks on the way in which the
people’s true innate nature has been lost and broken. He
pictures a perfect world when all were equal and none had
any sense of being greater or lesser. They just followed
their innate nature. He then depicts the fall from this age of
primal, innate, natural living:
Then the perfect sage comes, going on about benevolence,
straining for self-righteousness, and suddenly everyone
begins to have doubts… If the pure essence had not been so
cut about, how could they have otherwise ended up with
sacrificial bowls? If the raw jade was not broken apart, how
could the symbols of power be made? If the Tao and Te –
Way and Virtue – had not been ignored, how could
benevolence and righteousness have been preferred? If
innate nature had not been left behind, how could rituals
and music have been invented?… The abuse of the true
elements to make artefacts was the crime of the craftsman.
The abuse of the Tao and Te – Way and Virtue – to make
benevolence and righteousness, this was the error of the
sage.
Chuang Tzu sees all attempts to impose ‘civilization’ upon
the innate nature of the world, and especially on the people,
as a terrible mistake which has distorted and abused the
natural world – the world of the Tao, the flow of nature.
And so he stands firmly opposed to all that the Confucians
stood for – order, control and power hierarchies. This is
why the Book of Chuang Tzu was always ignored or
despised by Confucians and why it, along with other such
‘Taoist’ classics, was never formally counted as being
amongst the Classics of Academia in Imperial China. This
man is a subversive, and he knows it! The Chuang Tzu is a
radical text of rejection and mockery aimed at the
pretensions of human knowledge and powers.
   This rejection of the constructions of meaning which we
place upon the world and which we then assume to be
‘natural’ is central to Chuang Tzu as it was to Lieh Tzu as
well. They are perhaps the first deconstructionists. Let me
give you an example from Lieh Tzu. In chapter 8 of Lieh
Tzu we are introduced to a gentleman by the name of Mr
Tien. He is about to set off on a long journey so invites his
friends and relatives to come for a farewell banquet. As the
dishes of fish and goose are brought in, Mr Tien looks
benignly on them and says, ‘How kind Heaven is to
humanity. It provides the five grains and nourishes the fish
and birds for us to enjoy and use.’
  In response to this quaint piece of anthropocentrism,
everyone nods in agreement, except for a twelve-year-old
boy, the son of Mr Pao. He steps forward and says,
‘My Lord is wrong! All life is born in the same way that we
are and we are all of the same kind. One species is not
nobler than another; it is simply that the strongest and
cleverest rule over the weaker and more stupid. Things eat
each other and are eaten, but they were not bred for this. To
be sure, we take the things which we can eat and consume
them, but you cannot claim that Heaven made them in the
first place just for us to eat. After all, mosquitoes and gnats
bite our skin, tigers and wolves eat our flesh. Does this
mean Heaven originally created us for the sake of the
mosquitoes, gnats, tigers and wolves?’
Here is the authentic voice of the Taoist. Here is the
debunking of human pretensions and the re-assertion of the
natural as the highest order. Here is the Tao of Chuang Tzu
in the mouth of a twelve-year-old.
  By stressing the abuses that have happened to our innate
natures, Chuang Tzu constantly calls us to look with our
heads on one side at what is ‘normal’. He uses humour,
shock tactics, silly names, the weirdest characters (such as
Cripple Shu or Master Yu) and totally unbelievable
scenarios (such as the ‘willow tree’ incident in chapter 18)
to make us look again at what we hold to be true. He uses
contradiction to explode convention. Take these exchanges
from chapter 2:
There is the beginning; there is not as yet any beginning of
the beginning; there is not as yet beginning not to be a
beginning of the beginning… I have just made a statement,
yet I do not know whether what I said has been real in what I
said or not really said.
   Under Heaven there is nothing greater than the tip of a
hair, but Mount Tai [the greatest of the mighty sacred
mountains] is smaller; there is no one older than a dead
child, yet Peng Tsu [who, according to mythology, lived
thousands of years] died young.

So where does all this leave Chuang Tzu in his
understanding of life and his relationship to the rest of
creation – the ‘Ten Thousand Things’, as it is put in
Chinese? The next line in this quote from chapter 2 spells
it out. If Chuang Tzu could conceivably be imagined
uttering any kind of credal statement, perhaps this would be
it:
Heaven and Earth and I were born at the same time, and all
life and I are one.
This is the understanding that Chuang Tzu wishes us to
return to.
   The uselessness of language is the other key point of
Chuang Tzu’s discourses. He wants us to break beyond
words and to realize how they imprison us. This is captured
in a quote from chapter 2 which echoes the opening of the
Tao Te Ching:
               The great Way is not named,
               the great disagreement is unspoken,
               great benevolence is not benevolent,
               great modesty is not humble,
               great courage is not violent.
               The Tao that is clear is not the Tao,
               speech which enables argument is not
               worthy,
               benevolence which is ever present does not
               achieve its goal,
               modesty if flouted, fails,
               courage that is violent is pointless.
   I want to move on now from this glance at some of the
key threads in Chuang Tzu’s writings, to his place within
‘Taoist’ thought and belief. What was his relationship to the
book we now know as the Tao Te Ching? Traditionally, the
chronology of the three ‘classics’ of Taoism has been, first
Lao Tzu with the Tao Te Ching, second Chuang Tzu, third
Lieh Tzu.
   Lao Tzu has been ascribed to the sixth to fifth centuries
BC, while Chuang Tzu has always been known to be around
the 330–290 BC era. It would thus seem that Chuang Tzu
must have known of the book by Lao Tzu. However, as I
have mentioned earlier, it is highly unlikely, even if such a
person as Lao Tzu existed, that he wrote more than a few of
the chapters of the Tao Te Ching. This book dates from
around 300 BC at the earliest, though it uses much much
older material.
   When Jay Ramsay and I with our colleague Man Ho
Kwok produced our translation and exploration of the Tao
Te Ching, we discovered that each chapter consists of two
very different strata, clearly discernible in the original
Chinese. The first layer is a proverb, wisdom saying or
oracle which has been passed down through generations and
has become rounded and smooth as a result of re-telling. In
quatrains which each have an identical number of
characters, the saying is preserved in the midst or at the
start of each chapter. Around it, written in a totally
different style of Chinese, is a commentary, which
indicates the fourth– to third-century BC world of China.
   In Chuang Tzu we can see a similar process at work. At
no point is there a direct quote from the Tao Te Ching. This
is hardly surprising if the dates given above are accurate.
The Tao Te Ching was not written down when Chuang Tzu
was writing, or if it was, it was being compiled at roughly
the same time. But it is clear that both books relied upon
the same stock of folk wisdom, wisdom sayings and
oracles. What is distinctive is the different ways each book
handled the same common material. For example, compare
how they each use a series of sayings about babies.
  In chapter 55 of the Tao Te Ching we have:
              ‘Those who have true te
              Are like a newborn baby.’
              – and if they seem like this, they will not be
              stung by wasps or snakes, or pounced on by
              animals in the wild or birds of prey.
              A baby is weak and supple, but his hand can
              grasp your finger.
              He has no desire as yet, and yet he can be
              erect –
              he can cry day and night without even getting
              hoarse
              such is the depth of his harmony.
              It’s stupid to rush around.
              When you fight against yourself, it shows in
              your face.
              But if you draw your sap from your heart
               then you will be truly strong.

               You will be great.3
Chuang Tzu handles the same proverbial wisdom in a
characteristically different way in chapter 23. Lao Tzu has
been asked by Nan Jung Chu how one can protect one’s life.
Lao Tzu replies:
‘The basic way of protecting life – can you embrace the
One?’ said Lao Tzu. ‘Can you hold it fast?… Can you be a
little baby? The baby cries all day long but its throat never
becomes hoarse: that indeed is perfect harmony. The baby
clenches its fists all day long but never gets cramp, it holds
fast to Virtue. The baby stares all day long but it is not
affected by what is outside it. It moves without knowing
where, it sits without knowing where it is sitting, it is
quietly placid and rides the flow of events. This is how to
protect life.’
   … ‘Just now I asked you, “Can you become a little
baby?” The baby acts without knowing why and moves
without knowing where. Its body is like a rotting branch and
its heart is like cold ashes. Being like this, neither bad
fortune will affect it nor good fortune draw near. Having
neither bad nor good fortune, it is not affected by the
misfortune that comes to most others!’
So a common source in this instance is even cited as having
been used in discourse by Lao Tzu, but it is used in very
different ways. This is no rigid adherence to a fixed text –
for no such fixed Tao Te Ching text existed. It is the use of
a common source which later solidified into sacred texts –
both the Tao Te Ching and Chuang Tzu.
   So what was the religious background out of which these
two great texts arose? We have to rid ourselves of any
notion that they arose from a Taoist world. As I have said,
there was no Taoism until much later. Indeed the
philosopher Hsun Tzu, who lived from c. 312 to 221 BC,
thus overlapping in his earlier years with Chuang Tzu, puts
Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu into altogether different schools
of philosophy in his list of such schools. By the time of
Ssu Ma Chien, Chuang Tzu is being spoken of as a pupil of
Lao Tzu’s thought. It is obvious from Chuang Tzu himself
that he holds Lao Tzu in very high esteem, even if he then
goes off on his own path.
   Perhaps it is more important in Chuang Tzu’s case to see
who he was not in favour of, for this gives us a clue to the
religious thought from which he comes. He is an
implacable enemy of the bureaucrats, the petty officials,
the sages who teach benevolence and righteousness. He is
opposed to all those who seek to tame or harness the innate
nature of all aspects of creation, of nature – most
especially that of the people. Ssu Ma Chien’s inclusion of
the story of Chuang Tzu rejecting outright any offer of a
position of authority highlights this. But it is deeper than
this. Chuang Tzu has a profound hatred of all that enslaves
or controls the human spirit. In this he is against the state
cult of Confucians, the cruel, almost fascist teachings of
the Legalists and Mohists, who felt that human nature was
evil and therefore had to be brutally ruled, and yet he is also
against the sentimentality of those who believe that
everyone is really good.
   Chuang Tzu is fed by shamanism, the earliest stream of
Chinese spirituality, but is also in touch with the latest
thinking in fourth-century BC cosmology. He draws his
inspiration for the flow of nature from the shamanistic role
of acting as an intermediary between the spiritual and
physical worlds, where the Way of Heaven is the superior
Way and the material world just a pale reflection of the true
reality of the Heavenly world. This comes out time and
time again when he compares the natural way of Heaven and
Earth with the unnatural way of the rulers, sages and
Emperors. But he is also a man who is teasing out the
depths in new terms and models which were beginning to
percolate into general Chinese thought. Most important
amongst these is the role and significance of the individual
as a being in his or her own right within the cosmos. There
is no place here for the subsuming of the individual within
the needs of the state. In contrast to the State Cult of China,
where the ruler is the intermediary between the rest of
humanity and Heaven, Chuang Tzu sees the rulers as the
problem, and turns to the right of individuals to strike out
for their own salvation, their own sense of place in a world
which they are encouraged to deconstruct and then to re-
assemble by turning to their innate nature.
   This is quite the most radical aspect of his religio-social
thought and lays the seeds for the later rise of Taoism as a
specific religious expression where individual salvation,
purpose and meaning became the central tenet of the new
religion. For in elevating the free individual against the
incorporation and subsuming of the individual within the
corporate, he is moving in a much more radical direction
than the Tao Te Ching does and is challenging the whole
superstructure of conventional Chinese religious and social
life.
   So where does he get this idea from? Heaven knows! But
I would conjecture that much of it is from pure speculation
and from his own logical developments from the contextual
nature of all knowledge, which lead him to see all previous
attempts to impose order and meaning on the universe as
just so much wordy wind in the air. Because his critique of
language and knowledge is so ruthless, he is left with
nothing fixed, nothing ‘given’. In such circumstances the
human spirit can make great leaps forward. I believe that
Chuang Tzu is one of the great innovators of human thought
– a man whose time, maybe, has yet to come. Certainly the
remarkable thing about him, to someone writing in the final
days of the second millennium after Christ, is how modern
he sounds, and yet how in his modern-ness he actually
undermines that modern-ness’s notion of its own
modernity!
   So I would claim that, while one can to some extent
unravel the context of Chuang Tzu’s arguments and the
nature of his opponents, while one can see some
antecedents of his thought in the shamanistic culture which
these bureaucratic opponents were busy destroying, while
one can see elements of what he was saying reflected in
Lao Tzu, ultimately in Chuang Tzu we meet an original man.
A thinker who broke through all the conventions of his time
and entered new fields of thought. That he could do so with
such humour, through such wonderful stories and with such
amazing characters, puts him on a level with the most truly
original and enjoyable thinkers the world has ever seen.
CHAPTER 1
Wandering Where You Will




            In the darkness of the north there is a fish,
whose name is Vast. This fish is enormous, I don’t know
how many thousand miles long. It also changes into a bird,
whose name is Roc, and the roc’s back is I don’t know how
many thousand miles across. When it rises in the air, its
wings are like the clouds of Heaven. When the seas move,
this bird too travels to the south darkness, the darkness
known as the Pool of Heaven.
   The Book of Wonders records a variety of marvels. It
tells how ‘when the roc flies to the southern darkness, the
waters are stirred up for three thousand miles, and he rises
up in a whirlwind, soaring ninety thousand miles, not
ceasing for six months’. It is like the swirling of the dust in
the heat, blowing around below the deep blue of Heaven. Is
this its true colour? Or is it because it is so far away that it
appears like this? To one flying above looking down, the
pattern is indeed the same.
   If the waters are not great enough, they will not have the
ability to carry a large boat. Spill a cupful of water into a
small hollow and even a scrap will look like a boat.
However, if you try and float the cup upon it, it will just sit
there, for the water is not sufficient to carry such a boat.
And if there is not enough wind, it will not have enough
strength to bear up the great wings. The roc needs ninety
thousand miles and the strength of the wind below him, so
that he can rest upon the wind. Thus, with the light of
Heaven on his back and with nothing to restrain him, the
great bird can follow his course to the south.




A cicada taught a young dove, saying with a laugh, ‘I try to
fly, with considerable effort, into an elm or sandalwood
tree, but I find that, before I can reach it, I am pulled back
down to earth. So what chance does this creature have of
rising to ninety thousand miles and heading south?’
  Someone who goes into the countryside with his lunch,
and returns in time for the evening meal will be as full as
when he left. Someone travelling a hundred miles needs to
take enough food to see him through. And someone who
travels a thousand miles needs to carry food for three
months. What do these two understand?
   The understanding of the small cannot be compared to
the understanding of the great. A few years cannot be
compared to many years. How do we know this? The
morning mushroom does not know of the waxing and
waning of the moon. The cicada does not know of spring
and autumn, for theirs are but short lives. To the south of
Chu there is a vast creature for whom five hundred years is
but a spring, and five hundred years is but an autumn. In
ancient antiquity there was a giant tree called Chun, for
whom spring was eight thousand years and for whom
autumn was eight thousand years. Yet Peng Tsu4 is the only
man renowned for his great age, something envied by many
people, which is rather pathetic!
  When the Emperor Tang debated with Chi, a similar issue
arose, for he said:
   ‘In the barren north there is a dark sea called Heaven’s
Pool. Here there is a fish, several thousand miles wide and
goodness knows how long. This creature is called Vast.
There is also a bird, whose name is Roc, and whose back is
like Mount Tai5 and whose wings cover the heavens. He
rises up on a whirlwind, ninety thousand miles high, soaring
through the clouds and breaking through the clear blue sky,
then turns to plot his course south, travelling to the
southern darkness. A quail laughs at him, saying, “Where
are you travelling to? I leap up high but come down again
after just a few feet, falling to earth amongst the bushes.
And frankly that is the best you can expect from flying! So
where is that creature going?” This is what distinguishes the
small from the great.’
   Someone who can fulfil the duties of one office, or
behaves well enough to please one district, or has enough
virtue to please one leader and is used to rule one country,
views himself in the same way as these creatures. However,
Sung Jung Tzu6 would laugh at such a person. The whole
world might praise him but he would not do more as a
result. The whole world might condemn him, but he would
not be affected. He knew the difference between the inner
and the outer and the boundaries between honour and
disgrace, but he went no further. He did not care about the
world’s opinion, but there were boundaries he did not
manage to overcome. The great Lieh Tzu7 could ride the
wind, going to the edges without concern, but returning
after fifteen days. In the search for good fortune he knew
no boundaries. Although he never had to bother with
walking, nevertheless he needed some way of getting
around. If instead he had risen through the naturalness of
Heaven and Earth, travelled on the six elemental forces and
voyaged into the unknown and unlimited, he would have had
to depend upon nothing! As the saying goes
               The perfect man has no self;
               The spiritual man has no merit;
               The holy man has no fame.

   Yao,8 giving up rule of the earth to Hsu Yu,9 said, ‘When
the sun and moon have risen, there is no point in keeping
the torches lit, because it’s a waste of light! When the rainy
season comes, there is little point in continuing to water
the ground! If you, great Master, were to take over the rule
of everything under Heaven, then all would be well,
whereas if I continue, all I am aware of is my failures.
Please, take over ruling the earth.’
   Hsu Yu said, ‘Sir, you rule everything below Heaven, and
everything below Heaven is well ruled. If I take over from
you, Sir, won’t people think I’m doing it just for the fame?
But fame is nothing compared to reality. I would be like a
guest, wouldn’t I? The tailor bird makes its nest deep in the
forest, but only uses one branch. The tapir drinks from the
river Ho, but only takes what it needs. Return home, my
noble Lord, for I have no interest in ruling the kingdom.
The cook may not run his kitchen well, but the shaman does
not jump up and take over.’
Chien Wu said to Lien Shu, ‘I was listening to the words of
Chieh Yu10 – his words sounded fine, but there was no
substance, going on and on but coming to no conclusion. I
was considerably astonished by his words, for they seemed
endless like the Milky Way; vast overstatements and not
related to the world of humanity.’
  Lien Shu said, ‘What was he talking about?’
   ‘He said, “Far away on a mountain called Ku She, there
lives a holy man whose skin is like ice and pure snow, and
his manner is like a shy virgin. He does not eat the five
grains, but lives off the wind and dew. He climbs the clouds
and rides the dragons, and travels beyond the boundaries of
the known world. He has distilled holiness and uses this to
heal all and to bring full harvests.” Now I think this is
nonsense and don’t believe such words.’
   Lien Shu said, ‘Obviously. You wouldn’t ask a blind man
to appreciate a scene of beauty, nor a deaf man to enjoy the
sounds of drums and bells. But it is possible to be blind and
deaf in one’s deep understanding, as well as physically.
Your very words show this, for you spoke like a young
woman waiting for her appointed time!
   ‘This man with such virtue can hold all existence and roll
it into one. Reform is called for, so you, you fool, would
just ask such a one to take over the empire! Such a man as
this, nothing harms him, not even great floods pouring from
the sky can drown him, nor the great drought which melts
gold and stone and burns mountains and hills. One like him
could make a Yao or Shun11 just from his dust and debris,
but he is not bothered by such things! A man from Sung
who traded in official ceremonial hats travelled to Yueh,
but the people of Yueh, who cut their hair and tattoo
themselves, have no use for such things. Yao brought peace
to the people of the earth and within the boundaries of the
seas. But he went to visit the four masters of distant Ku She
mountain, north of the river Fen, and he became aware that
his rule was meaningless.’




Hui Tzu spoke to Chuang Tzu, saying, ‘The King of Wei
gave me the seeds of an enormous gourd, which I planted
and it produced a fruit big enough to hold five bushels of
anything, so I used it to hold water, but it was then too
heavy to pick up. I cut it into two to make scoops, but they
were too awkward to use. It was not that they weren’t big, I
just found I could not make use of them, so I destroyed
them.’
  Chuang Tzu said, ‘Dear Sir, surely the problem is that
you don’t know how to use big things. There is a man in
Sung who could make a cream which prevented the hands
from getting chapped, and generation after generation of
his family have made a living by bleaching silk. A pilgrim
heard this and offered to buy the secret for a hundred
pieces of gold. All the family came together to respond and
said, “For generation after generation we have bleached
silk, yet we have never made more than a few pieces of
gold; now in just one morning we can earn a hundred pieces
of gold! Let’s do it.” So the pilgrim got the secret and went
to see the King of Wu. He was struggling with the state of
Yueh. The King of Wu gave the pilgrim command of the
army and in the depths of winter they fought the men of
Yueh on the water, inflicting a crushing blow on the forces
of Yueh, and the traveller was rewarded by the gift of a vast
estate from the conquered territory. The cream had stopped
the hands chapping in both cases: one gained an estate, but
the others had never got further than bleaching silk,
because they used this secret in such different ways. Now,
Sir, you have a gourd big enough to hold five bushels, so
why didn’t you use it to make big bottles which could help
you float down the rivers and lakes, instead of dismissing it
as being useless? Because, dear Sir, your head is full of
straw!’




Hui Tzu spoke to Chuang Tzu, saying, ‘I have a big tree,
which people call useless. Its trunk is so knotted, no
carpenter could work on it, while its branches are too
twisted to use a square or compass upon. So, although it is
close to the road, no carpenter would look at it. Now, Sir,
your words are like this, too big and no use, therefore
everyone ignores them.’
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘Sir, have you never seen a wild cat or
weasel? It lies there, crouching and waiting; east and west it
leaps out, not afraid of going high or low; until it is caught
in a trap and dies in a net. Yet again, there is the yak, vast
like a cloud in heaven. It is big, but cannot use this fact to
catch rats. Now you, Sir, have a large tree, and you don’t
know how to use it, so why not plant it in the middle of
nowhere, where you can go to wander or fall asleep under
its shade? No axe under Heaven will attack it, nor shorten
its days, for something which is useless will never be
disturbed.’
CHAPTER 2
Working Everything Out Evenly




              Master Chi of the Southern District sat leaning
forward on his chair, staring up at Heaven and breathing
steadily, as if in a trance, forgetful of all around him.
Master Yen Cheng Yu stood beside him and said, ‘What is
it? Is it true that you can make the body like a shrivelled
tree, the heart like cold, dead ashes? Surely the man here
now is not the same as the one who was here yesterday.’
  Master Chi said, ‘Yen, this is a good point to make, but
do you really understand?
               ‘I have lost myself, do you understand?
               You hear the pipes of the people, but not the
               pipes of earth.
               Even if you hear the pipes of earth, you don’t
hear the pipes of Heaven!’
‘Please explain this,’ said Master Yu.
Master Chi replied,
‘The vast breath of the universe, this is
called Wind.
Sometimes it is unmoving;
when it moves it makes the ten thousand
openings resound dramatically.
Have you not heard it,
like a terrifying gale?
Mountains and forests are stormed by it,
great trees, a hundred spans round with dips
and hollows,
are like noses, like mouths, like ears, like
sockets,
like cups, like mortars, like pools, like
gulleys;
sounding like a crashing wave, a whistling
arrow, a screech; sucking, shouting, barking,
wailing, moaning,
the winds ahead howling yeeh,
those behind crying yooh,
light breezes making gentle sounds,
while the typhoon creates a great din.
               When the typhoon has passed, all goes quiet
               again.
               Have you not witnessed this disturbance
               settle down again?’
   Master Yu said, ‘What you’ve just described are the
notes of the earth, while the notes of humanity come from
wind instruments, but you have said nothing about the notes
of Heaven.’
  ‘The role of these forces on all forms of living things is
not the same,’ said Master Chi. ‘For each is different, using
what they need to be, not influenced by any other force!’




               True depth of understanding is wide and
               steady,
               Shallow understanding is lazy and wandering,
               Words of wisdom are precise and clear,
               Foolish words are petty and mean.
               When we sleep, our spirits roam the earth,
               when awake our bodies are alert,
               whatever we encounter captures us,
               day by day our hearts are struggling.
Often simple,
often deep,
often intimate.
Minor troubles make them unsettled,
anxious,
Major troubles are plain and simple.
They fly off like an arrow,
convinced that they know right from wrong;
it is like one who makes a sacred promise,
standing sure and true and on their way to
victory.
They give way, like autumn and winter,
decaying away with the ebb and flow of each
day;
it is like a stream of water, it cannot be
brought back;
they stagnate, because they are like old
blocked drains,
brought on by old age,
which makes their minds closed as if near
death,
and there is nothing which can draw their
hearts into the power of the yang –
the life-giving light.
Joy and anger,
sadness and delight,
hope and disappointment;
faithlessness and certainty,
forcefulness and sloth,
eagerness and reticence,
like notes from an empty reed,
or mushrooms growing in dampness,
day and night follow each other before our
very eyes and we have no idea why.
Enough, enough!
Morning and night exist,
we cannot know more about the Origin than
this!
Without them, we don’t exist,
Without us, they have no purpose.
This is close to our meaning,
but we cannot know what creates things to be
thus.
It is as if they have a Supreme Guidance, but
there is no way of grasping such a One.
He can certainly act, of that there is no
doubt,
but I cannot see his body.
He has desires, but no body.
A hundred parts and nine orifices and six
organs,
are parts that go to make up myself,
but is any part more noble than another?
You say I should treat all parts as equally
noble:
But shouldn’t I also treat some as better than
others?
Don’t they all serve me as well as each
other?
If they are all servants, then aren’t they all as
bad as each other?
Or are there rulers amongst these servants?
There must be some Supreme Ruler who is
over them all.
Though it is doubtful that you can find his
true form,
and even if it were possible,
is it not meaningless to his true nature?
When someone is born in this body, doesn’t
life continue until death?
Either in conflict with others or in harmony
with them,
we go through life like a runaway horse,
unable to stop.
Working hard until the end of his life,
unable to appreciate any achievement,
worn out and incapable of resting,
isn’t he a pathetic sight?
He may say, ‘I’m still alive,’ but so what?
When the body rots, so does the mind – is
this not tragic?
Is this not ridiculous, or is it just me that is
ridiculous and everyone else is sane?
If you allow your mind to guide you,
who then can be seen as being without a
teacher?
Why is it thought that only the one who
understands change and whose heart
approves this can be the teacher?
Surely the fool is just the same.
But if you ignore your mind but insist you
know right from wrong, you are like the
saying,
‘Today I set off for Yueh and arrived
yesterday.’
This is to claim that what is not, is;
               That what is not, does exist –
               why, even the holy sage           Yu cannot
               understand this,
               let alone poor old me!




   Our words are not just hot air. Words work because they
say something, but the problem is that, if we cannot define
a word’s meaning, it doesn’t really say anything. Is it
possible that there really is something here? Or does it
really mean nothing? Is it possible to make a proper case
for it being any different from the chirruping of chicks?
How is it that we have the Tao so obscured that we have to
distinguish between true and false? What has clouded our
words so that we can have both what is and what is not?
How can it be that the Tao goes off and is no longer? How
can it be that words are found but are not understood?
When the Tao is obscured by pettiness and the words are
obscured by elaboration, then we end up having the ‘this is,
this is not’ of the Confucians and Mohists, with what one of
them calls reality being denied by the other, and what the
other calls real disputed by the first. If we want to confound
what they call right and confirm what they call wrong, we
need to shed light on both of them.
   Nothing exists which is not ‘that’, nothing exists which is
not ‘this’. I cannot look at something through someone
else’s eyes, I can only truly know something which I know.
Therefore ‘that’ comes out of ‘this’ and ‘this’ arises from
‘that’. That is why we say that ‘that’ and ‘this’ are born from
each other, most definitely.
   Compare birth with death, compare death with life;
compare what is possible with what is not possible and
compare what is not possible with what is possible; because
there is, there is not, and because there is not, there is.
   Thus it is that the sage does not go down this way, but
sheds the light of Heaven upon such issues. This is also that
and that is also this. The ‘that’ is on the one hand also ‘this’,
and ‘this’ is on the other hand also ‘that’. Does this mean he
still has a this and that? Does this mean he does not have a
this and that?
   When ‘this’ and ‘that’ do not stand against each other, this
is called the pivot of the Tao. This pivot provides the centre
of the circle, which is without end, for it can react equally
to that which is and to that which is not. This is why it is
best to shed light on such issues. To use a finger to show
that a finger is not a finger, is not really as good as using
something that is not a finger to show that a finger is not a
finger; to use a horse to show a horse is not a horse is not
as good as using something other than a horse to show that
a horse is not a horse. Heaven and Earth are as one as a
finger is, and all of creation is as one as a horse is.
              What is, is, what is not, is not.
              The Tao is made because we walk it,
              things become what they are called.
              Why is this so? Surely because this is so.
              Why is this not so? Surely because this is
              not so.
              Everything has what is innate,
              everything has what is necessary.
              Nothing is not something,
              nothing is not so.
              Therefore, take a stalk of wheat and a pillar,
              a leper or a beauty like Hsi-shih,
              the great and the insecure,
              the cunning and the odd:
              all these are alike to the Tao.
              In their difference is their completeness;
              in their completeness is their difference.
   Through the Tao they are all seen as one, regardless of
their completeness or difference, by those who are capable
of such extended vision. Such a person has no need for
distinctions but follows the ordinary view. The ordinary
view is firmly set on the ground of usefulness. The
usefulness of something defines its use; the use is its
flexibility; its flexibility is its essence and from this it
comes to a stop. We stop but do not know why we stop, and
this is called Tao.
   To tax our spirits and our intellect in this way without
realizing that everything is the same is called ‘Three in the
Morning’. And what is ‘Three in the Morning’? A monkey
trainer was giving out acorns and he said, ‘In the morning I
will give you each three acorns and in the evening you will
get four.’ The monkeys were very upset at this and so he
said, ‘All right, in the morning you will get four and in the
evening, three.’ This pleased the monkeys no end. His two
statements were essentially the same, but got different
reactions from the monkeys. He gained what he wanted by
his skill. So it is with the sage, who manages to harmonize
right and wrong and is content to abide by the Natural
Equality of Heaven. This is called walking two roads.




The men of old understood a great deal. How much?
   In the beginning they did not know that anything existed;
this is virtually perfect knowledge, for nothing can be
added. Later, they knew that some things existed but they
did not distinguish between them. Next came those who
distinguished between things, but did not judge things as
‘being’ or ‘not being’. It was when judgements were made
that the Tao was damaged, and because the Tao was
damaged, love became complete. Is anything complete or
damaged? Is anything not complete or damaged? There is
completion and damage, just as Chao Wen12 played the lute.
There is nothing which is complete or damaged, just as
Chao Wen did not play the lute.
               Chao Wen played the lute,
               Shih Kuang conducted,
               Hui Tzu debated.
   The understanding of these three was almost perfect and
they followed it to the end of their years. They cared about
this because it was different, and they wanted to teach
others about it. But it was not possible to make things clear,
though they tried to make things simple. They ended up
instead with the folly of the ‘hard’ and the ‘white’.
   Wen’s son ended up continuing to play Wen’s lute and
achieved nothing for himself. If someone like this is called
complete, then am I not also? And if someone like this is
called incomplete, then surely neither I nor anyone else has
ever been complete. Also, by the light shining out of chaos,
the sage is guided; he does not make use of distinctions but
is led on by the light.
Now, however, I have something to say. Do I know whether
this is in the same sort of category as what is said by
others? I don’t know. At one level, what I say is not the
same. At another level, it most definitely is, and there is no
difference between what I say and what others say.
Whatever the case, let me try and tell you what I mean.
  There is the beginning; there is not as yet any beginning
of the beginning; there is not as yet beginning not to be a
beginning of the beginning. There is what is, and there is
what is not, and it is not easy to say whether what is not, is
not; or whether what is, is.
  I have just made a statement, yet I do not know whether
what I said has been real in what I said or not really said.
  Under Heaven there is nothing greater than the tip of a
hair, but Mount Tai is smaller; there is no one older than a
dead child, yet Peng Tsu died young.
   Heaven and Earth and I were born at the same time, and
all life and I are one.
   As all life is one, what need is there for words? Yet I
have just said all life is one, so I have already spoken,
haven’t I? One plus one equals two, two, plus one equals
three. To go on from here would take us beyond the
understanding of even a skilled accountant, let alone the
ordinary people. If going from ‘nothing’ to ‘some-thing’ we
get to three, just think how much further we would have to
go if we went from ‘some-thing’ to something!13
  Don’t even start, let’s just stay put.
   The great Tao has no beginning, and words have changed
their meaning from the beginning, but because of the idea
of a ‘this is’ there came to be limitations. I want to say
something about these limitations. There is right and left,
relationships and their consequences, divisions and
disagreements, emulations and contentions. These are
known as the eight Virtues.
   The sage will not speak of what is beyond the boundaries
of the universe – though he will not deny it either. What is
within the universe, he says something about but does not
pronounce upon. Concerning the record of the past actions
of the kings in the Spring and Autumn Annals, the sage
discusses but does not judge. When something is divided,
something is not divided; when there is disagreement there
are things not disagreed about.
  You ask, what does this mean? The sage encompasses
everything, while ordinary people just argue about things.
This is why I say that disagreement means you do not
understand at all.
               The great Way is not named,
               the great disagreement is unspoken,
               great benevolence is not benevolent,
               great modesty is not humble,
               great courage is not violent.
               The Tao that is clear is not the Tao,
               speech which enables argument is not
               worthy,
               benevolence which is ever present does not
               achieve its goal,
               modesty if flouted, fails,
               courage that is violent is pointless.
   These five are fine: they are, as it were, rounded. But if
they lose this they can become awkward. This is why the
one who knows how to stop at what he knows is best. Who
knows the argument that needs no words, and the Tao that
cannot be named? To those who do, this is called the
Treasury of Heaven. Pour into it and it is never full; empty
it and it is never empty. We do not know where it comes
from originally, and this is called our Guiding Light.




In the olden days Yao said to Shun, ‘I want to attack Tsung,
Kuai and Hsu Ao. I have wanted to do this since I became
king. What do you think?’
   Shun replied, ‘These three rulers are just primitives
living in the backwoods – why can’t you just forget them?
In ancient times, ten suns rose and all life was illuminated.
But how much more does Virtue illuminate life than even
these suns!’




Yeh Chueh said to Wang Ni, ‘Do you know, Master, what
everything agrees upon?’
               ‘How can I possibly know?’ said Wang Ni.
               ‘Do you know, Master, what you do not
               know?’
               ‘How can I know?’ he replied.
               ‘Then does nothing know anything?’
  ‘How could I know that?’ said Wang Ni. ‘Nevertheless, I
want to try and say something. How can I know that what I
say I know is not actually what I don’t know? Likewise, how
can I know that what I think I don’t know is not really what I
do know? I want to put some questions to you:
   ‘If someone sleeps in a damp place, he will ache all over
and he will be half paralysed, but is it the same for an eel?
If someone climbs a tree, he will be frightened and shaking,
but is it so for a monkey? Out of these three, which is
wisest about where to live?
  ‘Humans eat meat, deer consume grass, centipedes
devour snakes and owls and crows enjoy mice. Of these
four, which has the best taste?
  ‘Monkeys mate with each other, deer go with deer.
People said that Mao Chiang and Li Chi were the most
beautiful women in the world, but fish seeing them dived
away, birds took off into the air and deer ran off. Of these
four, who really knows true beauty? As I see it,
benevolence and righteousness, also the ways of right and
wrong, are completely interwoven. I do not think I can
know the difference between them!’
   Yeh Chueh said: ‘Master, if you do not know the
difference between that which is good and that which is
harmful, does this mean the perfect man is also without
such knowledge?’
   ‘The perfect man is pure spirit,’ replied Wang Ni. ‘He
does not feel the heat of the burning deserts nor the cold of
the vast waters. He is not frightened by the lightning which
can split open mountains, nor by the storms that can whip
up the seas. Such a person rides the clouds and mounts
upon the sun and moon, and wanders across and beyond the
four seas. Neither death nor life concern him, nor is he
interested in what is good or bad!’
Chu Chiao Tzu asked Chang Wu Tzu,
               ‘I have heard from the Master
               that the sage does not labour at anything,
               does not look for advantage,
               does not act benevolently,
               does not harm,
               does not pursue the Tao;
               He speaks without speaking,
               and does not speak when he speaks,
               and looks beyond the confines of this dusty
               world.
  ‘The Master sees all this as an endless stream of words,
but to me they are like the words of the mysterious Tao.
Master, what do you think?’
   Chang Wu Tzu said, ‘Such a saying as this would have
confused even the Yellow Emperor,14 so how could
Confucius be able to understand them! However, you are
getting ahead of yourself, counting your chickens before
your eggs are hatched and looking at the bowl, imagining
the roasted fowl. I will try to speak to you in a random way,
so you listen to me likewise. How can the wise one sit
beside the sun and moon and embrace the universe?
Because he brings all things together in harmony, he rejects
difference and confusion and ignores status and power.
While ordinary people rush busily around, the sage seems
stupid and ignorant, but to him all life is one and united. All
life is simply what it is and all appear to him to be doing
what they rightly should.
   ‘How do I know that the love of life is not a delusion? Or
that the fear of death is not like a young person running
away from home and unable to find his way back? The Lady
Li Chi was the daughter of a border warden, Ai. When the
state of Chin captured her, she wept until she had drenched
her robes; then she came to the King’s palace, shared the
King’s bed, ate his food, and repented of her tears. How do
I know whether the dead now repent for their former
clinging to life?
   ‘Come the morning, those who dream of the drunken
feast may weep and moan; when the morning comes, those
who dream of weeping and moaning go hunting in the
fields. When they dream, they don’t know it is a dream.
Indeed, in their dreams they may think they are interpreting
dreams, only when they awake do they know it was a dream.
Eventually there comes the day of reckoning and
awakening, and then we shall know that it was all a great
dream. Only fools think that they are now awake and that
they really know what is going on, playing the prince and
then playing the servant. What fools! The Master and you
are both living in a dream. When I say a dream, I am also
dreaming. This very saying is a deception. If after ten
thousand years we could once meet a truly great sage, one
who understands, it would seem as if it had only been a
morning.
   ‘Imagine that you and I have a disagreement, and you get
the better of me, rather than me getting the better of you,
does this mean that you are automatically right and I am
automatically wrong? Suppose I get the better of you, does
it follow that I am automatically right and you are therefore
wrong? Is it really that one of us is right and the other
wrong? Or are we both right and both wrong? Neither you
nor I can really know and other people are even more in the
dark. So who can we ask to give us the right answer? Should
you ask someone who thinks you are right? But how then
can that person give a fair answer? Should we ask someone
who thinks I am right? But then if he agrees with me, how
can he make a fair judgement? Then again, should we ask
someone who agrees with both of us? But again, if he
agrees with both of us, how can he make a true judgement?
Should we ask someone who disagrees with both of us? But
here again, if he disagrees with both of us, how can he make
an honest judgement? It is clear that neither you, I nor
anyone else can make decisions like this amongst
ourselves. So should we wait for someone else to turn up?
  ‘To wait for one voice to bring it all together is as
pointless as waiting for no one. Bring all things together
under the Equality of Heaven, allow their process of change
to go on unimpeded, and learn to grow old. What do I mean
by bringing everything together under the Equality of
Heaven? With regard to what is right and wrong, I say not
being is being and being is not being. But let us not get
caught up in discussing this. Forget about life, forget about
worrying about right and wrong. Plunge into the unknown
and the endless and find your place there!’




The Outline said to the Shadow, ‘First you are on the move,
then you are standing still; you sit down and then you stand
up. Why can’t you make up your mind?’
   Shadow replied, ‘Do I have to look to something else to
be what I am? Does this something else itself not have to
rely upon yet another something? Do I have to depend upon
the scales of a snake or the wings of a cicada? How can I
tell how things are? How can I tell how things are not?’
   Once upon a time, I, Chuang Tzu, dreamt that I was a
butterfly, flitting around and enjoying myself. I had no idea
I was Chuang Tzu. Then suddenly I woke up and was Chuang
Tzu again. But I could not tell, had I been Chuang Tzu
dreaming I was a butterfly, or a butterfly dreaming I was
now Chuang Tzu? However, there must be some sort of
difference between Chuang Tzu and a butterfly! We call this
the transformation of things.
CHAPTER 3
The Nurturing of Life




              Our life has a boundary but there is no
boundary to knowledge.
              To use what has a boundary to pursue what is
              limitless is dangerous;
              with this knowledge, if we still go after
              knowledge, we will run into trouble.
              Do not do what is good in order to gain
              praise.
              If you do what is bad be sure to avoid the
              punishment.
              Follow the Middle Course, for this is the
              way to keep yourself together,
              to sustain your life, to care for your parents
               and to live for many years.




Cook Ting was butchering an ox for Lord Wen Hui. Every
movement of his hand, every shrug of his shoulder, every
step of his feet, every thrust of his knee, every sound of the
sundering flesh and the swoosh of the descending knife,
were all in perfect accord, like the Mulberry Grove Dance
or the rhythm of the Ching-shou.15
  ‘Ah, how excellent!’ said Lord Wen Hui. ‘How has your
skill become so superb?’
   Cook Ting put down his knife and said, ‘What your
servant loves best is the Tao, which is better than any art.
When I started to cut up oxen, what I saw was just a
complete ox. After three years, I had learnt not to see the
ox as whole. Now I practise with my mind, not with my
eyes. I ignore my sense and follow my spirit. I see the
natural lines and my knife slides through the great hollows,
follows the great cavities, using that which is already there
to my advantage. Thus, I miss the great sinews and even
more so, the great bones. A good cook changes his knife
annually, because he slices. An ordinary cook has to change
his knife every month, because he hacks. Now this knife of
mine I have been using for nineteen years, and it has cut
thousands of oxen. However, its blade is as sharp as if it had
just been sharpened. Between the joints there are spaces,
and the blade of a knife has no real thickness. If you put
what has no thickness into spaces such as these, there is
plenty of room, certainly enough for the knife to work
through. However, when I come to a difficult part and can
see that it will be difficult, I take care and pay due regard. I
look carefully and I move with caution. Then, very gently, I
move the knife until there is a parting and the flesh falls
apart like a lump of earth falling to the ground. I stand with
the knife in my hand looking around and then, with an air of
satisfaction, I wipe the knife and put it away.’
   ‘Splendid!’ said Lord Wen Hui. ‘I have heard what cook
Ting has to say and from his words I have learned how to
live life fully.’




When Kung Wen Hsien saw the Commander of the Right he
was surprised and said, ‘Who is this man? Why has he only
got one foot? Is this from Heaven or from man?’16
   ‘From Heaven, not from man,’ said the Commander. ‘My
life came from Heaven, which also gave me just one foot.
The human appearance is a gift, which is why I know that
this is from Heaven, not from man. The marsh pheasant
manages one peck every ten paces, and one drink every
hundred steps, but it does not wish to be kept in a cage.
Even if you treated it like a king, its spirit would not be
happy.’




When Lao Tzu died, Chin Shih came to mourn for him. He
uttered three shouts and then left.
   A follower of the Master said, ‘Wasn’t the Master a
friend of yours?’
  ‘Certainly,’ he replied.
  ‘Then do you really think this way of mourning is best?’
   ‘Certainly. To begin with I thought these were real men,
but now I am not so sure. When I came in to mourn, there
were old folk weeping as though they had lost a child; there
were young people wailing as if for the loss of a mother.
Such a gathering of everyone, all talking away though he
didn’t ask them to talk and weeping even though he didn’t
ask for tears! This is to turn from Heaven and to indulge in
emotions, ignoring what is given. The ancient ones called
this the result of violating the principles of Heaven. When
the Master came, it was because he was due to be born.
When he died, it was entirely natural. If you are prepared to
accept this and flow with it, then sorrow and joy cannot
touch you. The ancient ones considered this the work of the
gods who free us from bondage.
   ‘We can point to the wood that has been burned, but when
the fire has passed on, we cannot know where it has gone.’
CHAPTER 4
Out and About in the World




            Yen Hui17 went to see Confucius and asked his
permission to leave.
  ‘Where are you going?’ asked Confucius.
  ‘To the state of Wei.’
  ‘For what reason?’
   He replied, ‘Hui, Prince of Wei, is full of youthful
vigour and determined in all he does. He treats his country
with scant regard and is incapable of seeing his own faults.
He has scant regard for the death of the people, and the
dead lie across his country like scrub in the marshland. As
for the people, they don’t know where to turn. About Hui, I
have heard you say, my Master, “Pay no heed to the state
that is well run, but go to the state that is in real trouble.
Around the door of the doctor gather many who are ill.”
Using these words of yours as a guide, I want to see if I can
do anything for that state.’
   ‘Alas!’ said Confucius. ‘You will certainly bring sorrow
and even death upon yourself! The great Way doesn’t get
involved like this, mixing many things together. In such a
mixture, the one true path gets lost in the many. With many
paths comes confusion; with confusion comes problems;
when problems arise, the situation cannot be resolved. The
perfect man of old looked after himself first before
looking to help others. If you look to yourself and find
there are troubles, what use will you be if you try to sort
out a dictator?
   ‘Do you know how virtue is ruined, or where knowledge
comes from? Virtue is ruined by fame and knowledge
comes from argument Struggling for fame, people destroy
each other, and knowledge is used for argument. Both of
them are used for evil and you should have nothing to do
with them. You may have great virtue and unquestionable
sincerity. You may be kind-hearted and without interest in
fame, but if you do not understand how people feel and
think, you will do harm, not good. Such people try to force
the people to be benevolent, to act properly and impose
laws, and as a result they end up being hated precisely
because they care about others. This is known as hurting
others. Those who hurt will themselves be hurt and this is
likely to be what will happen to you!
   ‘Imagine, he could be the sort of king who values the
good and hates the bad, so what point would there be in you
trying to make him change his ways? Keep your advice for
yourself. Kings and princes tend to assume they are right
and will do all they can to win. You will find your eyes
dazzled, your colour changing and your mouth trying to find
words to apologize with, you will bend in contrition and
your mind will agree with whatever he says. This is like
trying to fight fire with fire, or water with water. This is to
pile more on to more. Once you do this, you will be unable
to argue with him again. Your words will be of no avail, for
he will not believe them. As a result, you will be killed by a
dictator like this.
   ‘In earlier times, Chieh18 murdered Kuan Lung Feng and
Chou killed Prince Pi Kan.19 Both these two were men who
developed their characters best in order to pass the benefits
down to their people. Those who ruled them were upset by
the concern of these two, and as a result of their morality,
they were destroyed by the rulers. Both the good and the
bad struggle for fame. In ancient times, Yao attacked the
states of Tsung Chih and Hsu Ao, Yu attacked the state of
Yu Hu, and as a result these states were destroyed, their
kings killed. Their desire for warfare had been insatiable
and their wish for power inexhaustible. All of these sought
fame and fortune – surely you know of them? The sages
could not handle such people, how much less can you!
However, you obviously have some plan in mind, so go on,
tell me what it is!’
  ‘If I am stern in intent and dispassionate, keen and single-
minded, will this be enough?’ asked Yen Hui.
   Confucius said, ‘Is that it? That will not do! This man acts
as if he were supremely confident and puts himself about
with style, yet you cannot judge what he really thinks from
his demeanour. Ordinary people do not get in his way, so he
has developed a taste for trampling upon other people’s
feelings. Given that normal virtues are wasted on him, how
do you expect to present him with yet higher ones! He will
dig his toes in and refuse to change. He may pretend to
agree with you, but there will be no inner change. How can
you imagine you will succeed?’
   ‘I will retain my inner integrity, but outwardly be
deceptive. I shall cite historical precedent. Inwardly
genuine, I shall be guided by Heaven. Guided by Heaven, I
shall know that both I and the Prince, the Son of Heaven,
are both children of Heaven. Who then cares whether what
he says is listened to or not? Surely someone like this is
called a child by the people. This is what comes of being a
child of Heaven. With this external guile, I can befriend
people. Bowing and scraping, paying obeisance, this is what
all ministers do. As this is what everyone does, no one will
hold it against me. If I do just what others do, no one can
criticize me. Citing historical precedent, I will be the
dutiful student of antiquity. The words I shall use will
condemn and reprove, but the point is they will be seen as
the words of the old ones, not mine. This means I can tell
the truth but be free from any blame. This is what I mean by
citing historical precedent. If I do this, do you think it will
work?’
  Confucius said, ‘Is that it? That will not do! There are too
many schemes here, good ones but not well thought out.
They may get you out of trouble, but they will not do what
you want, as they are far from perfect. You are still being
guided by your expectations.’
  ‘I have nothing else to suggest,’ said Yen Hui, ‘so tell me
what you would do.’
  Confucius said, ‘Go away and fast, then I will tell you
what to do. While still plotting, do you think you can really
be guided in what to do? The one who thinks he has it will
not easily be guided by the Light of Heaven.’
   ‘The Hui family is poor,’ said Yen Hui, ‘and we have not
drunk wine or eaten meat for months. In this instance, will
this count as having fasted?’
  ‘This is fasting for the sacrifice, but not fasting of the
heart.’
  ‘Then what is fasting of the heart?’
   ‘Your mind must become one, do not try to understand
with your ears but with your heart. Indeed, not with your
heart but with your soul. Listening blocks the ears, set your
heart on what is right, but let your soul be open to receive
in true sincerity. The Way is found in emptiness. Emptiness
is the fasting of the heart.’
   Yen Hui said, ‘Previously, when I fasted, but not with the
fast of the heart, I felt I was Hui; when I went on to the fast
of the heart, I found I was not Hui. Is this what is called
emptiness?’
   The great Master said, ‘Precisely! I’ll tell you. Go and
join this man in his cage, but don’t set out to impress him.
If he comes to like you, then you may sing for him. If he
will not listen, keep quiet. Do not appear to be an open
door, nor seek to be a balm. Be at one with all in his house
and learn to bear what cannot be changed. Do this, and you
might almost be successful. It’s not difficult to stop
walking, but to walk without touching the earth is more
difficult. If you act like any other person, it is easy to be
hypocritical, but if you act in the style of Heaven, the
reverse is true. One hears of flying by means of wings, but
never of flying without them; one hears of knowing as a
result of knowledge, but never of knowing without
knowledge. Take a look at the room that is shut off, the
empty room where true light is born, and there is really
contentment and stillness. But if you cannot remain still,
then your mind goes racing off, even though physically you
remain sitting. Use your ears and eyes to speak to what is
within and use your heart and knowledge to speak to what is
without. Then you will draw down the very gods themselves
as well as other people. This is the mystery of all life: that
which links Yu and Shun, that which Fu Hsi and Chi Chu20
lived by. Just think how even more important it is for
ordinary mortals!’
   Duke Tzu Kao of She, just before he left on a mission to
the state of Chi, asked Confucius, ‘The King has given me a
most important mission to Chi. They will show me great
courtesy, but they are unlikely to make much speed in the
issue. Given how hard it is to push an ordinary person
along, a nobleman is likely to be even more difficult. I
really am worried. You used to tell me that “in whatever we
set ourselves to do, no matter how great or small,
following the Tao alone leads to success. To fail is to bring
the judgement of others upon you. To succeed brings
disturbance of the yin and yang. To escape any distress
regardless of success or failure is only possible to a really
virtuous man.” I eat sensible food so that my kitchens are
never overheated. However, this very morning I was given
my commission and this evening I am drinking iced water. I
wonder if I am getting sick. So already I have got into the
bad state of disturbed yin and yang. If I fail, I shall have
trouble from others. This means I am suffering on two
fronts, and as a minister I doubt if I can carry out this
commission. Perhaps you could give me some advice?’
   ‘Under Heaven there are two great principles,’ replied
Confucius. ‘The first is destiny, the other one is duty. The
love of a child for its parents, this is destiny, it is there in
his heart. A subject’s service of his lord, this is duty,
because he must have an overlord, this is how it is in the
wide world. These are known as the two great principles. To
be obedient to your parents and be prepared to follow them
come what may, this is true filial piety. To serve your lord
happily, regardless of what he asks you to do, this is real
loyalty. To serve your own soul in such a way as to prevent
either joy or sorrow within, but outwardly to handle what
life throws at you as inevitable and not to be worried by
this, this is the perfection of Virtue. Therefore, the person
who finds himself in the position of a son or subject has at
times to do what he has to do. Caught up in these affairs of
state, he forgets his own life. He has no time to sit and
contemplate the love of life or the fear of death! Therefore,
my dear Sir, go on your mission!
   ‘Let me tell you something else I have found out. In the
ebb and flow of relationships between two states, if they
live side by side and have regular links, they can show how
mutual their interests are through their actions. If, however,
they are separated by distance, then they have to rely upon
the spoken word, and such messages have to be relayed by
someone. But trying to convey the areas of joy and
displeasure of both sides in such messages, is about the
most thankless task under Heaven. When both sides are
happy, the messages have to be laden down with excessive
praise. When both sides are angry, the messages have to be
laden with excessive aggression. Any exaggeration is false.
Where there is falsehood, no one can trust a word and the
messenger is in real trouble. This is why the Fa Yen21 says,
“Convey what each side wishes to say, but leave out the
exaggerations.” Do that and you may well be all right.
   ‘When people gather to wrestle and sport, they always
begin in a friendly mood, but always end with anger and
aggression. As the pressure mounts, they resort to amazing
tricks. When people gather to drink at special ceremonies,
they begin in a proper and restrained manner, but soon
degenerate into rowdiness. As this grows, their behaviour
becomes more and more excessive. This is true of all
things. People start off with sincerity but degenerate into
rudeness. Things start simply enough, but soon become
complex and confusing.
   ‘Words are like the ebb and flow of the wind-blown seas:
the purpose of them can become overwhelmed. The wind
and seas are easily stirred, and what was attempted can be
swamped and lost. Likewise, anger can be whipped up by
cunning words and biased speeches. When anger comes,
people bellow their rage like animals being driven to their
death, their breath comes out in bursts of distress. Then the
hearts of both sides are turned to rage. People are driven
into a corner, having little idea how they got there but they
respond with brutality. They do not know how this happens,
so what hope is there of stopping all this? This is why the
Fa Yen says, “Do not wander from the original charge you
are given. Do not try to force the pace of negotiation. To go
beyond what is asked is to be excessive.” To go outside
what your charge was, and to try to solve everything
yourself, is dangerous. It takes time to arrive at an
appropriate settlement. A bad settlement, once made,
cannot be changed! Therefore, take care, let your heart
follow whatever happens. Accept what happens as it occurs
in order to find your true place, follow the middle way. The
best thing to do is leave it all to fate, even if this is not easy
to do!’
   Yen Ho was about to start as tutor to the eldest son of
Duke Ling of the state of Wei, so he went to visit Chu Po
Yu22 and said, ‘Here is a man whom Heaven has given a
nature devoid of all virtue. If I simply allow him to go on in
this way, the state is at risk; if I try to bring him back to a
principled life, then my life is at risk. He can just about
recognize the excesses of others, but not his own excesses.
In a case like this, what can I do?’
   ‘This is a good question!’ said Chu Po Yu. ‘Be on guard,
be careful, make sure you yourself are right. Let your
appearance be in agreement, let your heart be content and
harmonious. However, both these strategies have their
dangers. Do not let your outward stance affect your inner
self, nor allow your inner self to be drawn out. If you allow
yourself to be sucked into his way of things, you will be
thrown down, ruined, demolished, and will fall. If your
inner harmony becomes drawn out, then you will have fame
and a name, you will be called an evil creature. If he acts
like a child, then be a child with him; if he permits no
restraints, do the same. If he goes beyond the pale, follow
him! Understand him, and then guide him back subtly.
   ‘Don’t you know the story of the praying mantis? In its
anger it waved its arms in front of a speeding carriage,
having no understanding that it could not stop it, but having
full confidence in its own powers! Be on guard, be careful!
If you are over-confident in this way, you will be in the
same danger.
   ‘Don’t you know what a tiger trainer does? He does not
give them living animals for food, in case it over-excites
them and breeds a love of killing. He does not even give
them whole carcasses, for fear of exciting the rage of
tearing the animals apart. He observes their appetite and
appreciates their ferocity. Tigers are a different creature
from humans, but you can train them to obey their trainer if
you understand how to adapt to them. People who go
against the nature of the tiger don’t last long.
   ‘People who love horses collect their manure and urine
in fine baskets and bottles. However, if a mosquito or
gadfly lands on the horse, and the groom suddenly swipes it
away, the horse breaks its bit, damages its harness and hurts
its chest. The groom, out of affection, tried to do what was
good, but the end result is the reverse of that. So should we
exercise caution!’




Carpenter Shih was on his way to Chi, when he came to the
place called Chu Yuan, where he saw an oak tree which was
venerated as the home of the spirits of the land. The tree
was so vast that a thousand oxen could hide behind it. It was
a hundred spans round and it soared above the hill to eighty
feet before it even began to put out branches. There were
ten such branches, from any one of which an entire boat
could be carved. Masses of people came to see it, giving
the place a carnival atmosphere, but carpenter Shih didn’t
even look round, just went on his way. His assistant looked
at it with great intensity, and then chased after his master
and said, ‘Since I first took up my axe and followed you, I
have never seen wood such as this. Sir, why did you not
even glance at it nor stop, but just kept going?’
   He said, ‘Silence, not another word! The tree is useless.
Make a boat from it and it would sink; make a coffin and it
would rot quickly; make some furniture and it would fall to
pieces; make a door and it would be covered in seeping sap;
make a pillar and it would be worm-eaten. This wood is
useless and good for nothing. This is why it has lived so
long.’
   When Master Shih was returning, the tree appeared to
him in a dream, saying, ‘What exactly are you comparing
me with? With ornamental fruit trees? Trees such as the
hawthorn, pear trees, orange trees, citrus trees, gourds and
other such fruit trees? Their fruits are knocked down when
they are ripe and the trees suffer. The big branches are
damaged and the small ones are broken off. Because they
are useful, they suffer, and they are unable to live out the
years Heaven has given them. They have only their
usefulness to blame for this destruction wrought by the
people. It is the same with all things. I have spent a long
time studying to be useless, though on a couple of
occasions I was nearly destroyed. However, now I have
perfected the art of uselessness, and this is very useful, to
me! If I had been of use, could I have grown so vast?
Furthermore, you and I are both things. How can one thing
make such statements about another? How can you, a
useless man about to die, know anything about a useless
tree?’
   When carpenter Shih awoke, he told his apprentice what
he had dreamt. The apprentice said, ‘If it wants to be
useless, why is it used as the shrine for the spirits of the
land?’
   ‘Hush! Don’t say another word!’ said Shih. ‘The tree
happens to be here so it is an altar. By this it protects itself
from harm from those who do not realize it is useless, for
were it not an altar, it would run the risk of being chopped
down. Furthermore, this tree is no ordinary one, so to
speak of it in normal terms is to miss the point.’
   Nan Po Tzu Chi, wandering amongst the mountains of
Shang, came upon a great and unusual tree, under which
could shelter a thousand chariots, and they would all be
covered. Tzu Chi said, ‘What kind of a tree is this? It is
surely a most wondrous piece of timber!’ However, when
he looked up, he could see that the smaller branches were
so twisted and gnarled that they could not be made into
rafters and beams; and looking down at the trunk he saw it
was warped and distorted and would not make good coffins.
He licked one of its leaves and his mouth felt scraped and
sore. He sniffed it and it nearly drove him mad, as if he had
been drunk for three days.
  ‘This tree is certainly good for nothing,’ said Tzu Chi.
‘This is why it has grown so large. Ah-ha! This is the sort of
uselessness that sages live by.
   ‘In the state of Sung there is the district of Ching Shih,
which is excellent for growing catalpas, cypresses and
mulberry trees. However, those which are more than a
handspan or so around are cut down by people who want to
make posts for their monkeys; those which are three or
four spans around are cut down to make beams for great
houses; those of seven to eight spans are cut down by lords
and the wealthy who want single planks to form the side of
their coffins. As a result, the trees do not live out the years
Heaven has allotted them, but instead are cut down by the
axe in the prime of their life. This is all the result of being
useful! At the sacrifice, oxen marked by the white
forehead, pigs that have turned-up noses and men suffering
from piles are useless as offerings to the River Ho.
Shamans know this and as a result they consider such
creatures as being inauspicious. However, the sage, for
exactly this same reason, values them highly.
   ‘Crippled Shu, now, is a man with his chin lost in his
navel, his shoulders higher than the top of his head and his
topknot pointing to Heaven, his five vital organs all crushed
into the top of his body and his two thighs pressing into his
ribs. By sharpening needles and washing clothes he earns
enough to eat. By winnowing rice and cleaning it he was
able to feed ten people. When the officials called up the
militia, he walked about freely, with no need to hide; when
they are trying to raise a large work gang, because of his
deformities, no one bothers him. Yet when the officials
were handing out grain to the infirm, he received three
great portions and ten bundles of firewood. If a man like
this, deformed in body, can make a living and live out the
years Heaven sends him, how much more should a man who
is only deformed in terms of his Virtue!’
   Confucius went to Chu, and Chieh Yu, the madman of
Chu, wandered to his gate and said, ‘O Phoenix, O Phoenix!
How your virtue has faded! The future cannot be awaited,
nor the past reclaimed. When the whole world has the Tao,
the sage can succeed. When the whole world has lost the
Tao, the sage can only just survive. At a time like this, we
are lucky if we can escape punishment. Happiness is as
light as a feather, but who knows how to hold it?
Misfortune is heavier than the very earth, but who knows
how to escape it? Give up, give up trying to teach people
Virtue! Watch out, watch out – rushing on into areas already
marked out by you! Idiot, idiot, don’t harm my path. I go on
my way, walking crookedly, to preserve my feet from harm!
The mountain trees are the cause of their own destruction.
The fat throws itself into the fire. The cinnamon tree is
edible, so it is cut down. The varnish tree is useful and it is
cut about. Everyone knows the usefulness of the useful but
no one knows the usefulness of the useless!’
CHAPTER 5
Signs of Real Virtue




             In the state of Lu there lived a man called Wang
Tai, who had lost a foot – yet the number of his followers
was as great as those of Confucius. Chang Chi asked
Confucius, ‘Wang Tai has lost a foot, yet he manages to
divide up the state of Lu equally with you, Master. He
doesn’t preach, he doesn’t debate, but people come empty
and leave full. Is it true that there is teaching without words,
and that even if the body is not whole, the heart is
complete? What kind of man is he?’
  Confucius replied, ‘This master is a sage, and the only
reason I have not been his disciple is that I was slow in
going to him. I will certainly now go to him as my teacher,
and, therefore, how much more should those who are not
equal to me! Why stop at just the state of Lu? I will bring
all under Heaven to follow him.’
  ‘He is a man who has lost a foot,’ said Chang Chi, ‘yet his
authority is above yours! Sir, how very different he is from
ordinary people. How exactly does his heart function?’
   ‘Death and birth are matters of great significance,’ said
Confucius, ‘but they have no effect on him. Even if Heaven
and Earth were to collapse, he would not be disturbed. He
truly understands the primary things in life and is not
moved by mere things, he understands that some things are
predestined and therefore holds true to the unchanging.’
  ‘What do you mean?’
   ‘If you look at things in terms of their difference,’
replied Confucius, ‘then the liver and gall are as different
as the states of Chu and Yueh; however, study them from
the perspective of their sameness, and all life is one. This
is what this master does. Such a man is not guided by his
eyes and ears, instead he lets his heart decide what is
harmonious in its Virtue. He observes the unity and does
not see that which is lost. He considers the loss of his foot
as being like a lump of earth thrown away.’
  Chang Chi said, ‘In the way he has nurtured himself with
knowledge, he has followed his heart, his true heart.
Following his heart, he has cultivated an eternal heart, but
why should it be that he becomes such a focal point?’
   ‘People don’t look at a flowing river for a mirror, they
look at still waters, because only what is still stills things
and holds them still. Of those things which are given life by
the earth, only the pine and cypress are the best, for they
remain green throughout winter and summer. Of those
things given life by Heaven, only Shun was true, for he
made his own life an example and so guided others’ lives.
Holding to the primal strength and eliminating fear, a lone
brave knight can overcome nine armies. If this can be
achieved by a brave man seeking renown, just imagine what
can be achieved by one who is in control of Heaven and
Earth and who encompasses all life, who simply uses his
physical body as a place to dwell, whose ears and eyes he
knows only convey fleeting images, who knows how to
unite all knowledge, and whose heart never dies! Such a
man as this, when he chooses a day to ascend on high, will
be followed by many people. Yet why should he worry
about such matters?’
  Shen Tu Chia had lost a foot, and he was a student of Po
Hun Wu Jen, along with Cheng Tzu Chan.23 Tzu Chan said to
Shen Tu Chia, ‘If I go away from here first, please will you
remain behind, and if you go away first, I shall remain
behind.’ The very next day they were both sitting together
again on the same mat in the hall. Tzu Chan said to Shen Tu
Chia, ‘If I go away from here first, please will you remain
behind, and if you go away first, I’ll remain behind. Now I
am just about to leave, and I really want to know, will you
remain behind or not? When you see a top official, you
don’t even try to get out of his way. Do you think you are
his equal?’
    Shen Tu Chia replied, ‘Within the house of our Master,
does such a thing as a top official exist? You behave like a
top official and are proud of your status. I recall the saying
“If a mirror is bright, then no dust or dirt will collect upon
it. And if they do, then the mirror is not bright. If you live
for long around virtuous people, you are free from all
excess.” Now, you have chosen this master as a master to
make you great, yet you can still utter these words. Are you
not at fault?’
   ‘Someone like you tries to be as great as Yao,’ said Tzu
Chan. ‘Look at your Virtue, isn’t that enough to make you
stop and think about yourself?’
   ‘There are many who have caused trouble but who think
that they do not deserve punishment,’ said Shen Tu Chia.
‘However, those who do not cause trouble and who think
they deserve nothing are few indeed. To know what is
beyond your ability to change, and to live with this as your
destiny, is the action of a virtuous one. Anyone who
wanders into the middle of Archer Yi’s24 target will find
that such a central place is exactly where you get hit! If
they are not hit, then that is destiny. People with both feet
often laugh at me for having only one and I used to get very
angry. But when I come before our Master, I forget all
about that. I don’t know, maybe the Master has cleansed me
of all that? I have followed the Master for nineteen years
without worrying about the loss of my foot. Now you and I
are trying to move beyond the physical body, yet you keep
drawing attention to it. Isn’t this rather excessive of you?’
   Tzu Chan felt uncomfortable and wriggled about and said,
‘Sir, please, say no more about this.’




In the state of Lu there was a mutilated man25 called Shu
Shan the Toeless. He came upon his stumps to see
Confucius. Confucius said, ‘You were not careful and
therefore suffered this fate. It is too late to come and see
me now.’
   ‘Because of my lack of knowledge and through lack of
care for my body, I lost my feet,’ said Toeless. ‘Now I have
come to you because I still have that which is of greater
value than my foot and I wish to save it. There is nothing
that great Heaven does not cover, nor anything that the
Earth does not sustain. I had hoped you, Sir, would be as
Heaven and Earth to me, and I did not expect you to receive
me like this!’
   ‘I am being stupid!’ said Confucius. ‘Good Sir, please do
not go away and I will try to share with you what I have
learnt!’
   However, Toeless left and Confucius said, ‘Be watchful,
my followers! Great Toeless has lost his feet but still he
wants to learn in order to recompense for his evil deeds.
How much more so should you who are able-bodied want
to learn!’
  Toeless told his story to Lao Tzu, saying, ‘Confucius has
definitely not become a perfect man yet, has he? So why
does he try to study with you? He seems to be caught up
with the search for honour and reputation, without
appearing to understand that the perfect man sees these as
chains and irons.’
   Lao Tzu said, ‘Why not help him to see that death and
birth are one thing and that right and wrong are one thing,
and so free him from the chains and irons?’
   ‘Given that Heaven punishes him, how can he be set
free?’ asked Toeless.
   Duke Ai of Lu said to Confucius, ‘In Wei there was a
man with a terrible appearance called Ai Tai To. But those
around him thought the world of him and when women saw
him they ran to their mothers and fathers saying, “I would
rather be the concubine of this gentleman than anyone
else’s wife.” This has happened more than ten times. He
was never heard to take the lead in anything, but was always
in accord with others. He was not powerful and thus able to
save people from death, nor was he wealthy and able to feed
people. Furthermore, he was so hideous he could scare the
whole world. He never took the lead, just agreed with
whatever was suggested, and he knew little about the world
beyond his own four walls. But people came flocking to
him. It is clear he is different from ordinary people, so I
asked him to come and see me. He certainly was ugly
enough to frighten the whole world. Yet he had only been
with me for less than a month when I began to appreciate
him. Within a year I had full trust in him. In my country
there was no prime minister, so I offered him the post. His
response to my request was to look most sorrowful and
diffident as if he was going to turn it down. I was ashamed
of myself but in the end simply handed over the country to
him. Very soon after, he upped and left. I was distressed and
felt this a great loss, for I had no one with whom to share
the cares of the state. Now, what sort of man is this?’
  Confucius said, ‘I was once in the state of Chu on a
commission, and I saw some piglets trying to suckle from
their dead mother. After a while they started up and left her.
She did not seem to notice them and so they no longer felt
any affinity with her. What they loved about their mother
was not her body but what gave life to the body. When a
man is killed in battle, at his burial his battle honours are of
little use to him. A man without feet has little love for
shoes. In both cases they lack that which makes these of
any significance. Indeed, the consorts of the Son of
Heaven26 do not cut their own nails or pierce their ears; a
newly wed gentleman stays outside the court and is freed
from onerous duties. With so much attention being paid to
caring for the body, imagine what care should be given to
preserving Virtue! Now Ai Tai To speaks not a word, yet he
is believed. He does nothing and is loved. People offer him
their kingdoms, and their only fear is that he will refuse. He
must indeed be a man of perfect character, whose Virtue is
without shape!’
  ‘What do you mean by “perfect character”?’ asked Duke
Ai.
   Confucius replied, ‘Death, birth, existence and trouble,
auspicious and inauspicious signs, wealth, poverty, value
and worthlessness, glory and blame, hunger and thirst, cold
and hot – all these are the way the world goes and the result
of destiny. Day and night follow each other, but there is no
way of knowing where they come from. Don’t allow this to
disrupt your innate balance, don’t allow this to perturb your
mind. If you can balance and enjoy them, have mastery over
them and revel in this, if you can do this day in and day out
without a break and bring all things together, then this
brings forth a heart prepared for changes and this is perfect
character.’
  ‘But what do you mean when you say his Virtue is
without shape?’
  ‘Perfect balance is found in still waters. Such water
should be an example to us all. Inner harmony is protected
and nothing external affects it. Virtue is the result of true
balance. Virtue has no shape or form yet nothing can be
without it,’ said Confucius.
   A few days later, Duke Ai commented to Ming Tzu27 on
this discussion, saying, ‘To begin with, I took up the
position of authority and became a ruler of all under
Heaven, caring for the people and concerned lest they die. I
perceived this as being perfect. Now, hearing the thoughts
of the perfect man, I fear that I really understood very little,
for I cared more for my own self than for the country.
Confucius and I are not in a relationship of subject and
nobleman, for our friendship is founded upon Virtue.’




The Crooked Man with No Lips offered advice to Duke
Ling of Wei, who greatly appreciated his words of advice,
so much so that he thought ordinary people had backs too
straight and lips too big. The Man with a Jug-sized Goitre
offered advice to Duke Huan of Chi. Duke Huan
appreciated his counsel, so much so that he thought
ordinary people had necks which were too thin and short. If
virtue is foremost, the physical body is ignored. When
people do not ignore what they should ignore, but ignore
what they should not ignore, this is known as true
ignorance. The sage sees his role as that of a wanderer, sees
knowledge as a curse, convention as a glue, virtue as just a
means, and effort as common trade. The sage has no great
plans, so what use has he for knowledge? He makes no
divisions, so what use has he for glue? He has no problems,
so what use has he for virtue? He has no career, so what
need has he for common trade? These four, they are the
nourishment of Heaven. Fed by Heaven, he is nourished by
Heaven. As he loves being nourished by Heaven, he has no
need of humanity! He has the form of a man, but not the
emotions of a man. Because he has the form of a man, he
can be amongst men, but not having the emotions of a man,
he does not have to follow the ways of right and wrong.
Inconsequential and small, he stays amongst men!
Substantial and large, he is at one with Heaven!
  Hui Tzu asked Chuang Tzu, ‘Is it possible for someone to
be without emotion?’
  ‘Certainly,’ said Chuang Tzu.
  ‘A man without emotion – can you really call him a
man?’ asked Hui Tzu.
  Chuang Tzu replied, ‘The Way gives him a face and
Heaven provides a shape, so how can it follow he is not
called a man?’
  ‘But if he is already called a man, how can it follow that
he has no emotion?’
   ‘That’s not what I mean by emotions,’ said Chuang Tzu.
‘When I say a man has no emotions, what I mean by this is
someone who does not allow either the good or the bad to
have any effect upon him. He lets all things be and allows
life to continue in its own way.’
  Hui Tzu said, ‘If he doesn’t interfere with life, then how
does he take care of himself?’
   ‘The Way gives him a face and Heaven provides a shape.
He does not allow either the good or the bad to have any
effect on him. But you now, you wear your soul on your
sleeve, exhausting your energy, propping yourself up on a
tree, mumbling, or bent over your desk, asleep. Heaven
gives you a form and you wear it out by pointless
argument!’
CHAPTER 6
The Great and Original Teacher




            The one who understands Heaven and
understands the ways of humanity has perfection.
Understanding Heaven, he grows with Heaven.
Understanding humanity, he takes the understanding of what
he understands to help him understand what he doesn’t
understand, and so fulfils the years Heaven decrees without
being cut off in his prime. This is known as perfection.
   However, it is true that there are problems. Real
understanding has to have something to which it is applied
and this something is itself uncertain. So how can I know
that what I term Heaven is not human? Or that what I call
human is not Heaven?
  Only the true man has understanding. So what is a true
man? The true man of old did not fight against poverty, nor
did he look for fulfilment through riches – for he had no
grand plans. Therefore, he never regretted any failure, nor
exulted in success. He could scale the heights without fear,
plumb the depths without difficulties and go through fire
without pain. This is the kind of person whose
understanding has lifted him up towards the Tao.
  The true man of old slept without dreaming and awoke
without anxiety. He ate without tasting, breathing deeply,
incredibly deeply. The true man breathes from his feet up,
while ordinary people just breathe from the throat. The
words of broken people come forth like vomit. Wallowing
in lust and desire, they are but shallow in the ways of
Heaven.
   The true man of old did not hold on to life, nor did he
fear death. He arrived without expectation and left without
resistance. He went calmly, he came calmly and that was
that. He did not set out to forget his origin, nor was he
interested in what would become of him. He loved to
receive anything but also forgot what he had received and
gave it away. He did not give precedence to the heart but to
the Tao, nor did he prefer the ways of humanity to those of
Heaven. This is what is known as a true man.
              Being like this, his heart forgets,
              his appearance is calm,
his forehead is plain;
He is as chilly as autumn and as warming as
spring.
His joy and anger arise like the four seasons.
He acts properly towards all things
and none know where this will lead.
So if the sage summons the army and
conquers states,
he does not lose the affections of the
people.
His magnanimous nature enriches ten
thousand generations,
yet he has no affection for the people.
One who seeks to share his happiness with
others is not a sage.
One who displays his feelings is not
benevolent.
One who waits for Heaven is not a wise man.
The noble who cannot harmonize the good
and the destructive is not a scholar.
One who seeks for fame and thereby loses
his real self is no gentleman.
One who loses his true self and his path is
unable to command others.
Men such as Hu Pu Chieh, Wu Kuang, Po Yi,
Shu Chi, Chi Tzu, Hsu Yu, Chi To, Shen Tu
Ti28 –
all followed the example of others,
tried to get for them what they desired
but they did not seek for themselves what
they desired.
The true man of old appeared aloof but was
in no danger of falling.
He appears deficient, yet takes nothing.
He does what he wills but is not
judgemental.
His emptiness was clear, but there was no
showing off.
Cheerfully smiling, he seemed to be
content.
He responded immediately as if there was
no choice.
If upset, he showed it.
If content, he was at ease with Virtue.
When calm, he appeared to be one with the
world.
When superior, the world had no control
over him.
His inner nature seemed unknowable.
Never being really aware, he forgot what to
say.
He saw the law as the external form of
government.
The rituals he saw as the wings,
knowledge as being the same as what is
appropriate at the time.
Virtue he saw as what is proper.
Viewing law as the external form of
government,
he was flexible in imposing the death
sentence.
Viewing the rituals as the wings,
he got on well with society.
Viewing knowledge as being that which is
appropriate,
he followed the natural course of events.
Viewing virtue as that which is proper,
he walked along with others who were
capable of leading.
So he acted spontaneously,
but others thought it was at great cost.
Thus all that he sought was one.
               What he disowned was also but one.
               What is one is one, and what is not one is
               also one.
               In the one, he was with Heaven.
               In the not-one, he was one with humanity.
               When heaven and humanity are not in
               dispute,
               then we can say this is really the true man.
   Death and birth are fixed. They are as certain as the dawn
that comes after the night, established by the decree of
Heaven. This is beyond the control of humanity, this is just
how things are. Some view Heaven as their father and
continue to love it. How much more should they show
devotion for that which is even greater! Some people
consider their lord as being better than themselves and
would willingly the for him. How much more should they
do the same for one who is more true than their lord!
   When the springs dry out, the fish are found stranded on
the earth. They keep each other damp with their own
moisture, and wet each other with their slime. But it would
be better if they could just forget about each other in rivers
and lakes. People sing the praises of Yao and condemn
Chieh, but it would be better if they could forget both of
them and just follow the Tao. The cosmos gives me the
burden of a physical form, makes life a struggle, gives me
rest in old age and peace in death. What makes life good,
therefore, also makes death good.
   A boat can be hidden in a gorge, and a fishing net in a
pool, and you may think they are therefore safe. However,
in the middle of the night a strong man comes and carries
them off. Small-minded people just cannot see that hiding
smaller things in larger things does not mean they will not
be stolen. If you take everything under Heaven and try to
store it under Heaven, there is no space left for it to be lost
in! This is the real truth about things. To have a human form
is a joyful thing. But in the universe of possible forms,
there are others just as good. Isn’t it a blessing to have
these uncountable possibilities! The sage goes where
nothing escapes him, and rests contented there with them.
He takes pleasure in an early death, in old age, in the origin
and in the end and sees them all as equally good – he should
be an example to others. If this is so, then how much more
should our example be that which holds together the whole
of life and which is the origin of all that changes!
  The great Tao has both reality and expression, but it does
nothing and has no form.
               It can be passed on, but not received.
               It can be obtained, but not seen.
               It is rooted in its own self, existing before
               Heaven and Earth were born, indeed for
eternity.
It gives divinity to the spirits and to the gods.
It brought to life Heaven and Earth.
It was before the primal air, yet it cannot be
called lofty;
it was below all space and direction, yet it
cannot be called deep.
It comes before either Heaven or Earth, yet
it cannot be called old.
It is far more ancient than antiquity, yet it is
not old.
Hsi Wei29 obtained it, and with it he framed
Heaven and Earth.
Fu Hsi obtained it and through it he entered
into the Mother of life’s breath.
The Great Dipper constellation obtained it
and from of old has never wavered.
The Sun and Moon obtained it and from of
old have never ceased.
Kan Pi obtained it and was able to enter the
Kun Lun mountains.
Feng Yi obtained it and was able to journey
to the great river.
Chien Wu obtained it and was able to live on
              Mount Tai.
              The Yellow Emperor obtained it and was able
              to ascend into the clouds of Heaven.
              Chuan Hsu obtained it and was able to dwell
              in the Dark Palace.
              The Queen Mother of the West30 obtained it
              and was able to take her seat on Shao Kuang
              Mountain –
              no one knew her origin, no one knows her
              end.
              Peng Tsu obtained it and was able to live
              from the time of Shun to that of the Five
              Lords.
              Fu Yueh obtained it and was able to become
              the Prime Minister of Wu Ting,
              so he controlled all under Heaven.
              Then, riding upon one constellation, he
              climbed upon another and soared to the
              Milky Way to dwell as a star.
  Nan Po Tzu Kuei said to Nu Chu, ‘Master, you are old,
yet your appearance is one of youthfulness. Why is this?’
  The reply came, ‘I have studied the Tao.’
  ‘Can I study how to obtain the Tao?’
   The reply was, ‘Definitely not! Most definitely not! You
are not the kind of man who could do this.
   ‘Now there was Pu Liang Yi, who had the genius of a
sage but not the Tao. I have the Tao, but not the genius. I
wanted to teach him in order that he might become a sage.
It seemed as if teaching the Tao to a man of genius would
be easy. But no! I taught him for three days and he was able
to ignore worldly matters. Having dispensed with worldly
matters, I continued to teach him for seven days, so that he
was able to ignore all external matters. Having disposed of
all external matters, I continued to teach him for nine days,
whereupon he could observe his own being as irrelevant.
Having discerned his own self as irrelevant, he saw with
true clarity. Having seen with true clarity, he could see by
the One. Seeing by the One, he could ignore both past and
present. Having ignored both past and present he was able
to enter where there is neither death nor birth. The end of
life is not death, and the coming to birth is not life. He
could follow anything, he could receive anything. To him,
all was being destroyed, all was being built. This is known
as Tranquillity in Struggle. Tranquillity in Struggle means
perfection.’
  Na Po Tzu Kuei said, ‘Master, where did you learn this?’
  ‘I learned it through the medium of the spirit of writing;
writing learned it from the offspring of continuous study;
continuous study learned it from clarity of vision; clarity of
vision heard it from quiet agreement; quiet agreement from
being used; being used from great enjoyment; great
enjoyment from deepest mystery; deepest mystery from
absorption in mystery; absorption in mystery from the
ultimate.’
   The Masters, Ssu, Yu, Li and Lai, said one to another,
‘Anyone who can conceive of nothingness as his head, life
as his back and death as his tail and who knows that death
and birth, being and no-being, are one and the same – one
like this shall be our friend.’ The four men smiled and
agreed in their hearts and therefore became friends.
   Shortly after, Master Yu fell ill. Master Ssu went to visit
him and Yu said, ‘How great is the Maker of All! He has
made me deformed. My back is like a hunchback’s, and all
my organs are on top while my chin is lost in my navel and
my shoulders rise up above my head and my topknot points
to Heaven!’ His yin and yang were in disarray. However, his
heart was calm and he was not worried. He limped to a well
and looked in at his reflection and said, ‘Goodness me! The
Maker of All has made me completely deformed!’
  ‘Do you dislike it?’ asked Master Ssu.
   ‘Not really, why should I? For example, perhaps my left
arm will become a cockerel and then I shall be able to tell
the time at night. Maybe, eventually, my right arm will
become a crossbow and then I can hunt a bird and eat it.
Possibly my bottom will become wheels and my soul will
be a horse which I shall climb upon and go for a ride. After
all, I wouldn’t then need any other vehicle again! I obtained
life because the time was right. I will lose life because it is
time. Those who go quietly with the flow of nature are not
worried by either joy or sorrow. People like these were
considered in the past as having achieved freedom from
bondage. Those who cannot free themselves are
constrained by things. However, nothing can overcome
Heaven – it has always been so. So why should I dislike
this?’
  Later Master Lai fell ill. Gasping and heaving, he lay
close to death. His wife and children were mourning around
him. Master Li came to see him and Master Lai said, ‘Hush,
get out! Do you want to disrupt the processes of change?’
  Leaning against the doorway Li commented,
               ‘How great is the Maker of All!
               What will you be made into next?
               Where will you be sent?
               Will you come back as a rat’s liver?
               Or will it be as a pest’s arm?’
               Master Lai said,
               ‘When a mother and father tell a child to go
somewhere,
be that east, west, south or north, the child
obeys.
Yin and yang are the mother and father of
humanity.
They have brought me close to death
and if I disobey this would be just perversity.
My death is not their problem!
The cosmos gives me form, brings me to
birth,
guides me into old age and settles me in
death.
If I think my life good, then I must think my
death good.
A good craftsman, casting metal,
would not be too pleased with metal that
jumped up and said,
“I must be made into a sword like Mo
Yeh.”31
Now, given that I have been bold enough
to take on human shape already, if I then
said,
“I must be a human, I must be a human!”,
the Maker of All would view me somewhat
               askance!
               If Heaven and Earth are like a furnace and
               Nature is the craftsman,
               then is it possible he could send me
               anywhere that was not appropriate?
               Peacefully we die, calmly we awake.’




Masters Sang Hu, Meng Tzu Fan and Chin Chang, three
good friends, said to each other,
               ‘Who can be together without any being
               together,
               or collaborate with others without any
               collaboration?
               Who can ascend to Heaven, ride the clouds,
               journey through the infinite,
               and forget about existence for ever and
               ever?’
   The three men looked at each other and smiled, agreeing
in their hearts with one another and becoming firm friends.
  Some time later Master Sang Hu died. Before he was
buried, Confucius heard of his death and sent Tzu Kung to
participate in the rituals. On arrival, Tzu Kung found one of
the dead man’s friends was making up songs while the other
played a lute. Together they sang,
               ‘Woe! Sang Hu! Woe! Sang Hu!
               You have returned to the true form,
               while we are still but men!’
  Tzu Kung hurried forward and said, ‘Is it really seemly
and proper to sing before a dead body?’
  The two men looked at him, laughed and said, ‘What does
a man like this know about proper ceremony?’
   Tzu Kung went back to Confucius, told him what had
happened, and asked, ‘What kind of people are they? They
are uncouth and pay no heed to their external appearance.
They sing in the presence of a dead body without any
change of face! There is no appropriate title for them. What
kind of people are they?’
   Confucius said, ‘They go beyond the human world, while
I travel within. That beyond and that within can never meet.
It was a mistake to send you to join the mourning. They
have truly become one with the Maker of All and now
wander as the original breath of Heaven and Earth. They
view life as a grotesque tumour, a swelling they inhabit.
They view death as the removal of this growth. Since they
see life like this, they simply do not consider whether
death or birth comes first. They view their bodies as just so
many collected different pieces. They forget their liver and
gall and ignore their ears and eyes. They begin and cease
without knowing what is beginning or ceasing. Unaware,
they wander beyond the mundane world and stroll in the
world of non-action. Why should they have to worry about
proper conduct just to please ordinary people?’
  ‘In that case, Master,’ said Tzu Kung, ‘why do you
conform to convention?’
  ‘I am one punished by Heaven,’ said Confucius.
‘Nevertheless, this is what I will share with you.’
  ‘Can you tell me a little more?’ said Tzu Kung.
   ‘Fish enjoy water, humans enjoy the Tao. Enjoying water,
the fish stick to the pond and find all they need to survive
there. Enjoying the Tao, people do nothing and their lives
are fulfilled. The saying goes that fish forget about each
other in the pond and people forget each other in the Tao.’
  Tzu Kung said, ‘May I ask about the man alone?’
   ‘The man alone is only alone when compared to others,
but he is alongside Heaven. It is said that the mean-minded
man of Heaven is a nobleman amongst ordinary people and
the nobleman is a mean-minded man of Heaven.’
   Yen Hui asked Confucius, ‘When Meng Sun Tsai’s
mother died, he cried without tears, there was no distress in
his heart. When he mourned, there was no sorrow. Although
he was deficient on these three points, nevertheless he is
renowned throughout the state of Lu for his excellence as a
mourner. Is it possible to obtain such a reputation, even
when there is nothing to substantiate it? I find this very
surprising.’
   ‘Master Meng Sun Tsai did what was right,’ said
Confucius. ‘He was far beyond mundane understanding. He
could have restricted his actions even more but that was not
really feasible. Nevertheless, he did cut out a great deal.
Meng Sun Tsai does not know how he came to be born, nor
how he will die. He just knows enough not to want one or
the other. He doesn’t know why he should continue, he just
follows what happens without understanding! As we are all
in a process of change, how can we know what unknown
thing we will be changed into? As what we are changing into
has not yet happened, how can we understand what change
is? Perhaps you and I are in a dream from which we are yet
to awake! In Meng Sun Tsai’s case the body changes but this
does not affect his heart. His body, housing his soul, may
be affected, but his emotions are not harmed. Meng Sun
Tsai alone has awoken. People cry, so he cries. He
considers everything as his own being. How could he know
that others call something their own particular self? You
dream you are a bird and rise into the Heavens. You dream
you are a fish and swim down deep into the lake. We cannot
tell now if the speaker is awake or asleep. Contentment
produces the smile; a genuine smile cannot be forced.
Don’t struggle, go with the flow and you will find yourself
at one with the vastness of the void of Heaven.’
  Yi Erh Tzu went to visit Hsu Yu, who asked him, ‘In what
way has Yao been helpful to you?’
  Yi Erh Tzu said, ‘Yao said to me, “Practise benevolence
and justice. Speak up for what is right and against what is
wrong.” ’
   Hsu Yu said, ‘So why have you troubled yourself to visit
me? Master Yao has already branded on you the practice of
benevolence and justice and mutilated you with the
distinction between right and wrong. So how can you now
expect me to help you meander alone in freedom and
aimlessness, enjoying things as they happen through the
process of change?’
  ‘Maybe that is so,’ said Yi Erh Tzu, ‘but I’d like to find
some small corner for myself.’
   Hsu Yu said, ‘No, it can’t be done! If you have been
blinded, it is impossible to appreciate beauty of face or
form. Eyes with no pupils cannot see the beauty of fine,
coloured silks.’
   Yi Erh said, ‘Wu Chuang paid no attention to her looks;
Chu Liang ignored his strength; the Yellow Emperor
disregarded his wisdom – all these were transformed by
being worked upon. How can you know that the Maker of
All will not remove the mark of my branding, heal my
mutilation and, having thus restored me, enable me to
follow you as my teacher?’
   ‘Well!’ said Hsu Yu. ‘You never know. I will just tell you
the basic outline of the teachings.
               ‘Oh my Master, oh my Master!
               He judges all life but doesn’t believe
               himself to be a judge.
               His blessings extend to all life, but he
               doesn’t see himself as blessed.
               Older than antiquity, yet not old.
               Overarching Heaven, carrying Earth and
               forming all things, he is no craftsman.
               It is through him that I wander.’




               Yen Hui said, ‘I’m getting better.’
               Confucius said, ‘What do you mean?’
               ‘I have forgotten kindness and justice.’
               ‘Fine, but that is not enough.’
  On another occasion, they met again and Yen Hui said,
‘I’ve improved.’
              Confucius said, ‘What do you mean?’
              ‘I have forgotten rituals and music.’
              ‘Good, but that is still not enough.’
  On another occasion they met and Yen Hui said, ‘I’m
getting better.’
              Confucius said, ‘What do you mean?’
              ‘I can sit right down and forget everything.’
  Confucius was certainly disturbed by this and said, ‘What
do you mean by sit right down and forget?’
   Yen Hui replied, ‘My limbs are without feeling and my
mind is without light. I have ignored my body and cast aside
my wisdom. Thus I am united with the Tao. This is what
sitting right down and forgetting is.’
  Confucius said, ‘If you are one with the great Way, then
you no longer have preferences. If you are one with the
cosmos, you are transformed. If this is what you have done,
then I would like to follow you.’
   Masters Yu and Sang were friends. It happened to rain for
ten days, and Master Yu said, ‘Master Sang may be in
trouble!’ So he packed some food to take to him. Arriving
at Master Sang’s door he heard strange noises and someone
playing a lute, singing,
  ‘Oh Father! Oh Mother! Oh Heaven! Oh humanity!’
   It sounded as if the singer’s voice was about to break and
the singer was rushing to finish the verse. Master Yu
entered and said, ‘Master, why are you singing like this?’
   He said, ‘I was trying to work out what has reduced me to
this. My father and mother wouldn’t want me to be so poor,
surely? Heaven treats all alike. Earth supports all alike.
Heaven and Earth wouldn’t wish me poor, would they? I
seek to know who has done this, but I can’t find an answer.
When you come down to it, it must be simply fate.’
CHAPTER 7
Dealing with Emperors and Kings




             Yeh Chueh questioned Wang Ni. Four times he
raised a question and four times he said he did not know.
Yeh Chueh started jumping around in great excitement and
went off to inform Master Pu Yi.
   Master Pu Yi said, ‘Have you only just discovered this?
The noble ruler Shun32 was not equal to the noble ruler
Tai.33 Noble ruler Shun tried to use benevolence to bind the
people to him. This certainly worked, but he was unable to
escape into being aware of no-man. Noble ruler Tai slept
the sleep of innocence and awoke in calm collectedness.
Sometimes he believed himself to be a horse, other times
he might believe he was an ox. His wisdom was utterly true,
his Virtue was profoundly real. He never came into
awareness of no-man.’




Chien Wu went to visit the eccentric Chieh Yu, who asked
him, ‘What did Chung Shih say to you recently?’
   Chien Wu replied, ‘He said to me that the nobleman who
has authority over people should set a personal example by
proper regulations, law and practices. The corollary of this
will be that no one will disobey him and everyone will be
transformed as a result.’
   Eccentric Chieh Yu said, ‘That would ruin Virtue. If
someone tries to govern everything below Heaven in this
way, it’s like trying to stride through the seas or cut a tunnel
through the river or make a mosquito carry a mountain.
When a great sage is in command, he doesn’t try to take
control of externals. He first allows people to do what
comes naturally and he ensures that all things follow the
way their nature takes them. The bird flies high in the sky
and thereby escapes from the risk of being shot with
arrows. The mouse burrows down under the hill of the
spirits and thus escapes being disturbed. Don’t you even
have as much understanding as these two creatures?’
Tien Ken was travelling to the south of Yin Mountain. He
reached the river Liao, where he met the Man without a
Name and said to him, ‘I wish to ask you about governing
everything under Heaven.’
  The Man without a Name said, ‘Get lost, you stupid lout!
What an unpleasant question! I am travelling with the Maker
of All. If that is too tiring, I shall ride the bird of ease and
emptiness and go beyond the compass of the world and
wander in the land of nowhere and the region of nothing. So
why are you disturbing me and unsettling my heart with
questions about how to rule all below Heaven?’
  Tien Ken asked the same question again. The Man
without a Name replied,
               ‘Let your heart journey in simplicity.
               Be one with that which is beyond definition.
               Let things be what they are.
               Have no personal views.
               This is how everything under Heaven is
               ruled.’
  Yan Tzu Chu went to visit Lao Tzu and he said, ‘Here is a
man who is keen and vigilant, who has clarity of vision and
wisdom and who studies the Tao without ceasing. Such a
person as this is surely a king of great wisdom?’
   ‘In comparison to the sage,’ said Lao Tzu, ‘someone like
this is just a humble servant, tied to his work, exhausting
himself and distressing his heart. The tiger and the leopard,
it is said, are hunted because of the beauty of their hides.
The monkey and the dog end up in chains because of their
skills. Can these be compared to a king of great wisdom?’
   Yang Tzu Chu was startled and said, ‘May I be so bold as
to ask about the rule of a king who is great in wisdom?’
               Lao Tzu said,
               ‘The rule of a king who is great in wisdom!
               His works affect all under Heaven, yet he
               seems to do nothing.
               His authority reaches all life, yet no one
               relies upon him.
               There is no fame nor glory for him but
               everything fulfils itself.
               He stands upon mystery and wanders where
               there is nothing.’
  In Chen there was a shaman of the spirits called Chi
Hsien. He could foretell when people would die and be
born; he knew about good fortune and failure as granted by
Heaven; he knew about happiness and distress, life and its
span, knowing the year, month, week and day, as if he were a
god himself. As soon as the people of Cheng saw him
coming, they would run away. Lieh Tzu went to see him and
was fascinated by him. Coming back to Hu Tzu, he said, ‘I
used to believe, Master, that your Tao was perfection. Now
I have found something even better.’
   Hu Tzu said, ‘What I have shown you is the outward text
of my teaching, but not what is central. How can you think
you have grasped my Tao? If you have hens but no cockerel,
how can you have eggs? You flaunt your Tao before the
world. This is why this man can read your fortune. Bring
this shaman to me and let us meet.’
   The next day Lieh Tzu brought the shaman to visit Hu
Tzu. And as he left Hu Tzu’s house with Lieh Tzu, the
shaman said, ‘Oh dear! Your Master is dying. There’s
virtually no life left – he has maybe a week at most. I saw a
strange sight – it was like wet ashes!’
   Lieh Tzu went in again, weeping so copiously that tears
soaked his coat, and told Hu Tzu what had been said. Hu Tzu
said, ‘I made myself appear like the earth. I was as solid as
the mountain, showing nothing to him. He probably
perceived me to be a closed book, apparently without
virtue. Bring him again if you can.’
  The next day Lieh Tzu came again with the shaman to see
Hu Tzu. As they went out, the shaman said to Lieh Tzu,
‘How lucky for your Master that he has met me. He is
getting better. Indeed he is truly alive. Life is flowing
again.’
   Lieh Tzu went back in and commented on this to Hu Tzu.
Hu Tzu said, ‘I made myself appear to him like Heaven,
without fame or fortune on my mind. What I am wells up in
me naturally. He saw in me the full and natural workings of
life. Bring him again if you can.’
   The next day they came again to see Hu Tzu. As they
went out, the shaman said to Lieh Tzu, ‘Your Master is
never the same. I cannot grasp the fortune shown in his
face. If he returns to some constancy then I will come and
see him again.’
   Lieh Tzu went back in and reported this to Hu Tzu. ‘I
showed him myself as the great Void where all is equal,’
said Hu Tzu. ‘He almost certainly saw in me the harmony of
my innate forces. When water moves about, there is a
whirlpool; where the waters are calm, there is a whirlpool;
where the waters gather, there is a whirlpool. There are nine
types of whirlpool and I have shown him just three. Bring
him back again if you can.’
  The next day they both came again to see him. However,
before he had even sat down, the shaman panicked and ran
off. Hu Tzu said, ‘Follow him!’
  Lieh Tzu ran after him. But he could not catch up with
him. Coming back to Hu Tzu, he said, ‘He has gone, I’ve
lost him. I couldn’t catch him.’
   Hu Tzu said, ‘I just appeared to him as hitherto
unrevealed potential. I presented myself as not knowing
who is who, nor what is what. I came flowing and changing
as I willed. That’s why he bolted.’
   As a result of this, Lieh Tzu realized that he had so far
learnt nothing real, so he returned home. For three years he
did not go out. He cooked for his wife and tended the pigs
as if they were humans. He showed no interest in his
studies. He cast aside his desires and sought the truth. In
his body he became like the ground itself. In the midst of
everything he remained enclosed with the One and that is
how he remained until the end.
              Do not hanker for fame.
              Do not make plans.
              Do not try to do things.
              Do not try to master knowledge.
              Hold what is but do not hold it to be
              anything.
              Work with all that comes from Heaven, but
              do not seek to hold it.
              Just be empty.
              The perfect man’s heart is like a mirror.
              It does not search after things.
              It does not look for things.
              It does not seek knowledge, just responds.
              As a result he can handle everything and is
              not harmed by anything.
   The Emperor of the South Sea is known as Change. The
Emperor of the North Sea is called Dramatic. The Emperor
of the Centre is called Chaos. Change and Dramatic met
every so often in the region of Chaos. Chaos always treated
them kindly and virtuously. Change and Dramatic said,
‘Everyone has seven orifices so they can see, hear, eat and
breathe. Chaos does not have these. Let us bore some holes
into him.’ Each day they bored a hole into Chaos… but on
the seventh day Chaos died.
CHAPTER 8
Webbed Toes




              The big toe being webbed with the other toes,
or an extra finger, may both be quite natural, but they do not
spring from virtue. Swellings and tumours certainly arise
from the body, but do not spring from what is natural. There
are many acts of kindness and justice and they are often
associated with the five vital organs.34 But this is not the
correct way according to the Tao (the Way) and Te (Virtue).
In fact, webbed feet are simply useless extra pieces of skin;
an additional finger is useless. So to associate these with
the five vital organs is to confuse the use of kindness and
justice. It places too much emphasis on hearing and sight.
So heightened visual perception will cause confusion in
distinguishing the five colours. One will be overwhelmed
by interesting designs and dazzled by the bright and
luminous shades of blue and yellow. As a result, it will be
like Li Chu the keen-sighted. And doesn’t an extraordinary
faculty for hearing lead to confusion about the five notes,
and excessive use of the six tones created by metal, stone,
silk and bamboo together with the huang chung and ta lu
pipes. As a result, it will be like the music master Kuang.
   The result is that someone like this misuses the power of
Virtue and destroys his inner self in a quest for fame and
fortune, leading everything under Heaven to follow his
music in pursuit of the unobtainable – is this not so? This
results in Tseng and Shih.35 A great skill in debate leads to
the construction of arguments like a builder using bricks,
or a netmaker working with string. He makes his arguments
circular and his heart delights to go into pointless
nitpicking debate about similarity and divergence. He goes
slogging on uphill still spouting nonsense – is this not so?
This results in Yang and Mo.36 As a result, all of these types
of people walk a complex road, with little to do with the
correct Tao, the true path of all the world.
               One on the true path does not lose his innate
               given nature.
               To such a man that which is united presents
               no problem;
               That which is divided is all right;
               What is long is not too long;
               That which is short is not too short.
               The duck’s legs for example are short, but
               trying to lengthen them would cause pain.
               The legs of a crane are long, but trying to
               shorten them would produce grief.
               What nature makes long we should not cut,
               nor should we try to stretch what nature
               makes short.
               That would not solve anything.
   Perhaps then, benevolence and righteousness are not an
inherent part of human nature? For look how much anxiety
is suffered by those who wish to be kind.
   If one toe is united to another by extra skin, trying to
separate them will only cause tears. Likewise, if you try to
bite off the extra finger, this will provoke screams: of these
two, one has more, the other less, but the distress they
cause is the same. The benevolent person of today looks at
the evils of society with distressed eyes, while people who
are not benevolent uproot their proper inborn nature and
rush after wealth and honour. The conclusion, therefore, is
that benevolence and righteousness are not part of the true
nature of humanity! From the Three Dynasties37 onwards
they have created such trouble and nuisance for everyone.
  When a template or plumb line is used, or a compass and
set-square, in order to get things right, this involves cutting
away parts of what is naturally there. When cords or
buckles, glue or varnish are used, this means we affect the
original Virtue. Likewise, the bending and pauses in the
rituals and music, or the smiles and happy face of
benevolence and righteousness, are meant to hearten
everyone, but they ignore the inbuilt principles of
existence. Everything has its innate nature.
   Given this, then, what is curved is not curved by the use
of a template nor made straight by using a plumb line. It is
not rounded by using a compass, nor made square by using
a set-square; not made adhesive through glue and varnish,
nor bound together by ropes and bands. Then everything
under Heaven is made as it is by the ways of nature, without
understanding why or how. Everything achieves what is
intended, but does not understand why or how. Both today
and in the ancient past it has always been so, and nothing
can affect this. There is no point in holding to benevolence
and righteousness, like a mixture of glue and varnish, ropes
and bands, as a means of trying to journey in the Tao and Te
– the Way and Virtue – for this merely confuses everything
under Heaven.
  A minor deception alters the sense of purpose. A major
deception alters the very nature of a thing. How is it that I
can be so certain this is so? Ever since the time of the ruler
Shun,38 who began to teach about benevolence and
righteousness, everything under Heaven has been troubled
and distorted by this and everything under Heaven has never
ceased rushing about trying to live up to this. Is this not
because benevolence and righteousness have changed our
basic nature? I will try and explain what I mean by this. Ever
since the Three Dynasties, and on down to today, everything
under Heaven has had its innate nature affected by others.
The mean or petty person has been willing to risk his very
body for gain. The scholar risks his own self for fame. The
senior officials risk their lives for their families. The sage
risks his very self for everything under Heaven. All of these
different types, with differing claims to fame, have all
damaged their innate nature and risked their lives in the
same way.
  For example, a slave boy and girl: the two of them were
out, each looking after their sheep, but they lost the sheep.
Ask the slave boy what happened – the fact is, he was
holding his bamboo strips and reading; ask the slave girl
what happened – the fact is, she was playing a game. These
two were doing different things, but they both lost the
sheep.
  Po Yi39 died for the sake of fame at the bottom of Shou
Yang mountain, Robber Chih40 died for gain on top of the
Eastern Heights. These two both died in different ways but
the fact is, they both shortened their lives and destroyed
their innate natures. Yet we are expected to approve of Po
Yi and disapprove of Robber Chih – strange, isn’t it? In
situations like this world-wide, if someone makes
sacrifices for reasons of benevolence and righteousness,
people call such a person a nobleman, a gentleman; if
someone makes such sacrifices for wealth and power, then
people call such a person a mean and petty man! The action
of sacrifice is one and the same, yet we call one a
gentleman and the other a petty man! In terms of sacrificing
his life and harming his true nature, Robber Chih and Po Yi
did the same. So why should we make a difference of one
being a noble gentleman and the other a mean, petty
person?
   Those who apply themselves to benevolence and
righteousness may travel the same path as Tseng and Shih,
but I would not call them wise. Those who apply themselves
to the five flavours may travel the same path as the chef Yu
Erh, but I would not call them wise. Those who apply
themselves to the five colours may travel the same path as
Li Chu, but I would not call them very bright. My
description of wisdom has nothing to do with benevolence
and righteousness, it is to do with being wise in one’s own
virtue, nothing more. My description of being wise has
nothing to do with benevolence and righteousness, it is that
one should be led by one’s innate nature, nothing more.
When I talk about having good hearing, I don’t mean just
listening, but listening to yourself. When I talk about good
eyesight, I don’t mean just looking, but looking at yourself.
The fact is that those who do not see themselves but who
see others, who fail to get a grasp of themselves but who
grasp others, take possession of what others have but fail to
possess themselves. They are attracted to what others enjoy
but fail to find enjoyment in themselves. In such cases,
whether he be Robber Chih or Po Yi, such a person is just
as deceived and just as wrong. What I am ashamed of is of
failing the Tao and Te – the Way and Virtue – so I don’t try
to elevate myself through acts of benevolence and
righteousness, nor to sink down into useless and idiotic
ways.
CHAPTER 9
Horses’ Hooves




             Horses have hooves so that their feet can grip
on frost and snow, and hair so that they can withstand the
wind and cold. They eat grass and drink water, they buck and
gallop, for this is the innate nature of horses. Even if they
had great towers and magnificent halls, they would not be
interested in them. However, when Po Lo41 came on the
scene, he said, ‘I know how to train horses.’ He branded
them, cut their hair and their hooves, put halters on their
heads, bridled them, hobbled them and shut them up in
stables. Out of ten horses at least two or three die. Then he
makes them hungry and thirsty, gallops them, races them,
parades them, runs them together. He keeps before them
the fear of the bit and ropes, behind them the fear of the
whip and crop. Now more than half the horses are dead.
   The potter said, ‘I know how to use clay, how to mould it
into rounds like the compass and into squares as though I
had used a T-square.’ The carpenter said, ‘I know how to use
wood: to make it bend, I use the template; to make it
straight, I use the plumb line.’ However, is it really the
innate nature of clay and wood to be moulded by compass
and T-square, template and plumb line? It is true,
nevertheless, that generation after generation has said, ‘Po
Lo is good at controlling horses, and indeed the potter and
carpenter are good with clay and wood.’ And the same
nonsense is spouted by those who rule the world.
   I think that someone who truly knows how to rule the
world would not be like this. The people have a true nature,
they weave their cloth, they farm to produce food. This is
their basic Virtue. They are all one in this, not separated,
and it is from Heaven. Thus, in an age of perfect Virtue the
people walk slowly and solemnly. They see straight and
true. In times such as these the mountains have neither
paths nor tunnels, on the lakes there are neither boats nor
bridges; all life lives with its own kind, living close
together. The birds and beasts multiply in their flocks and
herds, the grass and trees grow tall. It is true that at such a
time the birds and beasts can be led around without ropes,
and birds’ nests can be seen with ease.
  In this time of perfect Virtue, people live side by side
with the birds and beasts, sharing the world in common with
all life. No one knows of distinctions such as nobles and
the peasantry! Totally without wisdom but with virtue which
does not disappear; totally without desire they are known as
truly simple. If people are truly simple, they can follow
their true nature. Then the perfect sage comes, going on
about benevolence, straining for self-righteousness, and
suddenly everyone begins to have doubts. They start to fuss
over the music, cutting and trimming the rituals, and thus
the whole world is disturbed. If the pure essence had not
been so cut about, how could they have otherwise ended up
with sacrificial bowls? If the raw jade was not broken apart,
how could the symbols of power be made? If the Tao and Te
– Way and Virtue – had not been ignored, how could
benevolence and righteousness have been preferred? If
innate nature had not been left behind, how could rituals
and music have been invented? If the five colours had not
been confused, how could patterns and designs have
occurred? If the five notes had not been confused, how
could they have been supplanted by the six tones? The
abuse of the true elements to make artefacts was the crime
of the craftsman. The abuse of the Tao and Te – Way and
Virtue – to make benevolence and righteousness, this was
the error of the sage.
  Horses, when they live wild, eat grass and drink water;
when they are content, they entwine their necks and rub
each other. When angry, they turn their backs on each other
and kick out. This is what horses know. But if harnessed
together and lined up under constraints, they know to look
sideways and to arch their necks, to career around and try
to spit out the bit and rid themselves of the reins. The
knowledge thus gained by the horse, and its wicked
behaviour, is in fact the fault of Po Lo.
  At the time of Ho Hsu,42 people stayed where they were,
not knowing anything else; they walked but did not know
where they were going; filled themselves with food and
were happy slapping their bellies to show their
contentment. This was what the people had. Then came the
sage. He brought the cringing and grovelling of the rituals
and music and infected all under Heaven with his offer of
benevolence and righteousness, which he said would
comfort the hearts of all.
  As a result the people desired and longed for knowledge,
and warred against each other to gain the advantage.
Nothing could stop them. All this was the fault of the sage.
CHAPTER 10
Broken Suitcases




            To guard yourself against thieves who slash
open suitcases, rifle through bags and smash open boxes,
one should strap the bags and lock them. The world at large
knows that this shows wisdom. However, when a master
thief comes, he simply picks up the suitcase, lifts the bag,
carries off the box and runs away with them, his only
concern being whether the straps and locks will hold! In
such an instance, what seemed like wisdom on the part of
the owner surely turns out to have been of use only to the
master thief!
   I will try to explain what I am saying. What the world at
large calls a wise man, is he not really just someone who
stores things up for the master thief? Likewise, isn’t the
one they call a sage just a guardian of the master thief’s
interests?
  How do I know all this?
   Long ago in the state of Chi, all the little towns could
see each other and the cockerels and dogs called to each
other. Nets were cast and the land ploughed over an area of
two thousand square miles. Within its four borders,
ancestral temples were built and maintained and shrines to
the land and the crops were built. Its villages and towns
were well governed and everything was under the guidance
of the sage. However, one morning Lord Tien Cheng killed
the ruler and took his country. But was it just his country he
took? He also took the wisdom of the laws of the state,
created by the sages. So Lord Tien Cheng earned the title of
thief and robber, but he was able to live out his days as
secure as Yao or Shun had done. The smaller states dared
not criticize him and the larger states did not dare attack.
So for twelve generations his family ruled the state of Chi.
Is this not an example of someone stealing the state of Chi
and also taking the laws arising from the wisdom of the
sages and using them to protect himself, although he was
both robber and thief?
  I will try to explain this. What the world at large calls
someone of perfect knowledge, is this not in fact the
person who stores up things for a great thief? Those
commonly called sages, are they not responsible for
securing things for the great thief?
  How do I know all this?
   Long ago Lung Feng was executed, Pi Kan was torn
apart, Chang Hung was ripped open, and Tzu Hsu was
smashed to pieces.43 Good men though these four were,
they could not escape their terrible ends. A member of
Robber Chih’s gang asked him, ‘Is there a Tao for the thief?’
Chih replied, ‘What profession is there without its Tao?
The robber works out what is worth stealing: this shows he
is a sage; his courage is shown by being the first to break
in; his righteousness is shown by being last to leave; his
understanding is shown by deciding whether the raid is
possible; his benevolence is shown by his dividing the
spoils equally. Without these five attributes, no one in the
world could become such a great thief.’ Considering all
this, it is clear that good men do not arise without
following the Tao of the sages and therefore that Robber
Chih had to also follow the sages’ Tao, or he could not have
succeeded. But in this world, the good men are few and far
between, while the bad are numerous. So it is that the sage
brings little to the world but inflicts much harm. It is said,
‘When the lips have gone, the teeth get cold; the bad wine
of Lu brought warfare to Han Tan.’44 When the sage is born,
the great thief arises. Beat the sages and let the thieves and
robbers go, then the world will be all right. When the rivers
dry up, the valley is empty. When the hill is levelled, the
pool is filled.
   If the sage does not die, then great thieves will continue
to arise. The more sages are brought forth to rule the
world, the more this helps people like Robber Chih. Create
weights and measures to judge by and people will steal by
weight and measure; create balances and weights and
people will steal by balances and weights; create contracts
and legal agreements to inspire trust and people will steal
by contracts and legal agreements; create benevolence and
righteousness to ensure honesty and even in this instance
benevolence and righteousness teach them to steal.
  How do I know all this?
   This one steals a buckle and he is executed, that one
steals a country and he becomes its ruler. Yet it is at the
gates of rulers that benevolence and righteousness are
professed. Surely this is a case of the wisdom of the sages,
benevolence and righteousness being stolen? So people
rush to become great robbers, to seize estates, stealing
benevolence and righteousness, and taking all the profits of
the weights and measures, balances and weights, contracts
and legal arguments. Try to prevent them with promises of
the trappings of power, they don’t care. Threaten them with
execution, and this doesn’t stop them. For by profiting
those like Robber Chih, whom none can stop, the sage has
made a great mistake.
   It is said, ‘Just as you do not take the fish away from the
deep waters, so the means of controlling a country should
not be shown.’ The sage is the means of control, so the
world should not see him clearly. Thus, if sages and
wisdom were abandoned, great robbers would cease;
destroy the jade and shatter the pearls, then petty thieves
would not appear; burn the accounts and rip up the
contracts, and the people will return to simplicity; break up
the weights and the measures and the people will no longer
argue; obliterate the laws of the world the sages have made,
then the people can begin to be reasoned with. Throw away
the six tones, destroy the pipes and lute, block the ears of
Blind Kuang the musician, then every person in the world
would for the first time be able to hear properly. If
adornments were abolished, the five colours cast away and
the eyes of Li Chu glued shut, then everyone in the world
would be able to see clearly for the first time. Shatter the
template and plumb line, discard the compass and T-square,
break the fingers of a craftsman such as craftsman Chui,
then for the first time everyone in the world will have and
use real skills.
  There is a saying: ‘The greatest art in the world is like
foolishness.’
  Ignore the behaviour of Tseng and Shih, shut the mouth
of Yang and Mo, purge benevolence and righteousness, and
the true Virtue of all under Heaven will display its mystic
power. When people have true clear vision, no one in the
world will be duped; if everyone has true hearing, then no
one in the world will be distracted; if everyone has true
wisdom, then no one in the world will be fooled; if
everyone has Virtue, then no one in the world will be
debased. Those such as Tseng, Shih, Yang, Mo, the musician
Kuang, craftsman Chui or Li Chu showed off their virtue on
the outside. They made the world aflame with admiration
and so confused the world: a way of proceeding which was
pointless.
   Sir, are you the only person who does not know about the
age of perfect Virtue? In times past, in the era of Yung
Cheng, Ta Ting, Po Huang, Chung Yang, Li Lu, Li Hsu,
Hsien Yuan, Ho Hsu, Tsun Lu, Chu Jung, Fu Hsi and Shen
Nung45 the people followed their ways, knotting string and
using the nets. They enjoyed their food; they took pleasure
in their clothes; they were content with their lifestyles;
they were at ease in their homes. Even though the states
were so close to each other that they could hear their
neighbours’ dogs and chickens, nevertheless the people
lived until a good age before dying and never travelled
beyond their own borders. At that time, perfect harmony
was the norm. Now the people are agitated, trying to see
what is going on, saying, ‘In such and such a place there is a
wise man!’ So they pack their bags and rush off, leaving
their parents at home and failing to fulfil their duties to
their ruler. You can see their footprints making a track from
one state to another and the grooves made by their
carriages, stretching for more than a thousand li. This is the
fault of those in authority who search for good knowledge.
   If those in authority search for knowledge, but without
the Tao, everything under Heaven will be in terrible
confusion. How do I know about all this? A great deal of
knowledge is needed to make bows, crossbows, nets,
arrows and so forth, but the result is that the birds fly
higher in distress. A great deal of knowledge is needed to
make fishing lines, traps, baits and hooks, but the result is
that the fish disperse in distress in the water. A great deal of
knowledge is needed to make traps, snares and nets, but the
result is that the animals are disturbed and seek refuge in
marshy lands. In the same way, the versatility needed to
produce rhetoric, to plot and scheme, spread rumours and
debate pointlessly, to dust off arguments and seek apparent
agreement, is also considerable, but the result is that the
people are confused. So everything under Heaven is in a
state of distress, all because of the pursuit of knowledge.
Everything in the world knows how to seek for knowledge
that they do not have, but do not know how to find what they
already know. Everything in the world knows how to
condemn what they dislike, but do not know how to
condemn what they have which is wrong. This is what
causes such immense confusion. It is as if the brightness of
the sun and moon had been eclipsed above, while down
below the hills and streams have lost their power, as though
the natural flow of the four seasons had been broken. There
is no humble insect, not even any plant, that has not lost its
innate nature. This is the consequence for the world of
seeking after knowledge. From the Three Dynasties down
to the present day it has been like this. The good and honest
people are ignored, while spineless flatterers are advanced.
The quiet and calm of actionless action is cast aside and
pleasure is taken in argument. It is this nonsense which has
caused such confusion for everything under Heaven.
CHAPTER 11
Leaving the World Open




             I have heard of leaving the world open to its
own way and not interfering, but I have never heard of
trying to control the world.
   We let the world be, fearful of spoiling its innate nature;
we leave it alone, fearful of those who adversely affect the
world’s Virtue. If the nature of everything under Heaven is
not distorted, if the world’s Virtue is not despoiled, then
what need is there to govern the world? In times gone by
Yao controlled everything under Heaven, everyone was
happy and the whole world was joyful, living in its true way.
Nowhere was there stagnation. But when Chieh governed
everything under Heaven, he made all life wearisome and
distressed, and all people found their own nature turning
bad and diseased. To be without peace, to be without
fulfilment, is to turn against Virtue. No one can struggle
against Virtue for long and still survive.
  Are people too cheerful? If so, they harm the yang. Are
people too vengeful? If so, they harm the yin. If both yin
and yang are corrupted, then the four seasons will not
follow each other, the balance of hot and cold will not be
kept and this results in distress to the very bodies of the
people! People will be unable to control a balance between
joy and anger. It makes them restless, moving here, moving
there, plotting to no purpose, travelling for no good reason
or result. The consequence of this is that the world
becomes concerned with mighty goals and plots, ambition
and hatred, which brings in its wake the likes of Robber
Chih, Tseng and Shih. As a result, the world may wish to
reward the good, but there are not enough rewards
available; nor can it adequately punish the bad, for there are
not enough punishments.
   The whole world is indeed vast, but it cannot provide
enough rewards nor punishments. Given all this, how could
people be expected to find enough time to rest quietly in
the essential qualities of their innate nature?
               Do people enjoy what they can see clearly?
               In fact they are disturbed by colours.
               Do they enjoy what they hear?
               In fact they are spoiled by sounds.
               Do they revel in benevolence?
               In fact they confuse Virtue.
               Do they take pride in righteousness?
               In fact they reject reason.
               Do they delight in ritual?
               In fact they resort to pretence.
               Do they take pleasure in music?
               In fact they sink into dissolution.
               Do they appreciate the sage?
               In fact they take pride in falsehood.
               Do they rejoice at knowledge?
               In fact they celebrate quibblers.
   While the world exists in its true nature, it is irrelevant
whether these eight treasures exist or not. However, when
the world exists in a way which distorts, twists, mixes up
and confuses its true innate nature, these eight treasures
cause immense confusion instead. It gets even worse if the
world goes on to honour and value them! It is said, all this
is passing! However, people go to great lengths, fasting,
praying, teaching these treasures, beating drums and
prancing around. I don’t know what can be done about all
this!
  So it is that the noble master who finds he has to follow
some course to govern the world will realize that
actionless action is the best course. By non-action, he can
rest in the real substance of his nature and destiny. If he
appreciates his own body as he appreciates the world, then
the world can be placed in his care. He who loves his body
as he loves the world can be trusted to govern the world. If
the noble master can prevent his five main organs from
being destroyed, and his vision and hearing also; if he can
become as lifeless as a corpse and develop his dragon
powers; if he can thus still himself, his words will sound
like thunder while his actions will be seen as the actions of
a spirit from Heaven, who is guided by Heaven. If he is
unconcerned and engaged in actionless action, his gentle
spirit will draw all life to him like a dust cloud. How then
would such a person have time for governing the world?
   Tsui Chu questioned Lao Tzu, saying, ‘If the world is not
ruled, how can you improve people’s hearts?’
   Lao Tzu said, ‘Take care how you play with people’s
hearts. People’s hearts should not be shoved down nor
pushed up, for this yo-yoing up and down makes the heart
either a prisoner or an avenging fury. It can be gentle and
giving, moulding even the hard and sharp, or it can be sharp
and pointed, tough enough to cut, carve or chisel. It can be
as hot as a searing fire; it can be as cold as ice. So swift that
in the nodding of one’s head it has twice roared over the
four seas and beyond all boundaries. At rest, it is as deep as
the abyss; when it is active, it is like a star in Heaven. It
races beyond anything that seeks to bind it, for this is in
truth the heart of humanity!
   Long, long ago, the Yellow Emperor was the first to
disturb the hearts of the people with all his cant about
benevolence and righteousness. Yao and Shun came after
him and wore themselves out trying to feed the material
bodies of the people. They distressed their five vital organs
with their benevolence and righteousness; they wore out
their life’s blood in drawing up codes of laws, and yet they
failed. Yao had to send Huan Tou to Mount Chung, banish
the three Miao tribes to the area of San Wei, and exile the
Minister of Works to the Dark City. This is the measure of
their failure to rule the world. This brings us to the Three
Dynasties, when the world was in chaos. At the bottom we
have people such as the dictator Chieh and Robber Chih; at
the top we have people like Tseng and Shih. At this time the
Literati and the Mohists also arose. As a result,
contentment and fury squared up to each other, foolishness
and wisdom rose against each other, good and bad insulted
each other, the vainglorious and the sincere traded insults,
and the whole of the world fell into decline. The great
Virtue was no longer unified, and innate nature and destiny
broke apart. The whole world sought knowledge and all the
different peoples of the world were distracted. At this stage
the axe and saw came into their own; the plumb line
determined truth and brought execution; the hammer and
gouge made their deep marks and the whole world fell into
great disarray. The crime lies in playing around with
people’s hearts. The result was that leaders of worth hid
below the mountains and princes in charge of vast armies
hid shaking in their ancestor shrines.
   In this generation, those condemned to death are piled
up; those who wear the punishment yoke press upon each
other; those sentenced to beatings are never out of sight of
each other. Out of this lot now appear the Literati and
Mohists, waving their arms. Oh dear! That this lot should be
so audacious! They have no shame! Isn’t it strange that we
can see neither sageness nor wisdom, neither benevolence
nor righteousness in the yoke and shackles of punishment!
How can we tell whether or not Tseng and Shih are the
arrows heralding the coming of Chieh and Chih? This is
why I say, ‘Destroy the sage, throw away wisdom and the
whole world will have great order.’
   The Yellow Emperor was the master of the world for
nineteen years: the whole world followed his edicts. Then
he heard of Master Kuang Cheng, who was dwelling on top
of Kung Tung mountain, and he went to see him, saying, ‘I
understand that you, Master, have found the perfect Tao. I
dare to ask you what is the essence of the perfect Tao? I
would like to grasp the essence of Heaven and Earth and
use them to assist the harvest of the five crops in order to
help the people. I would like to be able to direct the yin and
yang in order to bring all things to life. How can this be
done?’
   Master Kuang Cheng replied, ‘What you ask about is the
true element of all things; what you seek control over is in
essence divided. Since you began governing all below
Heaven, the very breath of the clouds has not yet formed,
and yet it rains; the trees and bushes drop their leaves
before they have turned yellow; the light of the sun and
moon grows ever weaker. You are a man whose heart has
become numbed by words, you are insubstantial and feeble.
It would be unworthy to teach you the Tao.’
  The Yellow Emperor withdrew and ceased ruling the
world. He constructed a rude hut, filled only with a white
grass mat, and he dwelt there for three months undisturbed.
Then he went again to make his request.
   Master Kuang Cheng was lying down facing south.46 The
Yellow Emperor, with an air of deference, came forward
kneeling. He bowed low twice and said, ‘I have heard it said,
Master, that you are a master of the perfect Tao. I would
like to ask, how should I govern my body in order to live a
long life?’
  Master Kuang Cheng sat up suddenly and said, ‘This
question of yours! Splendid! I will teach you about the
perfect Tao. The essence of the perfect Tao is hidden in
darkness, lost in silence. Nothing seen; nothing heard.
Embrace the spirit in quietness, the body with its own
rightness. Be still, be pure, do not make your body struggle,
do not disturb your essence. All this will result in a long
life. The eye does not see, the ear does not hear, the heart
knows nothing, yet your spirit will guard your body and
your body will have a long life. Guard what is within, block
that which is outside, for much knowledge is dangerous.
   ‘I will go with you up towards the great Light,47 to the
origins of the perfect other, the perfect yang. I will go with
you through the gate of Deepest Mystery to the origin of
the perfect other,48 the perfect yin. Heaven and Earth have
those who rule them, yin and yang have their places of
concealment. Guard and take care of your body, then the
rest takes good care of itself. I sustain the unity and dwell
in harmony, thus have I remained alive for one thousand two
hundred years and my body has not aged.’
   The Yellow Emperor bowed his head to the ground twice
and said, ‘Master Kuang Cheng, to me you are Heaven
itself.’
   Master Kuang Cheng said, ‘Splendid! I will teach you.
This is inexhaustible, but people still think it has an end;
this is incomprehensible, and yet people feel they can
encompass it. The one who follows my Tao, if he is
amongst the stars, will be elevated, if down below, will be a
king. The one who fails to follow my Tao can see the
brightness above but will still be just like the soil below.
Every creature born comes from the soil and returns to
soil. Therefore, I shall now leave you and enter the gate of
that which has no limit in the fields of the boundless. There
I shall combine with the sun and the moon. There I shall
combine with Heaven and Earth forever. I combine with
whatever is with me! What is apart from me, I ignore! All
the people may die, but I alone will survive!’
   Yun Chiang was travelling east, carried along upon the
wings of a whirlwind. Suddenly he met Hung Mung, who
was jumping around, slapping his thighs and hopping like a
bird. Yun Chiang saw this and stopped dead, standing still in
respect, and said, ‘Elderly man, who are you? What are you
doing?’
   Hung Mung continued to slap his thighs and hop like a
bird, then replied, ‘Enjoying myself!’
  Yun Chiang said, ‘I would like to ask a question.’
  Hung Mung looked at Yun Chiang and said, ‘That’s a
shame!’
   Yun Chiang said, ‘The very breath49 of Heaven is no
longer in harmony. Earth’s very breath is ensnared, the six
breaths do not mix, the four seasons do not follow each
other. Now I want to combine the six breaths in order to
bring life to all things. How do I do this?’
  Hung Mung slapped his thighs, hopped around and said, ‘I
don’t know, I don’t know!’
   Yun Chiang could go no further with this questioning.
But three years later, travelling east, he passed the
wilderness of Sung and came upon Hung Mung again. Yun
Chiang, very pleased, rushed towards him, stood before him
and said, ‘Heaven, have you forgotten me? Heaven, have
you forgotten me?’ Bowing his head twice, he asked for
teaching from Hung Mung.
  Hung Mung said, ‘Wandering everywhere, without a clue
why. Wildly impulsive, without a clue where. I wander
around in this odd fashion, I see that nothing comes without
reason. What can I know?’
   Yun Chiang replied, ‘I am also wildly impulsive, but the
people follow me wherever I am. I cannot stop them
following me. Now, because they follow me, I want to have
a word of teaching from you.’
   ‘The disruption of the ways of Heaven distresses the true
being of things, halting the fulfilment of Heaven’s
Mysteries,’ said Hung Mung. ‘This causes the animals to
disperse, the birds to sing throughout the night, misfortune
to hit the crops and the woods, and disaster to blight the
very insects themselves. Alas, all this is caused by the
people’s error of thinking they know how to rule!’
  ‘What should I do then?’ said Yun Chiang.
  ‘Oh, you distress them! Like a spirit, a spirit I will dance
away,’ said Hung Mung.
  ‘I have had such trouble meeting you,’ said Yun Chiang.
‘Oh Heaven, just give me one other word.’
   ‘Oh ho!’ said Hung Mung. ‘Strengthen your heart.
Remain sure in actionless action, and all things will then
transform themselves. Reject your body, throw out hearing
and eyesight, forget that you are anyone, become one with
the Vast and the Void. Loosen the heart, free the spirit, be
calm as if without a soul. All living things return to their
root, return to their root, not knowing why. Constantly in
darkness, constantly in darkness, and throughout their
physical existence they never depart from this. If they tried
to understand this, they would depart from this. Ask not for
its name, seek not for its shape. So all life comes to birth
through itself.’
   Yun Chiang replied, ‘Heaven, you have honoured me with
this Virtue, taught me through Mystery; my whole life I
sought it, now I have it.’ He bowed his head twice and got
up. He said farewell and left.
   Ordinary people are happy when someone agrees with
them and distressed when others disagree with them. This
happiness and distress comes from the desire to be marked
apart from the common crowd, a desire set within their
hearts. But if they have set their hearts upon distinguishing
themselves from the rest, how does this draw them out
beyond the rest? Better to go with everyone and be at peace
rather than struggle, for, regardless of how clever you are,
the others have more skills. However, when people want to
rule a country on someone’s behalf, they do so by
following the ways of the kings of the Three Dynasties, but
they do not see the evil which comes with such methods.
The country is at the mercy of their fortune, but this usually
ends in destruction! Only perhaps one in ten thousand men
can save the country by this; the chances are less than one
in ten thousand, so they ruin the country. It is very
distressing that those in power do not understand the risks
of using such people!
               The one who has a great country owns a
               great thing.
               Having such a great thing, he should not be
               treated as if he were just anyone.
               Being himself something and yet not just a
               humble something,
               he should consider all others as just things.
               If he really, truly clearly comprehends
               that treating other things as just something,
               he is not himself just a humble something,
               he will not just be content with ruling all
               things under Heaven.
               He will go out and come in through the
               whole cosmos,
               ranging wide across all lands,
               solitary in going, solitary in returning.
               He is the sole possessor,
               and as sole possessor he is the most perfect
               of all.
   The great man in what he teaches is like the shadow that
follows a body, the echo that follows a sound. Presented
with a question, he replies, confronting the questioner with
such a depth of understanding, as if the whole of the
cosmos was poured out. He lives in silence; he acts no-
where, guides those who are rushing hither and thither in
their search and journeys through that which has no origin.
His movements leave no trace as he goes in and out. He is
as the sun, beyond time. To describe him, you talk about his
unity with the great All. The great All has no self. Having no
self, he does not see himself having belongings! The one
who wants possessions is the nobleman of old, while the
one who has nothing is the real companion of Heaven and
Earth.
               Most things are mundane but useful.
               The people are lowly but have to be relied
               upon.
Affairs are secretive but need to be fulfilled.
Laws are crude but necessary.
Righteousness is distant but is needed
within.
Benevolence is intimate but needs to be
made universal.
Rituals are restricted but need to be
extended.
Virtue is central but needs to be raised
higher.
The Tao is perpetually One but needs to be
modified.
Heaven is spiritual but also practical.
So the sages contemplate Heaven but do not
assist it.
They are concerned to perfect their Virtue
but do not allow it to encumber them.
They set forth according to the Tao but do
not make plans.
They work with benevolence but put no
reliance upon it.
They draw extensively upon righteousness
but do not try to build it up.
They observe the rituals but do not set great
store by them.
They do what they have to and never shirk
their responsibilities.
They try to make their laws applicable but do
not believe them effective.
They value the people and do not take them
for granted.
They make use of things and do not dismiss
them lightly.
True, things are worthless but they must be
used.
Those who do not see Heaven clearly will
not be pure in Virtue.
Those who fail to follow the Tao cannot
follow any other path.
What a disaster for those who cannot follow
the Tao!
What is this Tao?
There is the Tao of Heaven;
there is the Tao of humanity.
Non-action brings respect: this is Heaven’s
Tao.
To be active is the Tao of humanity.
It is Heaven’s Tao that is the ruler;
the Tao of humanity is the servant.
The Tao of Heaven and the Tao of humanity
are poles apart.
Do not fail to reflect upon this.
CHAPTER 12
Heaven and Earth




       Heaven and Earth are vast,
       and their diversity comes from one source.
       Although there are ten thousand forms of
       life,
       they are one in their order.
       Human beings are multitudinous,
       but they are governed by one ruler.
       The ruler is rooted in Virtue and perfected
       by Heaven.
       It is said that long ago
       the rulers of everything below Heaven
       ruled through actionless action,
       through Heavenly Virtue and nothing else.
   If we look at words in the light of the Tao, then the title
‘Ruler of the World’ makes sense. If we look at the
distinctions between rulers and others in the light of the
Tao, then the separation of rulers and ministers is relevant
and clear. If we look at their abilities in the same light of
the Tao, then we see that the officials are in the right
places. Look at anything in the light of the Tao and you will
see that the response of all life is fulfilling. Pervading all
Heaven and Earth there is Virtue; stirring all life is the Tao.
The ruling classes govern those below them: this is
hierarchy. Where ability is trained, this is called skill. Such
skill is absorbed into administration and administration is
righteousness. Righteousness is of Virtue; Virtue is of the
Tao; the Tao is of Heaven. It is said that in olden times
those who ruled everything under Heaven wanted nothing
and the world was fulfilled; they practised non-action and
the whole of life was transformed; they were immensely
deep in their stillness and the many families of the world
were calm. The Records say, ‘Remain true to the One and
all manner of tasks will be completed. Be without emotion
and the very ghosts and spirits will submit.’
   The great Master said, ‘The Tao supports and sustains all
life, so immense, so immense is its vastness! The
nobleman should most definitely not have it on his heart.
               ‘The action of non-action is called Heaven.
             The words of non-action are called Virtue.
             To love all humanity and to bring success to
             them is called benevolence.
             To unite that which is not united is called
             greatness.
             To go beyond barriers and boundaries is
             called open-handedness.
             To have a vast multitude of diverse things is
             called wealth.
             To have and to hold Virtue is called
             guidance.
             To grow in maturity in Virtue is called
             stability
             To be aligned with the Tao is called
             completion.
             To refuse to allow anything external which
             distracts you is called perfection.
  ‘The nobleman who clearly perceives these ten things
will be also magnanimous in his ventures and his actions
will benefit all life.
             ‘Such a man will leave the gold in the
             mountain
             and the pearls to lie in the deep.
             He does not view money and goods as true
profit,
nor is he attracted by fame and fortune,
nor by enjoyment of long life,
nor sadness at an early death;
he does not value wealth as a blessing,
nor is he ashamed by poverty.
He will not lust for the wealth of a
generation to have as his own;
he has no wish to rule the whole world as his
private domain.
His honour is clarity of understanding that
all life are part of one treasury
and that death and birth are united.’
The Sage Master said,
‘The Tao, how deep and quiet it lies;
how pure is its clarity!
Without it neither gold nor stone would
resonate.
The gold and stones have sounds within them
but if they are not struck, then no sound
comes forth.
All the multitudinous creatures have
dimensions beyond calculation!
   ‘The man of regal Virtue moves without complexity and
is ashamed to be found concerned with the affairs of state.
His knowledge is firmly rooted in the origin of self, and
encompasses even the spirits. His Virtue embraces widely.
His heart goes out to what is beyond him. Were there no
Tao, then his body would have no life, and without Virtue,
his body has no brightness. One who preserves his body and
lives out his full life, who establishes Virtue and clarifies
the Tao, is he not imbued with regal Virtue? He suddenly
surges forth, wide and unlimited. He moves unexpectedly
and all life comes after him! This is what is meant by the
man of regal Virtue.
               ‘He can see in darkest darkness,
               hears where there is no sound.
               In the midst of darkest darkness,
               he alone sees clearly;
               in the midst of no sound,
               he alone hears the harmony.
               Where depth plunges into depth,
               he can discern things;
               in world upon world of the spirits
               he can discern the core of all.
               So in his dealings with the multitude of
               beings
               he can fulfil all their wants from perfect
               nothingness.
               Always in pursuit
               he returns for the night’s rest.
               Great and small, long and short, distant and
               near.’
   The Yellow Emperor was travelling to the north of Red
Water, ascending to the summit of Kun Lun and looking out
southwards. Returning home he lost his dark pearl. He
commissioned Knowledge to look for it, but Knowledge
was unable to trace it. He commissioned Li Chu to look for
it, but he could not trace it. He commissioned Heated
Debate to look for it, but he also could not trace it. Finally
he commissioned Pointless to look for it and he traced it.
The Yellow Emperor said, ‘How strange! How is it that only
Pointless could trace it?’
   Yao’s teacher was Hsu Yu; Hsu Yu’s teacher was Yeh
Chueh; Yeh Chueh’s teacher was Wang Ni; Wang Ni’s
teacher was Pi I. Yao asked Hsu Yu, ‘Could Yeh Chueh be
counted the equal of Heaven? I could then ask Wang Ni to
request that he take over from me.’
  Hsu Yu said, ‘Take care, for this could put everything
under Heaven at risk! Yeh Chueh is sharp, clear-thinking,
quick-witted and alert. By nature he is superior to others,
but he can exploit what Heaven gives him. He would try to
prevent flaws, but he does not understand where they spring
from. Make him the equal of Heaven? Beware, for he would
rely upon others rather than on Heaven, caring for his own
self first and having little regard to the lives of others. He
would pursue knowledge, and his actions would be like
swift fire. He would be in bondage to his own ideas, in
thrall to them, constantly looking all around to see how
things are going. He would be at the mercy of demands,
changing as they change and having no dependability at all.
How could he be the equal of Heaven? There are small
clans with common ancestors, and he could be the father of
one such small branch, but not the father of the fathers of
all the extended family. His rule would bring disaster, both
to the ministers facing north and the ruler facing south.’
   Yao was touring the sights of Hua. The guards of Hua
said, ‘Oh, a sage! Let me pray to the sage. Long life to the
sage!’
  Yao said, ‘Never!’
  ‘May the sage be wealthy!’
  ‘Never!’
  ‘May the sage have many sons!’
  ‘Never!’
  ‘Long life, wealth and many sons are what most people
want,’ said the guard. ‘Why do you not want them?’
   ’Many sons bring many anxieties, wealth brings many
troubles, long life brings many problems. These three
things do not enhance Virtue. I dismiss them.’
   The guard said, ‘When I first saw you I thought you were
a sage. Now I can see you are just a nobleman. Heaven
gives life to all the multitudinous peoples and gives them
their place. Many sons will have diverse assignments given
to them, so there is nothing to fear! If you share your
wealth with others, there is no trouble!
              ‘The sage finds his place as a quail settles,
              or as a fledgling is fed
              and as a bird flying leaves no mark of its
              passage.
              If the whole world has the Tao,
              he is part of that well-being.
              When the whole world has lost the Tao,
              he develops Virtue and avoids involvement.
              After a thousand years, wearied by the world,
              he departs and rises to be with the
              immortals,
              soaring up upon the white clouds,
              arriving at the Supreme One’s abode.
              The three troubles you quote never affect
              him;
               they do not touch his body;
               Such a man suffers no shame!’
   The guard then left. Yao pursued him, saying, ‘I would
just like to ask if …’
  ‘Get lost!’ said the guard.
   When Yao ruled all under Heaven, Po Cheng Tzu Kao
was made a governor. Yao passed the throne to Shun, then
Shun passed it to Yu. At this point Po Cheng Tzu Kao
resigned his commission and began farming. Yu went to see
him and found him ploughing. Rushing up to him and
bowing in deference, he halted and said, ‘When Yao ruled
the world, you, Sir, were made a governor. Yao gave way to
Shun and Shun gave way to me and then you, Sir, resigned
your commission and began farming. Dare I ask the reason
why?’
   Tzu Kao said, ‘When Yao ruled the world, people
worked, although he gave no rewards; the people were in
awe of him, although he gave out no punishments. Now, you
use both rewards and punishments but the people are
without benevolence. Virtue will now decay and
punishments will prevail. The chaos of the age to come has
its origin here and now. So, Sir, why don’t you leave? Do
not disturb my work!’
               He pushed on with his farming and did not
look around.
At the great Origin there was nothing,
nothing, no name.
The One arose from it; there was One
without form.
In taking different forms, it brought life, and
became known as Virtue.
Before any shape was given, their roles were
assigned,
varied and diverse but all linked to one
another.
This was their lot.
The forces worked on and things were
created,
they grew and took distinct shapes, and these
were called ‘bodies’.
The bodies contained spirits,
each distinct and mortal.
This is what we call the innate nature.
Train this innate nature and it will return to
Virtue;
Virtue at its best is identical with the Origin.
Being of the One is to be ultimately
formless, and this formlessness is vast.
               This is like the opening and shutting of a
               bird’s beak,
               where the opening and shutting is like
               Heaven and Earth united.
               This unity is chaotic and disorderly;
               it looks stupid or foolish.
               This is known as Mysterious Virtue,
               being, without knowing it, part of the great
               Submission.
   Confucius said to Lao Tzu, ‘Some people try to grasp the
Tao through argument. They try to make what is impossible
seem possible. They try to make what is not seem as if it is.
Like debaters, they make pointless distinctions and then
claim they are actually significant – as real as this roof!
Can such people as this be called sages?’
   ‘Such people are the workers kept in bondage,’ replied
Lao Tzu, ‘wearing out their bodies and bringing anxiety to
their hearts. Like the dog who is tied to a leash because he
catches vermin, or the monkey which is brought down from
the mountains because it is skilful. Chiu,50 I’m telling you,
telling you something you have not heard of and cannot
discuss. Those who have heads and feet but no heart and no
ears are numerous. Those who have their bodies but who
value that which is without body or form, are virtually
unheard of! Life stops and starts, is born and dies, grows
and declines, and there is nothing which can be done about
this. People think the ruler of all this is humanity. Forget
that, forget Heaven and be known as one of those who
forget self. The person who forgets self can be known as
the one who enters Heaven.’
   Chiang Lu Mien travelled to visit Chi Che and said, ‘The
ruler of Lu asked me, saying, “Teach me.” I refused, but he
kept hold of me and I had to say something. I am not sure I
chose the right path but I will tell you what I said. I said to
the ruler of Lu, “You must be courteous and disciplined.
Note and promote those who are public-spirited and loyal;
note and oppose those who are selfish and subservient. If
you do this, who could possibly wish to be against you?” ’
   Chi Che nearly choked with laughter and said, ‘Your
words, dear Sir, regarding the Virtue of Emperors and
kings, are like the praying mantis waving his arms around in
a fury, trying to stop a carriage – pretty pointless. If he
followed your advice, he would end up building taller
towers in which to store his increasing number of
valuables, and the people would just follow his example.’
   Chiang Lu Mien was taken aback and said in amazement,
‘I am astonished at your words, Master, but I would dearly
like to hear what you have to say on this issue.’
   Chi Che said, ‘If a great sage ruled the world, he would
free the hearts of his people, make his teachings accessible
and change people’s behaviour. He would erase all
falsehood and betrayal from their hearts and enable them to
act as their own consciences dictate.
It would arise from their very innate natures, yet they would
not realize this. If he proceeded like this, why should such a
person look up to Yao or Shun for guidance as to how to
rule the people, or even bother to despise their methods?
He simply wants all to be united in Virtue and in the
tranquillity of the heart.’
   Tzu Kung travelled south to Chu and as he returned
through Chin, he was journeying along the side of the river
Han. He saw a lone old man working on his land. The man
had prepared the ground and had drawn water from the well
and was carrying a jar of water to pour on the earth. Huffing
and puffing, he was using up much of his strength and yet
had little to show for it. Tzu Kung said, ‘There are machines
which can water a hundred fields in one day, for very little
effort but with much to show for it. Wouldn’t you like to
have one, Master?’
  The gardener looked up and said, ‘How does this work?’
   He said, ‘It is made from wood, solid at the rear and
lighter at the other end and it raises the water just as you
would pour it out, or the way boiling water overflows. It is
called a well dip.’
  The gardener was furious, then laughed and said, ‘I have
heard from my teacher that where you have machines, then
you get certain kinds of problems; where you get certain
kinds of problems, then you find a heart warped by these
problems. Where you get a heart warped, its purity and
simplicity are disturbed. When purity and simplicity are
disturbed, then the spirit is alarmed and an alarmed spirit is
no place for the Tao to dwell. It isn’t that I don’t know of
these machines, but I would be ashamed to use one.’
   Tzu Kung was covered in confusion, hung his head and
said nothing in reply. After a while, the gardener said, ‘Sir,
who are you?’
  ‘A disciple of Confucius,’ said Tzu Kung.
  The gardener said, ‘Sir, are you one of those types who
expand their knowledge so as to try and appear to be a sage,
seeking to impress everyone with your superiority, singing
sad songs all alone in the hope of becoming famous in this
world? It would be better for you to forget your breath and
spirit and disregard the care of your body. Then you might
make progress! As it is, you cannot care for yourself, so
how do you expect to rule the world? Off you go, Sir, and
do not disturb my work!’
  Tzu Kung was disturbed and nonplussed by all this. He
wandered off puzzled and disorientated, and he did not
recover until he had travelled thirty li. His followers said,
‘Who was that man? Master, why did you change colour
when you saw him and change your bearing so that it took
you all day to recover?’
   He said, ‘Previously I thought that there was only one
true man in the world, because I did not know of this man. I
have heard the Master say that in actions you aim for that
which is true and in ventures you aim for success. Use little
energy but have great results, this is the Tao of the sage.
Now I don’t believe this any more. Those who hold to the
Tao are endowed with its Virtue. Being virtuous, they are
complete in body. Being complete in their bodies, they are
complete in spirit. Being complete in spirit, as a result they
are in the Tao of the sages. They live in the world side by
side with the people, travelling with them, but never
knowing where they are going. Their simplicity is mind-
boggling! They consider accomplishments, gain, machines,
talents, to be inappropriate in the affections of the people.
People like this do not go where they do not want to go nor
do they do what their heart tells them not to do. Even if the
whole world sings their praises and acclaims them, they
will pay no attention at all; if the whole world blames them
and accuses them of losing things, they are calm and
unperturbed. Neither the praise nor the blame of the world
gives them either gain nor loss. Such a one as this is called
a man of complete Virtue! In contrast, I am just a wind-
blown wave.’
  When he returned to Lu, he reported the discussion to
Confucius. Confucius said, ‘That farmer is just a false man,
a practitioner of the ways of Primal Chaos. He grasps the
first thing, but does not know the second. He controls what
is internal but cannot rule over that which is external. If you
had met one who has the clarity of purity and simplicity,
who through non-action can restore the original, give shape
to his innate nature and enfold his spirit and thus wander at
will throughout the world – had you met one such as this,
then you would be alarmed! But this man of Primal Chaos,
why do we need to worry about him?’
  Chun Mang was travelling on his way east to the Great
Gorge of the ocean and met Yuan Fung on the shore of the
Eastern Ocean. Yuan Fung said, ‘Master, where are you
going?’
  ‘I am going to the Great Gorge.’
  ‘Why?’
    ‘The Great Gorge is the sort of place that can never be
filled by the waters entering it, nor emptied by the waters
that flow out of it. I shall have a fine time, wandering beside
it,’ said Chun Mang.
  Yuan Fung replied, ‘Master, do you not care about the
people? Can’t you tell me about the way sages rule?’
  ‘The way sages rule?’ said Chun Mang. ‘Only appoint
those who are fit for the office; make appointments in
accordance with the worthiness of those appointed; act
only after studying the situation thoroughly. When deeds
and words are in accord, the whole world is transformed.
Consequently, a wave of the hand or a sharp look will bring
the peoples of all the world rushing to you. This is the way
sages rule.’
              ‘Can I ask about the Virtuous ones?’
              ‘The Virtuous one is still and without
              thought;
              when he moves he is without design;
              he keeps no tally of right and wrong, good or
              bad.
              Virtuous ones share their gains with all
              within the four seas
              and from this they derive pleasure.
              They share what they have and are content.
              Mournful, they are like a child who has lost
              his mother;
              uncertain, they are like travellers who are
              lost.
              Though blessed with great wealth and
              comforts,
              they have no idea where it comes from;
              they have more than enough to eat and drink,
              but have no idea where it comes from.
              This is the style of Virtuous ones.’
              ‘What about the spiritual ones?’
              Chun Mang said,
              ‘Their spirits rise up to the brightest light
              and their bodies disappear.
              They are gloriously enraptured.
              They live out their fate,
              The spiritual one pursues to its end what is
              truly him
              and dwells in the delight of Heaven and Earth
              while his multitudinous cares fall away.
              All things return to their true nature.
              This is called Primal Mystery.’
   Men Wu Kuei and Chih Chang Man Chi were observing
the army of King Wu.51 ‘He is not of the stature of the
noble Lord of Yu and that is why he has this problem,’ said
Chih Chang Man Chi.
   Men Wu Kuei said, ‘Was the world really well ruled
under the noble Lord Yu? Or was it already in trouble and
then Yu came and ruled it?’
  ‘Everyone wants the world to be well governed,’ said
Chih Chang Man Chi. ‘If it was already well governed, do
you think anyone would have then commented upon the
good rule of Yu?52 He brought healing to wounds, a wig to
cover baldness, medicines for the sick. He was like a
dutiful son bringing medicines to a loving father, yet
wearing a grim look. Any sage would be ashamed of this. In
a time of perfect Virtue, the wise are not valued, the able
are unemployed. The rulers are like the top branches of a
tree, the people like deer: they do what is right but they do
not understand righteousness. They love each other but they
do not understand benevolence. They are dependable but
they do not understand loyalty. They are trustworthy but do
not understand good faith. In their movements amongst
each other they care for each other but do not understand
kindness. In this way they move without leaving any sign,
act without leaving any recordable effect.’
   The dutiful son who does not indulge his father and the
loyal minister who does not flatter his ruler, these are the
best of ministers and sons. The son who agrees with his
parents in everything they say and do is viewed by the
ordinary people as an unworthy son. The minister who
agrees with everything his ruler says and does is viewed by
the ordinary people as an unworthy minister. Yet people
don’t seem to understand the truth of this. Those who agree
with everything that the people say and think good whatever
the people think is good, are never called just yes-men or
sycophants. Does this mean popular opinion is of greater
authority than parents or rulers? Someone is immediately
angry if you tell him he is a yes-man or a sycophant.
Nevertheless, throughout this life he will be a yes-man and
all his life he will be a sycophant. His stories are designed
to agree with people, his turns of phrase are intended to
impress them. From start to finish, from beginning to end
he never disagrees with them. He displays his robes,
exhibiting the colours; his whole carriage is intended to
impress and earn him favour with his peers and yet he
cannot stand being called a sycophant! He just follows the
fashion, liking this and disliking that as others do and yet he
does not see himself as just one of the crowd. This is how
far his stupidity has reached! The one who knows he is
stupid is not that stupid; the one who knows he is confused
is not that confused. The greatly deluded will never be rid
of delusion; the monumentally foolish will never be very
bright. If there are three men walking along together and
one of them is confused, they will still reach their goal,
because confusion is in the minority; but if two of them are
confused, they will not arrive, because confusion is in the
majority. So nowadays, with so much confusion in the
world, I can indicate to the people where to go, but they do
not follow me. Distressing, isn’t it?
   Classical music is wasted upon the simple peasant, but
let them hear ‘The Breaking of the Willows’ or ‘The Bright
Flowers’ and they will be very jolly. Similarly, wise words
do not rest in the hearts of the people. Perfect words do
not stay, because vulgar words are in the ascendant. Two
basic drums can drown out the sound of the bell and deny
the pleasure it could give. These days the whole world is
confused. Even if I wanted to go in a particular direction,
what good would it do? Since I understand this, if I were to
try and force people to go my way, that would just be to fall
into a delusion of my own. It is better just to let things be
and not force them. If I don’t get into such struggles, I
shan’t have anything to worry about. A leper has a son born
at night-time and he rushes to find a light to look at him.
His eagerness to see is based on his fear that the child will
look like him.
   A hundred-year-old tree is chopped up and from that is
fashioned a sacrificial bowl, engraved and coloured green
and yellow. The rest is thrown away into a ditch. Now, if we
compare the sacrificial bowl and that which was cast away,
there is certainly a difference between them in terms of
beauty and ugliness, but they are one in that they have both
lost their innate nature. Robber Chih, as distinct from
Tseng and Shih, is very different from the others, but they
are all one in having lost their innate nature. There are five
ways in which the innate nature is lost. The first is when the
five colours confuse the eye and deprive it of clarity of
vision. The second is when the five notes confuse the ear
and deprive it of the ability to hear. The third is when the
five smells affect the nose and cause pains and distress to
the forehead. The fourth is when the five flavours deaden
the mouth and deprive the sense of taste of its ability to
enjoy. The fifth is when pleasures and dislikes unsettle the
heart and make the innate nature unstable. These five bring
troubles to life. Now the followers of Yang and Mo start
spreading out, thinking they have discovered something.
But I would not describe this as news. What they have
grasped only brings distress, so how can this be the right
thing? If they have, then we could claim that the dove in the
cage has found something worthwhile. Likes and dislikes,
music and colours just confuse your inner self, while
wearing caps of leather and feathered hats, carrying official
decrees in hand and wearing ceremonial robes hinder
appreciation of that which is external. Stuffed full of
nonsense on the inside and bound by cords externally,
people still look around, even when tied up like this, and
claim they have grasped something. Why, they are no better
off than criminals who are clamped in irons, their fingers in
the screw, or tigers and leopards trapped in cages, yet they
still think they have grasped something worth following.
CHAPTER 13
Heaven’s Tao




           It is Heaven’s Tao to journey and to gather
no moss,
           thus all the forms of life are brought to
           perfection.
           It is the Emperor’s Tao to journey and to
           gather no moss,
           which is why the whole world comes to his
           feet.
           It is the sages’ Tao to journey and to gather
           no moss,
           thus all that lies within the oceans venerates
           them.
           To understand Heaven clearly,
               to comprehend the sages,
               to journey through the entire cosmos
               following the Virtue of the Emperors and the
               kings
               but also to be spontaneous themselves:
               this is the nature of those who comprehend,
               seeming not to know
               but being centred in stillness.
   The sages are quiescent, not because of any value in
being quiescent, they simply are still. Not even the
multitude of beings can disturb them, so they are calm.
Water, when it is still, reflects back even your eyebrows
and beard. It is perfectly level and from this the carpenter
takes his level. If water stilled offers such clarity, imagine
what pure spirit offers! The sage’s heart is stilled! Heaven
and Earth are reflected in it, the mirror of all life. Empty,
still, calm, plain, quiet, silent, non-active, this is the
centredness of Heaven and Earth and of the Tao and of
Virtue. The Emperor, king, and sages rest there. Resting,
they are empty; empty, they can be full; fullness is
fulfilment. From the empty comes stillness; in stillness
they can travel; in travelling they achieve. In stillness they
take actionless action. Through actionless action they
expect results from those with responsibilities. Through
actionless action they are happy, very happy; being so happy
they are not afflicted by cares and worries, for these have
no place, and their years of life are prolonged. Empty, still,
calm, plain, quiet, silent, actionless action is the foundation
of all life. If you are clear on this and facing south, it means
you are a noble like Yao; if you are clear on this and facing
north, you will become a minister like Shun.
   Looking up to them, you observe the Virtue of
Emperors, kings and the Sons of Heaven. Looking down on
them, you observe the Tao of the dark sages and the
uncrowned king. If you retire as they did, amongst the
hermits of the rivers and oceans, mountains and forests,
you will be considered like them as true scholars. Coming
forward and offering help to this generation brings great
fame and merit and the whole world becomes one. The sage
is still; the king travels. Actionless action brings honour.
The beauty radiated, since it arises from simplicity,
outshines the rest of the world. Clarity is the Virtue of
Heaven and Earth: this is the great Origin, the great
Beginning. To have it is to be in harmony with Heaven, to
bring equality with everything below Heaven and to be in
harmony with all people. To be in harmony with all people
is called human happiness; to be in harmony with Heaven,
this is called Heavenly happiness.
  Chuang Tzu said,
  ‘My Master Teacher! My Master Teacher!
   He judges all life but does not feel he is being
judgemental;
  he is generous to multitudes of generations
  but does not think this benevolent;
  he is older than the oldest
  but he does not think himself old;
  he overarches Heaven and sustains Earth,
  shaping and creating endless bodies
  but he does not think himself skilful.
  This is what is known as Heavenly happiness.
   ’There is a saying: “If you know the happiness of Heaven,
then you know that life is from Heaven and death is the
transformation of things. In their stillness they are yin and
in their journeying they are yang.” To know Heavenly
happiness means that you do not upset Heaven, nor go
against others. You are not reliant on material things, you
are not rebuked by the ghosts. There is a saying: ”He moves
with Heaven and rests with Earth, his heart is one, he is the
king of the whole world; the ghosts do not worry him and
hissoul is not wearied, his heart is one with all living
beings.” This means his emptiness and stillness enter all
beings in Heaven and Earth, travelling alongside all beings.
This is known as the Heavenly happiness. Heavenly
happiness is the heart of the sage; this is how he cares for
all under Heaven.’
   The Virtue of Emperors and kings considers Heaven and
Earth as its parents, the Tao and Virtue as its master and
actionless action as its core. Through actionless action
they can make the whole world do as they will and yet not
be wearied. Through action they cannot even begin to fulfil
what the world requires. This is why the ancient ones valued
actionless action. When both the leaders and those below
them are in actionless action, then both the leaders and the
underlings have the same Virtue. If those below and those
above share the same Virtue, then none of them is in the
position of a minister. If those below act and those
aboveact also, then those above and those below share the
same Tao. If those above and those below share the same
Tao, then there is no one to be the lord. However, those
above tend to care for the world by actionless action, while
those below care for the world by action. This has always
been the case. Thus the ancient kings of the world, who
knew everything about Heaven and Earth, had no designs;
even though they understood the whole of life, they did not
speak out; though their skills were greater than any in the
lands bounded by oceans, they did nothing.
              Heaven produces nothing,
              yet all life is transformed;
               Earth does not support,
               yet all life is sustained;
               the Emperor and the king take actionless
               action,
               yet the whole world is served.
               There is a saying that there is
               nothing as spiritual as Heaven,
               nothing as rich as Earth,
               nothing as great as Emperors and kings.
   It is also said that the Virtue of Emperors and kings finds
its match in that of Heaven and Earth. Thus can one ascend
with Heaven and Earth, gallop with all life and harness all
people to the Tao.
  The beginning lies with those above, the outworking with
those below; the important lies with the ruler, the details
with the minister.
   The three armies and five types of weapons53 are the
irrelevant aspects of Virtue.
   Handing down rewards and punishments, advantage and
loss and the inflicting of the five types of sentence,54 these
are the irrelevant aspects of teaching.
   Rituals and laws, weights and measures and all the
attention to self and name are the irrelevant aspects of
governing.
  The sound of bells and drums, the attention to feathers
and hangings, these are the irrelevant aspects of music.
  The attributes of official mourning are the irrelevant
aspects of grief.
   These five unimportant aspects await the movement of
the spirit and the liveliness of the heart’s skills before they
can be of service.
  The ancient ones were aware of all these aspects but did
not give them any importance.
  The ruler precedes and the minister follows;
  the father precedes and the son follows;
  the elder brother precedes and the younger brother
follows;
  the senior one precedes and the junior follows;
  the man precedes and the woman follows;
  the husband precedes and the wife follows.
   This progression of the greater followed by the lesser
mirrors that of Heaven and Earth. The sages take their
example from this. Heaven is elevated, Earth lowly, and this
reflects their spiritual illumination. Spring and summer
precede and autumn and winter follow: this is the pattern of
the four seasons. In the growth of all life, their roots and
buds have their appointed place and distinct shape, and from
this comes maturation and then decay, the constant stream
of transformation and change. If Heaven and Earth, the
most perfect in spirit, have their hierarchy of precedence
and sequence, then how much more should this be so with
the people!
  In the ancestor shrine it is kinship which brings honour;
  in the court it is nobility;
  in the local areas it is age;
  in the governing of things it is wisdom.
  This is the pattern of the great Tao. To speak about the
Tao but not about its pattern of sequence goes against the
Tao itself. If we speak about the Tao that has no Tao, then
there is no Tao to guide!
  Thus it was that the ancient ones clearly grasped the
great Tao, seeking first the meaning of Heaven and then the
meaning of its Tao and Virtue.
  When they clearly understood the Tao and Virtue,
  they then understood benevolence and righteousness.
   When they        clearly       grasped   benevolence   and
righteousness,
  they could see how to perform their duties,
  When they grasped how to perform their duties,
  they came to understand form and fame.
  When they comprehended form and fame,
  they were able to make appointments.
  When they had made appointments,
  they went on to examining people and their efforts.
  When they had examined people’s efforts,
  they moved to judgements of good or bad.
  When they had made judgements of good and bad,
  they went on to punishments and rewards.
   Following this, the foolish and the wise knew what they
should do and the elevated and the lowly went to their
appropriate places. The good and the worthy as well as
those below them found in their own selves that all had
assignments adapted to their skills, appropriate to their
rank. Thus did they serve those above them and encourage
those below; external matters were governed and their own
selves developed. Knowledge and plotting were never used
and they relied upon Heaven.
  This is known as the great peace and perfect government.
  The Book says, ‘There is form and there is title.’ Form
and title were known to the ancient ones, but they gave it no
importance. In the olden days, when they talked of the great
Tao, they spoke of the five steps which brought them to
‘form and fame’, or they went to nine steps and debated
‘rewards and punishments’. If they had just gone straight to
discussing ‘form and fame’ they would have shown up their
ignorance of the origin; or if they had plunged straight into
‘rewards and punishments’ they would have shown their
ignorance of the correct beginning. Those who turn the Tao
upside down before talking of it, who in fact oppose the
Tao before speaking of it, will be governed by other people,
for they could not rule others! Those who plunge straight
in, gabbling on about ‘form and fame’ or ‘rewards and
punishments’, may have some understanding of the means
of governing but do not understand the Tao of governing.
They may be of use to the world, but they cannot use the
world. They are typical pompous scholars, just stuck in
their little corner. Rituals, laws, weights and measures, all
the point-scoring of correct forms and titles: the ancient
ones had all this, but they were the tools of those below to
serve those above. Those above did not use this to rule
those below.
  In days gone by Shun spoke to Yao, saying, ‘Being
Heaven’s king, how do you use your heart?’
   ‘I do not abuse those who are defenceless,’ said Yao, ‘nor
do I ignore the poor. I mourn for those who die, caring for
the orphaned child and for the widow. This is how I use my
heart.’
  ‘Righteous as far as righteousness goes, but not that
great,’ commented Shun.
  ‘What ought I to do, then?’ said Yao.
   ‘When Heaven’s Virtue is found, the hills rejoice, the sun
and moon shine and the four seasons are in line. The
regular pattern of each day and night follows properly and
the rain clouds are moved accordingly.’
  Yao said, ‘So all I’ve really been doing is getting worked
up and bothered! You seek compliance with Heaven,
whereas I have sought compliance with humanity.’
   Since earliest times Heaven and Earth have been known
as great. The Yellow Emperor, Yao and Shun have all praised
them. The ancient kings who ruled all under Heaven, did
they need to act? Heaven and Earth were sufficient for
them.
   Confucius travelled west to place his books in the
archives of Chou. Tzu Lu offered advice, saying, ‘I have
heard that the official in charge of the Royal Archives is
Lao Tzu. But he has resigned and lives at home. Sir, if you
want to place your books there, go and see him and ask his
assistance.’
  ‘Splendid,’ said Confucius. So off he went to see Lao
Tzu, but Lao Tzu refused to help. So Confucius took out his
Twelve Classics,55 and started to preach.
  When he was halfway through, Lao Tzu said, ‘This is too
much. Put it briefly.’
   Confucius said, ‘In essence, it is benevolence and
righteousness.’
   ‘May I ask,’ said Lao Tzu, ‘are benevolence and
righteousness of the very essence of humanity?’
   ‘Certainly,’ said Confucius. ‘If the nobleman is without
benevolence, he has no purpose; if without righteousness,
he has no life. Benevolence and righteousness, these are
truly of the innate nature of humanity. How else could it
be?’
  ‘May I ask, what are benevolence and righteousness?’
   ‘To be at one, centred in one’s heart, in love with all,
without selfishness, this is what benevolence and
righteousness are,’ replied Confucius.
  ‘Really! Your words reveal misunderstanding,’ said Lao
Tzu. ‘ “Love of all”, that’s both vague and an exaggeration!
“Without selfishness”, isn’t that rather selfish? Sir, if you
want people to remain simple, shouldn’t you look to the
ways of Heaven and Earth?
  ‘Heaven and Earth have their boundaries which are
constant;
  the sun and moon hold their courses in their brightness;
  the stars and planets proceed in the boundaries of their
order;
  the birds and creatures find their confines within their
herds and flocks.
  Think of the trees which stand within their own
boundaries in order.
  ‘So Sir, walk with Virtue and travel with the Tao, and you
will reach the perfect end. Why bother with all this
benevolence and righteousness, prancing along as if you
were beating a drum and looking for a lost child? Sir, you
will just confuse people’s true nature!’
   Shih Cheng Chi came to see Lao Tzu and asked him, ‘I
have heard tell that you, Sir, are a sage, so I came to see
you, regardless of the length of the journey. Over the
hundred nights of the journey my feet became blistered, but
I did not stop nor rest. Now I find, Sir, that you are not a
sage. Even though you were wealthy enough for even the rat
holes of your house to be full of left-over rice, you
nevertheless kicked your poor little sister out of the house.
What an unkind action! When your food is placed before
you, even if you cannot eat it all, you hoard it, whether it is
raw or cooked.’
  Lao Tzu showed no emotion and made no reply. The next
day Shih Cheng Chi came to see him again and said,
‘Yesterday I was rude to you, Sir. Today I have no heart for
it. Why is this?’
  Lao Tzu said, ‘I think I have freed myself from
knowledge, from the spiritual and from being a sage. If you
had called me an ox yesterday, Sir, then I would have said I
was an ox. If you had called me a horse, I would have said I
was a horse. If people name a reality, but someone won’t
have it, then he just makes life more problematic. I am
always like this, I don’t just put it on for certain occasions.’
   Shih Cheng Chi shrank back so as not to be even near
Lao Tzu’s shadow, then he came forward once more in a
humble way and asked how he could cultivate himself. Lao
Tzu said, ‘Your face is unpleasant; your eyes glare; your
forehead is broad; your mouth hangs open; your style is
pompous; you are like a tethered horse waiting to bolt,
ready to go like an arrow from a crossbow; you examine
everything in too much detail; you are cunning in your use
of knowledge, yet you lounge around. All this makes me
distrust you. Out on the frontier someone like you would
be called a bandit.’
  The Master said,
  ‘The Tao does not hesitate before that which is vast, nor
does it abandon the small.
  Thus it is that all life is enlivened by it.
  So immense, so immense there is nothing which is not
held by it;
  so deep, so unfathomable beyond any reckoning.
   The form of its Virtue is in benevolence and
righteousness, though this is a minor aspect of its spirit.
  Who but the perfect man could comprehend all this?
  The perfect man has charge of this age, a somewhat
daunting task!
  However, this does not fool him or trap him.
   He holds the reins of power over the whole world but it
is of little consequence to him.
  His discernment unearths all falsehood
  but he gives no thought to personal gain.
   He gets to the heart of issues and knows how to protect
the foundation of truth.
   Thus Heaven and Earth are outside him, he ignores all
life and his spirit is never wearied.
  He travels with the Tao,
  is in agreement with Virtue,
  bids farewell to benevolence and righteousness
  and ignores ritual and music,
  because the perfect man has set his heart upon what is
right.’
   This generation believes that the value of the Tao is to be
found in books. But books are nothing more than words,
and words have value but only in terms of their meaning.
Meaning is constantly seeking to express what cannot be
said in words and thus passed on. This generation values
words and puts them into books, yet what it values is
perhaps mistaken, because what it values is not really all
that valuable. So we look at things and see things, but it is
only an outward form and colour, and what can be heard is
just the name and sound. How sad that this generation
imagines that the form, colour, name and sound are enough
to capture the essence of something! The form, colour,
name and sound are in no way sufficient to capture or
convey the truth, which is why it is said that the
knowledgeable do not speak and those who speak are not
knowledgeable. But how can this generation understand
this?
   Duke Huan was sitting up in his hall reading a book. The
wheelwright Pien was down below in the courtyard making
a wheel. He put down his chisel and hammer, went up to the
hall and asked Duke Huan, ‘May I ask you, Sir, what words
you are reading?’
  Duke Huan replied, ‘The words of the sages.’
  ‘Are these sages still living?’
  ‘They are long dead,’ said Duke Huan.
   ‘Then, Sir, what you are reading is nothing but rubbish
left over from these ancient men!’
   ‘How dare you, a wheelwright, comment on what I read!
If you can explain this, fine, if not you shall die!’ thundered
Duke Huan.
   The wheelwright Pien replied, ‘Your Lordship’s servant
looks at it from the perspective of his own work. When I
work on a wheel, if I hit too softly, pleasant as this is, it
doesn’t make for a good wheel. If I hit furiously, I get tired
and the thing doesn’t work! So, not too soft, not too
vigorous, I grasp it in my hand and hold it in my heart. I
cannot express this by word of mouth, I just know it. I
cannot teach this to my son, nor can my son learn it from
me. So for seventy years I have gone along this path and
here I am still making wheels. The ancient ones, when they
died, took their words with them. Which is why I can state
that what Your Lordship is reading is nothing more than
rubbish left over from these ancient ones!’
CHAPTER 14
Does Heaven Move?




       Does Heaven move?
       Does the Earth stand still?
       Do the sun and moon argue about where to
       go?
       Who is lord over all this?
       Who binds and controls it?
       Who, doing nothing, makes all of this be?
       Is there some hidden cause that makes things
       as they are, whether they wish or not?
       Or is it just that everything moves and turns
       because it has no choice?
       Do the clouds come before the rain, or does
       the rain cause the clouds?
               What causes them to be?
               Who, doing nothing, brings all this joyful
               excess into being?
               The winds come from the north,
               going first to west then to east,
               swirling up on high, to go who knows where?
               Whose breath are they?
               Who, doing nothing, creates all this activity?
   Shaman Hsien said, ‘Come, I will tell you. Heaven has
six directions and five cardinal elements.56 Emperors and
kings follow them and there is good government. If they act
against them, there is bad government. Consider the Nine
Lo, whereby harmony can rule and Virtue can be
established. The scholar will illuminate all below and the
whole world will be with him. This is what life is like under
the August Rulers.’
  Tang, the Prime Minister of Shang, asked Chuang Tzu
about benevolence. Chuang Tzu said, ‘Tigers and wolves are
benevolent.’
  ‘What do you mean?’
   ‘The father cares for his children,’ said Chuang Tzu. ‘Is
this not benevolence?’
  ‘But it is perfect benevolence that I am interested in.’
   ‘Perfect benevolence has nothing to do with affection,’
said Chuang Tzu.
   But the Prime Minister replied, ‘I have heard that where
there is no affection, there is no love; where there is no
love, there is no filial piety. Do you mean to say that
perfect benevolence is without filial piety?’
   ‘Certainly not. Perfect benevolence is of the highest
order, and words such as “filial piety” cannot describe it.
What you want to say is not that filial piety is surpassed,
but that nothing even comes close to it. When a traveller
goes south and then turns to face north when he has reached
Ying, he cannot see Ming mountain. Why is this? Because
it is far away. There is the saying: filial piety arising from
respect is easy, filial piety arising from love is hard. If filial
piety from love is easy, then to forget your parents is hard.
It is easy to forget your parents, but it is hard to make my
parents forget me. It is easy to make my parents forget me,
but it is hard to make me forget the whole world. It is easy
to forget the whole world, but it is hard for the whole world
to forget me.
   ‘Virtue ignores Yao and Shun and dwells in actionless
action. Its benefits embrace every generation, though no
one in the world understands this. Despite your
protestations, how can you talk of benevolence and filial
piety? Filial piety, mutual respect, benevolence,
righteousness, loyalty, integrity, resoluteness and purity, all
of these can be of service to Virtue. But they are not
worthy in themselves. So it is said,
               ‘ “Perfect nobility disregards the honours of
               state;
               Perfect richness ignores the wealth of the
               country;
               Perfect fulfilment ignores fame and glory.
               Alone of all, the Tao never alters.” ’
   Cheng of the North Gate asked the Yellow Emperor, ‘My
Lord, when you had the Hsien Chih music performed in the
area around Lake Tung Ting, I listened and at first I was
afraid; I listened again and I was weary; I listened to the end
and I was bewildered. I became upset and incapable of
coherent speech and finally I lost my self assurance.’
   The Yellow Emperor said, ‘That is what I would expect! I
had it performed by the people, I attuned it to Heaven, I
proceeded according to the principles of ritual and I rooted
it in great purity. Perfect music must first of all find its
response in the world of the people. It must conform to the
principles of Heaven and walk with the five Virtues. It
should merge with spontaneity; as a result of which it can
order the sequence of the four seasons, bring great
harmony to all life. This will be seen in the procession of
the four seasons, bringing all life to birth. At one moment
swelling, at one declining, constrained by both martial and
civil boundaries. At one moment clear, at one obscure, the
yin and yang are in harmony, the sounds pour forth. It is as
if I were an insect awaking from hibernation or a crash of
thunder; without end, without beginning, at one, death, at
one, life, at one, finished, at one, surging forth. It is
constant but there is no dependable pattern, this is what
alarmed you.
   ‘Next I played it with the harmony of yin and yang, and
illuminated it by the light of the sun and moon. The notes
changed from short to long, from gentle to harsh. They all
hung upon a single harmony but were not determined by
anything. The notes filled the valleys and the gorges, and it
was useless for you to try to block them out or protect
your spirit, for such notes move as they wish. The notes are
measured and are clear and sharp. So the ghosts and the
spirits hide in the dark, and the sun, moon and stars follow
their own courses. I stopped when the music stopped but
the sounds flowed on. This worried you; you could not
understand it; you looked for them, but could not see them;
you went after them, but could not find them. You were
stunned and so you stood before the universal witness of
the Tao or leaned against an old tree and groaned. Your eyes
could not understand and so failed you; your strength
collapsed beneath you. I could not catch it. Your body
dissolved into emptiness and you lost control and so
achieved release. It was this which wore you out.
    ‘In the final section, I used notes that did not wear you
out. I brought them together spontaneously. This seemed
like chaos, like a thicket sprung from one root, like natural
music produced from no one knows what, moving yet going
nowhere, hidden in deep darkness. Some call this death,
others life. Some call it fruit, others the flower. The notes
moved, flowed, separated and changed, following no clear
pattern. Understandably, the world is uncertain about them.
The world sought advice from the sages, believing the sage
to know true shape and true fate. When Heaven has not
wound up the spring of life, but the five vital organs are all
there ready, this is what is known as the music of Heaven,
which delights the heart without words. So the Lord of Yen
praised it saying, “Listening for it, you do not hear it;
looking for it, you do not see its shape. It fills all Heaven
and Earth, embracing the six directions.” You desire to hear
it, but it is beyond you, which is what confused you.
   ‘I first performed the music which would induce awe,
and because of this awe, fear arose like some spectre. Next
I came up with weariness and this weariness brought on
compliance in you. I ended with confusion and this made
you feel stupid. But this stupidity reveals the Tao, the Tao
that can be carried with you, wherever you are.’
  Confucius was travelling in the west, in Wei State. Yen
Yuan asked musician Chin, ‘What do you think of the way
my Master proceeds?’
  Musician Chin replied, ‘It’s a shame! It seems likely to
end in problems!’
  ‘Why’s that?’ said Yen Yuan.
   ‘The straw dogs,57 before they are set out for the
sacrifice, are kept in a basket which is covered by a
beautifully designed embroidery. Meanwhile, the
representatives of the dead and the official in charge of the
rituals pray and prepare themselves to fetch the straw dogs.
However, once they have been presented, they are just
trampled on, head and back, by those around. The left-over
bits are swept up and burnt by the grass-cutters. That’s all
they’re worth by then. If anyone takes them and puts them
back in their baskets, covers them again with the
embroidery and then hangs around or even lies down beside
them to sleep, he will either have fearful dreams or, more
likely, constant nightmares.
   ‘Now your Master seems to have picked up some straw
dogs originating from previous kings and has summoned
his followers to lie down and sleep beneath them. The
result was that the tree was chopped down in Sung; he was
forced out of Wei; he got into considerable problems in
Shang and Chou. Aren’t these events like bad dreams? He
was besieged in Chen and Tsai, and for seven days he had no
cooked food, leaving him suspended between death and
life. Aren’t these events like nightmares?
   ‘If you’re travelling by water, using a boat is a good idea:
if you’re travelling by land, try using a carriage. The boat is
fine for travelling by water, but if you try and drag it across
the land, you can try for a whole lifetime but it is unlikely
to go very far. Are not the past and the present like water
and land? Are not the states of Chou and Lu like the boat
and carriage? To try nowadays to behave in Lu as if you
were in Chou is like trying to drag the boat across the land:
a great deal of effort for no return, and harmful to one’s
self as well. Anyone who tries to do so does not understand
that the efforts and the works of one age cannot, without
great contortions, be made to fit another age.
   ‘Have you never seen a well-pump in action? Pull it up,
down it goes, let go and up it comes. So, people pull it, it is
not the pump that is pulling the people. Thus, whether it
rises or falls, the well-pump itself cannot be blamed by
people. Therefore, it is the same with the rituals and
prescriptions of the Three August Ones and the Five
Emperors,58 who gained their reputation not from being the
same, but through their ability to govern. As a result we can
compare the Three August Ones and the Five Emperors to
haws, pears, oranges and lemons. Their taste is quite
distinct but all can enjoyably be eaten.
   ‘So it is with rituals and prescriptions – they change
according to the age. Now, take a monkey and dress it up to
look like the Duke of Chou and the poor monkey will
struggle and bite until he has got rid of the clothes. Look
carefully and you will see that the past and present are like
the monkey and the Duke of Chou. Take the case of Hsi
Shih, the famous beauty, whose heart was troubled and so
she often frowned on those around her. An ugly woman of
the area saw the beauty of Hsi Shih, went home, lamented,
and frowned on those around her. As soon as they saw her,
the wealthy people in the area slammed their gates shut and
refused to venture out! When the poor people saw her, they
rushed to gather up their women and children and fled! This
poor woman knew that a frown could be beautiful but she
did not know why a frown could be beautiful. Poor soul!
  ‘It’s all up for your Master!’
  Confucius had pottered along for fifty-one years and had
never heard anyone speak of the Tao until he went south to
Pei and went to see Lao Tzu.
  Lao Tzu said, ‘So you’ve come then, Sir? I have heard of
you, that you are the wise man of the north. Have you, Sir,
followed the Tao?’
  ‘I have not yet followed it,’ replied Confucius.
  ‘Well, Sir, where have you looked?’
  ‘I looked for it in what can be measured and regulated,
but even after five years I still haven’t been able to find it.’
  ‘So, Sir, what did you do then?’ asked Lao Tzu.
  ‘I looked for it in yin and yang, but ten, twelve years went
by and I still couldn’t find it.’
   ‘Obviously!’ said Lao Tzu. ‘If the Tao could be served up,
everyone would serve it up to their lords. If the Tao could
be offered, there is no one who would not offer it to their
parents. If the Tao could be spoken of, there is no one who
would not speak of it to their brothers and sisters. If the
Tao could be passed on, there is no one who would not pass
it on to their heirs. However, it obviously cannot be so and
the reason is as follows.
               ‘If there is no true centre within to receive
               it,
               it cannot remain;
               if there is no true direction outside to guide
               it,
               it cannot be received.
               If the true centre is not brought out
               it cannot receive on the outside.
               The sage cannot draw it forth.
               If what comes in from the outside is not
               welcomed by the true centre,
              then the sage cannot let it go.
              Fame is something sought by all,
              but don’t go for too much of it.
              Benevolence and righteousness are as the
              houses of the former kings,
              useful for one night’s shelter,
              but don’t stay there too long.
              To stay long causes considerable adverse
              comment.
   ‘The perfect man of old walked the Tao of benevolence, a
path which he took on loan; he used righteousness as a
place to lodge for a night. So it was that he ambled through
the void and uncontrolled places; found food in the open
fields and enjoyed the gardens which were not his. To be in
such freedom, you must take actionless action. The open
fields make living easy. He gives nothing and requires
nothing. The ancient ones knew this as the wandering of the
Truth Gatherer.
   ‘Someone who believes wealth is the most important
thing cannot give up their income; someone who seeks pre-
eminence cannot give up the hunt for fame; those who love
power cannot hand it over to others.
  ‘Those who cling to things like these are usually fearful.
Letting them go just once causes such agony that they will
not consider even once doing so, although it would show
them the folly of their ways. These are people bearing the
punishment of Heaven. Hatred and kindness, taking and
giving, correction and instruction, life and death, these
eight things are tools of reform. However, only the one
who abides by the great change and who does not stand in
its way can use them. So it is said, to correct is to reform.
If the heart cannot accept this, then the gate of Heaven is
not opened.’
   Confucius went to see Lao Tzu and talked with him about
benevolence and righteousness. Lao Tzu said, ‘If you get
grit in your eye from winnowing chaff, then Heaven and
Earth and the four directions get mixed up. A mosquito or
gadfly which stings you can keep you awake all night. And
benevolence and righteousness, when forced upon us,
disturb your heart and produce great distress. You, Sir, if
you want to stop everything below Heaven losing its
original simplicity, you must travel with the wind and stand
firm in Virtue. Why do you exert yourself so much, banging
a big drum and hunting for a lost child? The snow goose
doesn’t need a daily bath to stay white, nor does the crow
need to be stained every day to stay black. Black and white
comes from natural simplicity, not from argument. Fame
and fortune, though sought after, do not make people
greater than they actually are. When the waters dry up and
the fish are stranded on the dry land, they huddle together
and try to keep each other moist by spitting and wetting
each other. But wouldn’t it be even better if they could just
forget each other, safe in their lakes and rivers?’
   After seeing Lao Tzu, Confucius went home and for
three days he said nothing. His followers asked him,
‘Master, now you have seen Lao Tzu, what do you make of
him?’
  ‘I have now seen a dragon!’ said Confucius. ‘A dragon
coils up to show its form, it stretches out to display its
power. It rides upon the breath of the clouds and is
nourished by yin and yang. My mouth gaped open and I
could not shut it. What can I say about Lao Tzu?’
   Tzu Kung said, ‘So it is really true that this man can be as
still as the dead and see like a dragon, have a voice like
thunder and be as still as deep waters? Can he travel through
Heaven and Earth? Could I also set off to meet him?’ So,
with a note from Confucius, he set off to see Lao Tzu.
  Lao Tzu sat himself down and spoke softly: ‘I have seen
many years roll by. What do you want, Sir?’
   Tzu Kung replied, ‘The Three August Ones and the Five
Emperors ruled all under Heaven, but not in the same way,
yet their fame is as the same. Sir, why do you not consider
them as sages?’
  ‘Come a little closer, my boy!’ said Lao Tzu. ‘Why do
you say they were not the same?’
  ‘Yao gave the throne to Shun and Shun gave it to Yu. Yu
drew upon his strength and Tang resorted to war. King Wen
was faithful to Chou and did not rebel. King Wu revolted
against Chou and would not be loyal. This is why I say they
were different.’59
   ‘Come a little closer, my boy! I will tell you how the
Three August Ones and the Five Emperors ruled the whole
world. The Yellow Emperor ruled everything below Heaven
in such a way as to make the hearts of all people one. If
someone’s parents died, but he did not cry, none of the
people blamed him. Yao ruled the whole world in such as
way as to make the hearts of the people truly affectionate.
So, if someone wished to mourn for a longer or shorter
period for other relatives than they did for their parents,
none of the people blamed them.
   ‘Shun ruled all under Heaven in such a way as to make
the hearts of all the people divided. The wives gave birth to
the children after ten months. By the time they were five
months old, these children were talking; they were already
calling people by their proper titles when they were still
just babies. It was then that premature death first began.
   ‘Yu ruled all under Heaven in such a way as to make the
hearts of the people change. As a result, each person was
felt to have their own heart and warfare was seen as
legitimate. They killed thieves but not others. Everyone in
the world seemed only concerned with his own self. This
meant the whole world was full of anxiety, and from this
came the Literati and the Mohists. For the first time ever
they created the regulation of behaviour, but what would
they say today about the customs of marrying wives and
daughters?
   ‘Let me tell you frankly about the Three August Ones and
the Five Emperors and their rule – for it can be called
ruling, although it was nothing less than terrible chaos. The
knowledge of the Three August Ones rose up like a cloud
against the clarity of light of the sun and moon; bore down
upon the tranquillity of the hills and rivers and levelled the
distinctive aspects of the flow of the four seasons. Their
knowledge was more deadly than the sting of the scorpion
or the bite of a beast. Unable to be true to their innate
natures and being, they still saw themselves as sages. Is this
not shameful, that they were not ashamed?’
  Tzu Kung was deeply shocked and knew not what to say.
   Confucius said to Lao Tzu, ‘I have mastered the Poems,
the Histories, the Rites, the Music, the I Ching and the
Spring and Autumn – all of the Six Classics. I know them
inside out. However, I have discussed them with seventy-
two rulers, telling them of the Tao of the first kinds and the
illumination of the path trodden by Chou and Shao, but not
one king has been interested. They’ve done nothing! It is so
difficult to preach to such people! How can I make the Tao
clear to them?’
   Lao Tzu said, ‘It is very lucky, Sir, that you did not
discover a ruler who would try to govern this generation in
such a way! The Six Classics are the tired footpaths of the
first kings, not the actual feet that trod those paths! Now,
Sir, what you are going on about is just these worn
footpaths. But footpaths are created by the feet that first
walked them. They are not the feet themselves! The white
herons only have to look into each other’s eyes without
blinking for impregnation to happen. A male insect buzzes
above and the female replies from below and impregnation
takes place, borne upon the air. The creature called Lei
contains both male and female and so impregnates itself.
Innate nature does not change; fate is unalterable; time
cannot be stopped and the Tao cannot be halted. Hold fast
to the Tao and there is nothing it cannot do; lose it and
there is nothing that can be done.’
   Confucius did not go out for three months, then he went
to see Lao Tzu and said, ‘I’ve grasped it! The raven hatches
its young; the fish spew forth their eggs; the slim-waisted
wasp transforms, and when a younger brother comes along
the elder brother weeps. For too long I have not been able
to work in harmony with these changes. So, given that I did
not play my part in harmony with others, how could I
expect to change people?’
  Lao Tzu replied, ‘Well done. So now you’ve grasped it.’
CHAPTER 15
Rigid and Arrogant




             To be rigid and arrogant;
             to be above this generation and distant from
             its ways;
             to talk of great principles;
             to be critical and disparaging:
  these are approved by scholars who dwell in the
mountains, by men who are not of this age, who are worn
and weary or who cast themselves into the deep.
             To preach about benevolence, righteousness,
             loyalty and faithfulness;
             to be humble, moderate, selfless and civil:
  these are the marks of self-development and are the
signs of the scholars who wish to reform this generation.
These are approved by the one who wishes to preach and
teach, whether at home or abroad.
               To talk of great achievements;
               to make a great name;
               to arrange the rituals between ruler and
               minister;
               to sort out those above from those below;
               to organize the ruling of the state:
  this is what is approved by the scholar who values the
court and state, who loves his ruler and honours his
country, who does what he can and who seizes lands.
               To live amongst the wilds and lakes;
               to dwell in isolated places;
               to fish alone;
               actionless action:
   this is what is approved by the scholar who retreats to the
rivers and seas, who leaves this generation alone, who is in
no hurry.
               Huffing, puffing;
               grunting and groaning;
               expelling the old breath and taking in the
               new;
              undertaking physical exercises to preserve
              the body and soul;
              long life his sole concern:
   this is what is approved, this is the Tao of the scholar
who infuses his self with breath, feeding his body, hoping
to live as long as Peng Tsu.
              To achieve loftiness without the burden of
              bias;
              to follow the ways of improvement without
              benevolence or righteousness;
              to rule successfully without achievement or
              fame;
              who rest without rivers and oceans;
              long life without organization;
              to lose everything and yet to have all;
              to drift calmly and endlessly, while all good
              things pay court to them:
              this is the Tao of Heaven and Earth, the
              Virtue of the sages.
   The saying goes, ‘Calm, detachment, silence, quiet,
emptiness and actionless action, these are what maintain
Heaven and Earth, the Tao and Virtue.’ The saying goes,
‘The sage rests, truly rests and is at ease.’ This manifests
itself in his calmness and detachment, so that worries and
distress cannot affect him, nothing unpleasant can disturb
him, his Virtue is complete and his spirit is not stirred up.
   The saying goes, that the sage’s life is the outworking of
Heaven and his death is the transformation of everything.
When he is still, his Virtue is like yin; when he is moving,
his pervasiveness is like yang. He brings neither good
fortune nor bad. He acts and moves in response to forces
beyond. When he finds something, he rises up. He ignores
knowledge and nostalgia, following only the pattern of
Heaven. So he risks no disaster from Heaven, nor
complications from things, no accusation from anyone, no
charges from the spirits of the dead. In life he floats; at
death he rests. He does not consider and plot, nor design
for the future. He shines but is not seen; his good faith has
no record; his sleep is dreamless and he wakes without fear.
His spirit is pure and without blemish; his soul never tires.
Empty, selfless, calm and detached, he is in harmony with
Heaven’s Virtue.
   It is said that sadness and happiness are corruptions of
Virtue; joy and anger are errors of the Tao; goodness and
evil are contrary to Virtue. So, for the heart to be without
sadness and happiness, is to have perfected Virtue. To be
one and changeless, this is to have perfected stillness; to
encounter no opposition is to have perfected emptiness; to
have no dealings with anything is to have perfected
indifference; to have no feelings of dissent is to have
perfected purity. So it is said that, if the body is
overworked and is allowed no rest, it will collapse, and if
the spirit is employed without stopping, it becomes tired
and eventually reaches exhaustion.
   Water, if not mixed with other things, is by nature clear,
and if it is not stirred up, it is level. However, if it is
blocked and cannot flow, it cannot remain clear. This is like
the Virtue of Heaven. It is said that to be innocent and pure,
free from contamination, still and level, never changing,
detached and acting without action, is to move with Heaven
and to follow the Tao of sustaining the spirit. To have a
sword like Kan Yueh, you must look after it in a special box
and hardly dare use it, for this is the greatest of treasures.
The spirit emanates in all four directions, without
restriction, rising to Heaven and sinking down to enfold the
Earth. It changes and nourishes all forms of life yet no one
can find its shape. Its title is Harmony in the Supreme.
   It is only the Tao of true simplicity which guards the
spirit; if you are guarded and never lost, you become one
with the spirit. In being one you are in communion with the
Order of Heaven. Peasant wisdom says, ‘The common
people prize profit above all else; the worthy scholar, fame;
the wise man, ambition and the sage his essential purity.’
Simplicity means no mixing; purity means an unimpaired
spirit. The one who manifests simplicity and purity can
truly be called the true man.
CHAPTER 16
The Deceived and Ignorant Ones




             These are the people who are called the
deceived and ignorant ones: those who seek to improve
their innate nature by means of vulgar learning in order to
return to their origin, and those who wish to control their
desires by following vulgar ways of thinking in the hope of
achieving illumination.
              The ancient ones ruled by the Tao:
              they developed their understanding in calm;
              knowledge was their life, yet they did
              nothing with knowledge.
              When knowledge and calm nourish each
              other,
              then harmony and order emerge as from
              innate nature.
              Virtue is harmony; the Tao is order.
              When Virtue enfolds everything, there is
              benevolence.
              When the Tao is set out in order, there is
              righteousness.
              When righteousness is clearly understood
              and all adhere to it, there is loyalty.
              When the centre is pure and true and returns
              to its proper form, there is music.
              When sincerity is articulated through the
              body and is expressed in style, there is
              ritual.
   However, following ritual and music in an inappropriate
way will lead the whole world into confusion. When
someone tries to correct others, his own Virtue is clouded
over, and his Virtue will no longer reach all others. Trying
to do so will destroy everyone’s innate nature.
   Even in chaos, the ancient ones were centred, for they
were one with their generation and followed the paths of
simplicity and silence. In those times, yin and yang were in
harmony, ghosts and spirits did nothing wicked, the four
seasons followed each other, all forms of life were without
injury and no living thing suffered early death. The people
had knowledge but they did not use it; all this was perfect
Oneness. In those times no one planned anything, for
everyone maintained constant spontaneity.
   This was the case until the time when Virtue deteriorated
and then Sui Jen and Fu Hsi came to govern everything
below Heaven, with the result that there was compliance
but no unity. Virtue continued to deteriorate and then Shen
Nung and the Yellow Emperor came to govern everything
below Heaven, with the result that there was satisfaction
but no compliance. Virtue continued to deteriorate and then
Yao and Shun came to govern all below Heaven, with the
result that, ruling by decrees and grand plans, they polluted
the purity of nature and destroyed simplicity. The Tao was
abandoned and Good substituted. Virtue was put at risk for
the sake of opportunity. Then innate nature was abandoned
and hearts allowed to determine their own way. Heart
linked with heart through knowledge, but were unable to
give the world peace. Pomp and ceremony were added to
this knowledge. This displaced simplicity and the heart was
swamped, resulting in the people being confused and
disobedient, with no way back to true innate nature nor to
their origin.
  Perceiving this, we can see how the world has lost the
Tao, and the Tao has lost this world. In this sort of world,
how can the Tao lead the world, or a person of the Tao be
seen by this world, or the world come to appreciate the
Tao? The Tao cannot direct the world, nor the world direct
the Tao. Even if the sage does not retreat to the centre of
the forest and mountains, nevertheless his Virtue is still
hidden, whether he likes it or not.
   These hidden so-called scholars of old did not hide
themselves and refuse to be seen. They did not close the
doors on their words and refuse to let them out. They did
not shut away their wisdom and refuse to share it. But those
times were all haywire. If it had been possible for them to
act, they could have done great things, bringing all to
Oneness without any sign of doing so. However, the times
were not favourable and it was not possible, so they put
down deep roots, remained still and waited. This was the
Tao by which they survived.
   The ancient ones, wishing to keep themselves alive, did
not use elaborate style to express their knowledge. They
did not disturb everything in the whole world through their
knowledge, nor use knowledge to try and disrupt Virtue.
Alone and hermit-like they stayed where they were and
looked to restore their innate nature. What more could they
do than this? The Tao has no place for pettiness, and nor has
Virtue. Pettiness is dangerous to Virtue; petty actions are
dangerous to the Tao. It is said, rectify yourself and be
done. Happiness which is complete is called the Timeliness
of Purpose.
  The ancient ones talked of the Timeliness of Purpose,
but they did not mean having official carriages and badges
of office. They simply meant that it was happiness so
complete as to need nothing more. Today what is called
Timeliness of Purpose means having official carriages and
badges of office. Carriages and badges are of the body, they
do not touch the innate nature. From time to time such
benefits may come. When this happens, you cannot help it,
no more than you can stop them going again. So having
carriages and badges of office is no reason for becoming
proud and arrogant in our purposes, nor are distress and
poverty any reason for becoming vulgar. View both
conditions as one and the same, so be free from anxiety and
leave it at that. So if loss of what gives happiness causes
you distress when it fades, you can now understand that
such happiness is worthless. It is said, those who lose
themselves in their desire for things also lose their innate
nature by being vulgar. They are known as people who turn
things upside down.
CHAPTER 17
Season of Autumn Floods




            The season of the autumn floods had come and
the hundred rivers were pouring into the Yellow River. The
waters were churning and so wide that, looking across from
one bank to the other, it was impossible to distinguish an ox
from a horse. At this the Lord of the Yellow River was
decidedly pleased, thinking that the most beautiful thing in
the whole world belonged to him. Flowing with the river, he
travelled east until he came at last to the North Ocean,
where he looked east and could see no end to the waters.
He shook his head, the Lord of the Yellow River, and
looked out to confront Jo, god of the Ocean, sighing and
saying,
  ‘The folk proverb says, “The person who has heard of the
Tao a hundred times thinks he is better than anyone else.”
This refers to me. I have heard people mock the scholarship
of the Confucians and give scant regard to the
righteousness of Po Yi, but I didn’t believe them. Now I
have seen your endless vastness. If I had not come to your
gate, I would have been in danger, and been mocked by
those of the Great Method.’
   Jo of the North Ocean replied, ‘A frog in a well cannot
discuss the ocean, because he is limited by the size of his
well. A summer insect cannot discuss ice, because it knows
only its own season. A narrow-minded scholar cannot
discuss the Tao, because he is constrained by his teachings.
Now you have come out of your banks and seen the Great
Ocean. You now know your own inferiority, so it is now
possible to discuss great principles with you. Under
Heaven there are no greater waters than the ocean. Ten
thousand rivers flow into it, and it has never been known to
stop, but it never fills. At Wei Lu the water disappears but
the ocean never empties. Spring and autumn bring no
changes. It pays no attention to floods or droughts. It is so
much more than the waters of the Yangtze and the Yellow
Rivers, it is impossible to estimate. However, I have never
made much of this. I just compare myself with Heaven and
Earth and my life-breath I receive from yin and yang. I am
just a little stone or a little tree set on a great hill, in
comparison to Heaven and Earth. As I perceive my own
inferiority, how could I ever be proud?
   ‘To compare all the space filled by the four oceans, is it
not like a pile of stones beside a marsh in comparison with
the vastness between Heaven and Earth? To compare China
with all the space between the oceans, is it not like one
single piece of grain in a granary? When talking of all life,
we count them in tens of thousands, and humanity is just
one of them. People inhabit the Nine Provinces, but
humanity is just one portion of all the life that is sustained
by grain, wherever carriages or boats can go. In comparison
to all the multitudinous forms of life, isn’t humanity like
just a single hair on a horse?
   ‘What the Five Emperors handed on, the Three Kings60
argued over, the officials have struggled for, and benevolent
people worry about, is nothing more than this. Po Yi was
considered famous, because he gave up things, Confucius
was known as scholarly, because he taught about it. Yet, in
acting in such a way, making much of themselves, were they
not like you who just now were so proud of yourself
because of your flood?’
  The Lord of the Yellow River said, ‘Very well, so if I
recognize Heaven and Earth as big and a tip of a hair as
small, will that do?’
   ‘No,’ replied Jo of the North Ocean. ‘You cannot define
the capacity of things; time never stops; there is nothing
constant in fate; beginning and end have no regulation.
   ‘Great knowledge considers both that which is near and
that which is far off, sees that which is small as not
insignificant, sees that which is large as not necessarily
significant, knowing that you cannot define the capacity of
things.
  ‘Great knowledge has a clear understanding of the past
and present, which is why it can be unconcerned by the
remoteness of the past and not worry about striving to
grasp the present, for it knows that time never stops.
   ‘Great knowledge understands the differences between
fullness and emptiness, and is neither exalted by success
nor disheartened by failure, for it knows of the
inconsistency of fate.
  ‘Great knowledge knows the straight and quiet road, so it
does not get excited about life nor dejected by death, for it
knows that neither beginning nor end is regulated.
   ‘What people know is as nothing to what they don’t
know. The time since they were born is nothing in
comparison to the time before they were born. When
people take something minor and try to make it major, this
is the path to mistake and confusion and they cannot
achieve what they set out to do. Consider it thus: how can
you know the tip of a hair can be used as a measure of
smallness? How can we know that Heaven and Earth are
equal to being the measure of the truly great?’
   The Lord of the Yellow River said, ‘The debaters of this
generation say, “The tiniest thing has no body, the most
enormous thing cannot be contained.” Are these words
true?’
   Jo of the North Ocean replied, ‘From the viewpoint of
the tiniest, we look at what is so enormous and we cannot
comprehend it. From the viewpoint of the most enormous,
we look at what is tiniest and we cannot see it clearly. The
tiniest is the smallest of the small, the biggest is the largest
of the large; so we must distinguish between them, even
though this is just a matter of circumstance. However, both
the coarse and the refined have form. Without any form,
there is no way to enumerate them. What can be said in
words is the coarseness of things; what can be grasped
through ideas is the subtlety of things. But words cannot
describe nor ideas grasp, and this has nothing to do with
coarseness or refinement.
   ‘So it is that the great man through his actions will not
set out to harm others, nor make much of benevolence and
charity; he does not make any move for gain, nor consider
the servant at the gate as lowly; he will not barter for
property and riches, nor does he make much of his having
turned them down; he asks for no one’s help, nor does he
make much of his own self-reliance, nor despise the greedy
and mean; he does not follow the crowd, nor does he make
much of being so different; he comes behind the crowd, but
does not make much of those who get ahead through
flattery. The titles and honours of this world are of no
interest to him, nor is he concerned at the disgrace of
punishments. He knows there is no distinction between
right and wrong, nor between great and little. I have heard it
said, “The Tao man earns no reputation, perfect Virtue is
not followed, the great man is self-less.” In perfection, this
is the path he follows.’
  The Lord of the Yellow River asked, ‘Whether they are
external or internal, how come we have these distinctions
between noble and mean? Why do we distinguish between
small and great?’
   ‘Viewed from the perspective of the Tao,’ said Jo of the
North Ocean, ‘things are neither elevated nor lowly. Viewed
from the perspective of things, each one considers itself as
elevated and the rest as lowly. Viewed from the perspective
of the everyday opinion, neither elevation nor lowliness is
to be understood from the perspective of individual things.
Taking into account differing views, something which is
seen as big because it is big means that, in all the
multitudes of life, everything can be viewed as big.
Likewise, if something is seen as small because it is small,
then all forms of life can be viewed as small. If we know
that Heaven and Earth are as tiny as a grain or the tip of a
hair is as vast as a mountain range, then we will have
grasped that our understanding of size is relative. In terms
of what each does, we view something as useful because it
is useful, which means that, in all the multitudes of life,
everything can be viewed as useful. In the same way, if
something is viewed as useless because it appears useless,
then all forms of life can be viewed as useless. If we know
that east and west are opposite each other, but also need
each other, then we can understand how mutual exchange
and interaction work. Viewed from the perspective of
choice, if something is seen as good because it
undoubtedly is good, then in all the multitudes of life there
is nothing which is not good. Likewise, if something is
viewed as wrong because it undoubtedly is wrong, then
there is no form of life which cannot be viewed as wrong. If
we understand that Yao and Chieh both considered
themselves good, but saw the other as wrong, then we can
understand how we perceive things differently.
   ‘In the past Yao gave way to Shun and Shun ruled as
Emperor. Ki Kuai61 resigned and was disgraced. Chih ruled
then and was finished off. Tang and Wu struggled and
became kings. Duke Po62 struggled and was executed.
Looking at these models of struggle and defeat, acting like
Yao or like Chieh, we can see that there is a time for noble
behaviour and a time to be mean. There is nothing fixed
about either. A battering ram can be used to storm a city
wall but it is useless for filling a little hole: there is a
difference here of function. The horses Chih Chi and Hua
Liu could cover a thousand miles in a day, but were useless
for catching rats, unlike a wild dog or weasel: there is a
difference in skills. At night the horned owl can catch even
a flea or spot the tip of a hair; in daylight, no matter how
hard it tries, its eyes cannot see even a hill or mountain:
there is a difference of nature. There is a saying, “Shouldn’t
we follow the right but not make wrong our ruler?” To do
so shows that you have not been illuminated by Heaven and
Earth and by the multitudinous differences of all life. This
is like being a devout follower of Heaven and ignoring
Earth, or like being a devout follower of yin and ignoring
yang. It is quite clear this is not possible.
   ‘Now, it is certainly the case that people talk like this
endlessly, like fools or con-men. Emperors and kings have
different ways of abdicating, and the Three Dynasties have
different hereditary succession. Anyone who behaves
differently from the customs of his time and contrary to its
ways is called a rebel. Whoever complies and goes with the
prevailing customs is called a friend of righteousness.
  ‘Be quiet, be quiet, Lord of the Yellow River! How could
you know anything about the gateway to nobility or
meanness or the dwelling place of greatness or pettiness?’
  ‘All right then,’ said the Lord of the Yellow River. ‘What
am I to do and what may I not do? How can I decide what is
worth keeping or rejecting and what is worth going for or
leaving?’
   Jo of the North Ocean said, ‘Viewed from the
perspective of the Tao, what is noble and what is mean are
both just ceaseless changes. Don’t cling to your own ideas,
for this is contrary to the greatness of the Tao. What is
little and what is much, these are terms of very limited use.
Do not try to be just One, this just highlights how far away
you are from the Tao. Be stern and strict like a ruler of a
country who favours no one. Be gentle, be gentle like the
local earth god to whom offerings are made and who does
not grant fortune selfishly. Be open like air, like the four
compass points shed light but do not permit boundaries. If
you lovingly tend all forms of life, how could you favour
one? This is known as being impartial. Consider all life as
unified and then how could you talk in terms of long or
short? The Tao has neither beginning nor end, but all living
things have both death and birth, so you cannot be sure of
them. One moment they are empty, the next moment full.
They are unreliable. The years cannot be reversed nor time
halted. Decay, maturity, fullness and emptiness, when they
end, begin over again. So we can talk of great
righteousness, and discuss the fundamental principle within
all forms of life. The life force is a headlong gallop,
speeding along, changing with every movement and altering
every minute. As to what you should and should not do?
Just go with this process of change.’
   ‘If this is the case,’ said the Lord of the Yellow River,
‘then what is so important about the Tao?’
   Jo of the North Ocean replied, ‘To understand the Tao is
to understand the principle. If you understand the principle,
you know how to deal with things as they arise. Knowing
this, you can ensure that nothing detrimental to yourself
occurs. If someone has perfect Virtue, it is not possible for
fire to harm, nor for water to drown, nor for either cold or
heat to affect, nor birds and beasts to injure him. Not that I
say that he dismisses all these things, but that he is able to
discriminate between where he is safe and where he is in
danger. He is at ease with both calamity and fortune, takes
care as to what he approaches or avoids, and therefore
nothing harms him. There is a saying that Heaven is
internal, humanity external and Virtue comes from the
Heavenly. Know Heaven and humanity’s actions, root
yourself in Heaven and follow Virtue. Then you can bend,
stretch, rush forward or hold back, because you will always
return to the core and it will be said you have achieved the
supreme.’
  ‘But what do you call the Heavenly? What do you call the
human?’
  Jo of the North Ocean said, ‘Oxen have four feet: this is
what I call the Heavenly. When horses are harnessed and
oxen have pierced noses, this I call the human way. There is
the saying. “Don’t allow the human to displace the
Heavenly,” don’t allow your intentions to nullify what is
ordained. Be careful, guard it and don’t lose it, for this is
what I call coming back to the True.’
   The one-legged creature is envious of the millipede; the
millipede is envious of the snake; the snake is envious of
the wind; the wind is envious of the eye; the eye is envious
of the heart.
  The one-legged creature said to the millipede, ‘I have
one foot that I hop on and I can hardly go anywhere. But
you, Sir, have a multitude of feet. How do you manage?’
   The millipede said, ‘Don’t be so certain. Have you never
seen someone spit? Out comes a big blob followed by a
spray, which falls down like a shower of uncountable drops.
Now I just set the Heavenly machinery in motion and as for
the rest – I haven’t a clue!’
   The millipede said to the snake, ‘I get about with all
these feet, but I can’t keep up with you, Sir, who have no
feet. Why is this?’
  The snake said, ‘I am moved by the designs of Heaven,
how can I control that? What could I use feet for!’
   The snake said to the wind, ‘By moving my backbone and
ribs, I get along and at least I have some visible form. Now
you, Sir, come hurtling along from the North Ocean and
disappear off to the South Ocean but without any visible
form. How is that?’
   The wind said, ‘True, I come hurtling along from the
North Ocean and disappear off to the South Ocean.
However, it is true that, if you point your finger at me, you
are greater than me, or if you stamp on me, you also win.
But it is also true that I can bring down great trees and bowl
over great houses; only I can do this. Therefore, the one
who can overcome all the small problems is in truth the
great victor. To have a great victory, why, this is what a sage
does.’
  Confucius was travelling in Kuang and the men of Sung
encompassed him with a number of rings of soldiers,63 but
he went on singing to his lute with no hesitation. Tzu Lu
went in to see him and said, ‘How is it, Master, that you are
so contented?’
   ‘Come!’ said Confucius, ‘I shall explain to you. For ages
I’ve done my best to avoid difficulties. I have failed, but
that’s fate. For a long time I have tried to be given an
appointment. I have not been given one, such are the times.
In Yao and Shun’s time, there was no one in the whole wide
world who had difficulties, but it was not because of
knowledge that this happened. In Chieh and Chou’s time, no
one in the whole wide world succeeded, but this was not as
a result of lack of understanding. This was certainly a sign
of the times. Those who travel the waters are not afraid of
snakes or dragons: this is the courage of fishermen. To
travel overland and not to tremble upon meeting
rhinoceroses or tigers, this is the courage of hunters. To
see swords clash and to regard death as a return, this is the
courage of the bold soldier. To know that hardship is part of
life, to know that success depends upon the times and to
confront great disasters with fortitude, this is the courage
of the sage. Be patient, and my fate will then become clear
to you.’
   Not long after, the leader of the troops came and humbly
said, ‘We thought you were Yang Huo and so we surrounded
you. Now we know you are not, so we wish to apologize
and retreat.’
   Kung Sun Lung64 asked Mou of Wei,65 ‘When I was
younger, I learned the Tao of the earlier kings, and as I grew
up, I saw clearly the significance of benevolence and
righteousness. I brought together difference and similarity,
discerned hardness and whiteness, what was certain and
what was not, what was possible and what was not. I
laboured at understanding the Hundred Schools of
Philosophy66 and spoke out against their teachings. I
thought I had understanding of all things. Now, however, I
have heard the words of Chuang Tzu, and to my surprise I
am disturbed by them. Is it that my knowledge is not as
good as his, or is it that his understanding is greater? I find I
can’t even open my mouth, so I ask you what I can do.’
   Duke Tzu Mou leaned forward, sighed heavily, looked to
Heaven, smiled and said, ‘Dear Sir, have you not heard of
the frog in the broken-down old well? He said to the turtle
of the Eastern Ocean, “I have a great time! I leap on to the
well wall, or I go down in the well, stepping along the
broken bricks. When I enter the water, I float with it
supporting my chin, feet up; on the mud, I dig my feet deep
in. I look about me at the larvae, crabs and tadpoles and
there is none that is as good as I. To have complete control
of the waters of the gorge and not to wish to move but to
enjoy the old well, this is great! Dear Sir, why don’t you
come down and see me sometime?”
   ‘The turtle of the Eastern Ocean tried, but before he had
put his left foot into the well, his right knee was stuck. At
this he paused, shuffled out backwards and then began to
speak about the ocean. “A distance such as a thousand miles
doesn’t come close to describing its length, nor a depth of
a thousand leagues describe its deepness. In the time of Yu,
nine years in every ten there were floods, but this did not
raise the ocean an inch. In the time of Tang, seven years in
every eight there were droughts, but this did not lower the
ocean shore an inch. Nothing changes these waters, neither
in the short term nor in the long term; they neither recede
nor advance, grow larger nor smaller. This is the great
happiness of the Eastern Ocean.” When the frog in the
broken-down old well heard this, he was utterly amazed and
astonished; he was utterly astonished, dumbfounded and at a
loss.
   ‘For someone whose understanding can’t handle such
knowledge, such debates about right and wrong, if they
persist in trying to see through the words of Chuang Tzu, it
is like a mosquito trying to carry a mountain on its back, or
a scuttle bug rushing as fast as the Yellow River. This is
plainly impossible. For someone whose understanding
cannot handle such knowledge, such words of subtlety, all
they are capable of is gaining some short-term reward.
They are like the frog in the broken-down well, are they
not? But Chuang Tzu is not planted firmly in the Yellow
Springs of the Underworld, nor leaping, jumping into the
stratosphere. There is neither south nor north: he scatters
freely to the four points of the compass, and disappears
into the depth. There is neither east nor west: starting in the
darkest depth, he comes back to the great path. Then you,
Sir, you in your astonishment try to sift his views to
criticize them, or trawl through them in order to debate.
Why, this is like trying to examine Heaven through a
narrow tube or using an awl to explore the whole earth.
Such tools are too small, aren’t they? You, Sir, be on your
way! Or possibly, Sir, you have not heard of the young
students of Shou Ling and how things went for them in Han
Tan? Having not yet learnt the lessons that the people of
that country were trying to teach them, they forgot what
they had learnt at home, so were reduced to crawling back
home. So, Sir, if you don’t get out now, you will forget, Sir,
what you already knew and fail, Sir, in your career!’
  Kung Sun Lung’s mouth fell open and would not shut, his
tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth and wouldn’t drop
down, and he shuffled off and ran away.
  Chuang Tzu was one day fishing in the Pu river when the
King of Chu despatched two senior officials to visit him
with a message. The message said, ‘I would like to trouble
you to administer my lands.’
   Chuang Tzu kept a firm grip on his fishing rod and said, ‘I
hear that in Chu there is a sacred tortoise67 which died
three thousand years ago. The King keeps this in his
ancestral temple, wrapped and enclosed. Tell me, would
this tortoise have wanted to die and leave his shell to be
venerated? Or would he rather have lived and continued to
crawl about in the mud?’
  The two senior officials said, ‘It would rather have lived
and continued to crawl about in the mud.’
  Chuang Tzu said, ‘Shove off, then! I will continue to
crawl about in the mud!’
  Hui Tzu was made Minister of State in Liang and Chuang
Tzu went to see him. Someone told Hui Tzu, ‘Chuang Tzu is
coming, because he wants to oust you from your office.’
This alarmed Hui Tzu and he scoured the kingdom for three
days and nights trying to find this stranger.
   Chuang Tzu went to see him and said, ‘In the south there
is a bird known as the Young Phoenix, do you know about
this, Sir? This bird, it arises in the Southern Ocean and flies
to the Northern Ocean and it never rests on anything except
the begonia tree, never eats except the fruit of the melia
azederach and never drinks except from springs of sweet
water. There was once an owl who had clutched in his talons
a rotting rat corpse. As the Young Phoenix flew overhead
the owl looked up and said, “Shoo!” Now you, Sir, you have
the state of Liang and you feel you have to shoo me away?’
   Chuang Tzu and Hui Tzu were walking beside the weir on
the River Hao, when Chuang Tzu said, ‘Do you see how the
fish are coming to the surface and swimming around as
they please? That’s what fish really enjoy.’
  ‘You’re not a fish,’ replied Hui Tzu, ‘so how can you say
you know what fish enjoy?’
  Chuang Tzu said: ‘You are not me, so how can you know I
don’t know what fish enjoy?’
   Hui Tzu said: ‘I am not you, so I definitely don’t know
what it is you know. However, you are most definitely not a
fish and that proves that you don’t know what fish really
enjoy.’
   Chuang Tzu said: ‘Ah, but let’s return to the original
question you raised, if you don’t mind. You asked me how I
could know what it is that fish really enjoy. Therefore, you
already knew I knew it when you asked the question. And I
know it by being here on the edge of the River Hao.’
CHAPTER 18
Perfect Happiness




             Is it possible anywhere in this whole wide
world to have perfect happiness or not? Is there a way to
keep yourself alive or not? Now, what can be done and what
is to be trusted? What should be avoided and what adhered
to? What should be pursued and what abandoned? Where is
happiness and where is evil?
  What the whole wide world values is riches, position,
long life and fame.
  What brings happiness is good times for oneself, fine
foods, beautiful clothes, lovely sights and sweet music.
  What is despised is poverty, meanness, untimely death
and a bad reputation.
  What is considered sour is a lifestyle which gives the
self no rest, a mouth which never has fine foods, a body
without good clothes, eyes that never rest upon lovely
views, an ear that never hears sweet music.
  Those who cannot get these things become greatly
agitated and fearful. This is a foolish way to treat the body!
  Those who are wealthy weary themselves dashing around
working, getting more and more riches, beyond what they
need. The body is treated therefore as just an external thing.
   Those in positions of power spend day and night plotting
and pondering about what to do. The body is treated in a
very careless way. People live their lives, constantly
surrounded by anxiety. If they live long before dying, they
end up in senility, worn out by concerns: a terrible fate! The
body is treated in a very harsh fashion. Courageous men are
seen by everyone under Heaven as worthy, but this doesn’t
preserve them from death. I am not sure I know whether
this is sensible or not. Possibly it is, but it does nothing
towards saving them. Possibly it is not, but it does save
other people. It is said, ‘If a friend doesn’t listen to the
advice you offer him, then bow out and don’t argue.’ After
all, Tzu Hsu argued and lost his life.68 If he had not argued,
he would not be famous. Is it possible that there really is
goodness, or not?
   Now, when ordinary people attempt to find happiness,
I’m not sure whether the happiness found is really
happiness or not. I study what ordinary people do to find
happiness, what they struggle for, rushing about apparently
unable to stop. They say they are happy, but I am not happy
and I am not unhappy either. Ultimately, do they have
happiness or not? I regard actionless action as worthy of
being called happiness, though the ordinary people regard it
as a great burden. It is said: ‘Perfect happiness is not
happiness, perfect glory is not glory.’
   The whole world is incapable of judging either right or
wrong. But it is certain that actionless action can judge
both right and wrong. Perfect happiness is keeping yourself
alive, and only actionless action can have this effect. This is
why I want to say:
               Heaven does without doing through its
               purity,
               Earth does without doing through its
               calmness.
  Thus the two combine their actionless action and all
forms of life are changed and thus come out again to live!
Wonder of wonders, they have not come from anywhere!
All life is mysterious and emerges from actionless action.
There is a saying that Heaven and Earth take actionless
action, but yet nothing remains undone. Amongst the
people, who can follow such actionless action?
  Chuang Tzu’s wife died and Hui Tzu came to console
him, but Chuang Tzu was sitting, legs akimbo, bashing a
battered tub and singing.
   Hui Tzu said, ‘You lived as man and wife, she reared your
children. At her death surely the least you should be doing
is to be on the verge of weeping, rather than banging the tub
and singing: this is not right!’
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘Certainly not. When she first died, I
certainly mourned just like everyone else! However, I then
thought back to her birth and to the very roots of her being,
before she was born. Indeed, not just before she was born
but before the time when her body was created. Not just
before her body was created but before the very origin of
her life’s breath. Out of all this, through the wonderful
mystery of change she was given her life’s breath. Her
life’s breath wrought a transformation and she had a body.
Her body wrought a transformation and she was born. Now
there is yet another transformation and she is dead. She is
like the four seasons in the way that spring, summer,
autumn and winter follow each other. She is now at peace,
lying in her chamber, but if I were to sob and cry it would
certainly appear that I could not comprehend the ways of
destiny. This is why I stopped.’
  Uncle Legless and Uncle Cripple were touring the area
of the Hill of the Dark Prince and the zone of Kun Lun
where the Yellow Emperor stayed.69 Without warning a
willow tree suddenly shot up out of Uncle Cripple’s left
elbow. He was certainly most surprised and somewhat put
out.
  ‘Sir, do you dislike this?’ said Uncle Legless.
   ‘No,’ said Uncle Cripple. ‘What should I dislike? Life
exists through scrounging; if life comes through
scrounging, then life is like a dump. Death and birth are like
the morning and the night. You and I, Sir, observe the ways
of transformation and now I am being transformed. So how
could I dislike this?’
   Chuang Tzu went to Chu to see an ancient desiccated
skull, which he prodded with his riding crop, saying, ‘Sir,
did you follow some unfortunate course which meant you
brought dishonour upon your father and mother and family
and so end up like this? Sir, was it perhaps the cold and
hunger that reduced you to this? Sir, perhaps it was just the
steady succession of springs and autumns that brought you
to this?’
   So saying, he pulled the skull towards him and lay down
to sleep, using the skull as a head-rest. At midnight he saw
the skull in a dream and it said, ‘Sir, you gabble on like a
public speaker. Every word you say, Sir, shows that you are
a man caught up with life. We dead have nothing to do with
this. Would you like to hear a discourse upon death, Sir?’
  ‘Certainly,’ said Chuang Tzu.
  The skull told him, ‘The dead have no lord over them, no
servants below them. There is none of the work associated
with the four seasons, so we live as if our springs and
autumns were like Heaven and Earth, unending. Make no
mistake, a king facing south could not be happier.’
   Chuang Tzu could not believe this and said, ‘If I got the
Harmonizer of Destinies to bring you back to life, Sir, with
a body, flesh and blood, and companions, wouldn’t you like
that?’
   The skull frowned, looked aggrieved and said, ‘Why
should I want to cast away happiness greater than that of
kings and become a burdened human being again?’
   Yen Yuan went east to Chi and Confucius looked very
anxious. Tzu Kung stood up and asked him, ‘May I ask, as a
junior master, why you have looked so anxious, Sir, since
Hui has gone east to Chi?’
   Confucius said, ‘That is a very good question! Kuan Tzu70
had a saying that I think is very apposite. He said, “A small
bag cannot hold anything big and a bucket on a short rope
cannot reach the water in the depths.” Likewise it is also
true that destiny has its particular structure and the body its
proper uses, which you can neither add to nor subtract
from. I am worried that when Hui arrives he will talk to the
Duke of Chi about the Tao of Yao, Shun and the Yellow
Emperor, and thereafter he will continue by talking about
Sui Jen and Shen Nung.71 The ruler will then try to see if he
measures up to all this and will find he does not. As he is
unable to measure up he will be distressed and when such a
person is distressed – death!
   ‘Have you never heard this story before? Once upon a
time, a seabird alighted in the capital city of Lu. The Earl of
Lu carried it in procession to the ancestral shrine, where he
played the Nine Shao music and offered the offerings of
the sacrifice to it. However, the poor bird just looked
confused and lost and did not eat a single piece of meat,
nor did it drink even one cup of wine, and within three days
it died. The problem was trying to feed a bird on what you
eat rather than what a bird needs.
   ‘To feed a bird so it survives, let it live in the midst of
the forest, gambol on the shores and inlets, float on the
rivers and lakes, devour mudfish and tiddlers, go with the
flock, either flying or resting, and be as it wishes. Birds
dislike hearing human voices, never mind all the other
noises and trouble! If you try to make them happy by
playing the Nine Shao music in the area around their lakes,
when the birds hear it they will fly away. If the animals hear
it, they will run away and hide and if the fish hear it they
will dive down to escape. Only the people, if they hear it,
will come together to listen.
   ‘Fish can live in water quite contentedly, but if people try
it, they die, for different beings need different contexts
which are right and proper for them. This is why the ancient
sages never expected just one response from the rest of the
creatures nor tried to make them conform. Titles should
not be over-stretched in trying to capture reality and ideas
should be only applied when appropriate, for this is not
only sensible, it will bring good fortune.’
  Lieh Tzu was following the Tao and one day he was
eating by the roadside and saw a one-hundred-year-old
skull, which he pulled clear of the weeds and addressed,
saying, ‘Just you and I know that you never died nor were
you ever born. Does this distress you? Do I really enjoy
myself?’
   Where does everything come from? From the water
come creeping plants, from the water’s edge comes Frog’s
Robe, this gives birth to Hill Slippers, and these in turn
produce Crow’s Feet, and Crow’s Feet become maggots,
and the leaves become butterflies. The butterflies change
and become insects to be found below the stove, which are
similar to snakes and are called Chu To. A thousand days
later they become birds called Dried Old Bones. From the
spit of the Dried Old Bones comes a type of bug and these
bugs turn into Vinegar Drinkers. Other bugs are born from
the Vinegar Drinkers and Huang Shuang insects are born
from Chiu Yu insects, which themselves are born from
Mou Jui maggots, and Mou Jui maggots are born from
Rotting maggots, which themselves are born from Sheep’s
Groom. Sheep’s Groom comes together in intercourse with
bamboo that has not put forth any shoots for years and they
give birth to Green Peace plants. These give birth to
leopards, leopards give birth to horses, horses give birth to
humans, humans eventually sink back to what was in the
beginning. All the multitudes of life arise from the mystery
of beginning and return there.
CHAPTER 19
Grasping the Purpose of Life




            If you have grasped the purpose of life there is
no point in trying to make life into something it is not or
cannot be.
  If you have grasped the purpose of destiny, there is no
point in trying to change it through knowledge.
  If you wish to care for your body, first of all take care of
material things, though even when you have all the things
you want, the body can still be uncared for.
   Since you have life, you must first of all take care that
this does not abandon the body. However, it is possible for
the body to retain its life, but still not be sustained. Birth
cannot be avoided, nor death be prevented. How ridiculous!
To see the people of this generation who believe that
simply caring for the body will preserve life. But if caring
for the body is not sufficient to sustain life, why does the
world continue to do this? It may be worthless, but
nevertheless it cannot be neglected, we are unable to avoid
it.
   If someone wishes to stop doing anything to sustain the
body, they are advised to leave this world, for by leaving
they can be free from any commitments, and, being free
from commitments, they can be virtuous and peaceful.
Being virtuous and peaceful, they can be born again like
others and, being born again, they approach close to the
Tao. But why is it such a good idea to leave the troubles of
this existence and to forget the purpose of life? If you
leave the troubles of existence, your body will not be
wearied; if you forget life, your energy will not be
damaged. Thus, with your body and energy harmonized, you
can become one with Heaven. Heaven and Earth are the
father and mother of all life. Together they create a form,
apart they create a beginning. If body and energy are
without fault, this is known as being able to adapt.
Strengthened and again strengthened, you come back again
to assist Heaven.
  Master Lieh Tzu asked gatekeeper Yin, ‘Only the perfect
man can walk underwater and not drown, can walk on fire
without burning, and can pass over the multitude of forms
of life without fear. I would like to ask, how does the
perfect one do this?’
   Gatekeeper Yin replied, ‘It is because he preserves his
original breath and this has nothing to do with knowledge,
work, persistence or bravery. Sit down, and I will tell you
all about it.
   ‘Everything has a face, forms, sounds and colour: these
are just appearances. How is it possible that this thing and
that thing are separated from each other? Indeed, why
should any of them be viewed as truly the first of all
beings? They are just forms and colours, and nothing more.
However, everything arises from what is formless and
descends into that which is changeless.
   ‘If you grasp and follow this, using it to the full, nothing
can stand in your way! It means being able to reside within
limits which have no limit, be secluded within boundaries
which have no beginning, ramble to where both the
beginning and the end of all life is; combine the essential
nature, nourish the original breath, harmonize Virtue and,
by following this path, commune with the origin of all life.
Someone like this guards his unity with Heaven, his spirit is
without fault, and thus nothing can get inside and attack
him!
  ‘If a drunk falls out of his carriage, even if the carriage is
going very fast, he will not die. He is just the same as
others, bone and joints, but he is not injured, for his spirit
is united. Since he does not realize he was travelling, he has
no idea that he has fallen out, so neither life nor death,
alarm nor fear can affect him, and he just bumps into things
without any anxiety or injury.
   ‘If it is possible to stay united through being drunk on
wine, just imagine how much more together one could be if
united with Heaven! The sage retreats to the serenity of
Heaven, as a result nothing causes him harm. Even
someone who is out for revenge does not break his
opponent’s sword. Nor does someone get cross with a tile
that just fell on him, no matter how upset he is. Instead, we
should recognize that everything under Heaven is united.
Thus it is possible to get rid of chaos, violence and warfare
and of the rigours of punishment and execution, for this is
the Tao.
   ‘Do not hearken to the Heavenly in humanity, but listen
to the Heavenly in Heaven, for paying attention to Heaven’s
Virtue is life-giving, while attending to humanity damages
life. Do not cast aside the Heavenly, and do not ignore the
human aspect: then the people will draw closer to the
realization of Truth!’
   Confucius was travelling to Chu and he went through the
heart of a forest, where he saw a hunchback trapping
cicadas, using a sticky pole with such ease that it seemed as
if he used his hands. ‘Sir, what skill!’ said Confucius. ‘Do
you have the Tao?’
   ‘Indeed, I have the Tao. The first five to six months I
learned how to balance two balls on top of each other on a
pole, and when they did not fall, I knew I could catch a few
cicadas. Next I practised with three balls, and when they did
not fall, I knew I could catch one cicada in ten. Next I
practised with five balls, and when they did not fall, I knew I
could catch cicadas very easily. I brace my body as if it
were a straight tree trunk and stick out my arms like a pole.
Never mind how vast Heaven or Earth are, or the vast
numbers of the multitudes of living beings, I concentrate
my knowledge on catching cicadas. Never tiring, never
leaning, never being aware of any of the vast number of
living beings, except cicadas. Following this method, how
could I fail?’
  Confucius turned and said to his followers, ‘His will
undivided and his spirit energized, that is how I would
describe this hunchbacked gentleman!’
   Yen Yuan commented on Confucius, saying, ‘I was
crossing the gorge at Chang Shan and the boatman guided
the boat with real verve. I said to him, “Can one study how
to guide a boat?” He said, “Indeed. Someone who can swim
well will have no trouble. If someone can dive under water,
he may not have seen a boat before but he will know what to
do.” I asked him what this meant, but he could not say, so I
am asking you: what do his words mean?’
   ‘A good swimmer learns quickly,’ said Confucius,
‘because he knows how to ignore the water. Someone who
can swim under the water may indeed have never seen a
boat, but he regards the waters as though they were dry
land, and the overturning of a boat as nothing more serious
than a waggon turning over. So he too learns quickly. All
forms of life can be overturning or sliding downwards right
in front of his eyes, but he is not affected, nor does it
disturb his inner calm, so there is nothing bad that can
disturb him! In an archery competition, you shoot as
skilfully as possible, hoping to win. If you compete to win
decorated buckles, you are concerned with your aim. If you
compete for gold, it can make you very nervous. Your skills
are the same in all these cases, but because one of these is
more significant than the others, this puts external pressure
on you. To pay too much attention to such external things
makes you thoughtless about the internal things.’
  Tien Kai Chih went to see Duke Wei of Chou, and the
Duke asked him, ‘I hear Chu Hsien is studying life. As Chu
Hsien’s companion, what have you heard of this, Sir?’
  Tien Kai Chih replied, ‘I just sweep the courtyard and
guard the gate, so how could I have heard anything about it?’
   ‘Master Tien, don’t be so modest,’ said Duke Wei. ‘I want
to hear more.’
  ‘Well,’ said Kai Chih, ‘I have heard the Master say,
“Someone who sustains life is definitely like a shepherd
who watches for the stragglers and brings them into line.” ’
  ‘What does this mean?’ said Duke Wei.
   ‘In Lu they had Shan Po, who dwelt in the caves, drank
nothing but water and was not interested in profit like the
rest of the people,’ said Tien Kai Chih, ‘and for seventy
years he lived like this and had the complexion of a girl.
Then, sadly, he encountered a fierce tiger which killed and
ate him. You have Chang Yi, who knocked on all the doors
of the wealthy and powerful, never missing an opportunity
to visit. He continued like this for forty years, then caught a
fever, became sick and soon died. Po took care of what was
internal and a tiger devoured his externals, while Yu took
care of his external image and the illness destroyed him
from the inside. These two masters did not manage to keep
their herd together.’
   Confucius said, ‘Don’t hide inside, don’t come out and
shine like yang, but hold steadfastly to the middle ground.
Follow these three rules and you will be known as one of
the truest. When people are about to set out on a dangerous
journey, if they hear that one person in ten has been killed,
then fathers, sons, elder and younger brothers will all warn
them to be careful and they will not set off until they have
an armed escort. That is wise, isn’t it? People should really
worry about what truly worries them, the thoughts that
come when they are lying awake in bed or at table eating
and drinking. But they don’t understand these warnings –
what an error!’
   The priest of the ancestors looked into the pigsty and
said, ‘What’s so bad about dying? I fatten you up for three
months, then I undergo spiritual discipline for ten days, fast
for three days, lay out the white reeds, carve up your
shoulders and rump and lay them on the place of sacrifice.
Surely you’re OK with that, aren’t you?’
   It is, however, true to say that from the perspective of the
pig it would be better to eat oats and bran and stay there in
the pigsty. It is also true that, looking at this from my
perspective, I’d like to be honoured as an important official
while alive and, when I die, be buried with a horse-drawn
hearse, lying upon a bed of feathers. I could live with that!
From the pig’s point of view, I wouldn’t give a penny for
such a life, but from my point of view, I’d be very content,
though I wonder why I perceive things so differently from a
pig?
  Duke Huan73 was out hunting in the fields, accompanied
by Kuan Chung74 as his driver, when they saw a ghost. The
Duke grabbed Kuan Chung’s hand and said, ‘Kuan Chung,
what do you see?’ He replied, ‘I don’t see anything.’
  The Duke returned home, fell ill, got worse, and for a
number of days did not venture out. A scholar of Chi called
Huang Tzu Kao Ao said, ‘Sire, you are harming yourself,
for the ghost does not have the evil to harm you! When the
original breath within is scattered and will not reunite, then
weakness follows. If it goes up but will not come down, it
makes a man bad-tempered. If it goes down but will not
come up, it makes a man very forgetful. If it goes neither
up nor down, but centres upon the body, at the heart, then
illness comes.’
  ‘Is it certain that ghosts exist?’ asked Duke Huan.
   ‘There are such things,’ he replied. ‘The hearth has one,75
the store has one. The pile of rubbish outside the walls has
one. The northeast under the eaves has two; the north-west
under the eaves has one. In the water there is one; in the
hills there is another. The mountains have their own, as do
the meadows and the swamps.’
  ‘Can I ask you what a swamp ghost looks like?’ said the
Duke.
   ‘The swamp ghost is as big as a wheel rim, as high as a
carriage axle, wears a purple gown, a fur hat and is hideous,
as such things usually are. Hearing the sound of a waggon
or thunder, it holds its head and rises. To see this creature
means you will become a dictator.’
  Duke Huan was absolutely delighted and laughed, and he
said, ‘So that is the man I saw!’ Then he sat up, tidied
himself and even before the day ended, though he did not
realize it, he was better.
  Chi Hsing Tzu was raising game birds for the King.
  Ten days later he asked, ‘Are the game birds ready?’ ‘Not
yet,’ said Chi Hsing Tzu, ‘I need to work on their arrogance
and control their spirit.’
  Ten days later the King asked again, and he said, ‘Not yet,
they glare easily alarmed.’
  Ten days later the King asked again, and he said, ‘Not yet,
they glare about them and I need to control their spirit.’
   Ten days later the King asked again and Chi Hsing Tzu
told him, ‘Good enough. A cock nearby can crow and they
are not disturbed: if you saw them from afar, you’d think
they look like wood. They have harmonized their Virtue,
and other cocks will not challenge them, but run away.’
   Confucius was sightseeing in Lu Liang, where the
waterfall is thirty fathoms high and the river races along for
forty miles, so fast that neither fish nor any other creature
can swim in it. He saw one person dive in and he assumed
that this person wanted to embrace death, perhaps because
of some anxiety, so he placed his followers along the bank
and they prepared to pull him out. However, the swimmer,
having gone a hundred yards, came out, and walked
nonchalantly along the bank, singing a song with water
dripping off him.
  Confucius pursued him and said, ‘I thought you were a
ghost, but now I see, Sir, that you are a man. I wish to
enquire, do you have a Tao for swimming under the water?’
  He said, ‘No, I have no Tao. I started with what I knew,
matured my innate nature and allow destiny to do the rest. I
go in with the currents and come out with the flow, just
going with the Tao of the water and never being concerned.
That is how I survive.’
   Confucius said, ‘What do you mean when you say you
started with what you knew, matured your innate nature and
allow destiny to do the rest?’
   He said, ‘I was born on the dry land and feel content on
the land, where I know what I know. I was nurtured by the
water, and felt safe there: that reflects my innate nature. I
am not sure why I do this, but I am certain that this is
destiny.’
    Woodcarver Ching76 carved a piece of wood to form a
bell support, and those who saw it were astonished because
it looked as if ghosts or spirits had done it. The Marquis of
Lu saw it, and asked, ‘Where does your art come from?’
  ‘I am just a woodcarver,’ Ching replied. ‘How could I
have “art”? One thing is certain, though, that when I carve a
bell support, I do not allow it to exhaust my original breath,
so I take care to calm my heart. After I have fasted for three
days, I give no thought to praise, reward, titles or income.
After I have fasted for five days, I give no thought to glory
or blame, to skill or stupidity. After I have fasted for seven
days, I am so still that I forget whether I have four limbs
and a body. By then the Duke and his court have ceased to
exist as far as I am concerned. All my energy is focused
and external concerns have gone. After that I depart and
enter the mountain forest, and explore the Heavenly innate
nature of the trees; once I find one with a perfect shape, I
can see for certain the possibility of a bell support and I set
my hand to the task; if I cannot see the possibility, I leave it
be. By so doing, I harmonize the Heavenly with Heaven, and
perhaps this is why it is thought that my carvings are done
by spirits!’
   Tung Yeh Chi was showing his driving skills to Duke
Chuang. He drove up and down holding a straight central
line like a plumb line, and turned to left and right with the
grace of a curve drawn with a compass. Duke Chuang was
impressed, and felt that no one could do better, so he
commanded him to do a further hundred circuits.
   Yen Ho came by and went in to see the Duke, saying,
‘Chi’s horses are almost worn out.’ But the Duke said
nothing. Shortly after, the chariot broke down and the Duke
said, ‘Sir, how did you know this would happen?’ Ho
replied, ‘The strength of the horses was spent but he urged
them on. That’s why I said they would collapse.’
   Workman Chui could draw as straight as a T-square or as
curved as a compass, because his fingers could follow the
changes and his heart did not obstruct. Thus his mind was
one and never blocked. The feet can be forgotten when you
walk in comfortable shoes. The waist can be forgotten
when your belt fits comfortably. Knowledge can forget yes
and no, if the heart journeys contentedly. Nothing changes
inside, nothing proceeds from outside, if you respond to
what occurs in a contented way. By starting with what is
contented, not undergoing that which is disturbing, it is
possible to know the contentment of forgetting what
contentment is.
   There was a man called Sun Hsiu who came to the gate of
Master Pien Ching Tzu to call upon him, and said, ‘I used to
live in the countryside and no one I ever met said that I
didn’t behave properly, nor did anyone I met say that, when
confronted with problems, I didn’t display fortitude.
However, when I worked in the fields, the crops were never
good, and when I worked for the ruler, things didn’t go well
in the world. Therefore, I have been expelled from the
countryside and exiled from the court, yet what is the
nature of my offence against Heaven? How did this
misfortune become my destiny?’
   Ching Tzu replied, ‘Sir, have you not heard of how the
perfect man behaves? He forgets his liver and intestines
and disregards his ears and eyes. With no defined goal he
meanders through the rubbish. What he is good at is doing
nothing. Indeed, it is called being but not expecting any
reward, bringing up but not controlling. Now you display
your knowledge in order to impress the foolish; you strive
for fame to highlight your distance from others, polishing
yourself so as to be as bright as the very sun and moon.
Thus far you have harmonized with your body, having the
usual nine apertures, and you have not been struck midway
through life by blindness or deafness, lameness nor any
deformity, so in comparison to many, you are fortunate. So
why do you wander around grumbling about Heaven? Be
gone, Sir!’
  Master Sun left. Master Pien came in, sat down and
rested, then turned his face to Heaven and moaned. His
followers said, ‘Teacher, why are you groaning?’
   Master Pien said, ‘I have just been visited by Hsiu and I
told him about the Virtue of the perfect man. I fear he was
disturbed and has ended up completely confused.’
  His followers said, ‘Not necessarily. Were the words of
Master Sun correct? Were our teacher’s words wrong? If
wrong, then nothing can make it right. But what if Master
Sun’s words were wrong? And our teacher’s words were
right? This means he was already confused, so nothing has
changed!’
   Master Pien said, ‘Not necessarily. Once upon a time a
bird landed on the outskirts of the capital city of Lu. The
ruler of Lu was very pleased and prepared a special
sacrifice for it to enjoy and the Nine Shao77 music was
performed for its entertainment. The bird was distressed
and bewildered and did not eat or drink. This is known as
trying to sustain a bird with that which sustains us. If you
want to feed a bird, then let him go in the midst of a forest,
or float on a river and lake and devour snakes. This is what a
bird wants.
   ‘Now Hsiu, he is foolish and has heard little, so when I
try to tell him about the perfect man’s virtue, it is as if I was
trying to take a mouse for a ride in a horse-drawn waggon,
or trying to make a quail happy by providing the sounds of
bells and drums. It is not surprising that he was startled!’
CHAPTER 20
The Huge Tree




             Chuang Tzu was walking through the heart of
the mountains when he saw a huge verdant tree. A
woodcutter stopped beside the tree, but did not cut it.
When asked why he didn’t he said, ‘It’s no good.’ Chuang
Tzu said, ‘Because this tree is not considered useful, it can
follow all the years Heaven has given it.’
   The Master came out of the mountains and stayed a night
at a friend’s house. This man was delighted and told his son
to kill a goose and cook it. The son answered, saying, ‘One
goose can cackle, the other one can’t. Tell me which one to
prepare?’ The father replied, ‘Prepare the one that does not
cackle.’
  On the next day Chuang Tzu’s followers asked him,
‘Yesterday there was a tree in the heart of the mountains
which was able to live all the years Heaven gives because it
is no use. Now, at your friend’s house, there is a goose who
dies because it is no use. Teacher, what do you think of
this?’
   Chuang Tzu laughed and said, ‘Personally, I’d find a
position between useful and useless. This position between
useful and useless might seem a good position, but I tell
you it is not, for trouble will pursue you. It would certainly
not be so, however, if you were to mount upon the Virtue of
the Tao;
               ‘never certain, never directed,
               never praised, never condemned,
               on the one hand a dragon, on the other a
               snake,
               going as it seems appropriate.
               Now up, now down,
               using harmony as your guide,
               floating on the source of all life.
   ‘Let things be, but don’t allow things to treat you as just
an object, then you cannot be led into difficulties! This is
the path taken by Shen Nung and the Yellow Emperor. Now,
however, because of the multitudinous varieties of species
and the ethical codes of humanity, things certainly aren’t
what they were!
               ‘There is unity only in order to divide;
               fulfilment only in order to collapse;
               a cutting edge is blunted;
               those who are elevated are overthrown;
               ambition is thwarted;
               the wise are conspired against;
               the fools are conned.
   ‘So what can be trusted? My followers, just the Tao and
its Virtue!’
  I Liao78 from the Southern Market came to see the
Marquis of Lu.79 The Marquis had a very troubled
expression.
   ‘Why does the ruler look so anxious?’ said the Master of
the Southern Market.
  ‘I have studied the Tao of the first kings and the methods
of the first rulers,’ replied the Marquis of Lu. ‘I honour the
ghosts and worthy people, try to follow them and never
depart from them. But nevertheless I cannot avoid failure,
so yes, I am anxious.’
   The Master from the Southern Market said, ‘Marquis,
your method for avoiding troubles is pretty feeble! The
elegant, fur-dressed fox and the graceful snow leopard live
in the mountain forests: this is where they are at peace. At
night they set off but during daylight they stay at home,
being cautious. It is hunger and thirst that drives them out
one by one, after careful planning, to find food beside the
rivers and lakes. Nevertheless, they do not avoid the
misfortune of falling into traps and nets. Who is to blame?
Their own fur is to blame. Now, the country of Lu, is this
not the fur of the ruler? Cast away this body, get rid of the
fur, cleanse your heart, scorn the passions and go where
there is no one. In Nan Yueh there is a place called
Virtuously Founded. In that country the people are fools,
caring little for themselves, wanting little. They know how
to produce, but not how to preserve; they give away, but
expect nothing back; they don’t know righteousness or what
ritual requires. They are ill-mannered, careless and take no
care how they proceed, and as a result they don’t walk the
way of the great skill. At birth they are happy, at death they
celebrate. So I say to you, O ruler, cast aside your country,
break with tradition and, helped by the Tao, travel on.’
   ‘To follow the road there is both long and arduous,’ said
the Marquis, ‘with some rivers and mountains to cross. I
have neither a boat nor a carriage, so what should I do?’
  The Master of the Southern Market replied, ‘Ruler, don’t
follow form, don’t follow convention and this will be your
carriage.’
   ‘The road is dark and long and there are no people along
it. Who will accompany me? I have no rations, I have
nothing to eat, so how can I follow the path to perfection?’
   ‘Have simple needs, Sir, diminish your desires, Sir, then
you can step out without any rations,’ said the Master of the
Southern Market. ‘O ruler, you will be able to cross rivers
and float upon the ocean, which, no matter how hard you
stare, you will never see the end of, nor know where it
goes. O Sir, those who bid you farewell will depart from
the seashore while the ruler will journey out into the
unknown!’
   ‘The one who has responsibility for others always faces
difficulties, and those who are recognized by others as
their ruler also suffer. This is why Yao never had
responsibility or allowed others to own him. Therefore,
ruler, I suggest you get rid of difficulties, cast aside your
worries and travel alone with the Tao which leads to the
Country of Great Silence. If someone ties two boats
together and then uses them to cross the lake, and he is hit
by an empty boat, he won’t be angry, no matter what sort of
a temper he has. However, if there is a man in the other
boat, he will shout at him to get out of the way! If nothing
happens after his initial shout, he yells again and a third
time, with a lot of abuse and swearing. To begin with he is
not angry, now he is. To start with he had no one to be angry
with, now there is someone. If a person can be emptied, and
thus journey through this world, then who would harm
him?’
  Duke Ling of Wei wanted to cast new bells. So Pei Kung
She, his collector of taxes, built a scaffold outside the city
gate and in three months the bells were finished, top and
bottom.
   King Ching Chi saw this and asked, ‘Master, what is this
art of yours?’
  Pei said, ‘Centred on Oneness, how could I dare to try
anything? I have heard it said, “After the carving and
smoothing, revert to simplicity.” Being slow, I have no
comprehension; being still, I wander and drift; strangely,
mysteriously, I let go what goes and greet what comes; what
comes cannot be ignored and what goes cannot be held. I
amble after the louts and thugs, wander after the humble
and meek, seeing what becomes of them. In this way I
collect taxes all day long and never have an argument. Just
imagine how more significant this would be for someone
who grasped the great path!’
  Confucius was besieged in the area between Chen and
Tsai and had no hot food for seven days. The Grand Duke
Jen came out to express his concern and said, ‘Master, do
you think you will die?’
  ‘Certainly,’ said Confucius.
  ‘Master, are you frightened by death?’
  ‘Certainly.’
   ‘I would like to tell you the Tao of never dying,’ said Jen.
‘There is a bird that dwells in the Eastern Ocean called
Helpless. This bird is helpless for it flips and flops, flips
and flops, as if it had no strength, flying only with the
assistance of the other birds and jostling to return to the
nest. None of them likes to be in front or behind,
preferring to pick away at what others leave. Thus, when the
bird flies, it is never alone, and no others outside the flock,
such as humans, can do it any harm, so it avoids disasters.
   ‘The straight tree is the first to be chopped down; the
well of sweet water is the first to run dry. Sir, your
intention is to display your knowledge in order to astonish
the ignorant, and by developing your self, to cast a light
upon the crudeness of others. You shine, you positively
glow, as if you carried with you the sun and moon. All this
is why you cannot avoid disasters.
   ‘I have heard the great fulfilment man say, “The boastful
have done nothing worthwhile, those who do something
worthwhile will see it fade, fame soon disappears.” There
are few who can forget success and fame and just return to
being ordinary citizens again! The Tao moves all, but the
perfect man does not stand in its light, his Virtue moves all,
but he does not seek fame. He is empty and plain, and
seems crazy. Anonymous, abdicating power, he has no
interest in work or fame. So he doesn’t criticize others and
they don’t criticize him. The perfect man is never heard, so
why, Sir, do you so want to be?’
   Confucius said, ‘Splendid!’ then said farewell to his
friends, left his followers and retired into a great marsh,
put on animal skins and rough cloth and lived off acorns and
chestnuts. He went out amongst the animals and they were
not afraid, amongst the birds and they did not fly away. If
the birds and animals were not alarmed, then neither should
people be either!
   Confucius asked Master Sang Hu, ‘I have been exiled
from Lu twice, a tree was toppled on top of me in Sung, all
records of me have been wiped out in Wei, I was
impoverished in Shang and besieged in Chen and Tsai. I
have had to endure so many troubles. My friends and
acquaintances have wandered off and my followers have
begun deserting me. But why is this happening?’
  Master Sang Hu said, ‘Have you not heard of the man of
Chia who ran away? Lin Hui threw aside his jade emblem80
worth a thousand pieces of gold, tied his son to his back
and hurried away. People asked, “Was it because the boy
was worth more? Surely a child isn’t that valuable. Was it
because of all the effort required to carry the jade? But
surely a child is even more trouble. So why throw away the
jade emblem worth a thousand pieces of gold and rush off
with the young child on your back?” Lin Hui told them, “It
was greed that brought me and the jade emblem together,
but it was Heaven that linked my son and me together.”
   ‘When the ties between people are based upon profit,
then when troubles come, people part easily. When people
are brought together by Heaven, then when troubles come,
they hold together. To hold together or to separate, these
are two very different things. The relationship with a
nobleman can be as bland as water, that with a mean-spirited
person sickly sweet as wine. However, the blandness of the
nobleman can develop into affection, but the sweetness of
the mean-spirited person develops into revulsion. That
which unites for no apparent reason, will fall apart for no
apparent reason.’
  Confucius said, ‘I have heard your advice with true
respect!’ And so, with an ambling gait and a leisurely air, he
went home, gave up his studies and gave away his books.
His followers no longer came to bow to him, but their
regard for him grew greater.
  One day Sang Hu also said to him, ‘When Shun was close
to death he commanded Yu, “Take care of what I say!
Concerning the body, just let it go with the flow.
Concerning feelings, let them follow their course. If you
go with the flow, you avoid separation. If you follow the
course of feelings, you avoid exhaustion. No separation, no
exhaustion, so no need to adorn the exterior of the body.
When you no longer need to do this, you are free of
concern with material things.”’
   Chuang Tzu, dressed in a worn, patched gown made of
coarse cloth and with shoes held together with string, went
to visit the King of Wei. The King of Wei said, ‘Why are
you in such a state, Master?’
   Chuang Tzu replied, ‘This is poverty but not distress. If a
scholar has the Tao and the Virtue but is unable to use them,
that is distress. If his clothes are worn and shoes held
together with string, that is poverty but not distress. This is
known as not being around at the right time. Your Majesty,
have you never seen monkeys climbing? When they are
amongst plane trees, the oaks and camphor trees, they cling
to branches and leaves with such ease that not even the
archers Yi or Peng Meng could spot them. However, when
they are amongst the prickly mulberry, thorny date trees
and other spiky bushes, they move cautiously, looking from
side to side, shaking with fear. This is not because their
sinews and bones have gone stiff or unable to bend, but
because the monkeys are not in their own environment and
so cannot use their skills. Now that I find myself living with
a benighted leader and with rebellious ministers above me,
how can I avoid distress? Observe how Pi Kan’s heart was
cut out81 – that illustrates my point!’
   Confucius was confronted by troubles between Chen and
Tsai and he had no hot food for seven days. He grasped a
rotting tree in his left hand, while his right hand beat out a
rhythm on a rotting branch and he sang the poem of the
Lord of Piao. He had an instrument but no beat, he had
sound but no blend of melody. The tree gave sound and the
singer gave voice to a sadness that touched people’s hearts.
   Yen Hui, standing erect, arms folded, cast his eyes
towards him. Confucius, anxious that Hui might overdo the
respect and honour due to him, or that his love would make
him vulnerable, said, ‘Hui, it is easy not to care about what
comes from Heaven. It is hard not to care about what
comes from people. Nothing begins which will not end,
Heaven and humanity are one. So who, now, is actually
singing?’
   ‘How can one avoid the inflections of Heaven with ease?’
said Hui.
   ‘Hunger, thirst, cold and heat and being unable to
progress beyond barriers,’ said Confucius, ‘these are the
effects of Heaven and Earth, aspects of ever-changing
cycles. They are known as travelling together with others.
The minister of a ruler dare not disobey. If he is true to his
ruler, then how much more true should we be to respond to
the decrees of Heaven!’
  ‘What do you mean when you say it is difficult not to
respond to the works of humanity?’
   Confucius replied, ‘Someone landing a new position
goes out in all four directions at the same time. Honours
and wealth become his without ceasing, but these do not
come from who you are, they are just the external
attributes of that particular job. The nobleman is no thief,
an honest man is not a robber. Why should I be like that? It
is said that there is no bird wiser than the swallow. If its
eyes cannot find a good place, it will not give it another
thought. If the food it is carrying falls from its mouth, it
leaves it and goes on. It is cautious around humans, but it
nests amongst them, finding protection by being close to
the altars of the Earth and the Grain.’
  ‘What do you mean, nothing begins that does not end?’
  ‘The change and transformation of all forms of life goes
on,’ said Confucius, ‘but we do not know who sustains this
change. How, therefore, can we know beginnings? How can
we know ends? There is nothing else to do but wait.’
   ‘What do you mean when you say Heaven and humanity
are one?’
  ‘You have Heaven, therefore humanity is. You have
Heaven, which is because it is Heaven. Humanity cannot
create Heaven, because of humanity’s own innate nature.
The sage calmly passes on with his body, and that is the
end.’
   Chuang Tzu was wandering through the park at Tiao Ling,
when he saw a strange jackdaw come flying from the south.
Its wing-span measured seven feet and its eyes were large,
about an inch across. It brushed against Chuang Tzu’s
forehead as it passed and then came to rest in a copse of
chestnut trees. Chuang Tzu said, ‘What sort of bird is this,
with wings so vast but going nowhere, eyes so large but it
can’t see properly?’ Hitching up his robe, he hurried after it
with his crossbow in order to take a pot shot at it. On the
way he saw a cicada which was basking in a beautiful shady
spot, without a thought for its bodily safety. Suddenly, a
praying mantis stretched forth its feelers and prepared to
spring upon the cicada, so engrossed in the hunt that it
forgot its own safety. The strange jackdaw swept down and
seized them both, likewise forgetting its own safety in the
excitement of the prize. Chuang Tzu sighed with
compassion and said, ‘Ah! So it is that one thing brings
disaster upon another, and then upon itself!’ He cast aside
his crossbow and was on his way out, when the forester
chased after him, shouting at him for being a poacher.
  Chuang Tzu went home and was depressed for three
months. Lin Chou, who was with him, asked him, ‘Master,
why are you so miserable?’
  Chuang Tzu said, ‘I was so concerned with my body that I
forgot my self. It was like looking into cloudy water,
thinking it was really clear. Furthermore, I heard my Master
say once, “When associating with the locals, act like a
local.” So I went out walking in the park at Tiao Ling and
forgot my own self. A strange jackdaw touched my
forehead, then settled in a copse of chestnut trees and there
forgot its own true being. The forester thought I was to
blame. This is why I’m miserable.’
   Yang Tzu was travelling to Sung and stopped for the night
at an inn. The innkeeper had two concubines, one beautiful,
the other ugly. The ugly one was given all consideration,
while the beautiful one was made to serve. Yang Tzu asked
why this was, and a young boy from the inn said, ‘The
beautiful one knows her beauty, so we don’t think of her as
beautiful. The ugly one realizes her ugliness and therefore
we don’t think of her as ugly.’
   Yang Tzu said, ‘My followers, remember this! If you act
rightly but unselfconsciously, you will be universally
loved!’
CHAPTER 21
Tien Tzu Fang




          Tien Tzu Fang was in attendance on the
Marquis Wen of Wei,82 and he frequently referred to Chi
Kung. Marquis Wen said, ‘This Chi Kung, is he your
master?’
  ‘No,’ said Tzu Fang, ‘but he comes from the same region
as I do. In discussing the Tao with him I find he is often
spot on, which is why I refer to him.’
 ‘Is it the case, then, that you have no master?’ said
Marquis Wen.
  Tzu Fang said, ‘I have.’
  ‘Who then is your master?’
  ‘Master Shun from the Eastern Wall,’ said Tzu Fang.
  ‘Then why have you never praised this great master?’
  ‘He is indeed a man of Truth,’ said Tzu Fang, ‘having the
appearance of a man but the expanse of Heaven. He is
empty and his being is Truth; he is pure and holds all things.
He greets those without the Tao with a proper manner, and
they are enlightened, their conceits are dissolved. How
could I present his thoughts?’
   Tzu Fang left, and Marquis Wen sat profoundly shaken
for the whole day and didn’t say a word. He then summoned
his ministers and said to them, ‘How distant from us is the
nobleman of complete Virtue! I used to believe that the
words of the sages and the actions of benevolence and
righteousness were the most perfect we could achieve. I
have now heard of the teacher of Tzu Fang and my body is
all at sixes and sevens, I don’t want to move, my mouth is
shut and I don’t want to talk. That which I was studying has
turned out to be a thing of straw. The whole state of Wei
really is a weight on me!’
   Wen Po Hsueh Tzu was travelling to Wei, when he
stopped in the state of Lu. A citizen of Lu asked to see him,
but Wen Po Hsueh Tzu said, ‘Certainly not. I have heard that
these noblemen of the Middle Kingdom are clear about the
principles of ritual but foolish in their understanding of
people’s hearts. I do not wish to see him.’
  He duly arrived in Wei but as he returned home he passed
once more through Lu, and the citizen appeared again,
asking to see him. Wen Po Hsueh Tzu said, ‘He asked to
see me before, now he’s trying again. Obviously, he cares
enough to say something to me.’
  He went out to see the citizen and came back moaning
softly. The next day he saw him again and again returned
with a low moan. His servant asked, ‘Why is it that, when
you see this visitor, you come back moaning?’
   He replied, ‘I have said before, “These people of the
Middle Kingdom are clear about the principles of ritual,
but foolish in their understanding of people’s hearts.” Each
time I see this visitor his coming forward and withdrawing
is so precise it might have been calculated on a compass or
set-square. His appearance is first like a dragon, then a
tiger. He argues with me as if he was my son, and tries to
give me advice like my father, which is why I am sighing.’
   Confucius went to see him but did not say a word. Tzu Lu
said, ‘Sir, you have wished to visit Wen Po Hsueh Tzu for a
while, yet when you saw him you didn’t say a word. Why?’
  ‘As soon as I saw him, I could see the Tao,’ said
Confucius. ‘There was no need to say anything.’
   Yen Yuan said to Confucius, ‘Master, when you stroll, I
stroll. When you stride, I stride. When you gallop, I gallop.
But when you break into a headlong rush that leaves nothing
but dust behind, I just stand and stare after you in
astonishment.’
  ‘Hui, what are you talking about?’ said the Master.
  ‘Master, when you stroll, I stroll; when you speak, I
speak. When you stride, I stride; when you contrast, I also
contrast. When you gallop, I gallop; when you speak of the
Tao, I also speak of the Tao. But when I say you break into a
headlong rush and leave the dust behind you and I just stand
and stare, I mean you do not even need to speak to be
believed, everyone salutes your universality and your lack
of prejudice; even though you have no official status,
people are inspired to follow you. I simply do not
understand how this is.’
   ‘Ah ha!’ said Confucius. ‘So we must enquire into this!
There is no greater sadness than the death of the heart –
beside which the death of the body is secondary. The sun
rises in the east and sets in the west, and all forms of life
are guided by this. All beings that have eyes and feet await
the sun and then do what is necessary. When it rises, they
come out; when it sets, they disappear. This is certain for
all forms of life. They have to await their time of death;
they have to await their time of birth.
  ‘Having been given this prescribed shape, I hold to it
unchangingly and in this way I wait for the end. I exist,
acted upon by others both day and night without end, and I
have no idea when I shall end. Obviously I am here in this
particular shape and I understand my destiny, but not what
has happened beforehand. This is how I am, day after day.
   ‘I am sharing my ideas with you, and here we are side by
side and you don’t understand me. This is a shame! You can
see the part of me that I have shown you, but that is no
longer relevant – yet you still hunt for it as if it were. This
is like looking for a horse after the sale is over. I am of the
greatest service to you when I forget you, and you are of
the greatest service to me when you forget me. Given this
is so, why get so upset? It is my former self that you forget,
and what I retain is what cannot be forgotten.’
   Confucius went to see Lao Tzu and found him washing
his hair. He had spread it out over his shoulders to dry. He
stood there without moving, as if no one else existed in the
world. Confucius stood quietly and then, after a while,
quietly came into his vision and said, ‘Were my eyes
dazzled, is this really you? Just now, Sir, your body was as
still as an old dead tree. You seemed to have no thought in
your head, as if you were in another world and standing
utterly alone.’
   ‘I let my heart ponder upon the origin of beginnings,’
said Lao Tzu.
  ‘What do you mean?’ asked Confucius.
  ‘The heart may try to reason this out but doesn’t
understand it, and the mouth may hang open but can’t find
words to say. Still, I will attempt to describe this to you.
Perfect yin is harsh and cold, perfect yang is awesome and
fiery. Harshness and coldness emanate from Earth,
awesomeness and fieriness emanate from Heaven. The two
mingle and join, and from their conjunction comes to birth
everything that lives. Maybe there is one who controls and
ensures all this, but if so, then no one has seen any form or
shape. Decay and growth, fullness and emptiness, at one
time dark, at another bright, the changes of the sun and the
transformation of the moon, these go by day after day, but
no one has seen what causes this. Life has its origin from
which it emerges and death has its place to which it returns.
Beginning and end follow each other inexorably and no one
knows of any end to this. If this is not so, then who is the
origin and guide?’
  ‘I want to ask what it means to wander like this,’ said
Confucius.
  Lao Tzu said, ‘To obtain this is perfect beauty and perfect
happiness, and to obtain perfect beauty and wander in
perfect happiness is to be a perfect man.’
  ‘I would like to hear how this is done,’ said Confucius.
   Lao Tzu replied, ‘Creatures that eat grass are not put out
by a change of pasture. Creatures that are born in the water
are not put out by a change of water. They can live with a
minor change, but not with a change to that which is the
most significant. Joy, anger, sadness and happiness do not
enter into their breasts. All under Heaven, all forms of life,
come together in the One. Obtain the One and merge with it
and all your four limbs and hundred joints will become just
dust and ashes. For death and birth, ending and beginning
are nothing more than the sequence of day and night. Then
you will never be disturbed in your contentment by such
trifles as gain and loss, for example, good fortune or bad!
Those who ignore the status of authority, casting it aside
like so much mud, they know that their own self is of
greater significance than any title. The value of your self
lies within and is not affected by what happens externally.
The constant transformation of all forms of life is like a
beginning without end. What is there in this to disturb your
heart? Those who comprehend the Tao are freed from all
this.’
  ‘Master,’ said Confucius, ‘your Virtue is like that of
Heaven and Earth, but even you have to resort to these
perfect words to guide you. Who amongst the great men of
antiquity could have lived this out?’
   Lao Tzu replied, ‘I certainly do not. The flowing of the
stream does nothing, but it follows its nature. The perfect
man does the same with regard to Virtue. He does nothing
to cultivate it, but all is affected by its presence. He is like
the height of Heaven: natural; or the solidity of Earth, the
brightness of sun and moon: all natural. There is no need to
cultivate this!’
  Confucius came out and commented upon all this to Yen
Hui: ‘When it comes to comprehending the Tao I am about
as significant as a fly in vinegar! Had the Master not
revealed things to me, I would never have understood the
great unity of Heaven and Earth.’
   Chuang Tzu went to see Duke Ai of Lu. Duke Ai said,
‘There are many learned scholars in Lu but few of them
study your works, Master.’
  Chuang Tzu said, ‘Lu has few learned ones.’
   Duke Ai said, ‘There are men wearing the dress of
learned scholars throughout the state of Lu. How can you
say there are few?’
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘I have heard that those learned ones
who wear round caps on their heads, know the seasons of
Heaven; those who wear square shoes know the shape of
the Earth; those who tie semi-circular disks to their belts
deal perfectly with all that comes before them. But a
nobleman can follow the Tao without having to dress the
part. Indeed, he might wear the dress but not understand the
Tao at all! Should my Lord not be sure on this point, why
not issue an order of state saying, “Any wearing the dress
but not practising the Tao will be executed!”’
  This is exactly what Duke Ai did, and five days later
throughout the kingdom of Lu not a single learned one
wore the dress! Only one old man wore the dress of the
learned and stood at the Duke’s gate. The Duke
immediately called him in and discussed the affairs of the
kingdom with him, and though they went through a thousand
issues and tens of thousands of digressions, the old man
was never at a loss.
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘So, in the whole kingdom of Lu there
is just this one man who is among the learned ones. How
can you claim there are many?’
   Po Li Hsi83 did not allow thoughts of fame and fortune
to enter his heart. Instead, he looked after cattle, and his
cattle prospered. Seeing this, the Duke Mu of Chin forgot
Po Li Hsi’s servile state and he turned over the running of
the government to him. Shun of the Yu84 family did not
allow death nor birth to enter his heart, and this is how he
could influence others.
   Ruler Yuan of Sung wanted a map drawn up and so the
artists flocked to him. They received their materials and
instructions and formed up in line, licking their pencils and
grinding their ink. There were so many that half had to
remain outside. One artist arrived late, insolently and
without any concern for speed. Having received his
instructions and materials, he did not join the line, but went
off to his own studio. The ruler sent someone to see what
he was up to. He found him with his robe off, sitting cross-
legged and almost naked. The ruler said, ‘Splendid, this is
indeed a true craftsman!’
   King Wen85 was touring the sights of Tsang and he saw an
old man fishing. However, his fishing was not real fishing.
He was not fishing as if he had to fish for any good reason,
but just because he fished. King Wen wanted to summon
him to take over governing the kingdom, but he was worried
that such an action would upset his great ministers, uncles
and cousins. He tried to erase the matter from his mind, but
he could not bear the thought that all his people, all one
hundred families, would be deprived of such a gift from
Heaven. The next morning he summoned his great
ministers and said, ‘Last night I dreamed that I saw a man of
quality, bearded and with a dark complexion, riding a
dappled horse, half of whose hooves were red. This man
ordered me, “Pass your government over to the old man of
Tsang and the woes of your people will be healed!”’
  The great ministers were certainly impressed and said, ‘It
was the late king, Your Majesty.’
  King Wen said, ‘Let us ask the diviner.’
  The great ministers said, ‘It is the command of the late
King. Your Majesty should not doubt this, so there is no
need for a diviner!’
   So in due course the King handed over the government to
the Old Man of Tsang. However, all the old order and
regulations persisted unchanged and no new laws were sent
out. Three years later King Wen toured his kingdom. He
found that the officers in the districts had broken down the
gates of the different groups and dispersed them, that the
chiefs of the departments no longer bragged about their
positions, and that no one brought illegal weights or
measures into the country. The district officials had
destroyed the fortified places and scattered those within,
because they identified with those above them. The chiefs
of departments sought no special honours, because they
saw even the most mundane task as an honour. With no
different weights and measures, the princes were no longer
in two minds whether to use the official ones.
  King Wen appreciated the true worth of having found a
great teacher, and, facing north, he asked him, ‘Could this
government be extended to all the Earth?’ The Old Man of
Tsang looked confused and gave no answer. The next
morning he gave orders with a distracted look, and by night
he was gone and was never heard of again.
  Yen Yuan asked Confucius about this. ‘King Wen wasn’t
really up to it, was he? What was all that stuff about a
dream?’
  Confucius said, ‘Silence, don’t say a word! King Wen
knew what he was about. Let there be no criticism of him!
He only used the dream to extract himself from his
difficulty.’
   Lieh Yu Kou was displaying his skills at archery to Po
Hun Wu Jen. He drew his bow fully back and placed a bowl
of water upon his elbow. The arrow flew from his bow and
no sooner had it gone than a second arrow was there and
fired, followed by a third at the ready. And all this time he
stood still as a statue.
   Po Hun Wu Jen said, ‘This is indeed the archery of an
archer, not the non-archery of an archer. Let us go to the
top of a high mountain, climbing up the rocks until we
come to the edge of a drop eight hundred feet deep. Could
you shoot then?’
  So they set off, to the top of a high mountain, scrambling
over the rocks, until they reached a drop of eight hundred
feet. Here Wu Jen turned round and walked backwards
towards the drop until his feet were half over the edge,
whereupon he bowed to Yu Kou and asked him to join him.
Yu Kou fell to the ground, sweat pouring from him,
drenching him to his feet.
  Po Hun Wu Jen said, ‘The perfect man can stare at the
azure Heavens above, or go down into the Yellow Springs
below, or journey away to the eight ends of the cosmos,
without affecting his spirit and original breath. Now here
you are grovelling and your eyes agog. In such a state of
mind, if you were to take aim, you would be in great
danger!’
   Chien Wu said to Sun Shu Ao, ‘Sir, three times you were
appointed Prime Minister without showing any enthusiasm
and three times you were dismissed without showing any
distress. To begin with I really didn’t believe this. But now I
see you, nose to nose, I see how calm and unruffled you
are. Sir, have you some special influence over your heart?’
   Sun Shu Ao said, ‘Do I really exceed others? When I was
offered the post, I did not feel I could refuse. When the
post was withdrawn, I did not feel I could stop it. Neither
having nor losing affect who I am, so there was no point in
looking miserable. Do I really exceed others? I did not
know where the glory lay, in the job or in me. If it is in the
prime ministerial post, then why should it mean anything to
me? If in me, then what did it have to do with being Prime
Minister? With all these questions, I have decided just to
wander in the four directions. What leisure do I have to
speculate about whether my position is high or low?’
  Confucius heard about this and said:
  ‘He is a true man of the past:
  the wise could not follow his words;
  the charming ones cannot make him follow them, nor the
aggressive force him to do their will.
               Neither Fu Hsi nor the Yellow Emperor
               could have made him be their friend.
               Death and birth are momentous times but
               they do not affect him;
               how much less do fame and fortune!
               The spirit of one such as he can sail across
               the great mountain Tai
               without the slightest difficulty,
               enter into the deepest troughs of the ocean
               and not be wet,
               or fill the lowest position without any
               anxiety.
               He is filled with Heaven and Earth,
               and the more he gives to others, the more he
               has.’
  The King of Chu and the Lord of Fan were sitting
together. Three of the King of Chu’s servants came to
report that the state of Fan had been destroyed. The Lord of
Fan said, ‘Fan’s destruction does not deter me from
preserving what is most significant. I say, “If the
destruction of Fan is not sufficient to make me lose what I
most value, then the preservation of Chu is not enough to
ensure the preservation of what I should preserve. Viewed
this way, Fan has not begun to be destroyed and Chu has not
begun to be preserved.’
CHAPTER 22
The Shores of the Dark Waters




             Knowledge strolled north to the shores of the
Dark Waters, scaled the mount of Secret Heights and came
upon Words-of-Actionless-Action. Knowledge said to
Words-of-Actionless-Action, ‘I want to ask you something.
What sort of thought and reflection does it take to know
the Tao? In what sort of place and in what sorts of ways
should we undertake to rest in the Tao? What sort of path
and what sort of plans do we need to obtain the Tao?’ These
three questions he asked of Words-of-Actionless-Action,
but he did not answer. Not only did he not answer, he had no
idea what to answer.
   Knowledge did not obtain any answers, so he travelled to
the White Waters of the south, climbed up on to the top of
Doubt Curtailed and there caught sight of Wild-and-Surly.
Knowledge put the same question to Wild-and-Surly. Wild-
and-Surly said, ‘Ah ha! I know, and I will tell you.’ In the
middle of saying this, he forgot what he was going to say!
   Knowledge did not obtain any answers, so he went back
to the Emperor’s palace to see the Yellow Emperor and to
ask him. The Yellow Emperor said, ‘Practise having no
thoughts and no reflections and you will come to know the
Tao. Only when you have no place and can see no way
forward will you find rest in the Tao. Have no path and no
plans and you will obtain the Tao.’
   Knowledge said to the Yellow Emperor, ‘You and I know
this, but the others did not know, so which of us is actually
right?’
  The Yellow Emperor said, ‘Words-of-Actionless-Action
was truly right. Wild-and-Surly seems right. In the end, you
and I are not close to it.
               ‘Those who understand, do not say.
               Those who say, do not understand.
               And so the sage follows the teachings
               without words.
               The Tao cannot be made to occur,
               Virtue cannot be sought after.
               However, benevolence can be undertaken,
               righteousness can be striven for,
              rituals can be adhered to.
              It is said, “When the Tao was lost, Virtue
              appeared;
              when Virtue was lost, benevolence appeared;
              when benevolence was lost, righteousness
              appeared;
              when righteousness was lost, ritual appeared.
              Rituals are just the frills on the hem of the
              Tao, and are signs of impending disorder.”
   ‘It is said, “One who follows the Tao daily does less and
less. As he does less and less, he eventually arrives at
actionless action. Having achieved actionless action, there
is nothing which is not done.” Now that we have become
active, if we wish to return to our original state, we will
find it very difficult! Who but the great man could change
this?
              ‘Life follows death and death is the
              forerunner of life.
              Who can know their ways?
              Human life begins with the original breath;
              When it comes together there is life,
              When it is dispersed, there is death.
  ‘As death and life are together in all this, which should
be termed bad? All the forms of life are one, yet we regard
some as beautiful, because they are spiritual and wonderful;
others we count as ugly, because they are diseased and
rotting. But the diseased and rotting can become the
spiritual and wonderful, and the spiritual and wonderful can
become the diseased and rotting. It is said, “All that is
under Heaven is one breath.” The sages always comprehend
such unity.’
   Knowledge said to the Yellow Emperor, ‘I asked Words-
of-Actionless-Action, and he didn’t say anything to me.
Indeed, not only did he not say anything to me, but he didn’t
know what to say to me. I asked Wild-and-Surly and he was
in the midst of explaining to me, though he did not say
anything, then in the midst of it all he forgot what he
wanted to say. Then I asked you and you know the answer,
so why do you say you are not close to the answer?’
  The Yellow Emperor said, ‘Words-of-Actionless-Action
was actually right, because he knew nothing. Wild-and-
Surly was almost right, because he forgot everything.
However, you and I are not close, because we know.’
   When Wild-and-Surly heard about this, he concluded that
the Yellow Emperor knew what he was talking about.
               Heaven and Earth have great beauty but no
               words.
               The four seasons follow their regular path
               but do not debate it.
               All forms of life have their own distinct
               natures but do not discuss them.
               The sage looks at the beauties of Heaven and
               Earth and comprehends the principle behind
               all life.
               So the perfect man does without doing
               and the great sage initiates nothing,
               for, as we say, they have glimpsed Heaven
               and Earth.
   Now even the Tao, spirit-like and with perfect clarity, in
common with all other forms of life, undergoes the
transformations of life. All life forms are already dead or
living; they are square or round, and they do not
comprehend their beginning.
               Yet life goes on, just as it has done from
               time immemorial.
               Even the vastness of distances between the
               six areas of the world is encompassed by the
               Tao.
               Indeed, even the smallest hair relies upon
               the Tao for its very being.
               Every living thing below Heaven,
               those arising and those declining,
               are guided by this. Yin and yang.
              The four seasons are kept moving by it,
              each within its own sphere.
              Seeming lost in darkness, it still exists;
              Glorious and free, it has no body: it is spirit.
              All forms of life are guided by it,
              though they do not know it.
              This is what is called the root and origin.
              It is this which we discern in Heaven.
  Yeh Chueh asked Pi I about the Tao, and Pi I said, ‘Attend
to your body, concentrate upon the One, and the perfect
harmony of Heaven will be yours.
  ‘Rein in your understanding, unify your stance and the
spirit will dwell within you.
  ‘Virtue will be your beauty and the Tao will be your
dwelling place.
  ‘You will seem like a simple new-born calf and you
won’t try to understand the reason why!’
   Before he could finish what he was saying, Yeh Chueh
fell fast asleep. Pi I was very pleased indeed and wandered
off singing this song:
              ‘Body like a rotten tree stump,
              Heart like cold dead ashes,
              His understanding is true and real,
              Not inclined to pursue questions.
               Obscure, obscure, deeply dark,
               Heartless, no advice forthcoming,
               What sort of person is this!’
  Shun asked Cheng, ‘Is it possible to obtain the Tao and
have it as mine?’
  He said, ‘As you aren’t in control of your own body, how
could you hope to obtain and hold the Tao?’
  Shun said, ‘If I don’t control my own body, then who
does?’
   He said, ‘Your shape is given you by Heaven and Earth.
Life is not yours to have, it is the combining harmony of
Heaven and Earth. Your innate nature and destiny are not
yours to have, they are constructs given you by Heaven and
Earth. Grandsons and sons are not yours to have: they are
the sloughed-off skins bequeathed to you from Heaven and
Earth. You should walk, therefore, as if you don’t know
where you are going; remain where you are without
knowing why; eat without knowing what you’re tasting. All
this arises from the yang breath of Heaven and Earth. How
can it then be possible for you to obtain and hold anything?’
   Confucius said to Lao Tzu, ‘Now, today, you seem
relaxed, so I would like to ask about the perfect Tao.’
   Lao Tzu said, ‘You should cleanse and purify your heart
through fasting and austerities, wash your spirit to make it
clean and repress your knowledge. The Tao is profound and
almost impossible to describe! I will attempt to offer some
understanding of it:
              ‘The brightly shining is born from the deeply
              dark;
              that which is orderly is born from the
              formless;
              the spiritual is born from the Tao;
              the roots of the body are born from the
              seminal essence;
              all forms of life give each other shape
              through birth.
              Those with nine apertures are born from the
              womb,
              while those with eight are born from eggs.
              Of its coming there is no trace,
              no sign of its departure,
              neither entering the gate nor dwelling
              anywhere,
              open to all the four directions.
              Those who travel with the Tao will be strong
              in body,
              sincere and profound in their thought,
              clear of sight and hearing,
using their hearts without tiring,
responding to all without prejudice.
As a result of this, Heaven is high and Earth
wide,
the sun and moon move and everything
flourishes.
This is the Tao!
‘Even the broadest knowledge does not
comprehend it.
Reason does not mean wisdom, so the sage
casts these aside.
There is something which is complete, no
matter what you add;
is not diminished, no matter what you take
away.
This is what the sage holds to.
It is as the ocean, deeply deep,
as the mountains, high and proud,
its end is its beginning,
it carries all forms of life and never fails.
The Tao of the nobleman is just external
garb!
That which sustains all forms of life and
never falters,
               this is the true Tao!
   ‘Here is a man of China, balanced between yin and yang,
dwelling between Heaven and Earth. For a while he is a man
and then he returns to the origin. Viewed from the
perspective of the origin, when life begins for him, he is
just a collection of breath. When he dies, whether he is
young or very old, these different destinies make little
difference, his life-span is so short. What does it mean
then to ask which is good and bad between Yao and Shun?
The fruits of the trees and the trailing plants have their
distinctive patterns. Even human relationships, for all their
troubles, have an order and a structure. The sage does not
oppose them when he meets them: since he exceeds them
by far, he has no need to hold on to them. He responds to
them harmoniously: this is his Virtue. He greets them in
friendship: this is his Tao. This is how Emperors and kings
have arisen.
               ‘Human life between Heaven and Earth is
               like a white colt glimpsed through a crack in
               the wall, quickly past.
               It pours forth, it overwhelms,
               yet there is nothing that does not emerge.
               It drifts, it swirls,
               yet there is nothing that does not return.
               Life is transformation, death is also
transformation.
All living creatures are saddened, all
humanity mourns.
However, it is simply the releasing of the
Heavenly bowstring,
or the emptying of the Heavenly satchel,
a yielding and a changing which release the
soul, as the body follows,
back at long last to the great Returning.
That without shape comes from shape,
that with shape returns to the shapeless.
‘All people know this:
those with a perfect understanding do not
discuss it,
while everyone argues how to set about
achieving it.
Those who have achieved it do not discuss it.
Those who discuss have not achieved it.
Those who eagerly search with their keen
eyes will not discern it. Be silent, do not
debate.
The Tao cannot be heard, so it is better to
close your ears than strive to hear.
This is called the great Achievement.’
  Master Tung Kuo asked Chuang Tzu, ‘That which is
called the Tao, where is it?’
               Chuang Tzu replied, ‘There is nowhere
               where it is not.’
               ‘But give me a specific example.’
               ‘In this ant,’ said Chuang Tzu.
               ‘Is that its lowest point?’
               ‘In this panic grass,’ said Chuang Tzu.
               ‘Can you give me a lower example?’
               ‘In this common earthenware tile,’ said
               Chuang Tzu.
               ‘This must be its lowest point!’
               ‘It’s in shit and piss too,’ said Chuang Tzu.
   Master Tung Kuo had no answer to this. Chuang Tzu said,
‘Sir, your questions miss the point. When Inspector Huo
asked the superintendents of the market how best to test
the value of a pig by treading down on it with his foot, they
told him that the lower down the animal you pressed, the
closer you were to finding the truth. So you should not
look for the Tao in anything specific. There is nothing
without it. The perfect Tao is like this – so it is called the
Great. Complete, all embracing, universal: three different
words but with the same reality, all referring back to the
One.
              ‘Imagine that we were wandering in the
              palace of No-Place.
              Harmony and unity would be our themes,
              never ending, never failing!
              Join with me in actionless action!
              In simplicity and quietude!
              In disinterest and purity!
              In harmony and ease!
              My intentions are now aimless.
              I go nowhere and have no idea how I got
              there;
              I go and I come and don’t know why.
              I have been, I have gone.
              I have no idea when my journey is over.
              I wander and rest in limitless vastness.
              Great knowledge comes in and I have no idea
              where it will all end.
  ‘If you can regard things as simply things, then you do
not share the limited nature of things. The limitless arises
out of the limited, and the boundless arises out of the
restricted.
  ‘We talk of fullness and emptiness; of withering and
decaying. The Tao makes them full or empty but is not
defined by fullness or emptiness. It creates withering and
decay, but it is not defined by withering or decay. It
produces the roots and branches, but it is neither root nor
branch. It gathers together and it disperses, but it is neither
of these itself.’
  Ah Ho Kan and Shen Nung were fellow students of Lao
Lung Chi. One midday Shen Nung was sitting on his seat
with the door shut and he was fast asleep, when Ah Ho Kan
opened the door and came in, saying,
  ‘Lao Lung is dead.’
   Shen Nung leaned forward, grasped his staff and rose to
his feet. Then he dropped his staff and burst out laughing,
‘Our Heavenly wise Master, he knew just how cramped and
mean, arrogant and wilful I am and this is why he has gone
and cast me aside and died. My Master has gone off! He has
died without giving me words to control my wildness!’
   Yen Kang Tiao heard all this and said, ‘The one who
embodies the Tao has noblemen from all over the world
coming to him. Now, regarding the Tao, you who haven’t
grasped even a tip of the hair of it, not even a ten-
thousandth part, nevertheless you still know enough to curb
your wild words and to die without uttering them. How
much more is this the case with someone who embodies
the Tao! You can look for it but it has no shape. You can
listen for it, but it has no voice. Those who discuss it call it
deeply dark. To talk of the Tao is not to know the Tao.’
  Great Purity asked Endless, ‘Sir, do you know the Tao?’
  ‘I do not know it,’ said Endless.
   Then he asked Actionless Action, who replied, ‘I know
the Tao.’
  ‘Sir,’ asked Great Purity, ‘about your knowledge of the
Tao, do you have some special hints?’
  ‘I have.’
  ‘What are they?’
  Actionless Action said, ‘I know that the Tao can elevate
and bring low, bind together and separate. These are the
hints I would give you to know the Tao.’
  With these different answers Great Purity went to No
Beginning and said, ‘Between Endless’s statement that he
doesn’t know, and Actionless Action’s statement that he
does know, I am left wondering which of these is right and
which is wrong.’
   No Beginning said, ‘Not to know is profound and to
know is shallow. To be without knowledge is to be inward,
to know is to be outward.’
   Then indeed did Great Purity cast his eyes upward and
sigh, ‘Not to know is to know and to know is not to know!
Who knows about not knowing about knowing?’
  No Beginning said:
              ‘The Tao cannot be heard: what is heard is
              not the Tao.
              The Tao cannot be seen: what can be seen is
              not the Tao.
              The Tao cannot be spoken: what is spoken is
              not the Tao.
              Do we know what form gives form to the
              formless?
              The Tao has no name.’
  No Beginning continued:
  ‘To be questioned about the Tao and to give an answer
means that you don’t know the Tao.
  ‘One who asks about the Tao has never understood
anything about the Tao.
   ‘Do not ask about the Tao, for the asking is not
appropriate, nor can the question be answered, because it is
like asking those in dire extremity. To answer what cannot
be answered is to show no inner understanding. When
someone without inner understanding waits for an answer
from those in dire extremity, they illustrate that they
neither grasp where they stand outwardly nor understand
the great Beginning within. So they cannot cross the Kun
Lun mountains nor wander in the great Void.’
  Starlight asked No Existence, ‘Master, do you exist? Or
do you not exist?’
   Starlight could get no answer, but he looked upon the
form of the other and saw a deep void. All day long he
stared but could see nothing, listened but heard nothing,
reached out his hand but held nothing.
  Starlight said, ‘Perfect! Who can reach such heights? I
can imagine existence and non-existence but not non-
existing non-existence; yet here we have non-existence of
non-existence, how amazing!’
   The swordsmith of the Grand Marshal was eighty years
old, but he had not lost any of his skills. The Grand Marshal
said, ‘Master, you are so skilful! Do you have the Tao?’
   He said, ‘I do have the Tao. From the age of twenty
onwards I have been devoted to making swords. I pay no
heed to anything else, I look at nothing but swords. By
being so constant I am now able to do it without thinking.
Time brings one to such art, so imagine how much more
significant this would be for one who used the same
method but never ignored anything. Everything would
depend on him and everything would be achieved!’
  Jan Chiu asked Confucius, ‘Is it possible to know
anything about what there was, before Heaven and Earth?’
  Confucius replied, ‘It is. As it was in the past, so it is
now.’
   Jan Chiu got no further and left. The next day he saw
Confucius again and said, ‘Yesterday I asked if it’s possible
to know anything of what there was before Heaven and
Earth and you said, Master, “It is. As it was in the past so it
is now.” Yesterday that seemed fine to me, but now it
seems problematic. What does all this mean?’
  Confucius said, ‘Yesterday it was clear to you, because
your spirit was ready for such an answer. Now it is
problematic because you are no longer responding in the
spirit, are you? There is no past, nor present, no beginning
and no end. Is it possible to say that you had grandsons and
sons before you had grandsons and sons?’
   Jan Chiu did not answer. Confucius said, ‘Enough, don’t
try to answer! Don’t use life to give birth to death, don’t
use death to bring death to life. Do death and life depend
upon each other? They are both held within the One. What
was there before Heaven and Earth, was it a thing? That
which creates things each in their own way is not a thing.
Things that are produced cannot come before things that
produce them because these already exist. Likewise, they
were produced by things existing before them, and so on
through time. The sage’s love of humanity never ends and is
based on this way of seeing.’
   Yen Yuan asked Confucius, ‘Master, I have heard you say
that you should not welcome anything in, nor move out to
greet anything. I would like to know how this is done.’
  Confucius said, ‘The people of old didn’t change
inwardly in the midst of external changes. Today people
change inwardly but pay no attention to the externals. To
note the changes around but not to change oneself is not to
change. Where is change to be found? Where is there no
change? How can one be affected by changes of the
external? One needs to hold back from others.
   ‘Hsi Wei had his park and the Yellow Emperor his
garden. The Lord Shun had his palace and Tang and Wu had
their manors. Then amongst the noblemen there were those
such as the teachers of the Literati and the Mohists whose
teachings caused people to begin considering what was
right and what was wrong and arguing with each other, and
the present day is even worse! Sages, in their dealings with
others, do them no harm; those who do no harm cannot
themselves be harmed. Only the person who does no harm
can welcome others in or go out to meet them.
  ‘The mountains and forest delight! The hills and valleys
delight! However, this delight of mine ends and sadness
comes. When sadness and joy come, I cannot prevent them.
When they go, I cannot stop them. How distressing that the
people of this world are but rest-houses for things. They
know what they encounter but they do not know what they
do not encounter. They know how to do the things they
know, but not how to do those things they do not know. Not
knowing, not doing, this is what traps humanity. Still some
people attempt to escape from the inevitable. This is how it
goes! Perfect speech is no speech; perfect action is no
action. To know only what is known is a tragedy.’
CHAPTER 23
Keng Sang Chu




            One of the followers of Lao Tzu was Keng
Sang Chu, who had grasped something of Lao Tzu’s
teaching of the Tao. He went north and settled at the
mountain of Wei Lei. He dismissed those servants of his
who were brisk and efficient. He sent away any of his
concubines who were kind and benevolent. Into his home
he took the off-hand and rude, and employed the indolent
and aggressive. Three years later Wei Lei had become a
very prosperous place. The people of Wei Lei said to each
other, ‘When Master Keng Sang came here, we were
frightened of him. Now, if we think about it day to day,
there doesn’t seem to be sufficient for everyone, but if we
reckon him by the years, we can see there is more than
enough to go round. It is possible that he really is a sage!
Perhaps we should revere him as our priest before the dead
and put all our altars of the grain and earth under his
command.’
   Master Keng Sang heard this, but he turned his face to
the south and was certainly not pleased. His followers were
perplexed by this. Master Keng Sang said, ‘My followers,
why do you think this is strange? When the life-giving
breath of spring emerges, the plants begin to come to life,
and then in autumn they produce their multitudes of fruits.
Do spring and autumn do this of their own volition? They
just follow Heaven’s Tao. I have heard that the perfect man
lives without effort within the confines of his house,
leaving the different peoples to their own wild and
unthinking ways. Now these busybodies of Wei Lei in their
arrogant ways want to present their offerings to me and
make me one of their leaders, as if I were really some kind
of standard for others! This is why I am annoyed, because I
remember the words of Lao Tzu.’
   His followers said, ‘Surely not. In ditches eight to
sixteen feet wide the big fishes can’t turn around, but the
minnows and eels can. On a hill just six or seven feet high
the big animals don’t have space to hide themselves, but the
cunning fox finds it perfect. Honour should be shown to the
worthy and offices given to those who are capable, with
preference shown to the good and thoughtful. In the past
Yao and Shun behaved like this, so why shouldn’t the people
of Wei Lei! Master, let them do this!’
   Master Keng Sang said, ‘Come here my little ones! If a
creature large enough to swallow a carriage whole leaves
its mountain, it cannot avoid the dangers of being trapped in
the net. If a fish great enough to swallow a boat whole is
left stranded by the loss of water, it can fall prey even to
the ants. This is why birds and creatures don’t care how
high they go to escape, nor do fish and turtles care how
deep they go to escape. In the same way, those people who
wish to preserve their bodies and lives are concerned only
with how to hide away, and don’t mind how remote their
place of hiding is.
   ‘Regarding the two masters you mentioned, what was so
great about them as to be worthy of special mention? Their
nit-picking philosophies make them like people who go
around poking holes in walls and fences and sowing wild
seeds in these places. They are like balding men
contemplating combing their hair, or like a cook who
counts each grain of rice before cooking! They take
painstaking care, but to what end? They are useless to the
world! If people of worth are elevated, there will be chaos
as people fight to be promoted. If you choose people on
the basis of their knowledge, then the people will try to
steal this from each other. None of this makes the people
any better. Indeed, what happens is that the people become
more ambitious for gain. A son will kill his father for it and
a minister will kill his ruler. People will steal in broad
daylight and break down walls in the middle of the day. I say
to you, the roots of all this great trouble will be found to
have begun with Yao and Shun, and the consequences of this
will remain for a thousand generations. A thousand
generations later you will still have men who will eat each
other!’
   Nan Jung Chu sat upright on his mat looking perplexed
and said, ‘How can someone as old as I am study to achieve
the state of which you speak?’
  Master Keng Sang said, ‘Keep your body in unity, hold
on to life, don’t become too anxious. Do this for three
years and you can achieve the state of which I have spoken.’
   Nan Jung Chu said, ‘The eyes are a part of the body, I
have never considered them to be anything other, but a blind
person can’t see through his eyes. Ears are a part of the
body, I have never considered them to be anything other, but
a deaf person can’t hear through his ears. The heart is a part
of the body, I have never considered it to be anything other,
but the madman can’t experience feelings with his. The
body is also part of the body, but my soul seems separated
from it, because I try to find my self, but why can’t I find it?
Now you say to me, “Keep your body in unity, hold on to
life, do not become too anxious.” Despite all my attempts
to understand your Tao, this goes in one ear and out the
other.’
   Master Keng Sang said, ‘That’s all I can say. There is a
saying, mud daubers are incapable of changing into
caterpillars. The fowl of Yueh cannot hatch goose eggs, but
those of Lu can. It is not that the virtue of one kind of hen
is better than that of another. That one can and the other
cannot is to do with their size, big and small. My talents are
limited and cannot effect a change in you, Master. So, Sir,
why don’t you go south and see Lao Tzu?’
   Nan Jung Chu gathered his provisions and set off, and
after seven days and seven nights he arrived at the home of
Lao Tzu.
  ‘Have you come from Chu?’ said Lao Tzu, and Nan Jung
Chu replied, ‘I have.’
  ‘So, Sir, why have you brought this great crowd of other
people with you?’ Nan Jung Chu spun round and looked
behind him in astonishment.
  ‘Sir, don’t you understand what I am saying?’ said Lao
Tzu.
   Nan Jung Chu hung his head in shame and then looked up,
sighed and said, ‘Now I can’t remember what to say in
response and have therefore also forgotten what I was
going to ask.’
  ‘What are you saying?’ said Lao Tzu.
   ‘Do I have any understanding?’ said Nan Jung Chu.
‘People will call me a fool. Do I understand? This just
upsets me. If I am not benevolent, then I distress others. If I
am benevolent, then I distress myself. If I am not righteous,
then I harm others. If I am righteous, then I upset myself.
How can I get out of all this? These three issues perplex
me, so following Chu’s instructions I have come to ask you
about them.’
   Lao Tzu replied, ‘Just now I looked deep into your eyes
and I could see what sort of a person you are. What you
have just said convinces me I am right. You are bewildered
and confused, as if you had lost your father and mother and
were looking for them using a pole to reach the bottom of
the sea. You are lost and frightened. You want to rediscover
your self and your innate nature but you haven’t a clue how
to set about this. What a sorry state you are in!’
  Nan Jung Chu asked to be allowed to go into his room.
He sought to develop the good and rid himself of the bad.
After ten days of misery he came out and went to see Lao
Tzu again.
   ‘I can see that you have been washing and purifying
yourself thoroughly,’ said Lao Tzu, ‘but you are still impure
despite the outward cleanliness. Something is stirring
inside you and there is still something rotten within.
Outside influences will press upon you and you will find it
impossible to control them. It is wiser to shut the gate of
your inner self against them. Likewise, when interior
influences disturb you and you find it impossible to control
them, then shut the gate of your self so as to keep them in.
To struggle against both the outside and inside influences is
more than even one who follows the Tao and its Virtue can
control, so how much more difficult it is for one who is
just starting out along the Tao.’
   Nan Jung Chu said, ‘A villager fell ill and his neighbour
asked how he was. He was able to describe his illness, even
though he had never suffered from it before. When I ask
you about the great Tao, it is like drinking medicine that
makes me feel worse than before. I would like to know
about the normal method for protecting one’s life, that is
all.’
   ‘The basic way of protecting life – can you embrace the
One?’ said Lao Tzu. ‘Can you hold it fast? Can you tell good
from bad fortune without using the divination of the
tortoise shell or the yarrow sticks? Do you know when to
stop? Do you know when to desist? Can you forget others
and concentrate upon your inner self? Can you escape
lures? Can you be sincere? Can you be a little baby? The
baby cries all day long but its throat never becomes hoarse:
that indeed is perfect harmony. The baby clenches its fists
all day long but never gets cramp, it holds fast to Virtue.
The baby stares all day long but it is not affected by what is
outside it. It moves without knowing where, it sits without
knowing where it is sitting, it is quietly placid and rides the
flow of events. This is how to protect life.’
  ‘So this is what it takes to be a perfect man?’ said Nan
Jung Chu.
  ‘Indeed no. This is what is known as the melting of the
ice, the dissolving of the cold. Are you up to it? The perfect
man is as one with others in seeking his food from the
Earth and his joy from Heaven. However, he remains
detached from consideration of profit and gain from
others, does not get embroiled in plots and schemes nor in
grandiose projects. Alert and unceasing he goes, simple and
unpretentious he comes. This indeed is called the way to
protect life.’
  ‘So it is this which is his perfection?’
   ‘Not quite,’ replied Lao Tzu. ‘Just now I asked you, “Can
you become a little baby?” The baby acts without knowing
why and moves without knowing where. Its body is like a
rotting branch and its heart is like cold ashes. Being like
this, neither bad fortune will affect it nor good fortune
draw near. Having neither bad fortune nor good, it is not
affected by the misfortune that comes to most others!’
  One whose inner being is fixed upon such greatness
emits a Heavenly glow. Even though he has this Heavenly
glow, others will see him as just a man. Someone who has
reached this point will begin to be consistent. Because he
is consistent, people will unite with him and Heaven will be
his guide. Those with whom people wish to unite are called
the People of Heaven. Those whom Heaven guides are
called Sons of Heaven.
   Study is to study what cannot be studied. Undertaking
means undertaking what cannot be undertaken.
Philosophizing is to philosophize about what cannot be
philosophized about. Knowing that knowing is unknowable
is true perfection. Those who cannot grasp this will be
destroyed by Heaven.
   Draw on the generosity of life to sustain your body.
Protect yourself from cares and you will give life to your
heart. Revere what is central within and manifest it. Do this,
and even if a multitude of evils befall you, they will be
Heavenly in origin, not the works of fellow human beings.
They will not overcome your serenity, they will not enter
into your Spirit Tower.86 Your Spirit Tower has its guardian
but unless you know this guardian, it will not guard you.
   If you cannot see this sincerity within you and you try to
manifest it, it will fail. You will be invaded by external
influences and will be unable to rid yourself of them. Then,
whatever you do will inevitably fail. If you act badly in full
public view, then people will seize you and punish you. If
you act badly by night, then you will be seized by ghosts
and punished. Understand this properly, know how you
stand with regard to both people and ghosts and then reflect
on this alone.
              Someone who focuses on the internal is not
              interested in fame.
              Someone who focuses on the external is
              intent on gaining whatever he can.
              The one who does things which bring no
              glory, shines brightly in all he does.
              One who looks to make gains at any cost is
              just a trader.
              Others see he is just standing on tiptoe, but
              he thinks he is above all others.
              Someone who struggles to succeed gets
              worn out, while someone who doesn’t really
              mind can’t be possessed by such forces.
              To exclude others is to show lack of concern
              and not to be concerned with others means
              that everyone is a stranger.
              There is no weapon more lethal than the will
              – even Mo Yeh was inferior to it.
              There are no greater adversaries than yin and
              yang, because nothing in Heaven or on Earth
              escapes them.
              But it is not yin and yang that do this, it is
              your heart that makes it so.
   The Tao is in all things, in their divisions and their
fullness. What I dislike about divisions is that they
multiply, and what I dislike about multiplication is that it
makes people want to hold fast to it. So people go out and
forget to return, seeing little more than ghosts. They go
forth and, to be sure, they say they have laid hold of
something, but it is in fact what we call death. They are
killed off and gone, just like a ghost. It is only when the
formed learns from the unformed that there is
understanding.
   There is something which exists, though it emerges from
no roots, it returns through no opening. It exists but has no
place; it survives yet has no beginning nor end. Though it
emerges through no opening, there is something which
tells us it is real. It is real but it has no permanent place:
this tells us it is a dimension of space. It survives, but has
no beginning nor end: this tells us it has dimensions of
time. It is born, it dies, it emerges, it returns, though in its
emergence and return there is no form to be seen. This is
what we call the Heavenly Gate. The Heavenly Gate is non-
existence, and all forms of life emerge from non-
existence. That which exists cannot cause things to exist.
They all arise from non-existence. Non-existence is the
oneness of non-existence. This is the hidden knowledge of
the sages.
  In former times people had a knowledge which was
almost perfect. How nearly perfect? Some of them thought
that in the beginning there was nothing and that the future
brings nothing. There were others who believed that there
was something in the beginning, and they saw life as
decline and death as return, so they began to make
divisions. Yet others said that at the beginning there was
Non-Existence. Later there was life and with life there
came immediately death. We believe non-existence to be
the head, life the body and death the buttocks. Those who
know that life and death are all One, we are all friends
together. These three different perspectives, while
diverging, belong to the same dynasty but are like the Chao
and Ching families whose names show the line of
succession and the Chu family whose name comes from its
lands: they are not the same.
   From the grime you have life, and when the grime is
different in form, it is called different. You try to express
this difference in words, though this is not a subject for
words. But it is certain that this is not something you can
understand. At the Winter Sacrifice you can indicate the
intestines and the hooves of the sacrifice as being separate,
yet they shouldn’t be viewed as separate sacrifices. When
someone visits a house they are thinking of buying, they
inspect the whole house, from the ancestor shrines to the
toilets, evaluating each part separately but also as a whole.
  I will try to describe this discernment. It is rooted in life
and has knowledge as its teacher, and from there proceeds
to debate right and wrong. For example, we have fame and
fortune, with people thinking they can determine what is
really important. People think that they are the model of
propriety and therefore try to make others see them like
this, even to the point of dying for their views. These kinds
of people believe that being an official means you are wise,
and not being an official means you are a fool. They
consider success as meaning they are famous and failure as
being a disgrace. The people of this generation who follow
this method are like the cicada and the little dove: they
agree because they are the same.
  If someone treads on another person’s foot in the
marketplace, he apologizes profusely for the accident. If an
older brother treads on the foot of a younger brother, he
comforts him. If a parent treads on a child’s foot, there is
no need to ask for forgiveness. There is a saying:
               ‘Perfect behaviour does not discriminate
               amongst people;
               perfect righteousness takes no account of
               things;
               perfect knowledge makes no plans;
               perfect benevolence exhibits no emotion;
               perfect faith makes no oath of sincerity.’
               Suppress the whims of the will and untie the
mistakes of the heart.
Expunge the knots of Virtue,
unblock the flow of the Tao.
Honours and wealth,
distinctions and authority,
fame and gain,
these six are formed by the illusions of the
will.
Looks and style,
beauty and reason,
thrill of life and memories,
these six are the faults of the heart.
Hatred and desire,
joy and anger,
sadness and happiness,
these six are the knots of Virtue.
Rejection and acceptance,
giving and taking,
knowledge and ability,
these six are the impediments to the free
flow of the Tao.
When these four sets of six no longer
           trouble the breast,
           then you will be centred.
           Being centred, you will be calm.
           Being calm, you will be enlightened.
           Being enlightened, you will be empty.
           Being empty, you will be in actionless
           action,
           But with actionless action nothing remains
           undone.
           The Tao is the centrepiece of the devotions
           of Virtue.
           Life is the brightness of Virtue.
           Innate nature is what motivates life.
           Motivation which is untrue is lost.
           Knowledge extends and knowledge plans.
           But knowing what is not known is like
           looking at things like a child.
           Action which arises because you cannot stop
           yourself is called Virtue.
           When action arises from self, this is called
           governing.
           These titles seem to contradict each other
           but in fact they agree.
Yi the Archer was a master at hitting the centre of the
tiniest target, but he was foolish in that he could not stop
wanting praise from others. The sage is skilful with regards
to Heaven, but foolish in his dealings with people. Being
skilful in both Heavenly concerns and human affairs is the
mark of a complete man. Only an insect can be an insect,
because what they are is given by Heaven. Does the
complete man dislike Heaven? Does he hate what is of
Heaven in people? If so, then imagine how much he hates
the element of egocentricity in himself, which sets him and
the rest of humanity above Heaven!
   If a sparrow flew past Yi, he would have him, so good
was he at his art. If everywhere in the world were to be
caged, then the sparrows would be unable to escape. Indeed,
this was why Tang caged Yi Yin by making him his cook and
Duke Mu of Chin caged Po Li Hsi at the cost of five rams’
skins. However, if you wish to cage people, you must use
the things they like or you will never be successful.
   A man whose feet have been chopped off casts aside
fancy clothes, because his external appearance is incapable
of being admired. A criminal condemned to death will scale
the highest peaks, because he has no fear of life or death. If
someone ignores the advances of friendship, he forgets
about others and through forgetting others he is viewed as a
man of Heaven. Such a person can be treated with respect,
which will not please him, or be treated with contempt,
which will not make him angry. This is because he is part of
the Heavenly unity. Anyone who expresses anger but is not
really angry will exhibit non-anger. Anyone who acts yet is
not really acting, his actions will be non-action. If he wants
to be still, he must be at peace. If he wants to be spiritual,
he must calm his heart. When he wants to act, and to be
successful, then he is moved by a force beyond him. That
which one does because it is impossible to do other, that is
the Tao of the sage.
CHAPTER 24
Hsu Wu Kuei




             Through the kind offices of Nu Shang, Hsu Wu
Kuei was able to see Marquis Wu of Wei. Marquis Wu
greeted him fondly saying, ‘Sir, you are unwell! The rigours
of living in the wild mountain forests have been so great,
and yet you have been kind enough to come and see me.’
   To this Hsu Wu Kuei replied, ‘I have come to comfort
you, Sir, not for you to comfort me! Now, Sir, if you persist
in sating your sensual appetites and desires and engaging in
likes and dislikes, then you will adversely affect your true
innate nature and your destiny. And if, Sir, you try to desist
from sating your appetites and desires and make yourself
change your likes and dislikes, then your ears and eyes will
be afflicted. I have come to comfort you, and you, Sir, wish
to comfort me!’
  Marquis Wu looked very scornful and made no reply.
  A little later Hsu Wu Kuei said, ‘Let me tell you, Sir,
how I judge dogs. The lowest kind of dog grabs his food,
gorges himself and then stops, having the virtues of a fox.
The ordinary sort of dog is always staring arrogantly at the
sun. The most superior kind of dog appears to have
forgotten himself. That is how I judge dogs, but that is
nothing in comparison with how I judge horses. I judge
horses by whether they run straight as a line, or curve round
holding the centre, or turn as on a T-square, or circle like a
compass. Such a horse I describe as being indeed a national
horse, but not an international horse. A truly international
horse is complete. He looks anxious, he appears to lose his
way, to forget himself. However, a horse like this suddenly
prances along or rushes past, kicking up the dust, and no
one knows where he has gone.’
  The Marquis was very pleased, and laughed.
  Hsu Wu Kuei came out and Nu Shang said, ‘Sir, what did
you discuss with the ruler? When I discuss with him, I do
so in a roundabout way using the Book of Poetry and the
Book of History, and in this way I can discuss rituals and
music. More directly, I use the Golden Tablets and the Six
Bow Cases, and so guide him in decisions which have been
very successful. Yet in all our meetings I have never seen
him smile. So what is it that you discuss that makes him so
pleased?’
  ‘I simply explained how I judge dogs and horses,’ said
Hsu Wu Kuei.
  ‘That was it?’
   ‘Have you never heard of the exile from Yueh?’ said Hsu
Wu Kuei. ‘A few days after leaving the country he was
delighted if he met someone he had known in the country. A
month after leaving the country he was delighted if he met
someone he had seen in the country. A year after leaving
the country he was delighted to meet someone who just
looked as if he came from the country. The longer he was
absent from his country, the more fond of it he became, is
this not so? Those people who have retreated into the wild
valleys where thick bushes block the path of even the
weasels, and who have to struggle to move around, are
delighted if they hear even the sound of a human footstep.
How much more delighted are they if they hear the sounds
of their own brothers and family talking and laughing
beside them. Perhaps it has been rather a long time since a
true man has sat and talked with your ruler!’
  Hsu Wu Kuei went to see Marquis Wu, who said, ‘Sir,
you have been living in the forests of the mountains for a
long time, surviving on acorns and chestnuts, filling
yourself with onions and herbs and totally ignoring me!
Now, is it old age? Do you want to eat meat and drink wine?
Or have you come here to bless our altars of the Earth and
the harvest?’
   ‘Sir,’ said Hsu Wu Kuei, ‘I have lived in poverty and have
never been able to eat or drink at Your Lordship’s table, but
I have come to bring comfort to you.’
  ‘Really! Comfort me?’ said the ruler.
  ‘I wish to comfort both your body and your spirit.’
  ‘What do you mean?’
   ‘Heaven and Earth sustain all things,’ said Hsu Wu Kuei.
‘No matter how high you get, you should never consider
that this shows you to be better. No matter how low you
get, you should never consider that this shows you to be
useless. You are ruler of the tens of thousands of chariots,
the only ruler who taxes all the people of this country in
order to satisfy the desires of your senses, even though
your spirit does not wish to do this. The spirit prefers
goodness and harmony and does not like wild living. Wild
living is like an illness and this is what I have to comfort
you over. What do you think of this, Sir?’
   ‘Sir, I have wanted to see you for some time,’ replied
Marquis Wu. ‘I wish to love the people and to act
righteously and stop warfare. Would that do?’
  ‘Certainly not. Loving the people is the beginning of
harming the people. To act righteously and to cease warfare
is the root of increased warfare. If you set about things
thus, Sir, you will not succeed. All attempts to create
beauty end in evil consequences. Your Grace may plan to
act benevolently and righteously, but the result is the same
as hypocrisy! You may give shape to things, but success
leads to argument and argument leads to violence. Your
Grace must not have hosts of troops massing in your forts
nor lines of cavalry parading in front of the Palace of the
Dark Shrine.
   ‘Do not harbour thoughts that betray your best interests.
Do not try to overcome others by cunning. Do not try to
conquer others through plots. Do not try to defeat others
by battle. If I kill the leaders and people of another ruler
and seize the lands to satisfy my material wants, while my
spirit is unsure of the validity of such actions, what is the
point? Your Grace, the best thing is to do nothing, except
develop true sincerity and thus be able to respond without
difficulty to the true nature of Heaven and Earth. Thus the
people will not die and it will not be necessary for you to
have to enforce the end of warfare!’
  The Yellow Emperor went to see Great Kuei at Chu Tzu
Mountain. Fang Ming was the driver and Chang Yu travelled
beside him. Chang Jo and Hsi Peng guided the horses and
Kun Hun and Ku Chi rode behind the carriage. When they
eventually arrived in the wild region of Hsiang Cheng, the
seven sages were all confused and couldn’t find anyone to
ask the way.
  They came upon a boy leading horses and asked him the
way, saying, ‘Do you know how to get to Chu Tzu
Mountain?’
  ‘Certainly,’ he said.
  ‘Do you know where Tai Kuei lives?’
  ‘Certainly.’
  ‘What a remarkable lad!’ said the Yellow Emperor. ‘Not
only does he know how to reach Chu Tzu Mountain, he also
knows where Tai Kuei lives. I would like to ask you how to
govern everything below Heaven.’
   ‘Governing everything below Heaven is surely the same
as what I am doing at the moment, what’s so hard about
that?’ said the lad. ‘When I was younger, I liked to wander
within the confines of the six directions but my eyesight
began to fail. A wise elderly gentleman told me, “Climb up
and ride in the carriage of the sun and explore the wild
region of Hsiang Cheng.” Now my eyesight is better and I
am able to wander beyond the borders of the six directions.
Ruling everything under Heaven is just like this. So what’s
the big problem?’
  ‘Ruling everything under Heaven is, I agree, not your
problem, my boy,’ said the Yellow Emperor. ‘However, I
would like to hear how to do it.’
  The lad did not answer. So the Yellow Emperor asked
again. The boy said, ‘Governing everything below Heaven is
surely rather like leading horses! Get rid of anything that
might harm the horses!’
  The Yellow Emperor bowed twice to him, called him his
Heavenly Master and departed.
              If philosophers cannot see the effect of their
              ideas, they are not happy.
              If debaters cannot argue cogently, they are
              not happy.
              If interrogators cannot find candidates for
              criticism, they are not happy.
              All of these are restrained by such attitudes.
              Those scholars who are noticed by their
              generation rise to power.
              Those who win the affections of the people
              consider high office a reward.
              Those with great strength enjoy a challenge.
              Those who are brave and fearless revel in
              troubles.
              Those skilled in sword and spear look for
              wars.
              Those who are retiring rest on the laurels of
              their fame.
              Those who are lawyers want more power to
              legislate.
              Those who perform rituals and ceremonies
              enjoy their status.
              Those      who     like    benevolence  and
              righteousness like to be able to display
              them.
              Farmers who cannot weed their fields are
              not contented.
              The merchant who cannot trade at the market
              or by the well is not satisfied.
              The common folk like to have work to do
              from sunrise to sunset, as they keep each
              other going.
              The various craftsmen like to be using their
              skills.
              If his wealth does not grow, the greedy man
              is unhappy.
              If he is not getting more powerful, the
              ambitious man is distressed.
  Such people, driven by circumstance, are only happy
when things are changing, and when an opportunity arises,
they inevitably throw themselves into it. So they all
proceed, like the changes of the seasons, unchanging even
though others change. They drive their bodies and their
innate nature and are overwhelmed by the forms of life,
never turning themselves back, which is sad!
  Chuang Tzu said, ‘An archer, not bothering to take aim,
by sheer luck hits the centre of the target. We could call
him a good archer, but in that case, everyone in the world
could be called a Yi the Archer, isn’t that right?’
  ‘OK,’ said Hui Tzu.
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘People differ over what they consider
to be right, but everyone knows what they think is right. So
everyone in the world could be called a Yao, isn’t that
right?’
  ‘OK,’ said Hui Tzu.
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘So, there are four schools – the
Literati, Mohists, Yangists and Pingists – which along with
your own, Sir, make five. So which of these is right?
Perhaps it is more like the case of Lu Chu? One of his
followers said, “I have taken hold of your Tao, Master, and I
can heat the pot in winter and make ice in summer.” Lu Chu
said, “But this is surely just using yang for yang and yin for
yin. This is not what I would call the Tao. I will show you
my Tao.” So he tuned up two lutes and put one in the hall
and the other in a private apartment. On striking the note
Kung on one, the Kung note vibrated on the other. Likewise
with the Chueh note, for the instruments were in harmony.
Then he re-tuned one so that it was not in harmony with any
of the five key notes. When this was played, all twenty-five
of the strings on the other one vibrated, all faithful to their
own note and all set off by the one note on the other lute.
So, if you insist you are right, aren’t you like this?’
  Hui Tzi replied, ‘The followers of Confucius, Mo, Yang
and Ping,87 like to tackle me in debate, each one trying to
defeat the other, each violently trying to shout me down
with their various arguments – but they haven’t succeeded
yet. So what about that?’
  Chuang Tzu said, ‘A citizen of Chi, not concerned by any
mutilation,88 sold his son to someone in Sung, where he
became a gatekeeper. Yet this same man would go to great
lengths to protect any of his bells or chimes. But he would
not go looking for his son beyond the borders of his own
country, such was his understanding of what is worthwhile!
Or what if that well-known character, the citizen of Chu
who was maimed and a gatekeeper, at midnight in another
country, were to pick a fight with a boatman? Then he would
never get across the river and would only have provoked the
boatman’s anger.’
   Chuang Tzu was following a funeral when he passed by
the grave of Hui Tzu. He looked round at those following
him and said, ‘The man of Ying had on the end of his nose a
piece of mud as small as a fly’s wing. He sent for the
craftsman Shih to cut it off. Shih swirled his axe around and
swept it down, creating such a wind as it rushed past that it
removed all trace of the mud from the man of Ying, who
stood firm, not at all worried. The ruler Yuan of Sung heard
of this and called craftsman Shih to visit him.
  ‘ “Would you be so kind as to do this for me?” he said.
  ‘Craftsman Shih replied, “Your servant was indeed once
able to work like that, but the type of material I worked
upon is long since dead.”
  ‘Since the Master has died, I have not had any suitable
material to work upon. I have no one I can talk with any
longer.’
  Kuan Chung was ill and Duke Huan, hearing of this, said,
‘Father Chung, you are seriously ill. What if – which I had
hoped I wouldn’t have to say – your illness gets worse?
Who should I hand over government of the country to?’
   Kuan Chung replied, ‘Your Grace, who do you wish to
give it to?’
  ‘Pao Shu Ya,’ said the Duke.
   ‘Not him! He is a good man, a scholar of integrity and he
is honest, but he won’t mix with those who are not the same
as him. If he ever learns of someone’s error, he won’t
forgive him, ever. If you put him in charge of the state, he
will argue with you and upset everyone below him. Before
too long you will view him as having done the
unforgivable.’
  ‘Then who can do this?’ said the Duke.
  The reply was, ‘If I have to say anyone, then it should be
Hsi Peng who should undertake this. He is the sort of man
who forgets his high status and who will be supported by
those below. He is ashamed that he is not like the Yellow
Emperor, and is sorry for those who are not like him. The
one who shares his Virtue with other people is known as a
sage, he who shares his abilities with others is known as a
worthy man. One who uses his worthiness to oppress
others will never gain their support. One who uses his
worthiness to lower himself can never fail to win the
people’s support. This man is hardly heard of in the country,
nor does his own family have a great opinion of him. But as
you ask me to speak, then I must say Hsi Peng.’
   The King of Wu was sailing on the Yangtze River, and he
moored in order to climb a mountain known for its
monkeys. When the monkeys saw him they fled in terror
and hid in the bushes. However, there was one monkey who
didn’t seem bothered in the slightest, swinging around and
showing off before the King. The King fired an arrow at
him, which the monkey simply caught cleverly in his hand.
The King then called up his followers to join the hunt and
soon they had the monkey trapped and killed.
  The King said to his friend Yen Pu I, ‘This monkey
showed off, relied on its skills and was rude to me, and this
resulted in its death! Be warned by this! Ah, do not let
yourself seem arrogant to others!’ So Yen Pu I went home
and began to study with Tung Wu, to eliminate this look of
arrogance from his face, to give up happiness and to leave
reasoning. Within three years he was praised by everyone.
   Tzu Chi of the Southern Suburb was sitting, leaning on
the arm of his chair, gazing into Heaven and singing. Yen
Cheng Tzu came in and, seeing him, said, ‘Master, you
surpass all others. Is it true that your body can be made to
look like a pile of dried bones and your heart be made like
cold, dead ashes?’
   Tzu Chi replied, ‘I used to live in a cave in a mountain. At
that time Tien Ho89 came to see me for a visit, and the
citizens of the kingdom of Chi congratulated him three
times. I must have shown him who I am, since he obviously
knew me. I must have been selling something and that is
why he came to buy. If I had not displayed something, then
how could he have known who or what I was? If I had not
been selling something, then how could he have been able
to buy anything? Oh dear! I do so pity those who lose
themselves. I also pity those who pity others. However, I
also pity those who pity those who pity others, but that was
long ago.’
  Confucius went to Chu, and the King of Chu offered a
toast in wine. Sun Shu Ao stepped forward and raised the
wine glass in his hand and I Liao from the Southern Market
took some wine and poured it out as a libation, saying, ‘You
are like a man of old! They would make speeches.’
   Confucius said, ‘I have heard of speech which is without
words, but I have never spoken it. I shall do so now. I Liao
from the Southern Market played with a set of balls and the
problems between the two houses were solved. Sun Shu Ao
slept quietly,90 his fan waving gently, and the men of Ying
prepared for war. How I wish I had a beak three feet long.’91
   People like these follow the Tao that is not the Tao, and
this discussion is the Argument Without Words. So it is
that, when Virtue is fully integrated into the Tao and words
stop where knowledge can know nothing more, there is
perfection. The oneness of the Tao is beyond Virtue and
what knowledge does not know is beyond what argument
can cover. To label things as the Literati and the Mohists do
is useless.
   The sea does not reject the rivers that flow into it from
the east; this is great perfection.
   The sage holds both Heaven and Earth and his benign
influence reaches out to all below Heaven, yet we know
nothing of his background.
  So it is that he has no official title while he is alive and
no eulogies when he is dead. His reality is not known and
labels do not stick to him: this is known as the great man.
   A dog is not thought special just because it can bark, and
no man is thought wise just because he can speak. Even less
is he thought to be great. Anyone who thinks he is great is
not to be counted as such, nor seen as virtuous. Nothing is
greater than Heaven and Earth, but they do not seek
greatness. One who knows what it is to be great does not go
looking for it, does not lose it nor reject it and does not
change his opinions in order to be great. He turns inward
and finds what is without end. He follows the ancient ways
and finds what never dies. This is the sincerity of the great
man.
  Tzu Chi had eight sons, and he called them before him,
and summoned Chiu Fang Yin and said, ‘Study the
physiognomy of my sons and tell me which one is to be the
greatest.’
  ‘Kun is the most fortunate,’ said Chiu Fang Yin.
   Tzu Chi was stunned and yet also delighted. ‘How is
this?’ he said.
   ‘Kun will dine with the ruler of a kingdom and this will
last all his life.’
  Tears poured from Tzu Chi’s eyes and he said unhappily,
‘What has my son done to deserve this?’
   ‘One who shares the table of a ruler of a kingdom brings
blessings to all three sections of his family, and especially
to his father and mother!’ said Chiu Fang Yin. ‘Now, Master,
when I said this to you, you wept. This will disturb the
fortune. The son is fortunate indeed, but his father is not so
fortunate.’
   Tzu Chi said, ‘Yin, how do you know that this will be
fortune for Kun? What you describe, the food and drink,
only touches on the nose and the mouth, so how can you
claim to know where such things come from? I have never
been a shepherd, but a ewe gave birth to a lamb in the south-
west corner of my fields. I have never been a hunter, but a
flock of quail have arrived in the south-east corner of my
fields.92 If this isn’t strange, then what is? When I go out
wandering and travelling with my son, we journey through
Heaven and Earth. We look for pleasure in Heaven and we
look for nourishment from Earth. He and I don’t get caught
up in the affairs of the world, or in plots or in any strange
practices. He and I ride upon the reality of Heaven and
Earth and let nothing come between us. He and I are one in
undisturbed unity and we not interested in doing what
others think would be useful. Now you come and tell us
that he has this crude and common “success”! In my
experience, when something untoward happens, this is the
result of something untoward having been done. This
comes not from any action of mine nor of my son, but it
must come from Heaven! Yes, this is what makes me weep.’
   A little while after this he sent Kun to do some work in
the kingdom of Yen. While on the road, bandits captured
him. They decided that it would be difficult to sell him as
he was, but if they cut off his foot, then they could sell him
easily.93 They did this, and sold him in the kingdom of Chi,
where, as fortune would have it, he became a palace official
in the palace of Duke Kang and so had food to sustain him
until the end of his days.
   Nieh Chueh bumped into Hsu Yu and said, ‘Master, where
are you heading?’
  ‘I am escaping Yao.’
  ‘What do you mean?’
   Hsu Yu said, ‘Yao has become obsessed with
benevolence and I am worried that he will be mocked
throughout the world. Future generations might even resort
to eating each other because of this! The people come
together without difficulty. Give them love, and they will
care for you, assist them, and they will rally round you,
praise them, and they will be excited, upset them, and they
will desert you. Love and assistance arise from
benevolence and righteousness, and while some people will
deny benevolence and righteousness, the majority look to
them for assistance. Benevolence and righteousness
conducted under these circumstances become insincere,
and possibly may be evil, like lending traps to others.
Allowing one man to determine what the world needs
through his own powers is like trying to comprehend
everything in one moment. Yao knows that the worthy man
can assist the whole world, but he does not know that such a
person can ruin the whole world, for it is only those
outside this sphere of influence who can really understand.’
  You have the gullible and the weak, you have the quick
and vain and you have the greedy and bent.
   Those who are known as the gullible and the weak study
under just one master, they say yes to him and then feel
privately smug, believing that they have understood all that
is necessary, when in fact they have not grasped a single
thing. These are known as the gullible and the weak.
   The quick and the vain are like lice on a pig. The lice find
a place where the bristles are long and well-spaced and they
view this as a great palace or vast park. They might choose
the groove between the hoof or the area of the nipples and
the thigh and in such a safe place they consider this to be
their quiet retreat. They do not know that one morning the
butcher will make a sweep with his arm, lay out the grass,
light the fire and that then they will be burnt up along with
the pig. Their progress is limited and their retreat is
limited. These are known as the quick and the vain.
   The greedy and bent are similar to Shun. Mutton doesn’t
want ants, but ants want mutton, especially when it is off.
Shun was also off: this was why the hundred tribes were so
delighted with him and followed after him. Even though he
changed his place of residence three times, each one was
counted as a capital city. When he arrived at the wilderness
of Teng, he had a hundred thousand families with him. Yao
heard of Shun and gave him control over the new and
untamed country and said he hoped Shun would bring
benefits to all. When Shun was given this command, he was
already quite elderly and his hearing and eyesight were
poor, but he was unable to retire to his home. These are
known as the greedy and the bent.
   So it is that the spiritual man dislikes people crowding
around him. If they insist on coming, he argues with them,
and from this argument comes nothing of any benefit to
anyone. Therefore, he ensures he has no attachment to
anything, and nothing from which he is separated. Holding
fast to Virtue and dwelling in harmony, he follows the
world. This is what is known as the true man. He leaves
knowledge for the ants, follows the style of fish and
abandons the ideas of sheep.
   See using the eyes, hear using the ears, have vision using
the heart. If you do this the course is straight as if
measured using a line, the changes are congenial. The true
man of the past waited upon Heaven when dealing with
people and did not wait upon people when dealing with
Heaven. The true man of the past obtained it and was born,
lost it and died, obtained it and died, and lost it and was
born.
  Medicines are like this. There is monkshood, ballflower,
cockscomb and chinaroot. They each have their time when
they are best suited, though to list all their uses would be
impossible.
   Kou Chien94 retreated to Mount Kuai Chi with three
thousand soldiers in armoured jackets and carrying shields,
and Minister Chung alone understood how to save the
disaster-ridden state, but he didn’t know how to save
himself from a tragic fate.
   It is said that the eye of the owl is specially adapted and
the leg of the crane has its right proportion. To try and cut
out anything from these would be disaster to these
creatures.
   It is said that the wind blows over the river and the river
is diminished. When the sun passes over the river, it loses
something. If the sun and wind remain watching over the
river, then the river will not be alarmed that they are doing
anything to it, for it would continue to draw from the
streams and go on its way. Water stays close to the earth
and the shadow stays close to its source, for things stick
together.
   There is danger for the eye in seeing too clearly, danger
for the ear in hearing too sharply and danger to the heart
from caring too greatly. Indeed, it is dangerous to use any
of our faculties. If these dangers are not dealt with, then
disaster after disaster will ensue. To turn back from this to
the original state takes much effort and time, but people
consider these faculties as their greatest treasure, isn’t that
sad! As a result there is constant destruction of states and
endless massacre of the people, while no one knows how to
look into how this happened.
  The foot only touches a small part of the earth, yet
people can travel great distances into the unknown.
  The knowledge of people is minor, and though minor it
has to trust in that which they do not know, to know what is
meant by Heaven. It is known as the great One, the great
mystery, the great yin, the great eye, the great equal, the
great skill, the great truth, the great judge. All this is
perfection.
               The great One knows,
               the great mystery reveals,
               the great yin observes,
               the great eye sees,
               the great equal is the origin,
               the great skill creates it,
               the great trust touches it,
               the great judge holds fast to it.
   Heaven is in everything: follow the light, hide in the
cloudiness and begin in what is. Do this and your
understanding will be like not understanding and your
wisdom will be like not being wise. By not being wise you
will become wise later. When you ask questions, set no
limits, even though they cannot be limitless. Although
things seem to be sometimes going up and sometimes
descending, sometimes slipping away, nevertheless there is
a reality, the same today as in the past. It does not change,
for nothing can affect it. Could we not say it is one great
harmony? So why shouldn’t we ask about it and why are you
so confused? If we use that which does not confuse to
understand that which does confuse, then we can come back
to that which does not confuse. This will be the great
unconfusing.
CHAPTER 25
Travelling to Chu




            Peng Yang was once travelling to Chu and
hoped that Yi Chieh would mention him to the King. But
before the King would see him, Yi Chieh left to go home.
So Peng Yang went instead to Wang Kuo and said, ‘Sir,
would you be kind enough to mention me to the King?’
  Wang Kuo said, ‘I’m not as useful a contact as Kung Yueh
Hsiu.’
  Peng Yang said, ‘What sort of a person is this Kung Yueh
Hsiu?’
  ‘In winter he spears turtles beside the river, in summer
he holidays in the mountains. Those passing ask him what
he is doing and he answers, “This is where I live.”
  ‘As Yi Chieh could not persuade the King to see you,
what use will I be? I am not equal to Yi Chieh. He is the sort
of man who has no virtue but who does have understanding,
who is not lax with himself but devotes all his energy to
furthering those around him. He’s attracted to fame and
fortune, so if he helps you, it is not because of any virtue
but out of contrariness. It is like trying to pretend spring
has come by putting on extra clothes, or wanting winter’s
cold winds to come and cool you in the summer. The King
of Chu is also like this, overbearing and stern, and if he is
upset by someone, he is as merciless as a tiger. No one
except a toadying minister or one of true Virtue is able to
discuss anything with him!
   ‘The sage living humbly makes even his family forget
their poverty; when he is powerful, he makes kings and
dukes forget their status and properties and become
humble. With life he just tags along and enjoys himself.
With the people he delights in the successes of others and
holds true to himself. Sometimes, without a word, he
brings harmony to people. Simply by being with them, he
transforms people until they feel towards him as do father
and son who are on good terms with each other, in unity. All
this happens without any effort, for he is guided by his
heart. This is why I say wait for Kung Yueh Hsiu.’
  The sage goes beyond confusion and diversity and makes
everything into one body. Even though he does not know
for certain how, he is true to his innate nature. He comes
back to destiny and reacts appropriately, with Heaven as his
guide, so that people follow him and accord him titles. If he
was concerned with what he knew and what he did was
inconsistent, then how could he be stopped?
   If someone is born with a beautiful appearance, you can
give them a mirror, but they will never know that they have
a beautiful appearance if you never tell them so. Whether
they know it or not, whether they are told or not, their fine
appearance will never be changed. Other people admire
their good fortune, for it comes from their innate nature.
The sage loves the people and the people bestow titles on
him, yet if they do not tell him, he won’t know that he loves
the people. Whether he knows it or he doesn’t, whether he
is told this or not, his love for the people is unchanged and
their tranquillity in him is endless, for this is his innate
nature.
   Someone who sees his native kingdom or his old city is
bound to be excited. Even if it has become nothing but
mounds, trees and bushes, and when he enters it, he finds
nine-tenths of those whom he knew gone, nevertheless he
is most definitely glad to see the place. Imagine his joy
when he sees what he used to see and hears what he used to
hear, for it is like a mighty eighty-foot tower of which he
has heard talk.
  Lord Jin Hsiang grasped that core principle around which
everything revolves and followed it to its end. He went with
all other things, with no end and no beginning, no desire, no
time. Every day he saw change, but he himself was one with
what never changes, so there was never any need for him to
stop! Anyone who seeks Heaven as his teacher will never
obtain Heaven as his teacher. He will end up just following
things, and no matter what he does, he cannot help it.
               The sage has no thoughts of Heaven,
               no thoughts of humanity,
               no thoughts of beginning,
               no thoughts of others.
               He goes with his generation and does not
               stop.
               He does everything and is never blocked.
               Others want to unite with him, but then, what
               else could they do?
   Tang obtained the services of the rider Teng Heng and
made him his instructor. He followed this teacher but was
not restricted by him, so he was able to pursue his interests
to their conclusion. This resulted in various honours. These
honours were superfluous and revealed for all to see the
twin aspects of what he had obtained. Confucius
commands, ‘Work at what is at hand, that can be your
teacher.’ Yung Cheng said, ‘Remove the days and there are
no more years, no internal, no external.’
   Ying of Wei made a treaty with the Marquis Tien Mou,
but Marquis Tien Mou broke it. Ying of Wei was furious
and was planning to send an assassin. The duke responsible
for war heard of this and said, ‘Sire, you are the lord of ten
thousand chariots and yet you, as ruler, would use a
common man to exact revenge! Let me have two hundred
thousand soldiers so that I can attack him, capture his
people and seize his cattle and horses, stoking up a fire
within him that will burn into his back. I shall then attack
his capital. When his commander Chi attempts to escape, I
will strike from behind and break his spine.’
   Chi Tzu was ashamed when he heard this and said, ‘We
have been building our walls up to eighty feet high and now,
when they are almost complete, we’re about to make a
breach in them. This will be an immense waste of the
convict labour we have used. Now, we have not had to use
our troops for seven years and this is what Your Lordship’s
power rests upon. Yen is a trouble-maker and you should
take no notice of him.’
   Hua Tzu heard this and did not agree. ‘Those who say
attack the state of Chi are trouble-makers,’ he said. ‘Those
who say don’t attack are also trouble-makers. The one who
says those who urge you to attack and those who don’t are
both trouble-makers, is himself a trouble-maker.’
  ‘So, what should I do?’ said the ruler.
  ‘Just seek to discover the Tao!’
   Hui Tzu heard this and brought Tai Chen Jen to see the
ruler. Tai Chen Jen said, ‘There is a creature known as the
snail, do you know this, Sire?’
  ‘For sure,’ he said.
   ‘It has on its left horn a kingdom called Provoke and on
its right horn one called Foolish. These kingdoms are often
arguing over territory and fighting. The dead are heaped up
in multitudes with the defeated army fleeing – but within a
few days they are back.’
  The ruler said, ‘Ha! What is this empty chatter about?’
  ‘I just want to show Your Majesty what this is about.
When you contemplate the four directions and up and
down, Sire, is there any limit to them?’
  The ruler said, ‘No limit.’
   ‘When the heart has wandered through unlimited realms,
do you know how to return to this kingdom in such a way
that its troubles seem to be insignificant?’
  The ruler said, ‘Certainly.’
   ‘In the centre of these lands through which one wanders,
is the state of Wei, and in the centre of this state of Wei is
the capital, Liang, and at the centre of this capital Liang is
the King. Is there really any difference between the King
and the Foolish kingdom?’
  The ruler said, ‘No difference.’
  After his visitor had departed,          the   ruler   sat,
dumbfounded, as if lost to the world.
   Then Hui Tzu came to see him and the ruler said, ‘That
visitor, he is a great man, a sage cannot equal him.’
  Hui Tzu said, ‘If you blow a flute, you get a good sound,
but if you blow on the pommel of your sword, you get a
wheezing noise. Yao and Shun are often praised by people,
but if you talk about them in front of Tai Chien Jen, then it
sounds like one little wheeze.’
  Confucius travelled to Chu and stayed at a tavern on Ant
Hill. In the neighbouring house, the husband, wives and
servants, male and female, climbed on to the roof to see
him. Tzu Lu said, ‘What are those people doing up there?’
  Confucius said, ‘They are followers of a sage. He is
hidden among the people, hidden away in the fields. Fame
no longer interests him, but his resolve is unlimited. His
mouth speaks words, but his heart offers none. He is not at
ease with this generation and his heart is not concerned
with it. He is like someone who has drowned on dry land. I
imagine he is Liao of the Southern Market?’
  Tzu Lu wanted to bring him over.
  Confucius said, ‘Stop! He knows that I comprehend all
this and he knows I am travelling to Chu. He assumes that I
will seek promotion from the King of Chu and thus he
views me as a time-server. Someone like him is
embarrassed just hearing the words of a time-server, let
alone being seen with him! And why do you believe he is
still around?’
  Tzu Lu went and looked and found the house empty.
  The border guard at Chang Wu said to Tzu Lao, ‘The ruler
of a state must not be careless, nor should he be careless
with the people. Previously when plouhing my fields, I was
careless, and the result was a poor crop. When weeding, I
was thoughtless, and the result was a diminished harvest. In
recent years I changed my ways, I ploughed deep and was
careful to bury the seed. My harvests are now plentiful and
therefore I have all I need all year round.’
   Chuang Tzu heard this and said, ‘People today, when
looking after themselves and caring for their hearts, are
very much like this border guard’s description. They ignore
Heaven, wander from their innate nature, dissolve their real
being, extinguish their spirit and follow the common herd.
So it is that someone who is careless with their innate
nature causes evil and hatred to arise, affecting their innate
nature like rank weeds and bushes. These weeds and bushes,
when they first appear, seem helpful and supportive, but
slowly they affect the innate nature. They become like a
mass of suppurating sores which break out in scabs and
ulcers, oozing pus from this disease. This is how it is.’
  Po Chu studied under Lao Tzu and said, ‘I would like to
be allowed to wander the world.’
  Lao Tzu said, ‘No! Everywhere under Heaven is the
same.’
   He asked again and Lao Tzu said, ‘Where will you go
first?’
  ‘I will start with Chi.’
   When he arrived in Chi he saw the corpse of a criminal.
He lugged the body about to put it into the proper ritual
position, took off his robes and covered the body, crying to
Heaven and saying, ‘My son, my son! Everyone under
Heaven is in great trouble, and you, my son, have found this
out earlier than the rest of us. It is said, “Don’t steal, don’t
murder.” However when praise and failure have been
defined, suffering appears. When goods and fortunes have
been amassed, argument appears. To establish things that
bring suffering, to amass what brings argument, to cause
distress and restlessness to others, one asks how is this
possible?’
   The scholar rulers of old saw their success in terms of
the people and saw their failures in terms of themselves.
They viewed the people as right and themselves as wrong.
Thus, if even one person suffered, they would accept this as
being their responsibility and retire. This is certainly not
the case today. Today’s rulers hide what should be done and
then blame the people when they don’t understand. They
make the problems greater and punish those who cannot
manage. They push people to the limit and execute those
who can’t make it. When people realize that they simply
haven’t the energy, they use pretence. When every day there
is so much falsehood, how can the scholars and the people
not become compromised! When strength is lacking,
deceit is used; when knowledge is lacking, deception is
used; when material goods are lacking, theft is used. But
who really is to blame for these thefts and robbery?’
   Chu Po Yu had lived for sixty years and he changed at
sixty. He had never questioned that he was right, but he
came to change his views and saw that from the beginning
he had been wrong. Now it was not possible to know
whether what he had been saying for fifty-nine years was
right or wrong. All forms of life are born, yet it is not
possible to see their source. They all go forth, but it is not
easy to see by which gate. People all respect what they
understand as knowledge, but they do not understand what
their knowledge does not understand and so gain
understanding. So isn’t this simply great confusion? Well,
well! There is no way out of that. This comes from saying
definitely this, definitely that, doesn’t it?
   Confucius asked the Great Historians, Ta Tao, Po Chang
Chien and Hsi Wei, ‘Duke Ling of Wei enjoyed wine,
women and song, and didn’t look after the affairs of his
kingdom, going off hunting with nets and bows, not
attending to the sessions with the other lords. Why then is
he called Duke Ling?’
  Ta Tao said, ‘Because this was so, he was titled so.’
  Po Chang Chien said, ‘This Duke Ling had three wives
and he bathed with them in the same bathtub. However,
when Shih Chiu appeared before him with imperial gifts, he
himself would serve him. Duke Ling was corrupt in the first
case and yet, when he saw a worthy man, he behaved quite
correctly. This was the reason he was called Duke Ling.’
   Hsi Wei said, ‘Duke Ling died and divination was made
to see whether he should be buried in the family tomb, but
the oracle said no. When divination was made to see if he
should be buried on Sand Hill, the oracle was good. When
they dug down, they discovered a stone tomb. After
cleaning it and looking carefully at it they found an
inscription which said: ‘Do not rely upon your descendants,
Duke Ling will take this for himself.’ It’s obvious,
therefore, that Duke Ling was called Ling long before he
was born. However, you can’t expect these two to know
anything about all this!’
  Little Knowledge asked Great Official Accord, saying,
‘What do people mean when they say Talk of the Villages?’
   Great Official Accord said, ‘Talk of the Villages refers
to the union of the ten surnames and hundred names into
one code of living. What is different is united to form a
commonality. What is in common is broken up to form the
differences. If you point to different parts of a horse you
do not have “a horse”. However, if you have the whole
animal in all its parts standing before you, you have a horse.
In this way the hills and mountains arise, little layer upon
little layer, and so become lofty, and the Yangtze and
Yellow Rivers have become great through the conjoining of
small streams.
   ‘The great man shows his greatness by combining all the
common aspects of humanity. So, when ideas come to him
from outside, he can receive them but does not cling to
them. Likewise, when he brings forth some idea from
within himself, they are like guides to those around but
they do not seek to dominate.
               ‘The four seasons each have their own
               original life,
               and Heaven does not discriminate,
               so the cycle is fulfilled.
               The five government offices have different
               roles,
               but the ruler does not discriminate,
so the state is well run.
The great man does not discriminate
between war and peace,
so his Virtue is perfect.
All the forms of life are different,
but the Tao does not discriminate,
so it has no name.
Being nameless, it is also actionless action,
yet all life occurs.
The seasons end and begin;
the generations change and transform.
Inauspicious and auspicious fortune falls
upon you,
sometimes unwelcomed,
other times welcomed.
Settle into your own views,
argue with others,
at times condemn those who are upright,
then those who are bent.
You should be like a great marsh land
with space for a hundred kinds of trees.
Or be like a great mountain
where the trees and grasses rest on the same
ground.
               This is what is meant by Talk of the
               Villages.’
   Little Knowledge said, ‘Surely, if we call this the Tao,
that will be enough?’
   Great Official Accord said, ‘Certainly not. For example,
if we add up all that is, it definitely exceeds the
conventional description of ten thousand things. However,
we use the term “ten thousand things” as a way of saying
that the number of things is very large. So also we use
“Heaven and Earth” to describe great things, and “yin and
yang” as original breaths of life which are vast, and the term
“Tao” as being that term which covers them all. If we use
this term to cover everything, there is no problem.
However, if we try to go further and define this term by
comparing it to what can be discerned, then we would be
like those who call a dog and a horse by the same name,
even though they are so different.’
  Little Knowledge said, ‘Within the limits of the four
compass points and the six boundaries, where do the ten
thousand things all have their origin?’
   Great Official Accord said, ‘Yin and yang reflect each
other, oppose each other and control each other. The four
seasons follow each other, give birth to each other and
finish each other off. Good and evil, rejection and
reception thus arose in definition against each other, giving
rise to the distinction between male and female. People
change from security to insecurity; auspicious and
inauspicious fortune are born. Relaxation and tension are
side by side. Collecting and scattering emerge and round it
all off. These names and their developments can be
examined and their actions recorded exactly. The notions
of following in orderly sequence, of interaction, of
returning when the limit has been reached, of starting again
when they end, all this is inherent in things. Words can
define them and knowledge can comprehend them, but that
is all that can be said of things. The one who seeks the Tao
does not try to go beyond this nor try to find the source.
Quite simply, this brings all discussion to a close.’
  Little Knowledge said, ‘Chi Chen’s point that there is no
cause and Chieh Tzu’s argument that there is a cause are
two different perspectives. So which one is right and which
one is mistaken?’
   Great Official Accord said, ‘Chickens cackle and dogs
bark: this is what people know. However, even though they
have this level of understanding, they can’t explain how the
chicken and dog have such different voices, nor can they
conceive of what the future might be. We can examine and
define to such a point that what is left is minute, or we can
make it so great that we can’t take it in. So whether you say
there is a cause or there is not, you are still trapped in
relative terms and so you’re in error. If there is a cause,
then that is true, if there is no cause, then there is nothing.
If there is a name, there is reality and they really exist, if
there is no name, there is no reality and no thing.
   ‘It is possible to describe, to say, but these words take
you away from its reality. Before things are born, they
cannot stop being born, and once dead, they cannot resist
going. Death and birth are not far apart, but what causes
them is beyond our sight. Notions of a cause or no cause
are irrelevant. I search for their historic roots but they
disappear into the past. I look for the end of the future, but
it never ceases to arrive. Infinite, unlimited, there are no
words for this. To try to define it is to place it in the same
category as “Is there a cause or is there not?” These are just
words and they begin and end with things.
   ‘The Tao does not have an existence, nor does it not have
an existence. By using the title “Tao”, we use a limited
term. “Is there a cause or is there not?” are therefore words
of very minor significance. Do they have anything to do
with the great work? If what you say is of significance, then
all day long you can discuss the Tao. If what you say is
insignificant, you can talk all day long and all you will
discuss is minor issues. The Tao takes us to the edge and
neither words nor silence are able to describe this. No
words, no silence, this is the highest form of debate.’
CHAPTER 26
Affected from Outside




            It is not possible to determine what will affect
us from outside us. For example, Lung Feng was executed,
Pi Kan was sentenced to death, Prince Chi95 pretended to
be mad, E Lai96 was murdered and Chieh and Chou both
perished. All rulers want their ministers to be loyal, but
such loyalty may not always be sincere. So Wu Yun was
cast into the Yangtze and Chang Hung died in Shu, where
the people preserved his blood for three years, by which
time it had become green jade. All parents want their
children to be filial, but filial sons are not necessarily so
from love. This is why Hsiao Chi97 was distressed and
Tseng Shen98 was sad.
               If wood rubs against wood, it starts to burn.
When metal is heated, it melts.
When yin and yang go wrong,
Heaven and Earth are hugely disturbed.
Then comes the crash of thunder,
and fire from the midst of the rains
which destroys the great trees.
Gaining and losing,
the people are caught between them both
and there is no way out.
Trapped and entombed,
they can never complete anything.
Their hearts are strung out
as if suspended between Heaven and Earth,
sometimes comforted,
sometimes frightened,
plagued with problems.
Gain and loss rub against each other
and start fires beyond number
that burn up the balances of the heart in most
people.
The moon cannot contain such fires.
All is destroyed,
the quest for the Tao ends.
   Chuang Tzu’s family were poor so he went to borrow
some rice from the Marquis of Chien Ho. The Marquis of
Chien Ho said, ‘Of course. I am about to receive the tax
from the people and will give you three hundred pieces of
gold – is that enough?’
   Chuang Tzu flushed with anger and said, ‘On my way here
yesterday I heard a voice calling me. I looked around and
saw a large fish in the carriage rut. I said, “Fish! What are
you doing there?” He said, “I am Minister of the Waves in
the Eastern Ocean. Sire, do you have a measure of water
you could give me?” Well, I told him, “I am going south to
visit the Kings of Wu and Yueh and after that I would
redirect the course of the Western River so it will flow up
to you. Would that do?” The large fish flushed with anger
and said, “I am out of my very element, I have nowhere to
go. Give me just a little water and I can survive. But giving
me such an answer as that means you will only ever find me
again on a dried fish stall!”’
  Prince Jen had a great fish-hook and a vast line. He
baited the hook with fifty bulls, sat down on Mount Kuai
Chi and cast his line into the Eastern Ocean.
  Morning after morning he cast his line, but after a whole
year he had still caught nothing. Finally, a great fish was
hooked which dived into the depth, dragging the great fish-
hook down with him. Then it turned and rushed to the
surface and shot out, shaking its fins and churning up the
sea so the waves rose like mountains and the waters turned
white with its fury. The noise was like gods and demons
fighting and terror spread over a thousand miles.
Eventually, Prince Jen landed the fish and cut it and dried it.
From Chih Ho in the east to Tsang Wu in the north,
everyone had more than he could eat.
   Ever since, those with little talent in later generations
have told and retold this story, never ceasing to amaze
people. If people take their rod and line and set off to fish
in marshes and ditches, looking for minnows and sprats,
then they will have some difficulty in catching a big fish.
Those who make much of their little notions and strut
around in front of officials are a long way off being
companions of the greater comprehension. Indeed, if
someone has never heard of Prince Jen, he is far from
being competent to be one of this generation who rule the
world.
   A group of Literati students of the Odes of Ritual were
robbing a grave. The main scholar in charge said, ‘The sun
is rising in the east, how’s it going?’
  The younger Literati said, ‘We haven’t got his clothes off
him yet, but there’s a pearl in his mouth.99 As the Odes say,
               ‘Green, green the grain
               Dwelling on the slopes of the mound.
              If during life you give nothing,
              At death, does he deserve a jewel?’
   So saying, they pulled back his beard and moustache and
then one of them carefully prised open the mouth so as not
to damage the pearl.
   A follower of Lao Lai Tzu100 was gathering firewood,
when he chanced to meet Confucius. On his return he said,
‘There is a man who has a long body and short legs, a
slightly humped back and his ears far back. He seems like
one who is preoccupied with all the troubles within the four
oceans. I don’t know who he is.’
  Lao Lai Tzu said, ‘This is Confucius. Call him over here.’
  Confucius came. Lao Lai Tzu said, ‘Confucius! Rid
yourself of your pride and that smug look on your face and
you could then become a nobleman.’
   Confucius bowed and retreated and then a look of
astonishment came over his face and he asked, ‘Do you
think I could manage this?’
   Lao Lai Tzu said, ‘You can’t bear the sufferings of this
one generation, therefore you go and cause trouble for ten
thousand generations to come. Do you set out to be this
miserable, or don’t you realize what you are doing? You
insist that people should only be joyful in a way you
prescribe. The infamy of this will follow you all your life.
This is the action of a nondescript type of person, one who
wants to rule through fame, who enjoys plotting with
others, praising Yao and criticizing Chieh, when really you
should just forget them and silence your tendency to
glorify. What is wrong cannot but harm and what is active
cannot fail to be wrong. The sage is cautious and hesitates
before any action, and so always succeeds. But really, what
can I say about your actions? For ultimately they are only
bragging!’
   The Lord Yuan of Song dreamt in the middle of the night
that a man with dishevelled hair peered in at him through
the side door and said, ‘I have come from the depths of Tsai
Lu and was on my way from the clear Yangtze as an
ambassador to the Lord of the Yellow River, when a
fisherman called Yu Chu caught me.’
   Immediately Lord Yuan woke up and asked a diviner to
find out what this meant.
  ‘This is a sacred turtle,’ said the diviner.
  ‘Is there a fisherman called Yu Chu?’ asked the Lord.
  ‘There is,’ he was told.
  The Lord said, ‘Command that Yu Chu comes here.’
  Next day, Yu Chu arrived and the ruler asked him, ‘What
have you caught recently?’
  He replied, ‘I have caught a white turtle in my nets
recently. It is about five feet in circumference.’
  ‘Present your turtle,’ said the ruler.
   When the turtle came, the ruler couldn’t decide whether
to kill it or keep it. His heart was troubled, so he asked the
diviner, who said, ‘Kill the turtle and use it to make
divinations and receive an oracle.’ So the turtle had its shell
removed and seventy-two holes drilled into its shell for
divination.101 Not one of them failed to offer a good
oracle.
   Confucius said, ‘The sacred turtle could manifest itself
in a dream to Lord Yuan but could not escape the nets of Yu
Chu. It had sufficient wisdom to give seventy-two correct
divinations, but it could not escape having its vital organs
cut out. This is how it is, wisdom has its limits and even
spirituality has something beyond its reach. Even perfect
wisdom can be defeated by a multitude of scheming people.
  ‘Fish seem not to fear nets, they only seem to fear
pelicans. Rid yourself of petty knowledge and allow great
wisdom to enlighten you. Rid yourself of goodness, and
goodness will naturally arise. When a child is born, it needs
no great teacher; nevertheless it learns to talk as it lives
with those who talk.’
   Hui Tzu argued with Chuang Tzu and said, ‘What you say
is useless!’
   ‘You have to understand what is useless, then you can talk
about what is useful,’ said Chuang Tzu. ‘Heaven and Earth
are vast indeed and yet human beings only use the tiny part
of the universe on which they tread. However, if you dug
away beneath your feet until you came to the Yellow
Springs, could anyone make use of this?’
  ‘Useless,’ said Hui Tzu.
  ‘So indeed it is true that what is useless is clearly
useful,’ said Chuang Tzu.
   Chuang Tzu continued, ‘If someone has the itch to travel,
what can stop him? But if someone does not wish to travel,
then what can make him? The one who hides in conformity
or the one who is distant and seeks oblivion, both fail to
achieve perfect understanding and Virtue! They stumble and
fall but do not recover. They crash ahead like fire and never
look back. Even if they are a ruler with ministers, this too
passes. These titles change with each generation and
neither is better than the other. It is said that the perfect
man leaves no trace of his actions.
   ‘To respect the past and despise the present, this is what
scholars do. Even the followers of Chi Hsi Wei, who view
this generation in that way, are swept along without choice.
Only the perfect man is able to be in the world and not
become partisan, can follow others and not get lost. He
does not absorb their teachings, he just listens and
understands without any commitment.
               ‘The eye that is penetrating can see clearly;
               the ear that is acute hears well;
               the nose that discriminates distinguishes
               smells;
               the mouth with a keen sense of taste enjoys
               the flavours;
               the heart that feels deeply has wisdom
               and the wisdom that cuts to the quick is
               Virtue.
   ‘Through all that is, the Tao will not be blocked, for if it
is blocked, it gasps, and if it gasps, chaos breaks through.
Chaos destroys the life in all. Everything that lives does so
through breath. However, if breath will not come, this
cannot be blamed on Heaven. Heaven seeks to course
breath through the body day in and day out without ceasing:
it is humanity which impedes this. The womb has its
chambers and the heart has its Heavenly journey. However,
if rooms are not large enough, then mother-in-law and wife
will argue. If the heart does not wander in Heaven, then the
six openings of sensation will compete with each other.
The great forests, the hills and mountains surpass humanity
in their spirit because they cannot be overcome.
  ‘Virtue overflows into fame and desire for fame
overflows into excess. Plans arise from a crisis and
knowledge comes through argument. Obstinacy fuels
resolution and official actions arise from the desires of all.
When spring comes, the rains come along with the
sunshine, the plants surge into life and harvesting tools are
made ready again. Half of all that has fallen begins to
sprout, and no one knows why for sure.
               ‘Quietude and silence are healing for those
               who are ill;
               massage is beneficial to the old;
               peaceful contemplation can calm the
               distressed.
               To be sure, it is only the disturbed person
               who needs these.
               Someone who is at ease and is untroubled by
               such things has no need of this.
               The sage reforms everything below Heaven,
               but the spiritual man does not enquire how.
               The worthy person improves his generation,
               but the sage does not enquire how.
               The ruler governs the country, but the worthy
               person does not enquire how.
               The petty man makes do in these times, but
               the ruler does not enquire how.
   ‘The gatekeeper of Yen Gate had a father who died and
the gatekeeper was praised for the extremities of self-
deprivation he inflicted on himself, and was honoured by
the title of Model Officer. Some others in the area also
underwent such extremities, and half of them died. Yao
offered the country to Hsu Yu and Hsu Yu fled from him.
Tang offered the kingdom to Wu Kuang and Wu Kuang
became angry. Chi To heard this and retreated with his
followers to the waters of the Kuan, where the local nobles
came and commiserated with him for three years. For the
same reason, Shen Tu Ti threw himself into the Yellow
River. A fish trap is used to catch fish, but once the fish
have been taken, the trap is forgotten. The rabbit trap is
used to snare rabbits, but once the rabbit is captured, the
trap is ignored. Words are used to express concepts, but
once you have grasped the concepts, the words are
forgotten. I would like to find someone who has forgotten
the words so I could debate with such a person!’
CHAPTER 27
Supposed Words




            Supposed words constitute nine-tenths of
discourse, quotes make up seven tenths and flowing words
are brought forth every day, refined by the influence of
Heaven.
   Supposed words which constitute nine-tenths are similar
to people who are brought in from outside. For example, no
father is used as a reference for his son, for the father
cannot be as objective as someone not of the family. It is
not my fault but the fault of other people (who otherwise
wouldn’t listen to me), for otherwise people would only
pay attention to what they already know and dismiss
anything else. Thus they say that whatever agrees with them
is right, but whatever they dislike they call wrong.
   Quotes make up seven-tenths and are there to stop
arguments, which they do because they are respected as the
words of sagacious elders. However, those who are old but
have not grasped the warp and weft, the root and branch of
things cannot be quoted as sagacious elders. A person like
this hasn’t understood the Tao. Nor has he understood the
Tao of humanity. He is just a sad remnant of another time.
   Flowing words are spoken every day and they harmonize
through the influence of Heaven, continuing for ever and so
extending my years. If nothing is said about them, they
remain in agreement, and agreement is not affected by
words: words are in agreement but agreement is not words.
So it is said, ‘say nothing’. Words say nothing, so you can
talk all your life and say nothing. In contrast you can live
your life without speaking and have said things of worth.
              There is that which makes things acceptable
              and that which makes things unacceptable.
              There is that which makes things certain and
              that which makes things uncertain.
              How is this?
              Because it is.
              How is this not so?
              It is not so, because it is not so.
              How does this occur?
              Because it occurs.
               How does this not occur?
               It does not occur, because it does not occur.
   Everything is defined by what is right and everything is
defined by what is possible. If there is nothing, then it
cannot be. If there is nothing, then it cannot occur. If there
are no flowing words every day, influenced by Heaven, then
how could all this persist? All forms of life arise from the
same base and in their diverse forms they succeed each
other. They begin and end like an unbroken circle, and none
can say why. This is the influence of Heaven. This influence
of Heaven is the harmony of Heaven.
   Chuang Tzu asked Hui Tzu, ‘In reaching the age of sixty,
Confucius has changed his views sixty times, so what he
once held to be right he now holds to be wrong. So who
knows now whether what he once called right he hasn’t
fifty-nine times called wrong?’
  Hui Tzu said, ‘Confucius sincerely tries to pursue
understanding and tries to act in accord with this.’
   ‘Confucius has abandoned that,’ said Chuang Tzu, ‘but he
doesn’t talk about it. Confucius said, “We all received our
abilities from the Great Origin, and we should try to show
them in our lives.” Our singing should accord with the
chords and our speech should be an example. But you
parade profit and righteousness before us, and your likes
and dislikes, and what you approve and disapprove, and you
produce nothing more than servile agreement. To ensure
people’s hearts submit, so that they dare not resist, that
would make everyone under Heaven rest secure. Dear oh
dear! I have no chance of managing all this!’
   Tseng Tzu twice held power but twice he changed his
heart, saying, ‘At first, when I was caring for my parents,
my salary was three fu of rice, but I was happy. The second
time I received three thousand chung of rice, but my
parents were gone and I was sad.’
  One of the followers of Confucius said, ‘Surely Tseng
Tzu can be described as being free from the folly of
entanglement?’
   ‘But he was already entangled,’ replied Confucius. ‘If he
had been free, why should he have been so sad? He would
have viewed both his three fu and his three thousand chung
as just so many sparrows or mosquitoes flying in front of
him.’
   Yen Cheng Tzu Yu said to Tzu Chi of the Eastern Suburb.
‘When I listened to your words, Master, the first year I was
just a country bumpkin. The second year I was happy to be
led. The third year I began to journey with you. The fourth
year I was just a thing. The fifth year I began to progress.
The sixth year the ghosts came into me. The seventh year
Heaven’s perfection came. The eighth year I could not
understand death nor life. The ninth year I achieved the
great mystery.
   ‘When life completes its purpose, death results. What is,
follows, and each of us has to contemplate death, for it’s
the path we tread. That which lives in yang is without a path.
Is this certain? How does all this happen? Why is it not so
here? Heaven has its time and space and Earth has its
calculating peoples. Yet how can I discern all this? We have
no idea when and how life will end. But how can we try and
decide that they are not destined? Given that we have no
idea how and when they began, how can we try and decide
that they are destined? Given that there is something there,
how is it possible to claim that there are no ghosts? If there
is nothing there, how can we possibly claim that there are
ghosts?’
   The Outline asked the Shadow, ‘A few minutes ago you
were looking down, now you are looking up; a few minutes
ago your hair was piled up, now it is hanging down; a few
minutes ago you were sitting down, now you are standing
up; a few minutes ago you were walking, now you are
standing still. Why?’
   Shadow said, ‘Petty! Petty! Why do you ask me about all
this? This is all true to me but I haven’t a clue why I do it. I
am like the shell of a cicada or the shed skin of a snake:
something which seems real but is not. In the sunlight I
appear, in darkness I disappear. However, do you think I
arise from these? For they are themselves dependent upon
others. When it comes, I come also. When it goes, I go
with it. If they arise from the mighty yang, so do I.
However, there is no point in asking about the mighty
yang!’
  Yang Tzu Chu travelled south to Pei, Lao Tzu went west
to Chin but Yang asked him to go to the border at Liang
where they met. Lao Tzu stood in the middle of the road,
gazed up to Heaven and said with a sigh, ‘At first I thought
you could be taught, but now I know it is not possible.’
   Yang Tzu Chu said nothing. Later they arrived at the inn
and he went to fetch water in order to wash his teacher, and
a towel and a comb. Removing his shoes outside the door,
he crawled across the floor and said, ‘Earlier, Master, your
follower wanted to ask you about what you said, but you
were busy and I did not dare to. Now, it seems an
appropriate time, so I would like to ask what I’ve done
wrong.’
  Lao Tzu said, ‘Such pride and arrogance, such elevation
and certainty; who could bear being with you? The greatest
purity is soiled, overflowing virtue is not enough.’
  Yang Tzu Chu, when he first arrived at the inn, was
greeted by the people there. The innkeeper brought out a
mat, his wife brought towels and a comb. Others in the inn
respectfully moved aside from their mats. However, when
he came back, everyone tried to shove him off his very own
mat!
CHAPTER 28
Abdication




            Yao wanted to abdicate the country to Hsu Yu,
but Hsu Yu would not accept. He then offered it to Tzu
Chou Chih Fu. Tzu Chou Chih Fu said, ‘You wish me to be
the Son of Heaven, which is fine. But unfortunately I suffer
from a deep-rooted and painful disease which I am
currently trying to overcome. As I need to use all my
energy to deal with this, I am unable to rule the country.’
  The country is of course of tremendous significance, yet
he would not put his life at risk, so why do so for even less
important things? Someone who doesn’t wish to rule the
country is exactly the person to ask to do so.
  Shun wanted to abdicate the country to Tzu Chou Chih
Po, but Tzu Chou Chih Po said, ‘At this time I have an
unpleasant and disturbing illness and I am using all my
energy to deal with it, which means I have no time to rule
the country.’
  It is said that the country is the greatest of ventures, but
he would not risk his life for it, which shows how those
who have the Tao are very different from the ordinary
person.
   Shun tried to abdicate in favour of Shan Chuan, but Shan
Chuan said, ‘Here I am in the midst of space and time.
During the winter I wear skins and furs, in summer I wear
vine leaves and linen. In the spring I plough and plant and
my body is exercised by this. In the autumn I harvest and
pile up and then I rest and eat. When the sun rises I wake up
and work, while at sunset I rest. I journey where I will
between Heaven and Earth to my heart’s desire. So why
would I want to rule the country? Alas, Sire, you do not
understand!’ So he said no and went away, deep into the
mountains, and no one knew where he went.
   Shun wanted to abdicate the country to his friend the
farmer of Shih Hu. The farmer of Shih Hu said, ‘But you
have such strength and endurance, my Lord!’ Realizing that
Shun’s Virtue would not be enough, he collected his wife,
took hold of his son’s hand and went off into the islands of
the coast. He never ever came back.102
  The great king Tan Fu103 lived in Pin, and the Ti peoples
invaded. He tried to pay them off with skins and silks but
this did not satisfy them. He tried to appease them with
dogs and horses, but they didn’t like that. He offered them
pearls and jade but they didn’t like that, for the Ti peoples
were only interested in his lands.
   Great King Tan Fu said, ‘To live here with the older
brothers, to despatch the younger brothers to death, to live
amongst the fathers and despatch the sons to death – I
cannot do it! My children, stay here! Does it really matter
whether I rule you or the Ti people do? I have heard people
say that you should not use that by which you care for the
people, to harm the people.’ Then he picked up his staff and
riding crop, and left. However, the people came after him,
all following one another, and soon they founded a new
country under Chi Mountain.104
   The great King Tan Fu knew how to care for life. Those
who honour life, even if they are rich and powerful, misuse
what should nourish, and so cause injury to themselves.
Likewise, even if they are poor and lowly, they will
endanger themselves for the sake of profit. The people of
this generation, if they achieve greatness and title, are then
preoccupied with holding on to them. Looking only for
profit, they forget the risks involved. Surely this is
madness!
  The people of Yueh assassinated their rulers three times
in one generation. Upset by all this, Prince Sou fled to the
caves of Tan, which meant that the kingdom of Yueh was
without a ruler. The people of Yueh tried to find Prince Sou
but couldn’t, until they discovered the caves of Tan. Prince
Sou refused to come out, but the people of Yueh smoked
him out with noxious fumes. Then they put him in the royal
carriage. Prince Sou grasped the strap and hauled himself
up into the carriage, looked to Heaven and said, ‘O ruler, O
ruler! Couldn’t I have been spared all this?’ Prince Sou was
not frightened of being the ruler, it was all the troubles that
go with it that he was afraid of. It can be said of Prince Sou
that he was not willing to allow the concerns of the
kingdom to damage his life and it was exactly because of
this that the people of Yueh wished to have him as their
ruler.
   The countries of Han and Wei were at war over a
territorial dispute. Master Hua Tzu went to see Marquis
Chao Hsi of Han, who looked worried. Master Hua Tzu
said, ‘Now imagine that the people of the world were to
present you with a document which read, “If you lay hold of
this with your left hand, you will lose your right hand; lay
hold with your right hand, and you will lose your left hand;
however, if you lay hold of this, you will also rule the
world.” So, Lord, would you do so?’
  The Marquis Chao Hsi said, ‘I wouldn’t touch it.’
   Master Hua Tzu said, ‘Excellent! From that point of view,
I can certainly see that two hands are more important than
the whole world. Furthermore, your body itself is more
important than just your two hands. The whole of Han is
much less important than the whole of the world and this
scrap of land you are fighting over is of less significance
than Han. However, surely, my Lord, if you so value your
body and your life, you should not be following a path of
misery and distress trying to seize this territory!’
  Marquis Chao Hsi said, ‘Splendid! I have been offered all
sorts of advice from different people, but I have never
before been offered words of such wisdom.’
  Master Hua Tzu, it can be said, knew the difference
between what was significant and what was minor.
   The ruler of Lu had heard that Yen Ho had gained the Tao
and so he sent a messenger bearing gifts of silk to start up
discussions with him. Yen Ho was sitting in the doorway of
his simple house, dressed in coarse hemp cloth and feeding
a cow. The ruler of Lu’s messenger arrived and Yen Ho met
him.
  The messenger asked, ‘Is this Yen Ho’s house?’
  Yen Ho replied, ‘This is Ho’s house.’
  The messenger proceeded to offer the gifts to him, but
Yen Ho said, ‘I think that unfortunately you have got your
instructions confused. If you present these to the wrong
person, you will get into trouble. I suggest you return and
check that you are doing the right thing.’
  So the messenger went back, ensured his instructions
were accurate and then came back to look for him, but he
could not find him. It is true that those like Yen Ho really
do hate honours and wealth.
   It is said, the true purpose of the Tao is in caring for
yourself, its edges are concerned with running the country
and the family, while it is only its dregs which are
concerned with ruling the world. So, from this we can
understand that what Emperors and kings do is surplus to
what the sage does, for it does not relate to care of the self
or of life.
   The leaders of this generation, that is to say most of
them, throw away their lives in pursuit of material gain.
Isn’t it pathetic! When the sage starts something, he will
certainly have considered what he is doing and why he is
doing it. Now this is like a man who takes the pearl of the
Marquis of Sui and shoots a bird in the sky with it, high up
in the air. People would obviously laugh at him. Why is this
so? Because he has used something of great value to obtain
something of little value. Now surely life is even more
valuable than the pearl of the Marquis of Sui!
  Master Lieh Tzu was in great poverty and had a hungry
look about him. A visitor spoke about this to Tzu Yang,
Prime Minister of Cheng, saying, ‘Lieh Tzu Kou looks like
a scholar who has the Tao, yet here he lives in your state
and you let him exist in poverty?’ Prime Minister Tzu Yang
sent an officer to see him with a gift of rice. Master Lieh
Tzu greeted him and bowed, but twice refused the gift.
    After the messenger had gone, Master Lieh Tzu went
inside, and his wife looked scornfully at him and beat her
breast saying, ‘I have been told that the wife and children of
one who has the Tao have comfort and happiness, but right
now we are starving. The ruler understood his mistake, and
sends you some food to eat, Master. But the Master refuses
it. Is this then our destiny?’
   Master Lieh Tzu laughed and said, ‘The ruler does not
know me. He sent the rice because someone told him to.
Likewise, one day someone could speak against me and he
could treat me like a criminal. That is why I will not
accept.’ As it so happened, the people rose against Tzu Yang
in civil war and put him to death.
   When King Chao of Chu105 was forced into exile from
his country, sheep-butcher Yueh fled also and followed
King Chao into exile. King Chao eventually returned in
triumph to his kingdom and rewarded those who had
followed him. When he met sheep-butcher Yueh, Yueh said,
‘Oh great King, you lost your kingdom, and Yueh lost his
butcher’s shop. The great King has regained his kingdom
and Yueh has regained his butcher’s shop. I have received
back what I needed, so why should you speak of rewarding
me?’
  The King said, ‘Make him!’
  Sheep-butcher Yueh said, ‘The great King lost his
kingdom but not because of anything I did, so I could not be
punished for that. The great King has regained his kingdom,
again not because of anything I did, therefore I wouldn’t
expect to rewarded for that.’
  ‘I want to meet him,’ said the King.
   Sheep-butcher Yueh said, ‘The laws of the kingdom of
Chu say that someone must have achieved great deeds and
been the recipient of acclaim before he can be called to
meet the King. Now, my knowledge did not save the
kingdom, nor was I courageous enough to die in battle with
the invaders. When the armies of Wu entered Ying, I was
terrified of the danger and fled from the invaders. I did not
purposely follow the King. Yet the King intends breaking
with convention and wants to see me. This is not the sort of
thing I want the rest of the world to hear about me.’
   The King said to Tzu Chi, the War Minister, ‘Sheep-
butcher Yueh occupies a lowly place, yet what he says about
righteousness is very profound. I want you to promote him
to one of the three most senior positions in the
government.’
   Sheep-butcher Yueh said, ‘I appreciate that being one of
the three most senior ministers is more noble than being a
sheep-butcher, and that ten thousand chung is a better salary
than what I currently earn. However, I cannot, through my
desire for profit, allow the ruler to become known for
being so profligate with his favours! I dare not accept, but
wish simply to return to my stall as a sheep-butcher.’ He
never did accept.
   Yuan Hsien106 lived in Lu, where his house was only a
few steps wide and looked as if its thatch was shorn grass.
Its broken door was made from brushwood and the door-
posts were of mulberry wood. Earthenware pots minus
their bottoms and stuffed with rags served as the two
windows, while the house leaked above and was damp
below, but he sat contentedly playing music.
   Tzu Kung,107 wearing an inner robe of purple and an
outer one of white and travelling in a carriage drawn by
large horses, the top of which could not fit through the
gate, came to see Yuan Hsien. Yuan Hsien emerged at his
gate to greet him, wearing a hat made of bark and slippers
worn down to the heel, holding a staff made of hellebore.
   Tzu Kung said, ‘Good grief, Sir! You must be in terrible
distress.’
   Yuan Hsien replied, ‘I have heard say that to have no
money is to be poor, and to have studied but to have no way
to use one’s studies is to be in distress. Now, I may be poor,
but I am not in distress.’
  Tzu Kung stepped           back    in   astonishment     and
embarrassment.
   Yuan Hsien laughed and said, ‘To act only in order to be
praised; to pretend to be even-handed and yet to be biased;
to study just so as to show off; to teach just in order to
boast; to hide your real intentions behind a pretence of
righteousness and benevolence; to show off through
extravagant use of horses and chariots, I can’t bear all this!’
   Tseng Tzu lived in Wei, wearing a worn hemp quilt coat
and no outer garment, with a haggard and emaciated visage
and his hands and feet callused and hardened. He could go
three days without lighting a fire, ten years without having a
new set of clothes. If he put his hat on straight, the straps
broke; if he pulled his coat together, his elbows came
through the cloth; and if he pulled on his shoes, his heels
broke through at the back. Nevertheless, as he shuffled
along, he sang the Odes of Sacrifice of Shang108 with a
voice that penetrated Heaven and Earth as if it came from a
struck bell or a chiming stone. The Son of Heaven could
not get him to be a minister nor could the princes make
him their friend. Thus it is with those who feed their souls
while forgetting their body. Those who feed their bodies
forget about ideas of profit, and those who follow the Tao
forget about the concerns of the heart.
   Confucius said to Yen Hui, ‘Hui, come here! Your family
is poor and you are lowly, so why not seek high office?’
   Yen Hui replied, ‘I don’t want to be an official. I have
fifty acres of farm land outside the city, which supplies me
with basic foods. I have ten acres of land within the outer
wall and this supplies me with luxuries. I take delight in
playing my lute and I am more than happy just to study the
Tao of my Master. I don’t want any positions.’
  Confucius looked upset. Then his demeanour changed
and he said, ‘What a splendid mind you have, Hui! I have
heard it said,
               ‘ “One who knows he is contented will not
               get mixed up in the pursuit of gain;
               one who truly understands what is good will
               not be worried by any loss;
               one who knows himself inwardly will not be
               worried by lack of external positions.”
   ‘I have been preaching this for a long time, but now I see
it embodied in you, Hui, and I have certainly benefited from
that today.’
  Prince Mou of Wei from Chung Shan said to Chan Tzu,
‘My body is here beside the rivers and oceans, but my heart
is back in the courts of Wei. What advice can you give me?’
  Chan Tzu said, ‘Value life. If you value life then you will
put profit into perspective.’
  ‘I understand all that,’ said Prince Mou of Wei from
Chung Shan, ‘but I find I can’t overcome my feelings.’
  Chan Tzu said, ‘If you can’t handle your feelings, how
can you avoid harming your spirit? If you can’t control your
emotions, but nevertheless try to to stop yourself
following them, you will harm yourself twice over. Those
who do this double injury to themselves are not counted
amongst those with long life.’
  Wei Mou had command of ten thousand chariots, so for
him to retire and live alone in the caves and cliffs was much
more difficult than for a scholar. He may not have had the
Tao, but we can say he had the intention.
  Confucius was trapped in between Chen and Tsai and for
seven days he did not eat cooked food, simply a vegetable
soup without any rice.
   His face was drawn and haggard yet he sat contentedly
playing his lute and singing inside the house. Yen Hui was
outside choosing the vegetables, and Tzu Lu and Tzu Kung
were talking to each other.
  They said to Yen Hui, ‘Our Master has twice been chased
out of Lu, he has fled from Wei, had his tree chopped down
in Sung, been in distress in Shang and Chou and is now
trapped between Chen and Tsai. If anyone kills the Master,
they will be free of any guilt; if anyone imprisons him, they
will be without blame. Yet here he sits, endlessly playing
and singing. Can a noble gentleman be so lacking in shame
as this?’
   Yen Hui had nothing to say in reply, so he went in to
report this conversation to Confucius. Confucius laid aside
his lute and said, ‘Those two are just petty people. Tell
them to come here and I will explain to them.’
   Tzu Lu and Tzu Kung came in. Tzu Lu said, ‘The current
situation is one of considerable distress!’
   ‘What sort of talk is this?’ said Confucius. ‘When the
nobleman flows with the Tao, that is called flowing. When
he cannot flow with the Tao, he doesn’t flow. Now, I hold to
the Tao of righteousness and benevolence and am thus able
to confront this chaotic generation, so what prevents me
from flowing? Looking within, I am unconcerned by any
difficulties of the Tao and I confront any problems which
arise without losing my Virtue. When we see the winter
coming and the frost and snow arrive, that is when we
appreciate the endurance of the pine and cypress. The
difficulties between Chen and Tsai are in fact a blessing!’
  Confucius picked up his lute and started to play and sing
again. Tzu Lu siezed hold of a shield and began to prance
about while Tzu Kung said, ‘I had no idea that Heaven is so
high and Earth so far below.’
   The people of the past who had the Tao were happy if
they were trapped and happy if they could flow. Their
happiness was unconnected to either of these. If they had
the Tao and its Virtue, then being trapped or flowing were
simply to them like the regular succession of cold and hot
or wind and rain. So Hsu Yu was content on the warm
slopes of the Ying River and Kung Po enjoyed himself on
the top of Kung Hill.109
   Shun wanted to hand over the world to his friend from
the north, Wu Tse, but Wu Tse said, ‘You are a strange
person, my Lord, for at first you lived in the fields and
ditches and then you went into the gate of Yao. As if that
were not enough, he now wants to drag me into his awful
mess and taint me with his crimes. I am ashamed to be seen
with you.’ And having said this, he threw himself into the
deep waters of the Ching Ling.
  Tang110 was planning to attack Chieh and so he visited
Pien Sui, who said, ‘It is nothing to do with me.’
  ‘Then who can help?’ said Tang.
  ‘I don’t know.’
  Tang looked for advice from Wu Kuang, and Wu Kuang
said, ‘It is nothing to do with me.’
  ‘Then who can help?’
  ‘I don’t know.’
  ‘Could Yi Yin?’ said Tang.
 ‘He is a violent man who acts disgracefully. I don’t know
more than that.’
   So Tang went to Yi Yin and they planned the attack
together. When Chieh had been conquered, Tang offered to
abdicate to Pien Sui. Pien Sui said, ‘When you were
planning to attack Chieh, you asked my advice, so you must
consider me a villain. Now you have conquered Chieh, you
offer the throne to me, so you must also think I am
ambitious. I was born into this disorderly generation, yet a
man who has nothing of the Tao comes to me twice, trying
to stain me with his actions. I cannot stand to hear these
words repeated time and time again.’ So saying, he threw
himself into the waters of the Chou River and died.
  Tang wanted to offer the throne to Wu Kuang and said,
‘The man of wisdom has planned this, the fighting man has
carried it out and now the benevolent one should take over,
for this is the Tao of the past. So why should you not do so,
Sir?’
   Wu Kuang refused: ‘To overthrow the ruler is not
righteous; to massacre the people is not benevolent; to
cause distress to others and to take your own pleasure is
not honourable. I have heard it said that, if someone does
not act righteously, don’t accept their commission. If a
generation is without the Tao, don’t set foot on their land.
So there is no question of me accepting! I cannot stand
looking at you any longer.’ And so saying, he fastened a
stone to his back and drowned himself in the River Lu.
   Earlier, in the time of the Chou Dynasty’s triumph,111
there were two scholars who lived in Ku Chu called Po Yi
and Shu Chi. The two said to each other, ‘I have heard that in
the west there is a man who has the Tao, so let’s go and visit
him.’ When they reached the sunlit side of Mount Chi, King
Wu heard about them and sent Shu Tan to see them. He
suggested they make an agreement, saying, ‘Your wealth
will be second in rank and your titles of the first rank if you
agree to this proposal, and seal it with blood and bury it.’112
   The two friends looked at each other and burst out
laughing. ‘Huh, how odd!’ they said. ‘This is not what we
would call the Tao. In the ancient past Shen Nung had the
whole world, and he carried out the ritual sacrifices at the
appointed times and with great respect, but he never dreamt
of praying for blessings. When sorting out the people, he
was true and honest and did what was right, but never
expected anything from them. He liked to rule fairly, and
when necessary would be stern and strict. He didn’t exploit
the failures of others in order to further his own powers.
He didn’t use other people’s weaknesses to increase his
own strength. He didn’t exploit favourable openings in
order to make profit. But now the Chou Dynasty, seeing
that the Yin have fallen into disarray, suddenly seize the
government from them, asking advice from the leaders and
bribing the ordinary people. They have brought out their
weapons and offered sacrifices and made pacts with people
to try and show how serious they are. They shout their own
praises in order to impress the people and they attack just
for the sake of gain, which is just to overthrow disorder and
replace it with tyranny.
   ‘We have heard that, even if by good luck the scholars of
old lived in peaceful times, they did not shirk public office.
However, if they lived in a time of chaos, they tried not to
remain in office if they could help it. Now the world is in
darkness and the Virtue of the Chou has rotted. Rather than
stay here and be associated with it, it is better if we flee and
thus maintain our purity.’ The two scholars went north to
Mount Shou Yang, where they died of starvation. Now, if
men like them have managed to avoid getting any fame or
fortune, they did so by being high-minded and
conscientious in behaviour, taking pleasure in their own
ideas without having to lower themselves to serve the
world. This is what these two scholars achieved.
CHAPTER 29
Robber Chih




             Confucius was friendly with Liu Hsia Chi,
whose brother was called Robber Chih. Robber Chih had
nine thousand followers who pillaged wherever they wished
in the land, attacking and robbing the princes, breaking into
houses, stealing the people’s cattle and horses, seizing their
wives and daughters. Having stolen so much wealth, they
forgot their families, ignored their fathers and mothers and
did not sacrifice to their ancestors. Whenever they
rampaged through the countryside, if it was a big kingdom,
the people guarded their walls, and if it was a small
kingdom, the people fled into their forts. All the multitude
of peoples dreaded them.
  Confucius said to Liu Hsia Chi, ‘Those who are fathers
should be able to set out the law for their sons, and those
who are elder brothers should be able to instruct their
younger brothers. If a father is unable to set out the law for
his son, and an elder brother is not able to instruct his
younger brother, then the filial relationship between father
and son and between elder and younger brother is pointless.
Now, Sir, you are one of the best scholars of this
generation, and your younger brother is Robber Chih, who
threatens the whole world, yet you have not instructed him
well. I am ashamed of you. I suggest I go on your behalf,
Sir, to try and advise him better.’
   Liu Hsia Chi said, ‘Sir, you have said that a father should
set out the law for his son and that elder brothers should
instruct their younger brothers. However, if the son will not
listen to the father, or if the younger brother pays no
attention to his elder brother, then even if someone comes
with skill such as yours, what can he do? Furthermore, Chih
is a man whose heart is like a gushing fountain, and whose
will is like a hurricane, strong enough to see off any enemy
and clever enough to gloss over his evil. If you agree with
him, he is pleased, but if you disagree with him, he
becomes angry and he will curse you with the most foul
language. Do not go and see him, Sir.’
   Confucius did not listen. Accompanied by Yen Hui as his
driver, and with Tzu Kung by his side, he went off to see
Robber Chih. Robber Chih was camped with his followers
on the sunlit side of Mount Tai, savouring a meal of human
livers. Confucius stepped down from the carriage and went
to see the officer in charge of visitors.
  ‘I am Confucius of Lu,’ he said, ‘and I have heard that
your commander is a man of lofty righteousness.’ And he
bowed twice to the officer.
   The officer went in and passed on the message. On
hearing this, Robber Chih flew into a great rage. His eyes
blazed like bright stars and his hair stood on end under his
hat.
   ‘This must be that crafty one from Lu kingdom, the man
Confucius, is it not? Tell him this from me: “You talk away,
inventing phrases and eulogizing the kings Wen and Wu.
Your hat is so decorated it is like the boughs of a tree and
your belt is skin from the ribs of a cow. The more you say,
the more ridiculous it is. You eat yet you do not plough,
dress without ever weaving. You wag your lips and use your
tongue like a drumstick. You just decide what you think is
right and wrong and lead the rulers astray, preventing
scholars from studying the roots of the whole world. You
establish notions of filial piety and fraternal duty just as
you fancy, yet you also want to wriggle your way into
favour with the princes, the wealthy and the nobility. Your
wickedness is vast and your sins weighty. Get off home
now, for if you don’t then I will take your liver and add it to
this meal.” ’
  Confucius sent another message in: ‘I have the friendship
of your brother Chi and so I hope for the favour of being
able to view your feet from below the tent.’
  When the officer passed this on, Robber Chih said, ‘Tell
him to come here!’
   Confucius hurried forward, and declining the mat
offered, he stepped back and then bowed twice to Robber
Chih. Robber Chih was still in a terrible temper. He
stretched out his legs, placed his hand upon his sword and
glared with his eyes, speaking with a roar like a tigress
defending her young: ‘Confucius, come here! If what you
say pleases me, you will live. If it angers me, you will die.’
   Confucius said, ‘I have heard that there are three kinds of
Virtue in this world. The highest Virtue is to grow tall and
strong with wonderful looks so that all, young and old,
noble and commoner, are delighted to see you. The middle
Virtue is to understand Heaven and Earth and to be able
converse eloquently on all subjects. The lowest Virtue is to
be brave and fearless, resolute and dashing, gathering all to
oneself and leading them.
   ‘Anyone who has just one of these Virtues is suitable to
stand facing south and be called the Lone One, the Ruler.
Now, here you are with all three. You soar up to eight feet
two inches; light pours forth from your face and eyes; your
lips look as though coloured with vermilion; your teeth are
like rows of precious shells; your voice is in tune with the
musical notes, yet you are simply called Robber Chih.
Surely this is something to be ashamed of, and I disapprove
of you.
   ‘However, should you so wish, you could listen to my
ideas and send me as your ambassador to Wu and Yueh in
the south, to Chi and Lu in the north, east to Sung and Wei
and west to Chin and Chu, arguing with them that they
should form a great walled city several hundred li wide.
From there they could rule over towns containing several
hundred inhabitants, and I would argue that you should be
established there as lord. Then you could begin your career
again with this city. You can stop fighting, send your
followers home, bring your family together there and offer
sacrifices to your ancestors. This is what a sage would do,
or a true scholar, and it is what the whole world desires.’
   Robber Chih was in a towering rage. ‘Confucius, come
here!’ he roared. ‘The sort of person who can be won over
by promises of profit or reformed through speeches are
simply fools, idiots and the most common sort. That I am
tall and strong, and so handsome that everyone delights to
see me, is a virtue descended from my parents. Even if you
hadn’t told me, don’t you think I’d know this?
  ‘What’s more, I have heard that those who praise people
to their face will also speak against them behind their
backs. Now, Confucius, you tell me about a great walled
city filled with people, and you hope to make me change by
such promises of profit, attempting to make me follow
your words like some common person. But how long would
such a place survive? There is no walled city as big as the
whole world which was ruled by Yao and Shun, yet their
descendants own so little land that they can hardly stick the
point of an awl into it! Tang and Wu announced themselves
as Sons of Heaven, but within a few generations their
dynasties were dead and gone. Surely this was because what
they had was considered such a valuable prize?
   ‘What is more, I have heard that in the past113 the birds
and animals were many and the people few. As a result, the
people lived in nests to escape the animals. During daylight
they gathered acorns and chestnuts and during darkness
they hid in their tree nests. This is why they were known as
the Nest-Building People. In the ancient past the people
didn’t know how to make clothes. During the summer they
gathered firewood and in the winter they kept warm by
burning it. This is why they were called the People who
Know how to Keep Alive. In the time of Shen Nung the
people lay down in peace and contentment and rose in
serene security. The people knew their mothers but not
their fathers, and they lived side by side with the elks and
deer. They ploughed and ate, they wove and made clothes,
never dreaming of harming others, for this was the era of
the perfect Virtue.
   ‘However, the Yellow Emperor was unable to sustain this
era of Virtue. He battled with Chih Yu in the area of Cho Lu
until the blood flowed over a hundred miles. Yao and Shun
ascended the throne, establishing hordes of ministers. Tang
exiled his ruler Chieh and King Wu murdered his ruler
Chou, and from then on the strong oppressed the weak and
the many abused the few. From Tang and Wu until now they
have all been instruments of disorder and confusion. Now,
Sir, you come here promoting the ways of Kings Wen and
Wu, using your skills in debate to teach them to the whole
world and to all generations. Dressed in your distinctive
garb and wearing a narrow belt, armed with false speeches
and hypocritical behaviour, you fool the many lords and
princes of diverse countries and prowl around looking for
riches and fame. There is no greater robber than you, Sir.
Why doesn’t the whole world, which calls me Robber Chih,
call you Robber Confucius?
   ‘Using your sweet words, you persuaded Tzu Lu114 to
follow you. You caused him to put aside his high cap, to lay
down his long sword and attend to your teachings, with the
result that the whole world says, “Confucius is able to
suppress violence and stop evil.” But in the end Tzu Lu
attempted to murder the ruler of Wei, messed that up and
his body was pickled and hung over the east gate of the city,
so, yes, Sir, your teachings were no good to him.
   ‘Do you call yourself a scholar, of some skill, a sage?
You have been driven out of Lu twice, fled from Wei, got
into trouble in Chi and been besieged in Chen and Tsai.
There is nowhere in the world that will have you. You
advised Tzu Lu and this resulted in his being pickled. On
one hand you can’t care for yourself, and on the other, you
can’t help others. Is this Tao of yours worth anything?
   ‘There is no one thought more of by all generations than
the Yellow Emperor, yet the Yellow Emperor could not
maintain the harmony of Virtue, for he fought on the
battlefield of Cho Lu and the blood flowed for a hundred
miles. Yao was not compassionate, Shun was not filial, Yu
was paralysed down one side,115 Tang exiled his ruler, King
Wu attacked Chou and King Wen was imprisoned at Yu Li.
These seven men are thought of as lofty by the whole
world. However, if we study them carefully, we can see that
the pursuit of profit made them all act against what was true
and violate their innate selves. Their actions cause deep
embarrassment.
  ‘When the world discusses worthy scholars, Po Yi and
Shu Chi are mentioned. However Po Yi and Shu Chi both
refused the role of ruler for the state of Ku Chu and
preferred to go and die of starvation in the mountains of
Shou Yang, where no one buried them. Pao Chiao showed
off and condemned the world. He embraced a tree and
stayed there till he died. Shen Tu Ti spoke out in protest but
was ignored, so he fastened a stone to his back and drowned
himself in the river, where the fish and turtles ate him.
Chieh Tzu Tui was a perfect follower, and cut out a piece of
his own flesh for his lord, Duke Wen, to eat. However, later
on the Duke ignored him and Chieh Tzu Tui was angry and
stormed off into the woods where he burnt himself to death
hugging a tree. Wei Sheng had an assignation with a young
woman under a bridge, but the woman did not turn up. The
water began to rise, but rather than leave, he wrapped his
arms around the pillar of the bridge and died. These six men
are hardly to be distinguished from a dog torn to shreds, a
pig that is drowned or a beggar with his begging bowl in
hand. They all succumbed to their desire for fame and
honour and so they despised death. They did not nourish the
roots of their life nor live out the time allocated by destiny.
   ‘The world discusses loyal ministers and says that none
were better than Prince Pi Kan and Wu Tzu Hsu. However,
Wu Tzu Hsu’s body sank in the river and Pi Kan’s heart was
cut out. These two are called models of loyal ministers by
the whole world, but they both ended up being laughed at by
everyone. Taking the cases above down to Wu Tzu Hsu and
Pi Kan, none of them deserves respect.
  ‘Regarding the speech you have given me, Confucius,
were you to tell me about ghosts, then there would be no
way I could tell whether you are right or not. However, if
you talk to me about this world and its affairs, which is all
you have dwelt upon so far, then I have heard it all before!
   ‘Now I will tell you about the innate nature of things.
Eyes wish to look upon beauty, ears to hear music, the
mouth to taste flavours, the breath of life to persist. A man
of considerable age will live to be a hundred, one of middle
age will be about eighty and one of lesser years will be
sixty. If you remove the time lost on recovering from
illness, mourning the dead, worrying and being anxious,
then this leaves you with only four or five days in every
month when you can open your mouth and laugh. Heaven
and Earth are without end, but humans die when their time
is up. Take the longest period of possible finite time and
compare it with what is without limit: it is gone as swiftly
as when a horse dashes past a crack in a wall. Anyone
incapable of fulfilling their will and innate nature and
achieving their full years cannot be described as having
gained the Tao. I reject everything you have said,
Confucius. Get a move on and go. I don’t want to hear
anything more from you. Your Tao is foolish, deceitful,
artful, vain and hypocritical, incapable of sustaining the
inner harmony of truth and so it’s not worth talking about!’
   Confucius bowed twice and hurried off. Leaving by the
gate, he mounted his carriage, dropping his reins three
times. His eyes were glazed and he could not see; his face
was the colour of dead ashes. Supporting himself on the
crossbar of his carriage, his head hung down, he seemed to
be losing his life’s breath. He journeyed back to Lu and
when he arrived at the eastern gate, he chanced upon Liu
Hsia Chi.
  ‘So here you are at the city gate,’ said Liu Hsia Chi. ‘I
haven’t seen you for days. Your carriage and horses have
got dusty. Have you been by any chance to see Chih?’
  Confucius looked to Heaven and groaned. ‘I most
certainly did,’ he said.
  ‘Chih was infuriated by what you said, I suspect?’
   ‘He certainly was,’ said Confucius. ‘I am rather like
someone who has given himself moxibustion treatment,
even though he was not ill. I dashed off and stroked the
tiger’s head and played with his whiskers and I only just
escaped from his mouth!’
   Tzu Chang asked Man Kou Te, ‘Why do you not try and
do better? If you don’t, your words will not be believed. If
your words are not believed, you will not be employed. No
proper employment means no gain. So whether you view
this from the perspective of fame, or consider it in terms
of profit, then righteousness is the true thing to do. If you
can cast aside fame and fortune, and revert to the true
calling of your heart, then you can see that a real scholar
should not let a single day go by without pursuing a true
course!’
   ‘The one without shame grows rich,’ said Man Kou Te,
‘and the one in whom many place their trust becomes
famous. So it would appear that the grandest reputations
and profit come to those who are both trusted and without
shame. So if you’re concerned with reputation or gain, then
trust is crucial. If, however, you cast aside thought of fame
and fortune, and revert to the true calling of your heart,
then you will see that the scholar follows the path of his
Heavenly nature!’
   ‘In the past,’ said Tzu Chang, ‘Chieh and Chou both
enjoyed the honour of being the Sons of Heaven; all the
wealth of the world was theirs. Now if you say to a mere
sweeper, “Your behaviour is like Chieh or Chou,” he will
look embarrassed and his heart will be disturbed by such
words, for even the lowliest person despises them.
Confucius and Mo Ti, however, were poor and common
people. Now, however, if you say to a prime minister that
his conduct is like that of Confucius and Mo Ti, he will be
abashed and look disconcerted and proclaim that he is not
worthy, for these two are revered by all scholars. So, to be
as powerful as the Son of Heaven does not mean you are
respected. And to be poor and common does not mean you
will automatically be despised. The difference between
being honoured and despised is to be found in the worth or
worthlessness of your behaviour.’
   Man Kou Te said, ‘Minor criminals are locked up while
great criminals are made into lords and rulers. Yet in the
gates of such lords, righteous scholars are to be found. In
the past, Hsiao Po, Duke Huan murdered his elder brother
and made his sister-in-law his wife. However, Kuan Chung
still became his minister. Chang Tien Cheng murdered his
ruler and usurped his country, but Confucius still accepted
gifts from him. In their debates they condemn such people,
but in their actions they acquiesce before them. Surely
their words and their deeds must have been in conflict with
each other in their breasts! This is why the Book says,
“What is evil and what is beautiful? The successful is
considered the head and the unsuccessful is the tail.” ’
   ‘Sir,’ said Tzu Chang, ‘if you don’t pay attention to the
normal ways of behaviour, and make no distinction between
near and distant family, between noble and commoner,
between elder and younger, how can you maintain the order
of the five arrangements and the six kinships?’
   Man Kou Te replied, ‘Yao killed his eldest son and Shun
exiled his uncle. Do either of these have proper regard for
the rules about near and distant kinship? Tang exiled his
ruler Chieh and King Wu overthrew his lord Chou. Do
either of these have proper regard for the distinctions
between noble and commoner? King Chi usurped his
brother and the Duke of Chou killed his elder brother. Do
either of these have proper regard for the distinction
between elder and younger? The Literati speak
hypocritically and the Mohists say everyone should be
loved equally. Do either of these have proper regard for the
distinction between the five arrangements and the six
kinships?
   ‘Add to this that you, Sir, are concerned with reputation,
while I care about profit. In reality neither fame nor fortune
are in accord with principle and they cannot stand
examination in the light of the Tao. The other day we
referred this to the one who is unbound by opinion. He
said,
               ‘ “The mean person desires wealth,
               The nobleman desires fame.
               In the ways in which they affect their true
               form,
               and change their innate natures,
               they are different.
               But as they both cast aside what they have
               in pursuit of something they don’t have,
               they are identical.”
               So it is said,
               Do not be a mean person,
               Turn again and desire the heavenly within.
               Do not be a nobleman,
               Pursue the path of Heaven within.
               Whether bent or true,
               See all in the light of Heaven.
               Learn to face all four directions,
               and flow with the tides of the seasons.
               Whether right or wrong,
               Hold firm to that centring point within.
               Alone fulfil your will.
               Travel only in the company of the Tao.
               Do not stray from your path,
               Do not try to be perfect in righteousness,
               For then you will fail at what you do.
               Make no haste to become wealthy,
               Take no risks for fame,
               Or you will lose the Heavenly within.
   ‘Pi Kan’s heart was cut out, Tzu Hsu’s eyes were put out:
this is what faithfulness gave them. Kung the True spoke
against his father,116 Wei Sheng died by drowning, so
misfortune was the result of their loyalty. Pao Chiao stood
till he dried out and Shen Tzu would not defend himself,117
so harm was the result of their integrity. Confucius never
saw his mother and Kuang Tzu never saw his father: these
are the mistakes of the righteous. These are the models
passed down from generation to generation. They clearly
indicate that the scholar who is determined to be faithful in
his words and firm in his actions pays the price and brings
upon himself such disasters.’
   Not Enough asked Knowing Harmony, ‘There is no one
who doesn’t seek fame and fortune. When someone is rich,
everyone wants to know him. They are willing to abase
themselves, hoping to impress. To have others fall down
before you is one way of ensuring long life and comfort for
the bodily needs as well as peace for the mind. Do you
alone have no idea of this, Sir? Do you have no
understanding or simply lack the will power? Or have you
decided what is right and resolved never to deviate from
this?’
   Knowing Harmony said, ‘Now there is this man who
lives around here and who was born at the same time as us:
we who see ourselves as scholars, who have cast aside the
common lot of this generation and risen above it. He has
given up trying to define the principle of right. He studies
the ancient past and this present time, the different views
on what is right and what is wrong. He follows this
degenerate generation in changing as the world changes,
ignoring what has been deemed important, casting aside
what is worthy, just doing whatever he wants. Yet is he not
wrong in thinking this will prolong life, give the body all it
needs for pleasure and joy to his will? He swings from
grief and distress to happiness and joy, yet doesn’t
understand how these affect the body. He suffers fear and
fright and excitement and delight, yet this does nothing to
help him understand why. He knows what is to be done, but
not why it should be done. Indeed, you might have all the
status of being a Son of Heaven and all the wealth of the
whole world, yet still not escape disaster and distress.’
   Not Enough said, ‘There is nothing that riches cannot
give you. They bring the best in beauty and the summits of
power, which neither the perfect man nor the sage can ever
achieve. They buy strength and bravery from others which
then make the owner feared and powerful. They can buy up
the wisdom and the skills of others which then make the
owner seem wise and knowledgeable. They can entice the
virtues of others so that the owner can seem a man of
consequence and principle. Even though he has no kingdom
of his own, the wealthy man is as much respected as a ruler
or even a father. Furthermore, music, beauty, good food and
power can be enjoyed even by those who have never studied
them before. The body can enjoy these without ever having
had to learn from others.
   ‘Desire, dislikes, what to pursue and what to avoid: no
one needs to be taught about these, for they are part of our
innate nature. Nor am I the only person under Heaven to
think like this. Who could ever give them up?’
  Knowing Harmony said, ‘The wise man does things
because of his concern for the well-being of everyone, and
he does not do anything against convention. So if he has
enough, he doesn’t seek for more, for as there is no need,
he needn’t seek for anything. However, if there is too little,
then he will seek for more. To do this he goes in all
directions but would never see himself as being self-
indulgent. If there is too much, he gives it away. He can
give away all under Heaven and still not see himself as
open-minded.
   ‘Open-minded or greedy are not caused by any external
influence, they arise from the inborn state of being of each
of us. Someone might be as powerful as the Son of Heaven,
but never use this to dominate others. He could own the
whole world, but never use his wealth to degrade others. He
sizes up the situation and bears in mind the harm that could
be inflicted upon his innate nature. This might lead him to
withdraw from something he is offered – but not in order
to win false praise and honour. Yao and Shun were
Emperors and there was harmony, but not because they
strove to be benevolent, for they would not permit what was
good to harm them. Shan Chuan and Hsu Yu could have
become Emperors, but they refused, not because they
sought to impress by this but because they did not wish to
inflict harm upon themselves through this. All of these
followed what was to their advantage and refused what was
harmful, and so the whole world celebrates them. Though
they gained praise, they did not act as they did in order to
have such praise.’
   Not Enough replied, ‘But in order to do this they
distressed their bodies and renounced what was
pleasurable, restricting themselves to a meagre existence
in order to survive. They were like those who exist for
years in sickness and distress, waiting to die.’
   ‘Peaceful contentment is happiness,’ said Knowing
Harmony, ‘while excess is dangerous. This is true for all
things, but most especially in the case of wealth. Rich men
hear the sounds of the bell and drum, flute and pipe, and
their mouths are stuffed full of the most tasty meats and
fine wines, until they are satiated and have forgotten what
they are supposed to be doing. This is a disorderly state.
Sinking into the depths of their desires, they are like
someone carrying a heavy burden up a hill. This is bitter
suffering. They desire riches and hope to find some
comfort there. They desire power and try to hold on to it
all. In the quiet of their private moments they sink into
indulgence. Even if their bodies are fit and tanned, they
become inflated with pride. This is a state of sickness.
Desiring wealth, lusting after profit, they fill their rooms to
overflowing and cannot desist. They are unable to escape
this lust, they want even more and they ignore all those who
advise against this. This is a state of disgrace. They heap up
their wealth beyond anything they could ever use, but cling
to it frantically. Even when they know the distress it causes,
they want yet more and more. This state is called pathetic.
Behind doors, they fear robbers and thieves. Out of doors,
they are afraid of being mugged. They fortify themselves at
home with towers and moats, and when travelling they dare
not walk alone. This is the state of terror. These six states
are the worst possible. But they forget them all and seem to
have lost the faculty of reason. Once disaster comes, even
if they wish to draw on all their innate nature or use up all
their wealth, they can’t regain a single day of peacefulness.
So it is that those who look for fame will not find it and
those who look for fortune will not be able to find it. To
wear out their minds and destroy their bodies in searching
for these – surely this is simply terrible delusion!’
CHAPTER 30
The Lover of Swords




             In the past King Wen of Chao loved swords.
Specialists came to his gate, over three thousand of them,
all experts in swordsmanship. They were his guests. Day
and night they fought before him until the dead or wounded
each year were more than a hundred. But the King never
ceased to be delighted at watching them. This went on for
three years, then the country began to fall apart and the
other princes began to plot its overthrow.
  Crown Prince Kuei was distressed by this, and he
presented the situation to his followers:
  ‘If there is anyone here who can persuade the King to put
away these swordsmen, I will give him a thousand pieces of
gold,’ he said. His followers replied,
  ‘Chuang Tzu can do this.’
   The Crown Prince sent an ambassador with a thousand
pieces of gold to Chuang Tzu. Chuang Tzu refused the gold
but returned with the ambassador. He came in to see the
Crown Prince and said, ‘Oh Prince, what is it you wish to
tell me that you send me a thousand pieces of gold?’
   ‘I have heard, Sir, that you are an illustrious sage,’ said
the Crown Prince. ‘The gift of a thousand pieces of gold
was a gift for your attendants. However, you have refused to
accept this, so what more dare I say?’
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘I have heard that the Crown Prince
wants to use me to help the King give up his abiding
passion. If in trying to do so I upset the King and fail to
achieve what you hope for, then I might be executed. So
what use would the gold be to me then? Or, if I could get
the King to give up, and fulfil your hopes, what is there in
this whole kingdom of Chao that I could not ask for and be
given?’
  ‘You’re right,’ said the Crown Prince. ‘However the King
will only see swordsmen.’
  ‘That’s all right. I’m quite good with a sword,’ replied
Chuang Tzu.
   ‘Fair enough,’ said the Crown Prince, ‘but the swordsmen
the King sees are all tousle-headed with spiky beards,
wearing loose caps held on with simple, rough straps and
robes that are cut short behind. They look about them
fiercely and talk only of their sport. The King loves all this.
Now, if you go in wearing your scholar’s garb you will start
off on completely the wrong foot.’
  ‘With your permission I will get a full swordsman’s
outfit,’ said Chuang Tzu.
  Within three days he had got this and returned to see the
Crown Prince. The Crown Prince took him to see the King,
who drew his sword and sat waiting for him. Chuang Tzu
walked slowly into the hall through the main door. When he
saw the King, he did not bow.
   ‘What instruction have you for me, that you have
persuaded the Crown Prince about beforehand?’ demanded
the King.
  ‘I have heard that the King likes swords and so I have
brought my sword for the King to see.’
  ‘What use is your sword in combat?’
   ‘My sword can kill one person every ten paces, and after
a thousand miles it is not faltering.’
   The King was pleased and said, ‘There can be no one else
like you under Heaven!’
  ‘A fine swordsman opens with a feint then gives ground,
following up with a cut, stalling his opponent before he can
react,’ replied Chuang Tzu. ‘I would like to show you my
skills.’
   ‘Rest awhile in your rooms, Master, and await my
commands,’ said the King. ‘I shall make arrangements for
the contest and I will call you.’
  The King spent the next seven days testing his
swordsmen. More than sixty died or were severely
wounded, leaving five or six who were selected and
commanded to present themselves in the hall. Then he
called in Chuang Tzu and said, ‘Now, this very day I shall pit
you against these men to show your skills.’
  ‘I have longed for such an opportunity,’ said Chuang Tzu.
  ‘Sir, what sort of sword will you choose, long or short?’
asked the King.
   ‘Any kind will do,’ said Chuang Tzu, ‘but I have three
swords, any of which I could use if the King agrees. But
first I would like to say something about them and then use
them.’
  ‘I would like to hear about these three swords,’ said the
King.
  ‘I have the sword of the Son of Heaven, the sword of the
noble Prince and the sword of the commoner,’ said Chuang
Tzu.
  ‘What is this sword of the Son of Heaven?’
   ‘The Son of Heaven’s sword has as its point the Valley of
Yen, and the Great Wall and Chi and Tai mountains as its
blade edge. Chin and Wey are its ridge, Chou and Sung are
its hilt and Han and Wei its sheath. On all four sides it is
surrounded by barbarians and it is wrapped in die four
seasons. The Sea of Po encompasses it and the eternal
mountains of Chang are its belt. The five elements control
it and it enacts what punishment and compassion dictate. It
comes out in obedience to yin and yang, stands alert in
spring and summer and goes into action in autumn and
winter. Thrust forward, there is nothing in front of it; lift it
high, and there is nothing above it; swing it low, and there is
nothing below it; spin it around, there is nothing
encompassing it. Raised high, it cleaves the firmaments;
swung low, it severs the very veins of the Earth. Use this
sword but once and all the rulers revert to obedience; all
below Heaven submit. This is the sword of the Son of
Heaven.’
  King Wen was astonished and seemed to have forgotten
everything else.
  ‘What of the sword of the noble Prince?’ he asked.
  Chuang Tzu said, ‘The sword of the noble Prince, its
point is sagacious and courageous people; its blade is those
of integrity and sincerity; its ridge is those of worth and
goodness; its hilt is those who are trustworthy and wise; its
sheath is of the brave and outstanding. When this sword is
thrust forward, it encounters nothing; when wielded high, it
has nothing above it; when swung low, it has nothing below
it; when swirled about, it finds nothing near it. Above, its
guidance comes from Heaven and it proceeds with the
three great lights.118 Below, it is inspired by the square,
stable nature of the earth, proceeding with the flow of the
four seasons. In the middle lands it restores harmony to the
people and is in balance with the four directions. Use this
sword but once and it is like hearing the crash of thunder.
Within the four borders everyone obeys the laws and
everyone attends to the orders of the ruler. This is the
sword of the noble Prince.’
  ‘What of the sword of the commoner?’
   ‘The sword of the commoner is used by those who are
tousle-haired with spiky beards, wearing loose caps held on
by ordinary coarse cords, with their robes cut short behind.
They stare about them fiercely and will only talk about their
swordsmanship while fighting before the King. Raised high,
it cuts through the neck; swung low, it slices into the liver
and lungs. The people who use the sword of the commoner
are no better than fighting cocks who at any time can have
their lives curtailed. They are useless to the state. Now you,
O King, have the position of the Son of Heaven but you
make yourself unworthy by associating with the sword of
the commoner. This is what I dare to say.’
  The King brought him up into his hall where the butler
presented a tray of food, while the King strode three times
round the room.
  ‘Sire, sit down and calm yourself,’ said Chuang Tzu.
‘Whatever there was to say about swords has been said.’
  Following this, King Wen did not go out for three
months and all his swordsmen killed themselves in their
own rooms.
CHAPTER 31
The Old Fisherman




             Confucius wandered through the Black Curtain
Forest and sat down beside the Apricot Tree Altar. His
followers started reading their books while Confucius
played his lute and sang. He was not even halfway through
the song when a fisherman stepped out of his boat and came
towards him. His beard and eyebrows were white and his
hair was wild, while his sleeves hung down beside him. He
walked up the slopes until he reached the drier ground and
then stopped, resting his left hand on his knee and his chin
in his right hand, and listened until the song was over. Then
he called over Tzu Kung and Tzu Lu and the two of them
went to him.
  ‘Who is that?’ he said, pointing at Confucius.
  ‘He is a nobleman from Lu,’ replied Tzu Lu.
  The fisherman then enquired as to Confucius’ family. Tzu
Lu replied, ‘The family of Kung.’
  ‘What does this man of Kung do for a living?’
   Tzu Lu was working out what to say when Tzu Kung
replied, saying, ‘This man of the Kung family in his innate
nature holds fast to loyalty and faithfulness; in his
behaviour he shows benevolence and righteousness; he
makes the rituals and music beautiful, and balances human
relationships. He pays respect above him to the ruler of his
generation and in his dealings with those below him he tries
to transform the ordinary people, as he wants to bless the
whole world. This is what this man of the Kung family
does.’
  The fisherman enquired further, ‘Does he have any land
over which he rules?’
  ‘No,’ said Tzu Kung.
  ‘Is he an adviser to a king?’
  ‘No.’
   The stranger laughed and backed away, saying, ‘So
benevolence is benevolence, yet he won’t escape without
harm to himself. Exhausting the heart and wearing out the
body puts his true nature in jeopardy. Sadly, I believe he is
far removed from the Tao.’
  Tzu Kung went up and told Confucius about this.
Confucius laid aside his flute and stood up, saying, ‘Maybe
he is a sage!’ and he went down the slope to find him. He
reached the water’s edge as the fisherman was about to pole
away. Seeing Confucius, he poled back again and
confronted him. Confucius stepped back somewhat hastily,
bowed twice and went forward.
  ‘What do you want, Sir?’ said the stranger.
   ‘Just now, Master, you said a few words but didn’t finish,’
said Confucius. ‘Being unworthy, I do not understand them.
So I would like to be with you and to hear even just the
sounds of your words in the hope that they might enlighten
me!’
  ‘Oh-ho, you have a good love of study, Sir!’
   Confucius bowed twice and stood up. ‘Ever since I was
little I have pursued study, and now here I am sixty-nine
years old, yet I have never heard the perfect teaching, so
what can I do but keep my heart open?’
   The stranger said, ‘Like seeks like and each note
responds to its own. This is the boundary established by
Heaven. I will not discuss that which concerns me, but will
concentrate on what you need to know about. You, Sir, are
wrapped up in the affairs of the people. The Son of Heaven,
the noble princes, the great ministers and the common folk,
when these four groups do what is right, there is the beauty
of unity. If these four groups break apart, then there is
terrible great disorder. If ministers do what they should and
the ordinary people are concerned with what they do, then
no one infringes upon another.
   ‘Fields in ruin, leaking roofs, lack of food and clothing,
unjust taxes, disputes between wives and concubines,
disorder between the young and the old, these are what
trouble the common folk.
   ‘Inability to do the job, being bored by their work, bad
behaviour, carelessness and laziness in those below, failure
to succeed, insecurity in employment, these are what
trouble the great ministers.
   ‘Lack of loyal ministers, civil war in the kingdom,
workmen with no skills, tributes that are worthless, poor
positioning at the spring and autumn gatherings, the
disquiet of the ruler, these are what trouble the noble
princes.
   ‘Yin and yang out of harmony, fluctuations in heat and
cold which damage all, oppression and rebellion by nobles,
all leading to uprisings, ravage and abuse of the people, the
rituals badly performed, the treasury empty, social
relationships in turmoil and the people debauched, these
are what trouble the Son of Heaven and his people.
   ‘Now, Sir, at the higher end of the scale, you are not a
ruler, nor a noble nor even a minister in a court, while at the
other end you are not in the office of a great minister with
all his portfolios. Nevertheless, you have decided to bring
beauty to the rituals and the music and to balance human
relationships and thus to reform the ordinary people. Isn’t
this rather overdoing it?
   ‘Furthermore, there are eight defects that people are
liable to, as well as four evils that affect their affairs, which
must not be ignored:
  ‘To be involved with affairs that are not yours is to be
overbearing.
   ‘To draw attention to yourself when no one wants you is
to be intrusive.
   ‘To suck up to someone with speeches designed to
please is to be sycophantic.
  ‘Not to distinguish between good and evil in what others
say is to be a flatterer.
  ‘To gossip about other’s failings is to be slanderous.
  ‘To separate friends and families is to be malevolent.
  ‘To give false praise in order to hurt others is to be
wicked.
   ‘Having no concern for right or wrong, but to be two-
faced in order to find out what others know, is to be
treacherous.
   ‘These eight defects cause disorder to others and harm
to the perpetrator. A nobleman will not befriend one who
has them, nor will an enlightened ruler appoint such a
person to be a minister.
  ‘With regard to the four evils of which I spoke, they are:
   ‘Ambition – To be fond of taking on vast enterprises,
altering and changing the old traditions, thus hoping that
you can increase your fame and standing.
   ‘Greediness – To be a know-all and to try and get
everything done your way, seizing what others do and
claiming it as your own.
  ‘Obstinacy – To see your errors without doing anything
to change them and to persist in doing things the wrong
way.
   ‘Bigotry – To smile upon someone who agrees with you
but when that person disagrees, to disown and despise
them.
  ‘These are the four evils. If you can cast aside the eight
defects and avoid the four evils, then you are at a point
where it is possible to be taught.’
   Confucius looked sad and sighed, bowed twice, stood up
and said, ‘Lu has exiled me twice, I have fled from Wei,
they have felled a tree on me in Sung and laid siege to me
between Chen and Tsai. I have no idea what I did to be so
misunderstood. Why was I subject to these four forms of
trouble?’
   The stranger looked distressed, then his expression
changed and he said, ‘It is very difficult, Sir, to make you
understand! There was once a man who was frightened by
his own shadow and scared of his own footprints, so he
tried to escape them by running away. But every time he
lifted his foot and brought it down, he made more
footprints, and no matter how fast he ran, his shadow never
left him. Thinking he was running too slowly, he ran faster,
never ceasing until finally he exhausted himself and
collapsed and died. He had no idea that by simply sitting in
the shade he would have lost his shadow, nor that by resting
quietly he would cease making footprints. He really was a
great fool!
   ‘You, Sir, try to distinguish the spheres of benevolence
and righteousness, to explore the boundaries between
agreement and disagreement, to study changes between rest
and movement, to pontificate on giving and receiving, to
order what is to be approved of and what disapproved of, to
unify the limits of joy and anger, and yet you have barely
escaped calamity. If you were to be serious in your
cultivation of your own self, careful to guard the truth and
willing to allow others to be as they are, then you could
have avoided such problems. However, here you are, unable
to cultivate yourself yet determined to improve others. Are
you not obsessed with external things?’
   Confucius, really cast down, said, ‘Can I ask you about
truth?’
   ‘True truth is simple purity at its most perfect,’ replied
the stranger. ‘To be without purity, to be without sincerity
means you cannot move other people. So if you fake
mourning and weeping, then no matter how thoroughly you
do this, it’s not real grief. If you make yourself act angry,
even if you sound very fierce, this won’t inspire awe. If you
force yourself to be affectionate, no matter how much you
smile, you cannot create harmony. True grief may make no
sound but is really sorrowful; true anger, even if there is no
manifestation of it, creates awe; true affection doesn’t even
need to smile but creates harmony. When someone has
truth within, it affects his external spirit, which is why truth
is so important. In terms of human relationship it works
thus:
               ‘in service of parents, it is affection and
               filial piety;
               in service of rulers, it is loyalty and
               integrity;
               in celebrations, it is enjoyable pleasures;
               in conducting the mourning rituals, it is
               sadness and grief.
  ‘For in loyalty and integrity, service is all-important; in
celebration, enjoyment is all-important; in mourning, grief
is all-important; in service of parents, making them content
is all-important.
   ‘The splendour of service doesn’t mean just doing the
same thing every time. When making your parents content,
you don’t worry about what to do. In getting jolly at a
festival, you don’t get worked up about the crockery. In
mourning at times of death, you don’t get het up over the
precision of the rituals. Rituals have emerged from the
common needs of the ordinary people. Truth itself comes
to us from Heaven: this is how it is and it never changes. So
the sage models himself upon Heaven, values truth but does
not kowtow to convention. The fool does the opposite. He
cannot take his model from Heaven and so is swayed by the
mundane. He simply doesn’t know the value of truth, but is
under the domination of the ordinary people and so is
affected by this common crowd and is never at peace. Sadly
for you, Sir, you started early in such nonsense and have
only recently heard of the great Tao!’
   Confucius yet again bowed twice, stood up and said,
‘Now that I have had the opportunity to meet you, I feel as
if I have been blessed by Heaven. Master, if you wouldn’t
be embarrassed by this, will you allow me to join those
who serve you and to be taught by you, and therefore tell
me where I might find your house? I want to go there to
hear your teachings from you and to complete my study of
the great Tao.’
   The stranger replied, ‘I have heard it said that if you find
someone with whom you can walk, then go with him to the
deepest mysteries of the Tao. However, if it is someone
you cannot walk with, and he doesn’t know the Tao, do not
link yourself with him, and then you cannot be blamed. Do
what you must, Sir! I will now depart from you, Sir, I will
depart from you!’ With this he pushed off with his pole and
went away through the reeds.
   Yen Yuan returned with the carriage and Tzu Lu held out
the strap for Confucius to pull himself up and in, but
Confucius did not look their way. He waited till the last
ripples had died away and he could no longer hear the sound
of the pole and then he returned and climbed into his seat.
   ‘I have been your servant for many years, Master,’ said
Tzu Lu, running alongside the carriage, ‘but I have never
before seen you behave with such awe towards another. The
rulers of ten thousand chariots, of a thousand chariots,
when they see you, Sir, they never put you in another room
or treat you with anything less than the respect due to an
equal, while you yourself always conduct yourself with an
air of rigid politeness. Now this old fisherman stood tall
before you with his pole, while you bent double like a
musical chime bar, and you always bowed twice before
speaking to him. Wasn’t this going a bit too far? We are all
wondering about this. Why did this fisherman command
such respect from you?’
   Confucius leaned upon the crossbar of his carriage,
sighed and said, ‘Oh, Yu, it’s very hard to change you! You
have studied ritual and order for so long, yet your base and
mean heart has not yet been changed. Come here and I will
explain! If you meet someone who is older than you and are
not respectful, then this is a failure of etiquette. If you
meet a worthy person and fail to offer respect, this is a lack
of benevolence. If the fisherman was not a perfect man, he
would not have the power to make others humble before
him. If people do not humble themselves before him, they
are lacking in sincerity and thus are unable to obtain the
truth, so they harm themselves. Sadly, there is nothing
worse that can befall us than the lack of such benevolence,
but you alone, O Yu, risk such a calamity!
   ‘Furthermore, the Tao is that by which all the forms of
life have life. All that lose it die. All that obtain it live. To
struggle against it in practice is to face ruin. To flow with it
is to succeed. So it is that where the Tao is, the sage will
honour it. Now the old fisherman most certainly has the
Tao, so how could I risk not showing respect to him?’
CHAPTER 32
Lieh Yu Kou




           Lieh Yu Kou119 was on his way to Chi but he
returned before he got halfway down the road. He
encountered Po Hun Wu Jen, who said, ‘Why have you
come back?’
  ‘I was frightened.’
  ‘What scared you?’
   ‘I went into ten soup shops en route,’ said Lieh Yu Kou,
‘and in five of them I was served before anyone else.’
  ‘Really? But what exactly alarmed you?’ said Po Hun Wu
Jen.
   ‘Even if you try to hide the inner true nature of someone,
the body gives it away like a traitor and shines out. Once
this is external, it overpowers the hearts of people and
makes them treat you, for petty reasons, like someone who
is a noble or venerable. From such actions all sorts of
problems arise. Now, soup sellers don’t make much in the
way of profit and have only their soup to sell. If such
people, with so little to offer and so little power, treat me
thus, imagine what would happen were I to meet the lord of
ten thousand chariots! With his body worn out by the
concerns of state, and his wisdom stretched by its
governance, he would offer all this to me and ask me to
solve his problems! That is what alarmed me.’
  ‘How very perceptive of you!’ said Po Hun Wu Jen.
‘However, given who you are, people will still come to
you!’
   Shortly after this, Po Hun Wu Jen went to see Lieh Tzu’s
home and found the doorway full of the shoes of his many
visitors. Po Hun Wu Jen stood facing north, with his staff
upright in his hand and his chin resting upon it, until his
chin became creased. He stood there some time, then he
went away without a word.
   The porter at the gate went in to Lieh Tzu and told him
about this. Lieh Tzu grabbed his shoes and ran barefooted
after Po Hun Wu Jen, catching up with him at the outer
gate, where he said, ‘Sire, having come here, are you now
going to go away without giving me some medicine?’
   ‘It is pointless,’ he replied. ‘I said to you that people
would crowd round you, and so they have. It is not your
fault that they come, but you cannot keep them away, so
what use was my warning? It is the way your extraordinary
attributes shine forth which attracts people to you and
makes them happy. But if you so move others, this in turn
disturbs you to the very roots of your being. But there is
nothing more to be said about this. The sort of people who
gather round you will never tell you this. The silly words
they speak actually poison a person. There is no
comprehension and no conception of this among them, so
who can make this clear to you? The clever person labours
on and the wise person is distressed. However, someone
without skills looks for nothing. He eats what he wants and
wanders around, drifting like an empty boat, aimlessly,
vacuously.’
   A man of Cheng called Huan studied texts at a place
called Chiu Shih. After three years Huan had become one
of the Literati and just as the Yellow River spreads its
blessing over nine miles on either side, so did he bestow
blessings upon the three levels of his family relations. He
helped his younger brother study the teachings of Mo, and
he and his brother debated, though his father always took
the brother’s side. Ten years later Huan committed suicide.
He appeared to his father in a dream saying, ‘It was I who
had your son trained as a Mohist. Why don’t you
acknowledge this by taking a look at my grave where I have
become the berries on the cypress?’
   When Creation blesses someone, it blesses not that
which is human in the person, but that which is from
Heaven. In the same way was Huan’s brother guided to be a
Mohist. When Huan thought he was the one who made his
brother a Mohist, he despised his own family and was like
the people of Chi who try to prevent others from also
drinking from the well. It is said that nowadays, in this
generation, we have only people like Huan. They act as if
only they are right.
   However, note that people who have Virtue do not even
know this, and imagine how much more this is true of those
who have the Tao! In the past people like Huan were known
as those who have escaped Heaven’s retribution.
   The sage rests where there is true rest and does not rest
when there is no real rest. The bulk of humanity rests when
there is no real rest and does not know how to truly rest.
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘To know the Tao is easy, not to speak
about it is hard. Knowing and not saying, this is to aspire to
the Heavenly. Knowing and saying, this is to be subject to
the human element. In the past people paid attention to the
Heavenly, not to the human.’
  Chu Ping Man studied how to slay the dragons120 under
Cripple Yi and it cost a thousand pieces of gold, which was
all his family had. Three years later he had mastered the art
but he could never use it.
  The sage sees what is thought to be necessary as
unnecessary, so there is no call for warfare. The ordinary
person sees what is not necessary as necessary, with the
result that there is frequent warfare. The one who looks to
warfare always resorts to it in any situation. But relying
upon warfare leads to destruction.
   The comprehension of the petty person does not go
beyond the external wrappings and the ephemera of gifts,
business cards and letterheads. He exhausts his spirit on
that which is insignificant and vacuous, but wants to be seen
as leading others to the Tao and as bringing all things into
the great Oneness. Someone like this will most certainly
get lost in time and space. His body is trapped and can
never know the great beginning. The perfect man, in
contrast, concentrates his spirit upon that which was before
the beginning and rests in the strangeness of being in the
fields of nothingness. Like water he flows without form, or
pours out into the great purity. How pathetic you are! Those
of you whose understanding is no greater than the tip of a
hair, and who do not understand the great peacefulness!
  A man from Sung, called Tsao Shang, was sent by the
King of Sung as an ambassador to the state of Chin. When
he left Sung he was given only a few carriages. However,
the King of Chin was so delighted with him that he gave
him a hundred more. On returning to Sung he met Chuang
Tzu and said, ‘Living in poor streets of an impoverished
village, making sandals and starving, with a shrivelled neck
and a sickly face, this I cannot stand! But being in the
confidence of a ruler of ten thousand chariots and being
given a hundred of them, this I enjoy and am good at.’
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘Well now. When the King of Chin falls
ill, he summons his doctor who lances die ulcer or
squeezes the boil and as a reward receives one carriage.
The doctor who applies a suppository gets five carriages.
The lower down the service, the more carriages given. So,
Sir, I assume you must at least have been licking his piles to
have been given so many carriages? Be gone, Sir!’
  The Duke Ai of Lu asked Yen Ho, ‘If I were to take
Confucius as the main prop of my government, would the
problems of the country be resolved?’
   ‘To take on Confucius would be dangerous!’ replied Yen
Ho. ‘He likes to decorate feathers and to use flowery
language in his work and cannot differentiate the trunk of
issues from the mere branches. He is willing to distort true
nature in order to convince the people, and yet he has no
understanding of what he is doing. He draws inspiration
from his own heart and judges according to his own lights,
so how could you put such a person in charge? Do you
approve of him? Could you entrust things to him? If you do
so, it is a mistake. Surely a person who makes the people
turn away from reality and learn what is hypocritical is no
fit model for the people. If you care about the future, you
should forget this idea.’
   It is hard to govern people and not to forget yourself, for
this is not Heaven’s model. Merchants and traders won’t
want to be associated with someone like this. Their lowly
position might make you think they are the same, but such a
charge rankles with them.
   Punishments on the outside are inflicted with metal and
wood instruments. Punishments to the inner person are
inflicted by agitation and excess. When minor people
encounter external punishments, the instruments of metal
and wood deal with them. When they encounter internal
punishments, it is the yin and the yang that consume them.
Only the true man can avoid both external and internal
punishments.
  Confucius said, ‘The human heart is more dangerous than
mountains or rivers, more difficult to know than Heaven.
Heaven has its seasons of spring, summer, autumn and
winter, and its times for sunrise and sunset. But humanity
has a thickly cloaked exterior and its true nature is hidden
deep within. So it is that someone can have an honest face
but be miserly; can be truly gifted but be without skills;
seem featherbrained but actually have a very clear plan;
appear firm but be bent; look slow but be fast. Thus, those
who gather around righteousness as if it were there to slake
their thirst will later flee from righteousness as if it were a
fire.
  ‘So it is that the nobleman observes those working for
him at a distance and considers their loyalty, and observes
them close at hand to consider their respect. He tests their
skills by confronting them with difficult issues and tests
their knowledge by suddenly asking a question. He tests
their faithfulness by getting their commitment and he tests
their benevolence by giving them wealth, while he tests
their fortitude and resolve by informing them of coming
dangers. By getting them drunk he tests their ability to take
care of themselves and by mixing them with all manner of
people, he tests their chastity. By these nine tests, it is
possible to uncover the unworthy ones.’
  When Cheng Kao Fu121 received the first grade of
office, he bowed his head. When he received the second
grade, he bent his back. On receiving the third grade, he
doubled over and ran along the wall, hugging it. Who would
not have him as a model! But a common fellow, on
receiving his first grade, puts on airs. On receiving his
second grade, dances on top of his carriage. On his third
grade, dares to address his uncles by their personal names!
How far removed this is from Hsu in the time of Tang!
   There is nothing more dangerous than for Virtue to have
a heart, but for that heart to have eyelashes that obscure
vision. For if they have such eyelashes, then they can only
look within and this leads to ruin. There are five evil
Virtues, of which the central one is worst. What am I
talking about when I say the central Virtue? The central
Virtue is that which makes people think well of what they
say but despise what others say.
   There are eight extreme conditions which limit people,
three that assist and six repositories in the body. The eight
things that bring trouble if someone has all eight in excess
are: beauty, a good beard, height, size, strength, class,
bravery and courage.
  The three that will bring advancement are: following and
copying others; bowing and scraping; and ambition to be
better than others.
   The six repositories are: knowledge that goes out to all
things; bravery, determination and the many troubles they
create; benevolence, righteousness and the many requests
that arise; comprehending life in its essence – a massive
task; understanding knowledge is a lesser thing;
comprehending the great destiny you follow after –
comprehending the lesser destiny, you are just swept along.
  A man went to see the King of Sung and was given ten
carriages, and with the ten carriages he went and showed
off with them to Chuang Tzu.
   Chuang Tzu said, ‘Up on the Yellow River there lives a
family which earns enough to eat by weaving things out of
rushes. Their son was diving in the very deepest pools when
he found a pearl worth a thousand pieces of gold. His father
said to him, “Bring me a stone and I will smash it to pieces.
A pearl worth a thousand pieces of gold must have come
from a pool nine levels deep, from under the chin of the
Black Dragon. My son, to have got this pearl, the dragon
must have been asleep, for had he been awake, you would
have been cut to pieces, my son!” Now the kingdom of
Sung, is it not really deeper than the nine levels pool; and
the King of Sung, is he not really more ferocious than the
Black Dragon? My boy, if you were able to get these
carriages, he must have been asleep. For if the King of
Sung had been awake, you would be in pieces by now, my
lad!’
   Someone offered Chuang Tzu a court post. Chuang Tzu
answered the messenger, ‘Sir, have you ever seen a
sacrificial ox? It is decked in fine garments and fed on
fresh grass and beans. However, when it is led into the
Great Temple, even though it most earnestly might wish to
be a simple calf again, it’s now impossible!’
  Chuang Tzu was dying and his followers wanted to
provide a glorious funeral. Chuang Tzu said, ‘I will have
Heaven and Earth as my shroud and coffin; the sun and
moon as my symbols of jade; the stars for my pearls and
jewels; all the forms of life as my mourners. I have
everything for my funeral, what is there missing? What
more could I need?’
  His followers said, ‘We are worried, Master, that the
crows and kites will eat you.’
   ‘Above ground I shall be eaten by crows and kites,’ said
Chuang Tzu, ‘and below ground by worms and ants. Aren’t
you just being rather partisan in wanting to feed only one of
these groups, so depriving the others?
   ‘Trying to use what isn’t equal to produce equality is to
be equally unequal. Trying to prove something by
something uncertain is only certain to make things
uncertain. The person whose eyesight is clear and thinks he
understands is victim to these sights, whereas the one who
is guided by the spirit perceives the reality. That there is a
difference between what we see with our eyes and what we
know through our spirit is a wisdom from long ago. But the
fool relies upon his eyes and loses himself in what is
merely human, and everything he does is just a façade –
how sad!’
CHAPTER 33
Governing the World




            There are many ways of running the world, and
each of those who use a particular one considers theirs to
be so good as to be incapable of improvement. In the past,
this was known as the way of the Tao, but where is that
now? I say, ‘There is nowhere where it is not.’ You say,
‘Where does the spirit come from? Where does
enlightenment emerge from?’ ‘The sage brings them to be
and the king completes them, and the origin is the One.’
  The one who is not cut off from his primal origin is
known as the Heavenly man.
  The one not cut off from the true nature is known as the
spiritual man.
  The one who is not cut off from the truth, is known as
the perfect man.
   The one who views Heaven as the primal source, Virtue
as the root and the Tao as a gate, and sees change and
transformation as natural, such a one we call a sage.
   The one who makes benevolence the model for kindness,
righteousness the model for reason, ritual the model for
behaviour, music the model for harmony, who is content in
benevolence and pity, we call such a one a nobleman.
   This is how the people should be governed: laws should
be seen as defining difference, and their titles as
indications of status. Comparison should be used to
provide evidence and enquiry to establish decisions, so that
they can be numbered one, two, three, four and so on, and
thus give the hundred ranks their ranking. One should be
observant in business, and should ensure adequate food and
clothing, and that the cattle are fed and cared for and the
grain stored. One should be concerned for the old, the
infirm, the orphans and the widow.
   The people of the past were so thorough! They were
equals in spirituality and enlightenment, they were as all-
seeing as Heaven and Earth. They tended all the forms of
life and unified the whole world. Their care reached all
people, they clearly perceived the roots of all things and
they were attentive to even the smallest details. Their
influence extended to the six directions and the four
quarters, so that small and great, coarse or fine, there was
no place that they were not. Their insights, as discernible in
their laws and practices, were passed down from age to age
in their codes and in the Histories. In Tsou and Lu122 there
are scholars, gentlemen of the girdled class who can
understand what is to be found in the Book of Poetry and
the Book of History, in the Rites and the Music.
   The Book of Poetry has the Tao of the will, the Book of
History has the Tao of events, the Rites has the Tao of
conduct, the Music has the Tao of harmony. The Book of
Changes has the Tao illustrating the yin and yang and the
Spring and Autumn Annals has the Tao of titles and
procedures. These teachings are found across the face of
the whole world, and in China they are mentioned by many
of the hundred schools of philosophy of the Tao.
   Everywhere under Heaven is in great disarray, the worthy
ones and the sages have no light to shed, the Tao and Virtue
are no longer united, and the whole world tends to see one
aspect and think that they have grasped the whole of it. They
can be compared to the ear, the eye, the nose and the
mouth. Each has its own light to shed but you cannot
interchange their functions. Likewise, the hundred schools
of philosophy have their points and each has its time of
usefulness. Though this is true, nevertheless not one of
them covers the whole truth, just like the scholar who lived
in one corner. He tried to judge whether Heaven and Earth
are beautiful, to grasp the principle of all forms of life, to
calculate the worth of the ancient wise men. Yet it is rare
indeed for one such as he to be able to encompass all the
beauty of Heaven and Earth, or to describe that which is
spiritual and clear.
  As a result, the Tao which is within the sage and which
manifests itself externally in the king fell into obscurity
and was dulled, was constrained and became lost. The
people of the whole world just followed their own desires
and were their own judges. Sadly, the hundred schools
persist, fated to never be able to unite again, or agree. The
scholars of these later generations did not see the purity of
Heaven and Earth united, and the great wisdom of the
ancient ones of the Tao was scattered and torn by the world.
   To show no model of extravagance to later generations,
to leave all forms of life unaffected, to avoid embroidering
ritual, to rule oneself by strict regulation in one’s behaviour
so as to be ready to deal with crises, thus helping other
generations: this was what the ancients took to be the Tao.
   Mo Ti and Chin Hua Li heard of their opinions and were
pleased. But they pursued them to great excess and and
were too particular in applying the opinions to themselves.
Mo Tzu wrote a treatise called ‘Against Music’, and united
this with ‘Moderation in Economies’. He did not believe in
singing during life, nor in mourning at death. He taught
universal love and universal consideration. He forbade
warfare and would allow no space in his Tao for anger. He
thought study good and did not disagree with others. But he
did not agree with the primal kings but rather attacked the
rituals and music of the ancient times.
  The Yellow Emperor had Hsien Chih music, Yao had Ta
Chung, Shun had Ta Shao, Yu had Ta Hsia, Tang had Ta Huo,
King Wen had the music of the Pi Yung Hall and King Wu
and Duke Chou created Wu music.
   In ancient times the rituals for mourning outlined exactly
what was due to the noble and the ordinary, the highest and
the lowest. The coffin of the Son of Heaven had seven
layers, those of the nobles five layers, those of the prime
ministers had three layers, those of officers two layers.
Now Mo Tzu only said there should be no singing during
life, and at death no mourning. For everyone he would just
have a plain wooden coffin, three inches thick and with no
outer case. If he teaches people this, he can have no real
affection for people. If he did this for his own funeral, then
he does not have much affection for himself.
   Yet this has not led to the ignoring of Mo Tzu’s Tao. Far
from it, even though people continue to sing when he says
no singing, people continue to feel like crying when he
says no crying, people still want to be happy after he has
said no happiness. Is what he advocates really human? A life
that is laborious and a death which is insignificant: this Tao
is one of great thoughtlessness. Making people sad and
depressed by practices which are hard to follow cannot be
seen as the Tao of the sage. It is universally against human
nature, and the whole world rejects it. Even if Mo Tzu
himself could stand it, how can the rest of the world be
expected to live this way? With the whole world so
opposed, this Tao has wandered far from the ways of the
real king.
   Mo Tzu thought a great deal of his Tao, saying, ‘In the
past, when Yu held back the waters and controlled the
Yangtze and Yellow Rivers, he sent them to flow through
the lands of the four barbarian tribes and the nine
provinces. They were united with the three hundred rivers,
the three thousand streams and the smaller streams too
many to number. Yu himself carried the sandbags and dug
with the spade, until he had united all the rivers of the
whole world, and there was no hair left on his legs from his
knee to his ankle. He washed his hair in the pouring rain and
combed it with the harsh winds, while creating the ten
thousand states. Yu was a great sage, but he wore out his
body for the sake of the whole world.’ The result is that in
later years Mohists wear skins and coarse cloth, wooden
shoes or hemp sandals, never stop night or day, and view
such fervent activity as their highest achievement. They say,
‘Anyone who cannot do this is not acting in the spirit of Yu
and is not worthy of being called a Mohist.’
   The followers of Hsiang Li Chin and the disciples of Wu
Hou and the Mohists of the south such as Ku Huo, Chi
Chih, Teng Ling Tzu and so forth, all recite the texts of Mo,
but they argue and do not agree on these texts, calling each
other heretical Mohists. In their debates they argue about
hard and white, about sameness and difference, and they
dispute the use of terms such as odd and even. They
consider the main teacher of their group as a sage, each
hoping that their particular one will be seen as the teacher
by later generations. These same arguments continue up to
the present time.
   Mo Ti and Chin Ku Li had perfectly good ideas but were
wrong in what they proceeded to do. They have made later
generations of Mohists feel that they have to labour on
until there is not a hair left on their calves, their driving
ambition being to outdo each other. This is the height of
their folly and the low point of their unity. Indeed, it is true
that Mo Tzu was one of the good of this world and you will
not find his equal. He was weary and worn, but do not
despise him for he was a scholar of ability.
               This should be the purpose of the heart:
               not to be trapped by convention,
               nor to be concerned with adornments;
               not to be thoughtless in treating others,
               nor to be in opposition to the crowd;
               to want the whole world to live in peace and
               balance
               for the sake of the people’s unity,
               to look to the needs of others as well as
               yourself.
   This should be the purpose of the heart and this is what
the ancient ones considered to be the Tao’s way. Sung
Chien and Yin Wen heard of these ideas and were pleased.
They made their hats in the shape of Hua Mountain as their
distinguishing feature. In their intercourse with all forms of
life, they accepted difference as given. They discoursed
upon the nature of the heart and they sought a unity
proceeding from the heart. By such concerns they sought
to unite everyone in joyfulness and to harmonize all within
the boundaries of the oceans. Their greatest desire was to
see this achieved everywhere, by their efforts. They could
face insults and not be disturbed; they struggled to save the
people from warfare; they aimed to prevent aggression and
to silence arms and thus to deliver future generations from
violence. In pursuit of such ideals, they walked across the
whole world, advising the high and teaching the low, and
even though the world would not listen, they just continued
even more strongly and would not give up. So it is said that
high and low were tired of seeing them, but they never gave
up putting themselves forward.
   Indeed, this is so, but they did too much for others and
too little for themselves, saying, ‘All that we ask and need
is five pints of rice and this will suffice.’ It is inconceivable
that the Master had enough by this means. Even though the
followers were hungry, they never forgot the whole of the
world, persevering day and night without ceasing, saying,
‘We have to take care to preserve lives!’ What wonderful
aims these masters have for their generation! They say,
‘The nobleman does not scrutinize others too harshly, nor
does he take from others to adorn himself.’ If an idea does
not benefit the world, then they see that it’s not worth
struggling with. They see banning aggression and ridding
the world of violence as their major area of concern, and
see diminishing their own desires and feelings as an
internal goal. They sought this both on a grand scale and a
small scale, both in subtle things and in the more common
way, and when they had perfected this, they stood tall.
                This was the way of the ancient one who
                followed the Tao:
                public-spirited and completely non-partisan,
                flexible and not fixed upon one idea,
                open-minded and without a guide,
                following others without a second thought,
                not casting anxious glances,
                not using knowledge to make plots,
               not choosing one thing rather than another,
               instead going with all:
               this was the way of the ancient one who
               followed the Tao.
   Peng Meng, Tien Pien and Shen Tao123 heard of these
ideas and were delighted. They believed that all the various
forms of life are held in the Tao. They said, ‘Heaven can
overarch but not support; Earth can support but not
overarch; the great Tao embraces all but cannot distinguish
between them. We conclude that all forms of life have that
which they can do and that which they cannot do. It is said,
if you select, you abandon comprehensibility; if you
contrast, then you lose perfection. But the Tao leaves out
nothing whatsoever.’
   So it was that Shen Tao put aside knowledge and any
concern for himself, went where he could not avoid going,
seeking always to be without interest and pure in all that he
did, seeing this as being true to the Tao, and saying that
understanding is not understanding, thus viewing knowledge
as dangerous and struggling to be rid of it. He was without
ambition and so he was carefree, taking no responsibility
and scorning those in the world who praised the worthy.
Drifting and unconcerned, he did nothing and laughed at
those whom the world saw as sages. Cutting corners,
smoothing the rough, he flowed and twisted with all things.
He ignored right and wrong and simply worked at avoiding
trouble. Having nothing to gain from knowledge or
reflection, and with no understanding of what was going on,
he went through life with a lofty ease and disregard. He
walked only when he was pushed, and only started when he
was forced to. He was like a whirlwind, like a feather
spinning round and round, like the turning of a grindstone.
He had integrity, he was without any wrong, without failure
or excess, whether in action or in stillness. How was this
possible? Those who are without knowledge are free from
the tribulations of self-promotion, from the entrapment
that arises from working with knowledge. Whether moving
or resting, he never left the proper path, and throughout his
life was never praised. I would like to be one without
knowledge, not trapped in the teachings of a sage. Such
people, like the very earth itself, never lose the Tao. People
in positions of authority laughed at him together, saying,
‘Shen Tao’s Tao is not for the living but is the way for those
who are already dead, which is why they are so odd.’
   Tien Pien was the same, for he studied under Peng Meng
and understood that one should not make distinctions. Peng
Meng’s master said, ‘The Tao of the scholars of old taught
that nothing is right and nothing is wrong. Their essence
was like the wind; how can it be expressed in words?’ But
he was always opposed to the views of others, never seeing
things as they saw them, and he was prone to cut corners.
What they named the Tao he said was not the Tao, and what
was called right he always had to argue might be wrong.
Peng Meng, Tien Pien and Shen Tao did not properly
understand the Tao. Nevertheless, they had all had the
chance to hear about it.
   To consider the origin as pure and that which emerges as
coarse; to view accumulation as inadequate; to live by
oneself in peace and with spiritual clarity, this is what in
ancient times was known as the way of the Tao. Kuan Yin124
and Lao Tzu heard these ideas and were pleased. They
founded their system upon the belief that nothing exists
ultimately, and they were guided in this by the notion of the
great one. Gentleness and weakness combined with
humility and self-emptying were its distinguishing features
and its core was the prevention of harm to all forms of life.
   Kuan Yin said, ‘One who does not exist in self sees
others as they really are. His movement is like water, his
calmness like a mirror, his response is like that of an echo.
When he is empty, he seems to have forgotten; unmoving,
he is as still as water; peaceful, he is as one with all; he
views success as failure, and he never tries to take the lead
but always to follow.’
  Lao Tzu said, ‘Know the masculine but hold to the
feminine, become the valley of the whole world. Know
your purity but hold to the impure, be a channel for the
whole world.’ Most people choose to be first, he chooses
to be last and says that he will accept the dregs of the whole
world. Most people choose fulfilment; he chooses to be
empty. He has never hoarded, so has more than enough; he
prefers to be alone, yet has many around him. Living by
actionless action, he mocks at ability. While others look
for good fortune, he feels free to bend and twist. He says
that he only wishes to avoid blame. He considers what is
most profound to be the core and takes what is most severe
as his guide, and he says that which is strong will break and
that which is sharp becomes blunted. He is always open-
handed and tolerant with all and seeks no harm to any. This
can be called perfection.
  Kuan Yin and Lao Tzu! Truly great men of the past!
               The blank and the motionless have no form;
               change and transformation are never at rest;
               what is death?
               what is life?
               what is the companionship of Heaven and
               Earth?
               where does the spirit of clarity go?
               when forgotten, what becomes of it?
   All forms of life are gathered around us, yet none of
them is our destination. In the past people thought this was
the way of the Tao. Chuang Tzu heard of these ideas and was
pleased. He taught them using strange and mysterious
expressions, wild and extraordinary phrases, and terms
which had no precise meaning. He taught what he believed,
yet was never partisan, nor did he view things from just one
perspective. He saw the whole world as lost in foolishness
and thus incapable of understanding anything sensible.
   Therefore he used supposed words to offer a constant
insight, quotes to have a ring of truth and flowing words to
give greater depth. He came and went with the spirit of
Heaven and Earth but he never viewed all the forms of life
as being beneath him. He did not dispute right and wrong,
but dwelt alongside his generation and its ways. Some
might consider his writings insignificant, for they are
inoffensive and fluent. But though his words are varied, in
amongst the twists and turns there is more than might be
expected, for there is much which is true and eternal. He
travels with the Creative above and he makes friends with
those below who view life and death as meaningless and
who see neither beginning nor end. His vision of the origin
is vast and penetrating, ever expanding and open-minded,
unshackled by anything or anybody. It can be said that he is
in accord with the Author of the Tao, and soars to the
highest heights. Indeed this is so, but he still continues to
explore with us the changes and transformations that arise
within all, and come from him. His teachings have never
been fully appreciated, as they are difficult and subtle.
   Hui Shih made many efforts and all his books would fill
five carriages, but his Tao was false and confused and what
he said never hit the centre. Jumping from idea to idea, he
would say things like:
   ‘The greatest thing has nothing outside it and we call this
the great One. The smallest thing has nothing inside it and
we call this the smallest One.’
  Or:
   ‘No substance, incapable of being hoarded, yet greater
than a thousand miles.’
  Or:
   ‘Heaven is on the same level as Earth and the mountains
are equal to the marshes.’
  Or:
  ‘When the sun is in the centre, it is in the decline. That
which is born is dying.’
  Or:
  ‘That which is very similar is different from that which is
only a little similar and this is called being a little different.
All forms of life are similar and all differ. This we call the
great similarities and differences.’
  Or:
  ‘The south is limitless but has borders.’
  Or:
  ‘Today I left for Yueh and arrived yesterday.’
  Or:
  ‘That which is joined is separated.’
  Or:
  ‘I know where the centre is of the whole world, north of
Yen and south of Yueh.’125
  Or:
   ‘Love embraces all forms of life and Heaven and Earth
are of One.’
   Hui Shih made these great statements to help the whole
world to be more creative in debate and other speakers
throughout the world were delighted to follow his lead,
saying,
              ‘An egg has feathers,
              a chicken has three feet,
              Ying has the whole world,
              a dog could be called a sheep,
              horses have eggs,
              a toad has a tail,
              fire is not hot,
              mountains emerge from the mouth,
               chariot wheels never touch the ground,
               eyes cannot see,
               pointing is not the same as being there,
               being there is not the culmination,
               the tortoise is longer than the snake,
               a T-square does not work,
               a compass doesn’t make circles,
               chisels do not fit into handles,
               a bird’s shadow never moves,
               swift though the arrowhead is, at times it is
               neither moving nor still,
               a dog is not a dog,
               a bay horse and a black ox make three,
               a white dog is black,
               a motherless colt never had a mother,
               if you have a pole one foot long and every
               day you cut off half,
               ten thousand generations will not exhaust it.’
   These are the sorts of sayings speakers came up with in
response to Hui Shih, rattling on in this fashion eternally to
the end of their lives.
  Huan Tuan and Kung Sun Lung are to be numbered
amongst these. They were more vocal than others,
overwhelming the hearts of the people and changing their
ideas. But they could not subdue people’s hearts, they just
encompassed them with argument. Hui Shih drew upon his
knowledge every day to argue with these speakers, these
talkers from around the world, as can be seen from the
examples above.
   Indeed, Hui Shih’s style of speaking illustrates that he
thought himself the very best, saying that Heaven and Earth
are also equal! Shih certainly maintained his vigour, but
unfortunately he had no real skill.
   In the south there was a man with very odd views called
Huang Liao, and he enquired why Heaven and Earth didn’t
fall or collapse, where the wind and rain come from,
likewise the thunder and lightning. Hui Shih didn’t try to
avoid these questions and, without pausing to think, he
charged right in and gave answers to everything affecting all
the forms of life, without ceasing, with no end of words.
Nevertheless, he feared he hadn’t said enough, so he began
embroidering his answers with fantastic theories. If he
spoke contrary to what others thought, he saw this as
confirmation of the veracity of what he said and was
delighted at the fame he gained. In this he was indeed like
all other such speakers. He was weak in terms of true
Virtue and forceful in his engagement with what is external.
He trod a dark and confused path.
   From the perspective of the Tao of Heaven and Earth, we
can see that Hui Shih’s ability was simply like the buzzing
of a mosquito or gnat. What was the real use of it?
Certainly, he can be credited with founding one school of
thought, though to be honest I have to say he needed to
follow the Tao more! Hui Shih found no sense of
achievement in doing this. Instead he persisted in trying
endlessly to diagnose all the forms of life, until finally all
he is remembered for is his fame as a debater! Poor old
Hui Shih! With all that talent he never obtained any
significant achievement. Racing after the multitude of
things in this world and never returning, he was indeed like
someone who tries to have the last word with an echo, or
who tries to show that you can outrun your shadow.
  What a shame!
1. The Illustrated Tao Te Ching, translated by Man Ho
Kwok, Martin Palmer and Jay Ramsay, Element Books,
1993, p. 27.
2. Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in China,
Cambridge University Press, 1956, volume II, p. 35.
3. The Illustrated Tao Te Ching, p. 137.
4. Mythological figure, reputed to have lived to a great age.
5. The greatest of the Sacred Mountains of China, believed
to be the birthplace of creation and humanity.
6. Philosopher who taught simple living and pacifism.
7. One of the three great ‘Taoist’ writers, along with Lao
Tzu and Chuang Tzu.
8. One of the five original Emperors of Chinese mythology
and pre-history. A model of Confucian wisdom.
9. A hermit who, according to legend, refused to take over
the kingdom.
10. A critic of Confucius, known as ‘the Madman of Chu’.
11. Shun took over the kingdom from Yao and is another
model ruler.
12. A famous musician.
13. This passage plays on the use of positive and negative
signifiers in Chinese characters.
14. The greatest of the five original Emperors of Chinese
mythology, a symbol of wisdom and civilization.
15. Two very ancient forms of music.
16. Amputation of one foot was a common form of
punishment for criminals.
17. The favourite follower of Confucius.
18. Chieh is the archetypal evil ruler who murdered his
ministers when they tried to control him.
19. Pi Kan tried to restrain the last Shang Emperor’s
excesses.
20. Two primordial founder figures. Fu Hsi is credited with
discovering the eight Trigrams and with inventing writing.
21. A book of rules and proverbs.
22. Figures from the history of the fifth century BC.
23. Prime Minister of Cheng, died 522 BC.
24. The most famous archer of Chinese mythology.
25. Mutilated as a punishment for crime.
26. A formal title for the Emperors, marking their special
relationship with Heaven.
27. A disciple of Confucius.
28. Historical figures who were either reformers or
upholders of the status quo, but who were all killed or
committed suicide.
29. The following characters are all from the earliest myths
of China.
30. Primal mother figure, an early Heavenly goddess, later
adopted as a major deity in Taoism.
31. A famous sword belonging to King Ho Lu (c. 500 BC)
of Wu.
32. One of the five original Emperors of mythology, a
model of Confucian piety.
33.A mythological ruler of antiquity.
34. The five vital organs of early Chinese medicine are the
liver, lungs, heart, kidneys and spleen, and are linked to the
five elements: water, wood, fire, earth and metal.
35. Models of benevolence and righteousness in Confucian
teachings.
36. Yang taught hedonism, while Mo Tzu taught love of all.
37. Hsia, Shang and Chou (2200–600 BC).
38.2255 BC.
39. Ruler who abdicated to his brother and then refused to
serve an unjust ruler, so dying of starvation.
40. Famous for his wickedness.
41. A famous trainer of horses.
42. Mythological ruler of ancient China.
43. Advisers who tried to reform their rulers and were
executed for their pains.
44. At a great feast in Chu the Lord of Lu gave poor-quality
wine, while the Lord of Chao (whose capital was Han Tan)
gave good wine. The steward, having some desire for
mischief, swapped them. The ruler of Chu took offence at
the poor wine, attacked Chao and sacked Han Tan.
45. All mythological rulers or sages of antiquity.
46. Traditionally, this position and direction was only taken
by Emperors.
47. The sun.
48. The moon.
49. Chi – the breath which animates all life and, when used
up, causes death.
50. Confucius’ own name.
51. At the annual re-enactment of the Chou conquest of the
Shang in the twelfth or eleventh century BC.
52. Name for the model Emperor Shun.
53. The three armies are the standard subdivisions of a
feudal state, and the five weapons are the spear, halberd,
axe, shield and bow.
54. The five sentences are branding or tattooing, cutting off
the nose, cutting off the feet, castration and execution.
55. It is unclear what the twelve were, but they certainly
include the Six Classics of Confucianism.
56 Fire, wood, earth, metal, water.
57. Models used at sacrifices to distract evil spirits, which
were thrown away afterwards.
58. The two main categories of mythological early rulers
of China. The Three August Ones were Fu Hsi, Nu Kua and
Shen Nung. The Five Emperors were the Yellow Emperor,
Chuan Hsu, Kao Hsin, Yao and Shun.
59. This paragraph describes the last rulers of the Three
Dynasties and their successors or usurpers.
60. The Three Kings were the founders of the Three
Dynasties Hsia, Shang and Chou.
61. King Ki Kuai of Yen was urged to imitate Yao and to
abdicate. He did this in 316 BC and Tzu Chi, his minister,
took over, but it was a disaster.
62. He launched an assault on his relatives, who ruled Chu,
trying to emulate the Dynastic founders Tang (of the Shang)
and Wu (of the Chou), but he failed.
63. Apparently they thought he was an enemy of theirs
called Yang Huo.
64. A philosopher ridiculed by Chuang Tzu as one who
argues about the difference between ‘hard’ and ‘white’.
65. Author of a ‘Taoist’ text, now lost.
66. Traditional title for the remarkable flourishing of
different schools of philosophy between the sixth and
fourth centuries BC.
67. Used for divination and oracles.
68. Wu Tzu Hsu tried to alert his master the King of Wu
that a neighbouring kingdom would invade. In the end the
King grew to distrust Tzu Hsu and made him commit
suicide in 484 BC.
69. All symbols or places of immortality.
70. Minister of Chi c. 650 BC, admired by Confucius.
71. Sometimes counted as two of the Three August Ones,
but more often as mythological progenitors of the Chinese
and their civilization.
72. This entire paragraph assumes traditional Chinese
notions of how different species emerge as transmutations
of other species.
73. Despotic ruler of Chi 684–643 BC.
74. Chief Minister of Duke Huan, who held him in very
high esteem.
75. In the Chinese, all the ghosts have specific names,
which I have omitted to make the paragraph easier to read!
76. Historical figure, c. 569 BC.
77 Formal ritual music.
78 Hsiung I Liao of Chu lived c. 480 BC.
79 Ai of Lu.
80. Symbol of authority as a minister.
81. Prince Pi Kan was murdered by the despot Chou, last
ruler of Shang. This action was considered one of the
reasons why the Shang Dynasty fell.
82. A remarkable politician who won freedom for the state
of Wei, c. 400 BC.
83. A seventh-century BC minister who was taken prisoner
when his state fell. He became a slave on a farm, but
eventually rose to power again.
84. His family tried to kill him, but he would not seek
revenge when in power.
85. Father of Wu who founded the Chou Dynasty.
According to tradition, King Wen wrote the commentaries
on the sixty-four hexagrams of the I Ching.
86. The heart and mind.
87. Ping is the title of the philosopher Kung Sang Lung.
88. A gatekeeper who could not run away was more
valuable, so they were deliberately mutilated.
89. Chief Minister of Chi who actually controlled the state,
but was admired for his respect for the hermit Tzu Chi.
90. Both men displayed coolness in times of trouble, and
by their calm actions, not saying a word, stared down
trouble.
91. The beak refers to the chattering of birds – noisy
conversation.
92. i.e., things come to me, although I have done nothing to
deserve them.
93. Slaves were usually doormen, and one who could not
run away was the most valuable.
94. King of Yueh who was overthrown by invaders and
retreated to the mountain with his minister Chung. They
won back the kingdom, but the King then feared Chung and
made him commit suicide.
95. Pretended to be mad in order to escape the wrath of
Chou, the last Shang Emperor.
96. A crony of Chou.
97. A model of filial piety, persecuted by his stepmother.
98. Another model of filial piety, hated by his father.
99. A jewel was placed in the mouth of a corpse to help pay
its way through the Underworld.
100. A ‘Taoist’ teacher – not Lao Tzu.
101. Heat was applied to the holes and the resulting cracks
were read as prototype characters which furnished an
answer to questions asked of the gods or ancestors.
102. All the preceding instances of virtuous rulers wishing
to abdicate in favour of sages, wise advisers or ministers,
are drawn from history or mythology, and many have been
explained more fully earlier.
103. Founder of the Chou state. He is mentioned in the
Book of Songs in similar terms as a model of wise
kingship.
104. The Sacred Mountain of Chou, site of the original
oracles which form the I Ching.
105. The country was invaded by Wu, but he regained his
kingdom within a year, in 506 BC.
106. One of Confucius’ followers, famous for not being
bothered by his poverty.
107. One of Confucius’ followers, renowned for his
wealth.
108. Ancient ritual hymns.
109. Kung Po ruled for fourteen years, then in 828 BC
retired to Kung Hill as a hermit.
110. He overthrew the tyrant ruler Chieh, last king of the
Hsia Dynasty, and founded the Shang Dynasty.
111. c. eleventh century BC.
112. This describes traditional ways of concluding a
contract by smearing it, and the parties to it, with blood
from a sacrifice.
113. The following paragraphs describe traditional myths
of the founding of civilization by, amongst others, the
Three August Ones.
114. A follower of Confucius, previously renowned for his
fighting abilities.
115. Yao murdered his son; Shun exiled his mother’s
youngest brother; Yu worked without ceasing for twelve
years to harness the floods of the Yellow River and
damaged his health as a result.
116. Because his father stole a sheep.
117. Because to do so he would have had to indict his
father.
118. Sun, moon and stars.
119. The full name of Lieh Tzu – see p. xiv.
120. Study the Tao.
121. An ancestor of Confucius, eighth century BC.
122. Home states of Mencius and Confucius.
123. Shen Tao is known as an originator of certain Legalist
concepts.
124. The traditional name of the Gatekeeper to the West,
who asked Lao Tzu to write the Tao Te Ching before he left
China for good.
125. Extreme north and extreme south.
Index




        Actionless action; true Tao not to be talked
        about, xiii, xxi
        Actionless action (Wu Wei), 80, 83–4, 92–
        3, 103, 107, 150, 187–9, 195, 208
        ‘Against Music’ (Mo Tzu), 298
        Ah Ho Kan, 194
        Ai (border warden), 19
        Ai (Duke of Lu), 41–3, 181, 291
        Ai Tai To, 41–2
        ambition, 200, 283, 293
        anger, 10, 31, 169–170, 208
        animals; cats, 6; deer, 17; leopards, 154,
        168; monkeys, 13–14, 17, 122, 172, 216–
17; oxen, xv, 23, 293–4; pigs 160, 193;
rabbits, 242; sacred tortoise, 146–7; tigers,
32–3; weasels, 6. See also dogs; horses
Ant Hill, 228
Apricot Tree Altar, 280
archery, 183–4, 214
argument, 19–20, 26–7, 67, 97–8, 150,
214–15, 218, 221
August Rulers (Three August Ones), 117,
121–2 and n., 124–6, 152 and n., 264 n.
babies, xxvii–xxviii, 200–203
beauty, 122, 175, 226, 268, 293
beginning of the beginning, 15, 179
benevolence, 16, 57, 60, 67–70, 79, 83, 90,
112, 118, 123–4, 144, 202, 220, 257, 281,
293
bigotry, 283
birds; bird of ease and emptiness, 61;
chickens, 233; crane, 1, 67; dove, 2; Dried
Old Bones, 154; ducks, 67; feeding, 153,
164; game, 161; goose that cackles, 167;
jackdaws, 174; marsh pheasants, 23–4; owl,
222; pelicans, 240; quail, 3; raven, 126; Roc,
1, 2–3; sparrow, 208; swallow, 173–4; tailor
bird, 4; Young Phoenix, 147
birth, 49, 52, 88, 142, 156
Black Curtain Forest, 280
Black Dragon, 293
bodily parts, 10, 35, 53, 64, 66, 164; control
of body, 190–91; five vital organs, 66 and
n.,83, 84; unity of, 201
Book of Chuang Tzu, xiv–xxx
Book of History, 211, 297
Book of Poetry, 211, 297
Book of Wonders, 1
books; archive of Confucius, 112; Classics,
112 and n., 126; value of Tao in, 114–15
bravery, 39, 149, 293
bureaucracy; minor officials, 68;         top
officials, 39–40. See also government
butchering skills, 22–3
butterflies, 20, 154
Chai (state), 43
Chan Tzu, 255–6
Chang Chi, 38–9
Chang Hung, 77 and n.
Chang Jo, 212
Chang Tien Cheng, 268
Chang Wu, 229
Chang Wu Tzu, 18
Chang Yi, 159
Chang Yu, 212
change, 56–8, 151, 174, 180, 197, 201,
214, 226, 230
Change (Emperor of the South Sea), 64
Chao, King of Chou, 253–4
Chao family, 205–6
Chao Hsi, Marquis of Han, 251
Chao Wen (lute player), 14
Chao (state), 77 n.
Chaos (Emperor of the Centre), 64
chapped-hand cream, 5–6
Chen (state), 62
Cheng Kao Fu, 292 and n.
Cheng of the North Gate, 118–19
Cheng, 190–1
Cheng (state), 289
Cheng Tzu Chan, 39–40 and n.
Cheng Tzu Yu, 246
Chi, 2
Chi, Master, 8–9
Chi, Prince, 236 and n.
Chi (state), 30, 33, 76–7, 152, 160, 215,
217, 220; attack on, 227–8
chi (breath of Heaven), 87
Chi Che, 98
Chi Chen, 233
Chi Chih, 299
Chi Chu, 27
Chi Hsien (shaman of spirits), 62–3
Chi Hsing Tzu, 161
Chi Kung, 177
Chi Mountain, 250, 258
Chi To, 242
Chi Tzu, 227
Chiang Lu Mien, 98
Chieh (evil ruler), 27 and n., 50, 82, 84–5,
144, 236, 268–9
Chieh (state), 258
Chieh Tzu Tui, 266
Chieh Yu, 4 and n., 60–61
Chieh Yu (madman of Chu), 35
Chien Ho, Marquis of, 237
Chien Wu, 4, 51, 60–61, 184
Chih, Robber, xxii, 69–70, 77, 78, 82, 84–5,
104, 261–77
Chih, ruler, 141
Chih Chang Man Chi, 102–4
Chih Chi, 141
Chih Ho, 238
Chih Yu, 264
Chin (musician), 120
Chin (state), 19, 99, 291
Chin Chang (master), 54
Chin Hua Li, 298
Chin Ku Li, 300
Chin Shih, 24
Ching (woodcarver), 162–3
Ching family, 205–6
Ching Ling, 257
Ching-shou (form of music), 22
Ching Tzu, 164
Chiu Fang Yin, 219
Chiu Shih, 289
Chiu Yu insects, 154
Cho Lu (battlefield), 265
Chou, Duke of, 122
Chou Dynasty, 67 and n., 258–9
Chou (Shang Emperor), 27 and n., 144, 236,
268–9
Chu, King of, 146, 185, 217, 225
Chu family, 206
Chu (state), 2, 35, 38, 42, 77 and n., 99, 112,
141 n., 151, 158, 215, 217, 253; King of,
225; travelling to, 225–34
Chu Chiao, 18
Chu Hsien, 159
Chu Jung, 79 and n.
Chu Liang, 57
Chu Ping Man, 290
Chu Po Yu, 32, 230
Chu To, 154
Chu Tzu Mountain, 212–13
Chu Yuan, 33
Chuan Hsu, 51
Chuang, Duke, 163
Chuang Tzu; on benevolence, 118; on
carelessness, 229; and Confucius, xx–xxi,
xxviii; on desiccated skull, 151–2; on excess
of wealth, 237; existence in dreams, 20; on
forgetting one’s self, 174–5; founder
teacher, xiii; funeral, 294; historical details,
xiii–xiv; on limited nature of things, 194; on
location of Tao, 193; on man without
emotion, 44; on Master Teacher, 107;
mourning wife’s death, xvii, 150–51; on
perfect man, 240–41; place in Taoist
thought, xxvi–xxx; on poverty, 172–3;
refusal of status and power, xv, xxii, xxviii,
146–7; religious background, xxviii–xxix;
rivalry with Hui Tzu, xvi; scholars’
employment, 267–8; and Tao, 290; teaching
method, 304; understanding teaching of,
145–6; on use of big things, 5–6; and use of
swords, 275–8; on uselessness, 6, 240; on
wealth, 293; writings (Chuang Tzu), xiv–
xxvii
Chui (craftsman), 79, 163
Chun (ancient tree), 2
Chun Mang, 101–2
Chung, Minister, 222
Chung, Mount, 84
Chung Shan, 255
Chung Yang, 79 and n.
civilization, xxiii–xxv, 72–4, 264–6 and n.
Classics; Six, 126; Twelve, 112 and n.
Commander of the Right, 23–4
completeness, 14–15
Confucianism; arguments of, 215; words
used in, 12
Confucius (Kung Fu Tzu); appearance, 238;
archives of, 112; on benevolence and
righteousness, 112; on change, 174, 197;
changing views, 245; and Chuang Tzu, xx–
xxi; on contentment, 255; criticized for
being miserable, 239; on death, 170–71,
179; on destiny, 30, 152; on disfigurement,
42; on duty, 30; exiled, 171–2, 256, 283; on
farmer of Primal Chaos, 100; fasting, 28–9,
170–71, 173, 256; on fate, 144; first
hearing of Tao, 122–7; on flowing with the
Tao, 256–7; followers, 178–9; and four
evils, 283; on government, 183, 184–5; on
grasping Tao through argument, 97–8; on
Great Way, 26, 29; on human heart, 292; and
hunchback, 158; on innate nature of things,
266–7; on judging men by their demeanour,
28; on keeping the law, 261–2; and Lao Tzu,
124–7; on learning, 41; on limits of wisdom,
240; on middle way, 31–2; as minister of
government, 291; on mourning, 55–6; on
mystery of life, 29; and old fisherman, 280–
86; on the past, 196–7; on perfect man, 42–
3; preaching, 112; reputation of, 268; on
responding to decrees of Heaven, 173; and
Robber Chih, 261–7; role and influence of,
280–84; scholarship of, 137, 138; singing
and lute-playing, 144, 257, 280; on speech
without words, 217–18; on swimming, 158–
9, 162; on Tao, 55–6, 181, 191, 257; on
time-servers, 229; travelling methods, 120–
21; understanding, 18, 29; on Wang Tai, 38;
on words and their meaning, 31; on work,
227; on worrying, 159–60
Country of Great Silence, 169
courage, 16, 144, 293
craftsmanship, 72, 78, 182
Cripple Yi, 290
Crooked Man with No Lips, 43
Crows Feet, 153–4
Dark City, 84
Dark Palace, 51
death, 24, 47–8, 49, 52, 53–4, 55, 142, 149,
156, 160, 170–71, 179, 194, 238 and n. See
also mourning; reincarnation
deformities, see disfigured men
desiccated skull, 151–2
destiny, 30, 40, 293
difference, 12–14, 15–16, 38–9, 52, 139–
44, 153–4 and n., 231, 233, 268, 290, 303.
See also right and wrong; yang; yin
disfigured men, 35, 39–42; acceptance of
deformity, 53; Crooked Man with No Lips,
43; gatekeepers, 215 and n., 220 and n.;
hunchback, 158; Man with a Jug-sized
Goitre, 43; Uncles Legless and Cripple,
151; webbed toes, 66–8
divination, 83, 240 and n.
dogs; barking, 233; judging, 210–11, 218;
straw, 120–21 and n.
Doubt Curtailed, 187
dragon powers, 84
Dramatic (Emperor of the North Sea), 64
dreams; living in, 19; and transformation of
things, 20
Dried Old Bones, 154
drunkenness, 19, 31, 157
E Lai, 236 and n.
Earth, 13, 15, 89–90, 92–104, 113, 117,
150, 156
Eastern Heights, 69
Eastern Ocean, 145
eight defects, 282
eight limiting conditions, 293
eight treasures, 83
elements, 66, 73, 117 and n.
Emperor of the South Sea, 64
emperors, 60–4, 96, 98, 107–9; August
Rulers, 117, 264n.; Five Emperors, 121 and
n., 124–7, 138. See also government; kings
Endless, 195
existence, 12–14, 15, 19, 20, 22–4, 68,
196, 205–6, 233–4, 303. See also life
Fa Yen (book of rules and proverbs), 31
fame, 4, 26–7, 64, 68–9, 111, 123, 129,
138, 149, 182, 225, 241, 269–70
Fan, Lord of, 185
Fang Ming, 212
farmer; of Primal Chaos, 99–100; of Shih
Hu, 250
fate, 58, 144
Fen, river, 5
Feng Yi, 51
fish and fishing, xvi, 1, 2–3, 50, 55, 147,
153, 182, 237–8, 239–40, 280–6
five colours, 69, 73, 78, 104
five flavours, 69, 104
Five Lords, 51
five notes, 66, 73, 104
five smells, 104
five types of sentence, 109 and n.
five types of weapons, 109 and n.
five unimportant aspects, 109
five vital organs, 66 and n.., 83, 84
forces on living things, 8–9
forecasting, 62–4
forgetting, 57–8
four evils, 282–3
friendship, 54–5
frogs, 137
Frog’s Robe, 153
Fu Hsi, 29, 51, 79 and n.., 134
Fu Yueh, 51
gate of Deepest Mystery, 86
gatekeepers, 215 and n.., 220 and n.., 303
ghosts, 160–61
going with the flow, 172, 256–7
Golden Tablets, 211
gourds, 5–6
government, 3–4, 27, 60–61, 72–3, 76–80,
82–5, 89, 92, 96–7, 102, 103, 109, 111,
117, 129, 142, 182–5, 212, 213, 216, 219,
230, 236, 242, 249–59 and n.., 251, 258,
266, 268–70, 272, 291, 292, 296–307
Grand Marshal, 196
grave robbers, 238
Great Dipper, 51
Great Gorge, 101
Great Official Accord, 231–4
Great Origin, 245
Great Purity, 195
Great Temple, 294
Great Wall, 277
Great Way, 26, 29, 58
greatness, 218–19, 222–3, 231–2
greed, 272, 283
Green Peace plants, 154
Han, river, 99
Han (state), 251
Han Tan (capital of Chao), 77, 146
Hao, river, 147
happiness; 35, 88, 107–8, 131, 145, 149–
54, 180, 272
Harmonizer of Destinies, 152
harmony, 79, 117, 127
hats; ceremonial, 5
hearing, 70, 78–9, 83, 84, 104, 201, 221;
hearts; of the people, 84–5; purpose of, 300
Heaven; birth of, 15; blueness of, 1;
boundaries, 113; breath of, 87; children of,
28; companion of, 89–90; decrees of, 173;
disruption of ways of, 88; does it move?,
117–27; and Earth, 92–104; Equality of, 20;
equals of, 95; establishing death and birth,
49; in everything, 223; examining through a
narrow tube, 146; father and mother of all
life, 156; government of everything below,
51, 213; guidance from, 28; as guide to
sages, 226; happiness of, 107–8; harmony
of, 190; Heaven’s Pool, 2; Heaven’s Tao,
106–15; and humanity, 174; internal, 143;
mean-minded man of, 56; as one with Earth,
13; as Primal source, 296; produces nothing,
108; providing shape, 44–5; purity of, 150;
sages nourished by, 44; Sons of (Emperors),
42; as teacher, 226–7; Treasury of, 16;
troubled by benevolence and righteousness,
68; understanding ways of, 47; united in,
157–8; violation of principles of, 24; Virtue
of, 112, 131
Heavenly Gate, 205
Hill of the Dark Prince, 151
Hill Slippers, 153
Histories, 126, 297
Ho, River, 4, 35
Ho Hsu (mythological ruler), 74 and n., 79
and n.
honour, 3, 173, 200, 252
horses, xxiii, 33, 72–4, 141, 154, 163, 210–
11, 213
Hsi Peng, 212, 216
Hsi-shih (famous beauty), 13, 122
Hsia (Dynasty), 67 and n.
Hsiang Cheng (wild region), 213
Hsiang Li Chin, 299–300
Hsiao Chi, 236 and n.
Hsiao Po, Duke Huan, 268
Hsien, Shaman, 117
Hsien Chih music, 118–20
Hsien Yuan, 79 and n.
Hsu Ao (ruler), 17
Hsu Ao (state), 27
Hsu Wu Kuei, 210–23
Hsu Yu (hermit), 3–4 and n., 6, 56–7, 95,
220, 242, 249, 257
Hsuan, Prince of Chi, xiv
Hsun Tzu (philosopher), xxviii
Hu Tzu, 62–3
Hua, 95
Hua Liu, 141
Hua Mountain, 300
Hua Tzu, Master, 251
Huan, Duke of Chai, 43, 115, 160–61, 216
Huan (man of Cheng), 289–90
Huan Tou, 84
Huan Tuan, 306
huang chung, 66
Huang Liao, 306–7
Huang Shuang insects, 154
Huang Tzu Kao Ao, 160
Hui, Prince of Liang, xiv
Hui Shih (Tzu) (philosopher and friend of
Chuang Tzu), xvi, 5, 6, 14, 44, 147, 215,
228, 240, 304, 305–7
humanity, 112, 143, 168, 174, 231
humility, 39–40
hunchback, 158
Hundred Schools of Philosophy, 143 and n.
Hung Mung, 87–8
Huo, Inspector, 193
hurting others, 27
I Ching, 126, 182n.
I Liao (Master of the Southern Market),
168–9 and n., 217–18, 229
ignorance; deceived and ignorant ones, 133–
5; true, 44
insects; ants, 221; bugs, 154; Chiu Yu, 154;
cicada, 2; Huang Shuang, 154; lice, 220–21;
millipedes, 143; praying mantis, 32, 98; in
reincarnation, 154; rotting maggots, 154
jade, 73, 78, 171 and n.
Jan Chiu, 196–7
Jen, Prince, 237–8
Jin Hsiang, Lord, 226
Jo (god of the North Ocean), xxi, 137, 139,
142
Kan Pi, 51
Keng Sang Chu, 199–208
Ki Kuai, King of Yen, 141 andn.
King Chin Chi, 170
kings, 60–64, 98, 107–9, 138 and n;.;
August Rulers, 117, 264n. See also
emperors; government
Knowing Harmony, 270–71
knowledge; of able-bodied and mutilated,
40; from argument, 26–7; can forget yes and
no, 163; distress at pursuit of, 80; of
existence, 14; futility of, 80; great, 138–9;
and inwardness and outwardness, 195;
knowing the unknowable, 203–5; lack of
boundary to, 22; of people, 222; people’s
longing for, 74; perfect, 77, 205; power of,
39; rejoicing at, 83; ridding of petty, 240; of
right and wrong, 17–18; ruining virtue, 26–
7; and shores of the Dark Waters, 187; that
goes out to all things, 293; of those in
authority, 79–80; of what is now known, 17–
18; and Yellow Emperor’s pearl, 95. See
also understanding; wisdom
Kou Chien (King of Yueh), 222
Ku Chu (state), 258
Ku Huo, 299
Ku She (mountain), 4–5
Kuai Chi, Mount, 222
Kuai (ruler), 17
Kuan Chung, 160 and n., 216, 268
Kuan Lung Feng, 27
Kuan Yin, 303 and n. See also Yin
(gatekeeper)
Kuang, Blind (musician), 78, 79
Kuang Chen, Master, 85–7
Kuang (state), 143
Kuei, Crown Prince, 275–6
Kun Hun, 212
Kun Lun mountains, 151, 196
Kun (son of Tzu Chi), 218–20
Kung family, 280
Kung Fu Tzu, see Confucius (Kung Fu Tzu)
Kung Po, 257 and n.
Kung Sun Lung, 144–6 and n., 306
Kung the True, 270
Kung Wen Hsien, 23
Kuo Hsiang, xviii–xix
Lai (Master), 52, 53–4
language, see words
Lao Lai Tzu, 238–9 and n.
Lao Tzu; on benevolence and righteousness,
112–14; and Confucius, 41, 122–7; death,
24; on embracing the One, 201–2; founder
teacher, xiii; and Keng Sang Chu, 199; lack
of historical details, xiv; on people’s hearts,
84, 97–8; on perfect man, 179–81, 202–8,
303; on pride and arrogance, 247; on Tao’s
profundity, 191–3; and Tzu Kung, 124–6; on
wandering, 229–30; on wisdom, 61– 2;
writings, xiii, xv, xxvi
laws, 90, 109, 296
Li (Master), 52, 53–4
Li Chi, 19
Li Chu, 66, 69, 78–9, 95
Li Hsu, 79 and n.
Li Lu, 79 and n.
Liang (capital of Wei), 147, 228
Liao, river, 61
Liao of the Southern Market, see I Liao
Lieh Tzu (Lieh Yu Kou), Master, xiii, xxiv–
xxv, 3, 62–4, 153, 157, 183–4, 208–9, 252–
3, 288–94
Lien Shu, 4
life; from actionless action, 150; all forms
held in Tao, 301; boundary of, 22;
comprehending, 293; force, 142; grasping
purpose of, 156–65; Middle Course (or
Way), 22, 32; mystery of, 29; nurturing of,
22–4; and profit, 256; study of, 159; through
breath, 241; through scrounging, 151;
transmutation of species, 153–4. See also
existence
Ling, Duke of Wei, 32, 170, 231
Literati, 84–5, 197, 214, 218, 238, 289
Little Knowledge, 231–3
Liu Hsia Chi, 261
love, 19, 30, 112–13, 212
loyalty, 50, 118, 236, 266, 284, 292
Lu, Marquess of, 162, 168–9
Lu (state), 38, 41, 56, 77, 153, 159, 168,
178, 251–2, 262, 297; learned men in, 181–
2
Lu Chu, 215
Lu Hsia Chi, 267
Lu Liang (state), 161–2
Lung Feng, 77 and n., 236
machines, 99
Madman of Chu, 4 n.
Maker of All, 61
man, 3, 56, 139–40, 296; spiritual, 3, 221,
296; true, 131. See also perfect man
Man Kou Te, 267–9
Man with a Jug-sized Goitre, 43
Man without a Name, 61
Men Wu Kuei, 102
Mencius, 297n.
Meng Sun Tsai, 56
Meng Tzu Fan (master), 54
Miao tribes, 84
Middle Course (or Way), 22, 32
Middle Kingdom, 178
Mih Tzu, xv
Ming Tzu, 43 and n.
misfortune, knowing how to escape, 35
Mo Ti (Tzu), 67 and n., 79, 104, 268, 298,
299–300
‘Moderation in Economics’ (Mo Tzu), 298
Mohists, 12, 84–5, 197, 214, 218, 289,
299–300
Mou of Wei, Duke, 144–5 and n., 255–6
mourning, 24, 55–6, 109, 150–51, 284,
298–9
Mu, Duke of Chin, 208
mud on the nose, xvi, 215–16
Mulberry Grove Dance, 22
mushrooms, 2
Music, 126, 297
music; ‘Against Music’ (Mo Tzu), 298;
classical, and peasants, 103; Confucius
singing and lute-playing, 144, 257, 280;
discussing, 211; five notes, 66, 73, 104;
following appropriately, 133; forgetting, 58;
hearing, 78; Hsien Chih, 118–20, 298; Kung
and Chueh notes, 215; lute harmony, 215;
Nine Shao, 153, 164; pleasure in, 83;
singing, 58; six tones, 66, 78; types used by
emperors, 298
Nan Jung Chu, xxvii, 200–203
Nan Po Tzu Chi, 34, 51–2
Nan Yueh, 169
nature, 61, 68, 73, 83, 266–7, 288; innate,
xxii–xxv, 83, 104, 135, 266–7
Needham, Joseph, xiv and n.
Nest-Building People, 264
Nieh Chueh, 190, 220
Nine Lo, 117
Nine Provinces, 138
No Beginning, 195
No Existence, 196
no-men, 60
noblemen; ten things to be believed by, 93
non-action, see actionless action
non-existing non-existence, 196
Northern Ocean, 137–8, 143, 147
Not Enough, 270–71
Nu Chu, 51–2
Nu Shang, 210–11
Odes of Sacrifice of Shang, 255 and n.
Old Lung Chi, 194
Old Man of Tsang, 183
one-legged creature, 143
Oneness, 134, 170, 197, 290; embracing the
One, 202–3; great One and smallest One,
304; life coming together in, 180; seeing by
the One, 52; of Tao, 218
Origin, 10, 97, 107
Outline, 246; and Shadow, 20
Pao Shu Ya, 216
parents and children, 102–3, 118, 171; filial
piety, 30, 118, 236
Pei (state), 122, 247
Pei Kung She, 170
Peng Meng, 301
Peng Tsu (mythological figure of great age),
2, 15, 51, 130
Peng Yang, 225
People Who Know how to Keep Alive, 264
perfect man, 3, 18, 157, 164–5, 181, 184,
199; Confucius on, 42–3; has no self, 33;
heart like a mirror, 64; Lao Tzu on, 202–8;
leaving no trace of his actions, 241; not cut
off from truth, 296; as pure spirit, 18;
understanding Heaven and ways of humanity,
47
pettiness, 135
philosophy, schools of, 143 and n., 145,
213–14, 218, 299–300
Pi I, 95, 190
Pi Kan, 173 and n., 270
Pi Kan, Prince, 27, 77 and n., 236, 266
Pien (wheelwright), 115
Pien Ching Tzu, Master, 163–4
Pien Sui, 258
Pin (state), 250
Pingists, 214–15 and n.
pity, 217
plumb lines, 72, 78, 85, 163
Po, Duke, 141 and n.
Po, Sea of, 277
Po Chang Chien (historian), 231
Po Cheng Tzu Kao, 96–7
Po Chu, 229
Po Huang, 79 and n.
Po Hun Wu Jen, 39, 183–4, 288
Po Li Hsi, 182 and n., 208
Po Lo, 72 and n., 74
Po Yi (scholar), 69–70, 137, 138, 258–9,
266
Poems, 126
Pointless, 95
Pool of Heaven, 1
poverty, 172, 211, 225, 237, 252–5, 268
Primal Mystery, 102
Provoke (kingdom), 228
Pu, river, 146
Pu Liang Yi, Master, 52
Pu Yi, 60
punishments, see rewards and punishments
Queen Mother of the West, 51
Records, 93
Red Water, 94
reincarnation, 52, 55, 156–7; transmutation
of species, 153–4
relationships, 16, 171–2
religious background of Chuang Tzu, xxviii–
xxix
rewards and punishments, 82–3, 96–7, 109,
111, 291–2
right and wrong, 17–18, 19–20, 140, 146,
150, 245
righteousness, 67–70, 79, 90, 111–12, 118,
123–4, 144, 202, 267, 270, 293
Rites, 126, 297
ritual, 58, 73, 83, 109, 111, 119, 120–22,
133, 178, 211; Odes of Ritual, 238
Roc (bird), 1, 2–3
sacrifice, xv, 69, 293–4
sages; activities of, 90; behaviour of, 18;
definition of, 296; destruction of, 85; as
example to others, 50; Heaven as guide, 226;
and human relationships, 192; life and death,
130–31; poverty forgotten,            225–6;
quiescent, 106–7; reality not known, 218;
rest where there is true rest, 290; risking
very self, 68; rule of, 101; Sage Master, 93–
4; securing things for the great thief, 76–8;
seven, 212–13; skilful and foolish, 208;
succeeding under Tao, 35; Tao of, 208;
understanding life, 18–19; on the Universe,
16; as wanderers, 44; writings of, 115. See
what is necessary as unnecessary, 290
San Wei, 84
Sang Hu, Master, 54–5, 58, 171–2
scholars, 129–30, 134, 137, 181–2, 230,
266, 267–8, 299–300
seasons, 82, 110, 119, 134, 137–8, 199,
214, 232, 241
Secret Heights, mount of, 187
self; development, 129; non-existence in,
303; value of, 180
Shadow, 20, 246
shamanism, xxix
Shan Chuan, 249
Shan Po, 159
Shang (Dynasty), 67 and n., 257n.
Shang (state), 118
Shao Kuang Mountain, 51
She (state), 30
Sheep’s Groom, 154
Shen Nung, 79 and n., 134, 152 and n., 168,
194, 259
Shen Tao, 301–2 and n., 302
Shen Tu Chia, 39–40
Shen Tu Ti, 242, 266
Shih (model of benevolence), 66 and n., 69,
79, 82, 84–5
Shih (craftsman), xvi–xvii, 33–4, 215–16
Shih Cheng Chi, 113–14
Shih Chiu, 231
Shih Hu, 250
Shih Kuang, 14
Shou Ling, 146
Shou Yang, Mount, 69, 259, 266
Shu (cripple), 35
Shu Chi (scholar) 48, 258–9, 266
Shu Shan the Toeless, 41
Shu Tan, 258–9
Shun, Emperor, 5 and n., 102n., 17, 29, 39,
51, 60, 68, 76, 84, 96, 111, 112, 125, 141,
144, 190, 221, 249–50, 257, 264
Shun (Master from the Eastern Wall), 177
sight, 78–9, 83, 84, 104, 201, 221–2, 294
Six Bow Cases, 211
six breaths, 87
six repositories, 293
six tones, 66, 78
snails, 228
snakes, 21, 143–4, 154
Sou, Prince, 250–51
Southern Market, 168, 218, 229
Southern Ocean, 143, 147
Southern Suburb, 217
Spirit Tower, 204 and n.
Spring and Autumn Annals, 16, 126
Ssu Ma Chien; Historical Records, xiv–xv,
xix, xxviii
Ssu (Master), 52–3
Starlight, 196
states, 26, 27, 30–31. See also government
Su Shu Ao, 184
Sui, Marquis of, 252
Sui Jen, 134, 152 and n.
suitcases, broken, 76
Sun Hsiu, Master, 163–5
Sun Shu Ao, 217–18
Sung (state), 5, 34, 87, 121, 144, 290–91
Sung (state), King of, 293
Sung Chien (Sung Jung Tzu), 3 and n., 300
swords; lover of, 275–8; swordsmith, 196
ta lu pipes, 66
Ta Tao (historian), 231
Ta Ting, 79 and n.
Tai, Noble Ruler, Emperor, 60
Tai, Mount, 2 and n., 15, 51
Tai Chen Jen, 228
Talk of the Villages, 231–2
Tan Fu, King, 250 and n.
Tang, Emperor, 2, 125, 141 and n., 145, 197,
208, 227, 242, 257–8 and n., 265, 269, 298
Tang, Prime Minister of Shang, 118
Tao; abandoned, 134; all forms of life held
in, 301; for all professions, 77; in all things,
205; ancient understanding of, 300–303; of
benevolence, 257, see also benevolence;
chaos if blocked, 241; comprehending all
existence, 232–4; Confucius and, 122–4;
discussion of, 137; of Earth, 130; failing,
70; flaunting, 62; flowing with, 256–7;
followers of, 50; fulfilment from, 55–6;
gaining, 251; of governing, 111; grasping
through argument, 97–8; Great, 193; of
Heaven, 90, 106–15, 130; of humanity, 90;
immensity of, 93, 114; knowledge without,
79–80; location of, 193; Mo Tzu’s, 182,
299; neither beginning nor end, 142; never
alters, 118; nobility and meanness of, 140–
42; not to speak about, 290; oneness of,
218; pattern of, 110; perfect, 86, 193; pivot
of, 12; reality but no form, 50–51; of
righteousness, 257; Ruler of the World, 92;
of the sage, 77, 208; of the scholar, 129–30;
slaying the dragons, 290; as source of life,
286; for swimming, 162; teaching, 51–2;
that is clear is not the Tao, 16; true path, 67–
8; true purpose of, 252; of true simplicity,
131; true Tao not to be talked about, xiii, xxi;
understanding, 142, 180–81, 187–97; value
in books, 114–15; and Virtue, 110, 167–8,
218; Way, 66; written teachings, 297; Yen
Kang Tiao on, 194–5
Tao Te Ching, xiii, xv, xvii–xviii, xxi, xxvi
Taoism; xiii, xx, xxviii, 3, 12, 13–15, 23, 30,
35
Te (Virtue), xxvii, 66, 68, 70, see also Virtue
templates, 72, 78
ten things to be believed by noblemen, 93
Teng Hang, 227
Teng Ling, 299
that and this, 12–13, 15–16
thieves, 76–8
Three Dynasties, 67 and n., 68, 80, 88, 141
Three Kings, 138 and n.
Ti people, 250
Tiao Ling, 174–5
Tien Cheng, Lord, 76–7
Tien Ho, 217 and n.
Tien Kai Chih, 159
Tien Ken, 61
Tien Mou, Marquis, 227
Tien Pien, 301–2
Tien Tzu Fang, 177–85
Ting (cook), 22
transformation of things, 20, 153–4, 166,
180
transmutation of species, 153–4 and n.
travelling, 168–9, 173, 222, 240
trees; Apricot Tree Altar, 280; bamboo, 154;
cause of own destruction, 36; Chun, 2;
cinnamon, 36; cutting down, 34–5, 121;
huge, 167–75; hundred-year-old, 104; oak
tree of Chu Yuan, 33; old, 167; within own
boundaries, 113; pines and cypresses, 257;
straight, 170; useless, 6, 33–5, 167; varnish,
36
Truth, 143, 177, 284
true man, 47–9,
Tsang (state), 182
Tsang Wu, 238
Tsao Shang, 290–91
Tseng, 66 and n., 69, 79, 82, 84–5
Tseng Shen (Tzu), 236 and n., 246, 254–5
Tsui Chu, 84
Tsun Lu, 79 and n.
Tsung Chih (state), 27
Tsung (ruler), 17
Tung, Kuo, Master, 193
Tung Ting, Lake, 119
Tung Wu, 217
Tung Yeh Chi, 163
turtles, 145, 239–40
Tzu Chang, 267
Tzu Chi (hermit), 127, 218–19, 246
Tzu Chi (War Minister), 253
Tzu Chou Chih Fu, 249
Tzu Chou Chih Po, 249
Tzu Hsu, 150 and n., 270
Tzu Kao, Duke, 30
Tzu Kung, 54–5, 99–100, 124, 152, 254,
256, 280
Tzu Lao, 229
Tzu Lu, 112, 144, 229, 256–7, 265 and n.,
280, 285
Tzu Yang (Prime Minister of Cheng), 252
Uncle Cripple, 151
Uncle Legless, 151
understanding; application of, 47; complete,
14; with heart, not ears, 29; heaven, 47; how
people feel, 27; Lao Tzu on, 201–2;
learning, 52; limitations of, 144–6; by men
of old, 14; people’s hearts, 178; of petty
person, 290; sages, 16; of the small and
great, 2; true depth of, 9; of true man, 47;
use of words in, 15, 18; ways of humanity,
47; without virtue, 225. See also knowledge;
wisdom
unity from difference, 13–14, 38–9
universe; what is beyond boundaries of, 16
uselessness, 33–6; Chuang Tzu on, 240;
usefulness of the useless, 36; useless trees,
6, 33–5; of words, xxv–xxvi
Vast (fish), 1, 2–3
Virtue; in actionless action, 118; central,
293; deformed in terms of, 35; despoiling
world’s, 82; deterioration of, 134; distress
avoided by virtuous man, 30; eight Virtues,
16–17; of Emperors and kings, 98, 107–9;
enough to please one leader, 3; era of, 264;
five evil Virtues, 293; five Virtues, 119;
harmony in, 39; of Heaven, 112, 131, 143;
highest, 263; and humility, 39–40;
illuminating life, 17; man of Regal, 94;
misuse of power of, 66; nobleman of
complete, 177; and Origin, 97, 107; perfect,
73, 79, 142; preservation of, 42; ruined by
fame and knowledge, 26–7; sadness and
happiness corruptions of, 131; sage’s lack of
need for, 44; signs of real, 38–45; struggle
against, 82; and Tao, 110, 167–8, 218; Te,
66, 68, 70; teaching, 35; Virtuous Ones,
101; without shape, 43
Virtuously Founded, 169
wandering, 1–6, 44, 180, 184, 229, 241,
289
Wang Kuo, 225
Wang Ni, 17–18, 60, 95
Wang Tai (teacher of Lu), 38–9
water, 106, 131; excess of, 237; none
greater than the Great Ocean, 137; shores of
the Dark Waters, 187; staying close to earth,
222; still, 43; swimming, 158–9, 162; White
Waters of the south, 187
wealth, 123, 149, 173, 182, 225, 237, 252,
269–73
webbed toes, 66–8
Wei, Duke, 159
Wei, Prince of Chu, xiv
Wei (state), 26, 32, 41, 120, 178, 228, 251;
King of, 5–6, 172
Wei Lei, mountain of, 199
Wei Lu, 138
Wei Mou, 256
Wen, King, 182–3 and n., 275–8
Wen, Marquis of Wei, 177 and n.
Wen Hui, 22–3
Wen Po Hsueh Tzu, 178
wisdom; description of, 69–70; lack of, 4–5;
limits of, 240; and virtue, 241; words of, 9.
See also knowledge; understanding
woodcarving, 162–3
words; Argument Without Words, 218;
change of meaning of, 15–16; of Chuang
Tzu, 304; of Confucius, 28; conveying joy
and pleasure, 31; flowing, 244–5; forgetting,
242; of guidance, 180–81; meaning of, 12;
need for, 15; quotes, 244; speech without,
217–18; supposed, 244–7, 304; of Tao, 18;
teaching without, 38; uselessness of, xxv–
xxvi; Words–of-Actionless-Action, 187–9,
195
world; leaving open, 82; out and about in,
26–36. See also Earth
Wu, King, 102 and n., 141 and n., 216, 265,
269
Wu, Marquis of Wei, 210–11
Wu (state), 253
Wu Chuang, 57
Wu Hou, 299
Wu Kuang, 242, 257–8
Wu Ting (state), 51
Wu Tse, 257
Wu Tzu Hsu, 266
Wu Yun, 236
Yan Tzu Chu, 61–2
yang, 10, 30, 53, 191; going wrong, 236;
harming, 82; harmony of, 119; in harmony
with yin, 134, 192; perfect, 86, 180; for
yang, 215
Yang (teacher), 67 and n., 79
Yang Huo, 144 and n.
Yang Tzu, 175
Yang Tzu Chu, 247
Yangists, 214
Yangtse River, 138, 216, 239
Yao (Emperor of mythology), 3–5 and n.,
17, 27, 50, 57, 76, 82, 84, 95–6, 104, 111,
112, 141, 144, 169, 214, 220–21, 242, 249,
264, 265 and n.
Yeh Chueh, 17, 60
Yellow Emperor, 18 and n., 51, 57, 84, 85–
6, 94–5, 112, 118–19, 134, 151, 168, 187–
9, 197, 212–13, 264–5
Yellow River, 289, 293; Lord of, xxi, 137,
138–42
Yellow Springs of the Underworld, 146
Yen Chung Yu, Master, 8–9
Yen Gate, 242
Yen Ho, 32, 251–2, 291
Yen Hui (Prince of Wei), 26, 28–9, 56, 57–
8, 173, 181, 255–6. See also Yen
Yen Yuan
Kang Tiao, 194
Yen Pu, 217
Yen (state), 141n., 219
Yen Yuan, 120, 152, 158, 183, 197, 285. See
also Yen Hui (Prince of Wei)
Yi the Archer, 40, 208, 214
Yi Chieh, 225
Yi Erh Tzu, 56–7
Yi Yin, 208, 258
yin, 10; going wrong, 236; harming, 82;
harmony of, 119; in harmony with yang, 134,
192; perfect, 86, 180; for yin, 215
Yin (gatekeeper), 157. See also Kuan Yin
Yin Wen, 300
Ying (state), 215–16, 253
Ying of Wei, 227
Ying river, 257
Yu (holy sage), 11, 27, 29, 52–3, 58, 96;
rule of, 102, 145
Yu Chu (fisherman), 239
Yu Erh (chef), 69
Yu Hu (state), 27
Yuan (ruler of Sung), 182, 216, 239
Yuan Fung, 101
Yuan Hsien, 254 and n.
Yueh (sheep-butcher), 253–4
Yueh (state), 5–6, 11, 38, 250–51; exile
from, 211
Yun Chiang, 87–8
Yung Chen, 79 and n., 227
