Difference and Repetition

This page intentionally left blank

Gilles Deleuze

Difference and Repetition
Translated by
Paul Patton

CONTINUUM
London and New York

Continuum
The Tower Building, 11 York Road, London SE1 7NX
First published in Great Britain 1994 by
The Athlone Press
Reprinted 1997, 2001
First published in France 1968 by
Presses Universitaires de France, Paris
as Difference

et Repetition

© 1968, Presses Universitaires de France
English translation © 1994 The Athlone Press
Publisher's Note
The publishers wish to record their thanks to the French Ministry of
Culture for a grant towards the cost of translation.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN 0 8264 5957 9 (pb)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without
prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
The Cromwell Press, Trowbridge, Wilts

Contents
Translator's Preface

xi

Preface to the English Edition xv
Preface xix
INTRODUCTION: REPETITION AND DIFFERENCE 1
Repetition and generality: first distinction from the point of view of
conduct — The two orders of generality: resemblance and equality —
Second distinction, from the point of view of law — Repetition, law of
nature and moral law — The programme of a philosophy of repetition
according to Kierkegaard, Nietzsche and Péguy — True movement, theatre
and representation — Repetition and generality: third distinction from the
point of view of concepts — The comprehension of concepts and the
phenomenon of ‘blockage’ — The three cases of ‘natural blockage’ and
repetition: nominal concepts, concepts of nature and concepts of freedom
— Repetition is not explained by the identity of the concept, any more
than it is by a purely negative condition — The functions of the ‘death
instinct’: repetition in its relation to difference and as requiring a positive
principle. (The example of concepts of freedom) — The two repetitions: by
means of the identity of the concept and a negative condition, and by
means of difference and excess in the Idea. (Examples of natural and
nominal concepts) — The bare and the disguised in repetition —
Conceptual difference and difference without concept — But the concept of
difference (Idea) cannot be reduced to a conceptual difference, any more
than the positive essence of repetition can be reduced to a difference
without concept

CHAPTER I DIFFERENCE IN ITSELF 28
Difference and the obscure ground — Must difference be represented? The
four aspects of representation (fourfold root) — The propitious moment,
difference, the large and the small — Conceptual difference: the greatest
and best — The logic of difference according to Aristotle, and the
confusion of the concept of difference with conceptual difference —
Specific and generic difference — The four aspects or the subordination of

vi

Difference and Repetition

difference: identity of the concept, analogy of judgement, opposition of
predicates, resemblance of the perceived — Difference and organic
representation—Univocity and diference—The two types of distribution
— The impossibility of reconciling univocity and analogy — The moments
of the univocal: Duns Scotus, Spinoza, Nietzsche — Repetition in the
eternal return defines the univocity of being — Difference and orgiastic
representation (the infinitely large and the infinitely small) — The ground
as reason — Logic and ontology of difference according to Hegel:
contradiction — Logic and ontology of difference according to Leibniz:
vice-diction (continuity and indiscernibles) — How orgiastic or infinite
representation of difference does not escape the four aspects previously
mentioned — Difference, affirmation and negation — The illusion of the
negative — Eternal return and the elimination of the negative — The logic
and ontology of difference according to Plato — The figures of the method
of division: claimants, the ground-test, problems-questions, (non)-being
and the status of the negative — That which is crucial in the problem of
difference: simulacra and the resistance of simulacra

CHAPTER II REPETITION FOR ITSELF 70
Repetition: something is changed — First synthesis of time: the living
present — Habitus, passive synthesis, contraction, contemplation — The
problem of habit — Second synthesis of time: the pure past — Memory,
pure past and the representation of presents — The four paradoxes of the
past — Repetition in habit and in memory — Material and spiritual
repetition — Cartesian Cogito and Kantian Cogito — The indeterminate,
determination, the determinable — The fractured I, the passive self and the
empty form of time — Inadequacy of memory: the third synthesis of time
— Form, order, totality and series of time — Repetition in the third
synthesis: its condition by default, its agent of metamorphosis, its
unconditioned character — The tragic and the comic, history, and faith
from the point of view of repetition in eternal return — Repetition and the
unconscious: ‘Beyond the pleasure principle’ — The first synthesis and
binding: Habitus — Second synthesis: virtual objects and the past — Eros
and Mnemosyne — Repetition, displacement and disguise: difference —
Consequences for the nature of the unconscious: the serial, differential and
questioning unconscious — Towards the third synthesis or the third
‘beyond’: the narcissistic ego, the death instinct and the empty form of time
— Death instinct, opposition and material repetition — Death instinct and

Contents

vii

repetition in the eternal return — Resemblance and difference — What is a
system? — The dark precursor and the ‘differenciator’ — The literary
system — The phantasm or simulacrum and the three figures of the
identical in relation to difference — The true motivation of Platonism lies
in the problem of simulacra — Simulacra and repetition in eternal return

CHAPTER III THE IMAGE OF THOUGHT 129
The problem of presuppositions in philosophy — First postulate: the
principle of the Cogitatio natura universalis — Second postulate: the ideal
of common sense — Thought and doxa — Third postulate: the model of
recognition — Ambiguity of the Kantian Critique — Fourth postulate: the
element of representation — Differential theory of the faculties — The
discordant functioning of the faculties: the violence and limits of each —
Ambiguity of Platonism — Thinking: its genesis in thought — Fifth
postulate: the ‘negative’ of error — Problem of stupidity — Sixth postulate:
the privilege of designation — Sense and proposition — The paradoxes of
sense — Sense and problem — Seventh postulate: the modality of solutions
— The illusion of solutions in the doctrine of truth — Ontological and
epistemological importance of the category of problems — Eighth
postulate: the result of knowledge — What does it mean ‘to learn’? —
Recapitulation of the postulates as obstacles to a philosophy of difference
and repetition

CHAPTER IV IDEAS AND THE SYNTHESIS OF DIFFERENCE 168
The Idea as a problematic instance — Indeterminate, determinable and
determination: difference — The differential — Quantitability and the
principle of determinability — Qualitability and the principle of reciprocal
determination — Potentiality and the principle of complete determination
(the serial form) — Futility of the infinitely small in differential calculus —
Differential and problematic — Theory of problems: dialectic and science
— Idea and multiplicity — Structures: their criteria, the types of Idea —
Procedure of vice-diction: the singular and the regular, the distinctive and
the ordinary — Ideas and the differential theory of the faculties — Problem
and question — Imperatives and play — Ideas and repetition — Repetition,
the distinctive and the ordinary — The illusion of the negative —

viii

Difference and Repetition

Difference, negation and opposition — Genesis of the negative — Ideas
and virtuality — The reality of the virtual: ens omni modo ... —
Differentiation and differenciation; the two halves of the object — The two
aspects of each half — The distinction between the virtual and the possible
— The differential unconscious; the distinct-obscure — Differenciation as
process of actualization of Ideas — Dynamisms or dramas — Universality
of dramatization — The complex notion of different/ciation

CHAPTER V ASYMMETRICAL SYNTHESIS OF THE SENSIBLE 222
Difference and diversity — Difference and intensity — Cancellation of
difference — Good sense and common sense — Difference and paradox —
Intensity, quality, extension: the illusion of cancellation — Depth or the
spatium — First characteristic of intensity: the unequal in itself — Role of
the unequal in number — Second characteristic: affirmation of difference
— The illusion of the negative — The being of the sensible — Third
characteristic: implication — Difference in kind and difference of degree —
Energy and eternal return — Repetition in the eternal return is neither
qualitative nor extensive but intensive — Intensity and differential — Role
of individuation in the actualization of Ideas — Individuation and
differenciation — Individuation is intensive — Individual difference and
individuating difference — ‘Perplication’, ‘implication’, ‘explication’ —
Evolution of systems — Centres of envelopment — Individuating factors, I
and Self — Nature and function of the other in psychic systems

CONCLUSION 262
Critique of representation — Futility of the choice between finite and
infinite — Identity, resemblance, opposition and analogy: how they betray
difference (the four illusions) — How they betray repetition as well — The
ground as reason: its three senses — From the ground to groundlessness —
Impersonal individuations and pre-individual singularities — Simulacra —
Theory of Ideas and problems — The Other — The two kinds of play:
their characteristics — Critique of categories — Repetition, the identical
and the negative — The two repetitions — Pathology and art, stereotypes
and choruses: art as the locus of coexistence of all the repetitions —
Towards a third, ontological repetition — The form of time and the three

Contents

ix

repetitions — Selective force of the third: Nietzsche and eternal return
(simulacra) — That which does not return — The three senses of the Same:
ontology, illusion and error — Analogy of being and representation,
univocity of being and repetition

Notes 305
Bibliography 334
Index 345

This page intentionally left blank

Translator’s Preface

Difference and Repetition was first published in 1968. It was Deleuze’s
principal thesis for the Doctorat D’Etat. Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza, published in the same year, was his accompanying secondary thesis.
The Logic of Sense (Athlone, 1990) appeared the following year. This interrelated body of writing marks the border between two phases of
Deleuze’s career: one side facing the earlier texts of an unorthodox historian of philosophy, the other facing his subsequent work, alone and with
Guattari. If the study of Spinoza is the more strictly scholarly undertaking,
then Difference and Repetition is the first book in which Deleuze begins to
write on his own behalf. As such, it occupies a pivotal place in his œuvre.
Difference and Repetition is a work of prodigious conceptual invention
in which Deleuze draws upon his earlier readings of Plato, Hume, Bergson,
Nietzsche and Kant, as well as elements of contemporary science and art,
to weave together a physics and a metaphysics of difference. If this
amounts to a critique of the philosophy of representation which has
dominated European thought since Plato, then it does so in the same
manner that Anti-Oedipus (Athlone, 1984) amounts to a critique of
psychoanalysis - namely, by proposing a retrospective analysis on the basis
of an alternative. The different kinds of multiplicity found in Bergson, the
ontology of eternal return understood as the being of that which differs
and a transcendental empiricism of the faculties are among the elements of
Deleuze’s earlier studies which are here woven into a systematic philosophy
of difference. ‘Representation’ is replaced by the expression or
actualization of Ideas, where this is understood in terms of the complex
notion of ‘different/ciation’. The system is ‘grounded’ only in the repetition
of difference, or the repetition of Ideal problems, which precisely amounts
to a non-ground or groundlessness.
As befits the exposition of a novel metaphysical system, there is
occasional recourse to neologisms. These include some terms which are
Deleuze’s own inventions, and which I have attempted to render into
appropriate English equivalents, such as ‘a-presentation’ (p.24) or the
recurrent notion of ‘the disparate’ [le dispars]. A more significant case
arises from the need to make a terminological distinction in English where
no equivalent exists for the corresponding French terms. Thus, Deleuze
makes significant use of the distinction in French between différencier, to
make or become different, and différentier, which is restricted to the
mathematical operation. Because of the extent and significance of his use
of this distinction (which becomes apparent in Chapter IV), I have had to

xii

Difference and Repetition

follow his terminology and introduce ‘differentiate’' as a term of art in
English.
On the whole, however, Difference and Repetition achieves its effects by
means of ‘no typographical cleverness, no lexical agility, no blending or
creation of words, no syntactical boldness...’.1 The problems which it poses
for the translator are of another order. These include, first, problems raised
by the diversity of philosophical languages deployed in the course of this
book. For the most part, I have followed the terminology employed in the
standard English translations of the primary texts in question: for example,
following the authorized translations of Bergson in using ‘extensity’ for
étendue (see Chapter V). In some cases, however, where standard French
terminology differs from the English in ways which relate to important
aspects of Deleuze’s project, I have followed the French. For example,
Deleuze uses the term ‘Ideas’, in standard Platonic or Kantian senses, but
then develops his own concept of Ideas which owes as much to Leibniz and
contemporary structuralism as it does to Kant or Plato. In order to
maintain the continuity in Deleuze’s use of this term, I have used the term
‘Ideas' with reference to Plato in some contexts where standard English
translations would use ‘Forms’.
Secondly, in the pursuit of his own distinctive style of philosophizing which combines an extreme sobriety in the use of language with an
extraordinary vitality in the use of concepts - Deleuze often draws upon
existing words to create a terminology for concepts of his own making. In
some cases, this involves the use of technical terms taken from the sciences
or particular philosophies. For example, the term ‘multiplicity’, which is
now well established in the translations of Deleuze’s work, is derived from
the French mathematical term [multiplicité] used to refer to those
Reimannian objects which English mathematicians would call ‘manifolds’.
In other cases, Deleuze employs apparently ordinary words to designate
important concepts of his own making. This is true of point remarquable,
which I have rendered as ‘distinctive point’. This term has been variously
translated as ‘prominent’, ‘exceptional’ or ‘remarkable’ point. In fact, there
is nothing remarkable about these points: they are the points or
pre-individual singularities which distinguish one Idea, problem or
multiplicity from another. Initially introduced alongside the mathematical
concept of ‘singular point’, which is employed to designate those points
which characterize or define a given function, ‘distinctive point’ takes on a
life of its own as a non-mathematical term of art in Deleuze’s work. It is
not to be confused with the ‘distinctive traits’ referred to by structural
linguistics. Nor should it be confused with the ‘shining points’ to which
Bergson refers in his discussion of memory, although in this book and in
Bergsonism Deleuze does establish a connection between these two terms.
A further difficulty arises in cases where a single word in French has
multiple English equivalents. A frequently occurring word of this type is

Translator's Preface

xiii

moi, which may be rendered either as ‘ego’ or as ‘self’. Here, the attempt to
follow standard English terminology has led me to use ‘self’ in all contexts
except those where it is explicitly a question of psychoanalysis, in which
case I have used ‘ego’. In this case, readers should be aware that I have
maintained continuity with the existing English terminology for particular
philosophies, at the cost of introducing a discontinuity into Deleuze’s text
which is not present in the original.
Another case of this type is the word fond, which may be either ‘ground’
or ‘bottom’. This term occurs widely in conjunction and opposition with a
series of cognate French words, fondé, fondement, fondation, as well as the
important term sans-fond and Deleuze’s own effondement. I have retained
Deleuze’s distinction between ‘foundation’ [fondation] and ‘ground’
[fondement]. However, while the French fonder often occurs in contexts in
which the appropriate English term would be the verb ‘to found’, I have
mostly preferred ‘ground’ in order to maintain the connection with
Deleuze’s important usage of le fond and fondement. Both these terms are
connected with the philosophical concept which is regularly rendered as
‘ground’ in English translations of German philosophy, while his notion of
the ‘groundless’ [sans-fond] is explicitly linked to the German Ungrund
(p.229). For this reason, I have also used ‘ungrounding’ for effondement.
This family of terms is further complicated by the occasional play upon
fond (bottom or depths) and profond (deep, profound). However, since
Deleuze contrasts a concept of depth [profondeur] with that of ground
[fond] in Chapter V, I have used ‘ground’ for le fond throughout.
Additional translator's notes on particular points, along with references
to texts cited, have been included in the Notes. These are indicated by an
asterisk*.
Many colleagues have read sections, offered assistance or answered my
queries in the course of preparing this translation. In particular, I would
like to thank Genevieve Lloyd, Paul Crittenden, Kim Lycos and Paul Thorn
for their scholarly assistance; the dean, Richard Campbell, and the Faculty
of Arts at The Australian National University for awarding me a Faculty
Research Fund Grant; Rex Butler for his considerable efforts as research
assistant and reader; Hugh Tomlinson, who suggested that I undertake this
task; Constantin V. Boundas, who sent me his draft translation of the
entire text, thereby providing me with an invaluable means of checking the
accuracy of my own; Martin Joughin, Timothy S. Murphy and Amitavo
Islam for their comments; and Brian Massumi for his scrupulous and
helpful Reader's review. I am grateful to Peter Cook for his help with
proof-reading and printing the final text, and with compiling the Index.
Throughout the course of this project, I have been fortunate to enjoy the
support, encouragement and scholarly assistance of Moira Gatens.

This page intentionally left blank

Preface to the English Edition
There is a great difference between writing history of philosophy and writing philosophy. In the one case, we study the arrows or the tools of a great
thinker, the trophies and the prey, the continents discovered. In the other
case, we trim our own arrows, or gather those which seem to us the finest
in order to try to send them in other directions, even if the distance covered
is not astronomical but relatively small. We try to speak in our own name
only to learn that a proper name designates no more than the outcome of a
body of work - in other words, the concepts discovered, on condition that
we were able to express these and imbue them with life using all the possibilities of language.
After I had studied Hume, Spinoza, Nietzsche and Proust, all of whom
fired me with enthusiasm, Difference and Repetition was the first book in
which I tried to ‘do philosophy’. All that I have done since is connected to
this book, including what I wrote with Guattari (obviously, I speak from
my own point of view). It is very difficult to say why one becomes attached
to a particular problem: why was it difference and repetition which
preoccupied me rather than something else, and why the two together
rather than separately? These were not exactly new problems, since the
history of philosophy, and especially contemporary philosophy, dealt with
them constantly. But perhaps the majority of philosophers had
subordinated difference to identity or to the Same, to the Similar, to the
Opposed or to the Analogous: they had introduced difference into the
identity of the concept, they had put difference in the concept itself,
thereby reaching a conceptual difference, but not a concept of difference.
We tend to subordinate difference to identity in order to think it (from
the point of view of the concept or the subject: for example, specific
difference presupposes an identical concept in the form of a genus). We
also have a tendency to subordinate it to resemblance (from the point of
view of perception), to opposition (from the point of view of predicates),
and to analogy (from the point of view of judgement). In other words, we
do not think difference in itself. With Aristotle, Philosophy was able to
provide itself with an organic representation of difference, with Leibniz
and Hegel an orgiastic representation: it has not, for all that, reached
difference in itself.
The situation was perhaps no better with regard to repetition: in another
manner, this too is thought in terms of the identical, the similar, the equal
or the opposed. In this case, we treat it as a difference without concept:
two things repeat one another when they are different even while they have
exactly the same concept. Henceforth, everything which causes repetition

xvi

Difference and Repetition

to vary seems to us to cover or hide it at the same time. Here again, we do
not reach a concept of repetition. By contrast, might we not form such a
concept once we realize that variation is not added to repetition in order to
hide it, but is rather its condition or constitutive element, the inferiority of
repetition par excellence? Disguise no less than displacement forms part of
repetition, and of difference: a common transport or diaphora. At the limit,
might there not be a single power of difference or of repetition, but one
which operates only in the multiple and determines multiplicities?
Every philosophy must achieve its own manner of speaking about the
arts and sciences, as though it established alliances with them. It is very
difficult, since philosophy obviously cannot claim the least superiority, but
also creates and expounds its own concepts only in relation to what it can
grasp of scientific functions and artistic constructions. A philosophical
concept can never be confused with a scientific function or an artistic
construction, but finds itself in affinity with these in this or that domain of
science or style of art. The scientific or artistic content of a philosophy may
be very elementary, since it is not obliged to advance art or science, but it
can advance itself only by forming properly philosophical concepts from a
given function or construction, however elementary. Philosophy cannot be
undertaken independently of science or art. It is in this sense that we tried
to constitute a philosophical concept from the mathematical function of
differentiation and the biological function of differenciation, in asking
whether there was not a statable relation between these two concepts
which could not appear at the level of their respective objects. Art, science
and philosophy seemed to us to be caught up in mobile relations in which
each is obliged to respond to the other, but by its own means.
Finally, in this book it seemed to me that the powers of difference and
repetition could be reached only by putting into question the traditional
image of thought. By this I mean not only that we think according to a
given method, but also that there is a more or less implicit, tacit or
presupposed image of thought which determines our goals when we try to
think. For example, we suppose that thought possesses a good nature, and
the thinker a good will (naturally to ‘want’ the true); we take as a model
the process of recognition - in other words, a common sense or
employment of all the faculties on a supposed same object; we designate
error, nothing but error, as the enemy to be fought; and we suppose that
the true concerns solutions - in other words, propositions capable of
serving as answers. This is the classic image of thought, and as long as the
critique has not been carried to the heart of that image it is difficult to
conceive of thought as encompassing those problems which point beyond
the propositional mode; or as involving encounters which escape all
recognition; or as confronting its true enemies, which are quite different
from thought; or as attaining that which tears thought from its natural
torpor and notorious bad will, and forces us to think. A new image of

Preface to the English Edition

xvii

thought - or rather, a liberation of thought from those images which
imprison it: this is what I had already sought to discover in Proust. Here,
however, in Difference and Repetition, this search is autonomous and it
becomes the condition for the discovery of these two concepts. It is
therefore the third chapter which now seems to me the most necessary and
the most concrete, and which serves to introduce subsequent books up to
and including the research undertaken with Guattari where we invoked a
vegetal model of thought: the rhizome in opposition to the tree, a
rhizome-thought instead of an arborescent thought.

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
The weaknesses of a book are often the counterparts of empty intentions
that one did not know how to implement. In this sense, a declaration of intent is evidence of real modesty in relation to the ideal book. It is often said
that prefaces should be read only at the end. Conversely, conclusions
should be read at the outset. This is true of the present book, the conclusion of which could make reading the rest unnecessary.
The subject dealt with here is manifestly in the air. The signs may be
noted: Heidegger's more and more pronounced orientation towards a
philosophy of ontological Difference; the structuralist project, based upon
a distribution of differential characters within a space of coexistence; the
contemporary novelist's art which revolves around difference and
repetition, not only in its most abstract reflections but also in its effective
techniques; the discovery in a variety of fields of a power peculiar to
repetition, a power which also inhabits the unconscious, language and art.
All these signs may be attributed to a generalized anti-Hegelianism:
difference and repetition have taken the place of the identical and the
negative, of identity and contradiction. For difference implies the negative,
and allows itself to lead to contradiction, only to the extent that its
subordination to the identical is maintained. The primacy of identity,
however conceived, defines the world of representation. But modern
thought is born of the failure of representation, of the loss of identities, and
of the discovery of all the forces that act under the representation of the
identical. The modern world is one of simulacra. Man did not survive God,
nor did the identity of the subject survive that of substance. All identities
are only simulated, produced as an optical ‘effect’ by the more profound
game of difference and repetition. We propose to think difference in itself
independently of the forms of representation which reduce it to the Same,
and the relation of different to different independently of those forms
which make them pass through the negative.
Modern life is such that, confronted with the most mechanical, the most
stereotypical repetitions, inside and outside ourselves, we endlessly extract
from them little differences, variations and modifications. Conversely,
secret, disguised and hidden repetitions, animated by the perpetual
displacement of a difference, restore bare, mechanical and stereotypical
repetitions, within and without us. In simulacra, repetition already plays
upon repetitions, and difference already plays upon differences. Repetitions
repeat themselves, while the differenciator differenciates itself. The task of
life is to make all these repetitions coexist in a space in which difference is
distributed. Two lines of research lie at the origin of this book: one

xx

Difference

and Repetition

concerns a concept of difference without negation, precisely because unless
it is subordinated to the identical, difference would not extend or ‘would
not have to extend’ as far as opposition and contradiction; the other
concerns a concept of repetition in which physical, mechanical or bare
repetitions (repetition of the Same) would find their raison d'être in the
more profound structures of a hidden repetition in which a ‘differential’ is
disguised and displaced. These two lines of research spontaneously came
together, because on every occasion these concepts of a pure difference and
a complex repetition seemed to connect and coalesce. The perpetual
divergence and decentring of difference corresponded closely to a
displacement and a disguising within repetition.
There are certainly many dangers in invoking pure differences which
have become independent of the negative and liberated from the identical.
The greatest danger is that of lapsing into the representations of a beautiful
soul: there are only reconcilable and federative differences, far removed
from bloody struggles. The beautiful soul says: we are different, but not
opposed... . The notion of a problem, which we see linked to that of
difference, also seems to nurture the sentiments of the beautiful soul: only
problems and questions matter.... Nevertheless, we believe that when these
problems attain their proper degree of positivity, and when difference
becomes the object of a corresponding affirmation, they release a power of
aggression and selection which destroys the beautiful soul by depriving it
of its very identity and breaking its good will. The problematic and the
differential determine struggles or destructions in relation to which those of
the negative are only appearances, and the wishes of the beautiful soul are
so many mystifications trapped in appearances. The simulacrum is not just
a copy, but that which overturns all copies by also overturning the models:
every thought becomes an aggression.
A book of philosophy should be in part a very particular species of
detective novel, in part a kind of science fiction. By detective novel we
mean that concepts, with their zones of presence, should intervene to
resolve local situations. They themselves change along with the problems.
They have spheres of influence where, as we shall see, they operate in
relation to ‘dramas’ and by means of a certain 'cruelty'. They must have a
coherence among themselves, but that coherence must not come from
themselves. They must receive their coherence from elsewhere.
This is the secret of empiricism. Empiricism is by no means a reaction
against concepts, nor a simple appeal to lived experience. On the contrary,
it undertakes the most insane creation of concepts ever seen or heard.
Empiricism is a mysticism and a mathematicism of concepts, but precisely
one which treats the concept as object of an encounter, as a here-and-now,
or rather as an Erewhon from which emerge inexhaustibly ever new,
differently distributed 'heres' and 'news'. Only an empiricist could say:
concepts are indeed things, but things in their free and wild state, beyond

Preface

xxi

'anthropological predicates'. I make, remake and unmake my concepts
along a moving horizon, from an always decentred centre, from an always
displaced periphery which repeats and differenciates them. The task of
modern philosophy is to overcome the alternatives temporal/non-temporal,
historical/eternal and particular/universal. Following Nietzsche we
discover, as more profound than time and eternity, the untimely:
philosophy is neither a philosophy of history, nor a philosophy of the
eternal, but untimely, always and only untimely - that is to say, 'acting
counter to our time and thereby acting on our time and, let us hope, for the
benefit of a time to come'. Following Samuel Butler, we discover
Erewhon, signifying at once the originary 'nowhere' and the displaced,
disguised, modified and always re-created 'here-and-now'. Neither
empirical particularities nor abstract universals: a Cogito for a dissolved
self. We believe in a world in which individuations are impersonal, and
singularities are pre-individual: the splendour of the pronoun 'one' whence the science-fiction aspect, which necessarily derives from this
Erewhon. What this book should therefore have made apparent is the
advent of a coherence which is no more our own, that of mankind, than
that of God or the world. In this sense, it should have been an apocalyptic
book (the third time in the series of times).
Science fiction in yet another sense, one in which the weaknesses become
manifest. How else can one write but of those things which one doesn't
know, or knows badly? It is precisely there that we imagine having
something to say. We write only at the frontiers of our knowledge, at the
border which separates our knowledge from our ignorance and transforms
the one into the other. Only in this manner are we resolved to write. To
satisfy ignorance is to put off writing until tomorrow - or rather, to make
it impossible. Perhaps writing has a relation to silence altogether more
threatening than that which it is supposed to entertain with death. We are
therefore well aware, unfortunately, that we have spoken about science in
a manner which was not scientific.
The time is coming when it will hardly be possible to write a book of
philosophy as it has been done for so long: 'Ah! the old style...'. The search
for new means of philosophical expression was begun by Nietzsche and
must be pursued today in relation to the renewal of certain other arts, such
as the theatre or the cinema. In this context, we can now raise the question
of the utilization of the history of philosophy. It seems to us that the
history of philosophy should play a role roughly analogous to that of
collage in painting. The history of philosophy is the reproduction of
philosophy itself. In the history of philosophy, a commentary should act as
a veritable double and bear the maximal modification appropriate to a
double. (One imagines a philosophically bearded Hegel, a philosophically
clean-shaven Marx, in the same way as a moustached Mona Lisa.) It
should be possible to recount a real book of past philosophy as if it were

xxii

Difference and Repetition

an imaginary and feigned book. Borges, we know, excelled in recounting
imaginary books. But he goes further when he considers a real book, such
as Don Quixote, as though it were an imaginary book, itself reproduced by
an imaginary author, Pierre Menard, who in turn he considers to be real.
In this case, the most exact, the most strict repetition has as its correlate the
maximum of difference (The text of Cervantes and that of Menard are
verbally identical, but the second is almost infinitely richer...'2 ).
Commentaries in the history of philosophy should represent a kind of slow
motion, a congelation or immobilisation of the text: not only of the text to
which they relate, but also of the text in which they are inserted - so much
so that they have a double existence and a corresponding ideal: the pure
repetition of the former text and the present text in one another. It is in
order to approach this double existence that we have sometimes had to
integrate historical notes into the present text.

Introduction:
Repetition and Difference
Repetition is not generality. Repetition and generality must be distinguished in several ways. Every formula which implies their confusion is regrettable: for example, when we say that two things are as alike as two
drops of water; or when we identify 'there is only a science of the general'
with 'there is only a science of that which is repeated'. Repetition and resemblance are different in kind - extremely so.
Generality presents two major orders: the qualitative order of
resemblances and the quantitative order of equivalences. Cycles and
equalities are their respective symbols. But in any case, generality expresses
a point of view according to which one term may be exchanged or
substituted for another. The exchange or substitution of particulars defines
our conduct in relation to generality. That is why the empiricists are not
wrong to present general ideas as particular ideas in themselves, so long as
they add the belief that each of these can be replaced by any other
particular idea which resembles it in relation to a given word. By contrast,
we can see that repetition is a necessary and justified conduct only in
relation to that which cannot be replaced. Repetition as a conduct and as a
point of view concerns non-exchangeable and non-substitutable
singularities. Reflections, echoes, doubles and souls do not belong to the
domain of resemblance or equivalence; and it is no more possible to
exchange one's soul than it is to substitute real twins for one another. If
exchange is the criterion of generality, theft and gift are those of repetition.
There is, therefore, an economic difference between the two.
To repeat is to behave in a certain manner, but in relation to something
unique or singular which has no equal or equivalent. And perhaps this
repetition at the level of external conduct echoes, for its own part, a more
secret vibration which animates it, a more profound, internal repetition
within the singular. This is the apparent paradox of festivals: they repeat
an 'unrepeatable'. They do not add a second and a third time to the first,
but carry the first time to the 'nth' power. With respect to this power,
repetition interiorizes and thereby reverses itself: as Péguy says, it is not
Federation Day which commemorates or represents the fall of the Bastille,
but the fall of the Bastille which celebrates and repeats in advance all the
Federation Days; or Monet's first water lily which repeats all the others.1

Generality, as generality of the particular, thus stands opposed to repetition
as universality of the singular. The repetition of a work of art is like a
singularity without concept, and it is not by chance that a poem must be

2

Difference and Repetition

learned by heart. The head is the organ of exchange, but the heart is the
amorous organ of repetition. (It is true that repetition also concerns the
head, but precisely because it is its terror or paradox.) Pius Servien rightly
distinguished two languages: the language of science, dominated by the
symbol of equality, in which each term may be replaced by others; and
lyrical language, in which every term is irreplaceable and can only be
repeated. Repetition can always be 'represented' as extreme resemblance
or perfect equivalence, but the fact that one can pass by degrees from one
thing to another does not prevent their being different in kind.
On the other hand, generality belongs to the order of laws. However,
law determines only the resemblance of the subjects ruled by it, along with
their equivalence to terms which it designates. Far from grounding
repetition, law shows, rather, how repetition would remain impossible for
pure subjects of law - particulars. It condemns them to change. As an
empty form of difference, an invariable form of variation, a law compels its
subjects to illustrate it only at the cost of their own change. No doubt there
are as many constants as variables among the terms designated by laws,
and as many permanences and perseverations as there are fluxes and
variations in nature. However, a perseveration is still not a repetition. The
constants of one law are in turn variables of a more general law, just as the
hardest rocks become soft and fluid matter on the geological scale of
millions of years. So at each level, it is in relation to large, permanent
natural objects that the subject of a law experiences its own powerlessness
to repeat and discovers that this powerlessness is already contained in the
object, reflected in the permanent object wherein it sees itself condemned.
Law unites the change of the water and the permanence of the river. Elie
Faure said of Watteau: 'He imbued with the utmost transitoriness those
things which our gaze encounters as the most enduring, namely space and
forests.' This is the eighteenth-century method. Wolmar, in La Nouvelle
Heloise, made a system of it: the impossibility of repetition, and change as
a general condition to which all particular creatures are subject by the law
of Nature, were understood in relation to fixed terms (themselves, no
doubt, variables in relation to other permanences and in function of other,
more general laws). This is the meaning of the grove, the grotto and the
'sacred' object. Saint-Preux learns that he cannot repeat, not only because
of his own change and that of Julie, but also because of the great natural
permanences, which assume a symbolic value and exclude him no less from
true repetition. If repetition is possible, it is due to miracle rather than to
law. It is against the law: against the similar form and the equivalent
content of law. If repetition can be found, even in nature, it is in the name
of a power which affirms itself against the law, which works underneath
laws, perhaps superior to laws. If repetition exists, it expresses at once a
singularity opposed to the general, a universality opposed to the particular,
a distinctive opposed to the ordinary, an instantaneity opposed to variation

Repetition and Difference

3

and an eternity opposed to permanence. In every respect, repetition is a
transgression. It puts law into question, it denounces its nominal or general
character in favour of a more profound and more artistic reality.
From the point of view of scientific experiment, it seems difficult to deny
a relationship between repetition and law. However, we must ask under
what conditions experimentation ensures repetition. Natural phenomena
are produced in a free state, where any inference is possible among the vast
cycles of resemblance: in this sense, everything reacts on everything else,
and everything resembles everything else (resemblance of the diverse with
itself). However, experimentation constitutes relatively closed environments in
which phenomena are defined in terms of a small number of chosen
factors (a minimum of two - for example, Space and Time for the
movement of bodies in a vacuum). Consequently, there is no reason to
question the application of mathematics to physics: physics is already
mathematical, since the closed environments or chosen factors also
constitute systems of geometrical co-ordinates. In these conditions,
phenomena necessarily appear as equal to a certain quantitative relation
between the chosen factors. Experimentation is thus a matter of
substituting one order of generality for another: an order of equality for an
order of resemblance. Resemblances are unpacked in order to discover an
equality which allows the identification of a phenomenon under the
particular conditions of the experiment. Repetition appears here only in the
passage from one order of generality to another, emerging with the help of
- or on the occasion of - this passage. It is as if repetition momentarily
appeared between or underneath the two generalities. Here too, however,
there is a risk of mistaking a difference in kind for a difference of degree.
For generality only represents and presupposes a hypothetical repetition:
'given the same circumstances, then...'. This formula says that in similar
situations one will always be able to select and retain the same factors,
which represent the being-equal of the phenomena. This, however, does
not account for what gives rise to repetition, nor for what is categorical or
important for repetition in principle (what is important in principle is 'n'
times as the power of a single time, without the need to pass through a
second or a third time). In its essence, repetition refers to a singular power
which differs in kind from generality, even when, in order to appear, it
takes advantage of the artificial passage from one order of generality to
another.
Expecting repetition from the law of nature is the 'Stoic' error. The wise
must be converted into the virtuous; the dream of finding a law which
would make repetition possible passes over to the moral sphere. There is
always a task to recommence, a fidelity to be revived within a daily life
indistinguishable from the reaffirmation of Duty. Büchner makes Danton
say:

4

Difference and Repetition
'It is so wearisome. First you put on your shirt, then your trousers; you
drag yourself into bed at night and in the morning drag yourself out
again; and always you put one foot in front of the other. There is little
hope that it will ever change. Millions have always done it like that and
millions more will do so after us. Moreover, since we're made up of two
halves which both do the same thing, everything's done twice. It's all
very boring and very, very sad.3

However, what good is moral law if it does not sanctify reiteration, above
all if it does not make reiteration possible and give us a legislative power
from which we are excluded by the law of nature? Moralists sometimes
present the categories of Good and Evil in the following manner: every
time we try to repeat according to nature or as natural beings (repetition of
a pleasure, of a past, of a passion) we throw ourselves into a demonic and
already damned exercise which can end only in despair or boredom. The
Good, by contrast, holds out the possibility of repetition, of successful
repetition and of the spirituality of repetition, because it depends not upon
a law of nature but on a law of duty, of which, as moral beings, we cannot
be subjects without also being legislators. What is Kant's 'highest test' if
not a criterion which should decide what can in principle be reproduced in other words, what can be repeated without contradiction in the form of
moral law? The man of duty invented a 'test' of repetition; he decided what
in principle could be repeated. He thought he had thereby defeated both
the demonic and the wearisome. Moreover, as an echo of Danton's concerns or a response to them, is there not a moralism in that repetition apparatus described with such precision by Kant's biographers, right down to
the astonishing garters that he made for himself, and the regularity of his
daily promenades (in the sense that neglecting one's toilet and missing
exercise are among those conducts whose maxim cannot, without contradiction, be regarded as a universal law, nor, therefore, be the object of
rightful repetition)?
Conscience, however, suffers from the following ambiguity: it can be
conceived only by supposing the moral law to be external, superior and
indifferent to the natural law; but the application of the moral law can be
conceived only by restoring to conscience itself the image and the model of
the law of nature. As a result, the moral law, far from giving us true
repetition, still leaves us in generality. This time, the generality is not that
of nature but that of habit as a second nature. It is useless to point to the
existence of immoral or bad habits: it is the form of habit - or, as Bergson
used to say, the habit of acquiring habits (the whole of obligation) - which
is essentially moral or has the form of the good. Furthermore, in this whole
or generality of habit we again find the two major orders: that of
resemblance, in the variable conformity of the elements of action with a
given model in so far as the habit has not been acquired; and that of

Repetition and Difference

5

equivalence, with the equality of the elements of action in different
situations once the habit has been acquired. As a result, habit never gives
rise to true repetition: sometimes the action changes and is perfected while
the intention remains constant; sometimes the action remains the same in
different contexts and with different intentions. There again, if repetition is
possible, it would appear only between or beneath the two generalities of
perfection and integration, testifying to the presence of a quite different
power, at the risk of overturning these two generalities.
If repetition is possible, it is as much opposed to moral law as it is to
natural law. There are two known ways to overturn moral law. One is by
ascending towards the principles: challenging the law as secondary,
derived, borrowed or 'general'; denouncing it as involving a second-hand
principle which diverts an original force or usurps an original power. The
other way, by contrast, is to overturn the law by descending towards the
consequences, to which one submits with a too-perfect attention to detail.
By adopting the law, a falsely submissive soul manages to evade it and to
taste pleasures it was supposed to forbid. We can see this in demonstration
by absurdity and working to rule, but also in some forms of masochistic
behaviour which mock by submission. The first way of overturning the law
is ironic, where irony appears as an art of principles, of ascent towards the
principles and of overturning principles. The second is humour, which is an
art of consequences and descents, of suspensions and falls. Must we
understand that repetition appears in both this suspense and this ascent, as
though existence recommenced and 'reiterated' itself once it is no longer
constrained by laws? Repetition belongs to humour and irony; it is by
nature transgression or exception, always revealing a singularity opposed
to the particulars subsumed under laws, a universal opposed to the
generalities which give rise to laws.
There is a force common to Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. (Péguy would have
to be added in order to form the triptych of priest, Antichrist and Catholic.
Each of the three, in his own way, makes repetition not only a power peculiar to language and thought, a superior pathos and pathology, but also the
fundamental category of a philosophy of the future. To each corresponds a
Testament as well as a Theatre, a conception of the theatre, and a hero of
repetition as a principal character in this theatre: Job-Abraham, DionysusZarathustra, Joan of Arc-Clio). What separates them is considerable, evident and well-known. But nothing can hide this prodigious encounter in
relation to a philosophy of repetition: they oppose repetition to all forms of
generality. Nor do they take the word 'repetition' in a metaphorical sense:
on the contrary, they have a way of taking it literally and of introducing it
into their style. We can - or rather, must - first of all list the principal
propositions which indicate the points on which they coincide:

6

Difference and Repetition

1. Make something new of repetition itself: connect it with a test, with a
selection or selective test; make it the supreme object of the will and of
freedom. Kierkegaard specifies that it is not a matter of drawing something
new from repetition, of extracting something new from it. Only
contemplation or the mind which contemplates from without 'extracts'. It
is rather a matter of acting, of making repetition as such a novelty; that is,
a freedom and a task of freedom. In the case of Nietzsche: liberate the will
from everything which binds it by making repetition the very object of
willing. No doubt it is repetition which already binds; but if we die of
repetition we are also saved and healed by it - healed, above all, by the
other repetition. The whole mystical game of loss and salvation is therefore
contained in repetition, along with the whole theatrical game of life and
death and the whole positive game of illness and health (cf. Zarathustra ill
and Zarathustra convalescent by virtue of one and the same power which
is that of repetition in the eternal return).
2. In consequence, oppose repetition to the laws of nature. Kierkegaard
declares that he does not speak at all of repetition in nature, of cycles and
seasons, exchanges and equalities. Furthermore, if repetition concerns the
most interior element of the will, this is because everything changes around
the will, in accordance with the law of nature. According to the law of
nature, repetition is impossible. For this reason, Kierkegaard condemns as
aesthetic repetition every attempt to obtain repetition from the laws of
nature by identifying with the legislative principle, whether in the
Epicurean or the Stoic manner. It will be said that the situation is not so
clear with Nietzsche. Nietzsche's declarations are nevertheless explicit. If
he discovers repetition in the Physis itself, this is because he discovers in the
Physis something superior to the reign of laws: a will willing itself through
all change, a power opposed to law, an interior of the earth opposed to the
laws of its surface. Nietzsche opposes 'his' hypothesis to the cyclical
hypothesis. He conceives of repetition in the eternal return as Being, but he
opposes this being to every legal form, to the being-similar as much as to
the being-equal. How could the thinker who goes furthest in criticising the
notion of law reintroduce eternal return as a law of nature? How could
such a connoisseur of the Greeks be justified in regarding his own thought
as prodigious and new, if he were content to formulate that natural
platitude, that generality regarding nature well known to the Ancients? On
two occasions, Zarathustra corrects erroneous interpretations of the eternal
return: with anger, directed at his demon ('Spirit of Gravity ... do not treat
this too lightly'); with kindness, directed at his animals ('O buffoons and
barrel-organs ... you have already made a refrain out of it'). The refrain is
the eternal return as cycle or circulation, as being-similar and being-equal in short, as natural animal certitude and as sensible law of nature.
3. Oppose repetition to moral law, to the point where it becomes the
suspension of ethics, a thought beyond good and evil. Repetition appears

Repetition and Difference

1

as the logos of the solitary and the singular, the logos of the 'private
thinker'. Both Kierkegaard and Nietzsche develop the opposition between
the private thinker, the thinker-comet and bearer of repetition, and the
public professor and doctor of law, whose second-hand discourse proceeds
by mediation and finds its moralising source in the generality of concepts
(cf. Kierkegaard against Hegel, Nietzsche against Kant and Hegel; and
from this point of view, Péguy against the Sorbonne). Job is infinite
contestation and Abraham infinite resignation, but these are one and the
same thing. Job challenges the law in an ironic manner, refusing all
second-hand explanations and dismissing the general in order to reach the
most singular as principle or as universal. Abraham submits humorously to
the law, but finds in that submission precisely the singularity of his only
son whom the law commanded him to sacrifice. As Kierkegaard
understands it, repetition is the transcendent correlate shared by the
psychical intentions of contestation and resignation. (We rediscover the
two aspects in Péguy's doubling of Joan of Arc and Gervaise.) In
Nietzsche's striking atheism, hatred of the law and amor fati (love of fate),
aggression and acquiescence are the two faces of Zarathustra, gathered
from the Bible and turned back against it. Further, in a certain sense one
can see Zarathustra's moral test of repetition as competing with Kant. The
eternal return says: whatever you will, will it in such a manner that you
also will its eternal return. There is a 'formalism' here which overturns
Kant on his own ground, a test which goes further since, instead of relating
repetition to a supposed moral law, it seems to make repetition itself the
only form of a law beyond morality. In reality, however, things are even
more complicated. The form of repetition in the eternal return is the brutal
form of the immediate, that of the universal and the singular reunited,
which dethrones every general law, dissolves the mediations and
annihilates the particulars subjected to the law. Just as irony and black
humour are combined in Zarathustra, so there is a within-the-law and a
beyond-the-law united in the eternal return.
4. Oppose repetition not only to the generalities of habit but also to the
particularities of memory. For it is perhaps habit which manages to 'draw'
something new from a repetition contemplated from without. With habit,
we act only on the condition that there is a little Self within us which
contemplates: it is this which extracts the new - in other words, the general
- from the pseudo-repetition of particular cases. Memory, then, perhaps
recovers the particulars dissolved in generality. These psychological
movements are of little consequence: for both Nietzsche and Kierkegaard
they fade away in the face of repetition proposed as the double
condemnation of habit and memory. In this way, repetition is the thought
of the future: it is opposed to both the ancient category of reminiscence
and the modern category of habitus. It is in repetition and by repetition
that Forgetting becomes a positive power while the unconscious becomes a

8

Difference and Repetition

positive and superior unconscious (for example, forgetting as a force is an
integral part of the lived experience of eternal return). Everything is
summed up in power. When Kierkegaard speaks of repetition as the second
power of consciousness, 'second' means not a second time but the infinite
which belongs to a single time, the eternity which belongs to an instant, the
unconscious which belongs to consciousness, the 'nth' power. And when
Nietzsche presents the eternal return as the immediate expression of the
will to power, will to power does not at all mean 'to want power' but, on
the contrary: whatever you will, carry it to the 'nth' power - in other
words, separate out the superior form by virtue of the selective operation
of thought in the eternal return, by virtue of the singularity of repetition in
the eternal return itself. Here, in the superior form of everything that is, we
find the immediate identity of the eternal return and the Overman.
We are not suggesting any resemblance whatsoever between Nietzsche's
Dionysus and Kierkegaard's God. On the contrary, we believe that the
difference is insurmountable. But this is all the more reason to ask why
their coincidence concerning this fundamental objective, the theme of
repetition, even though they understand this objective differently?
Kierkegaard and Nietzsche are among those who bring to philosophy new
means of expression. In relation to them we speak readily of an
overcoming of philosophy. Furthermore, in all their work, movement is at
issue. Their objection to Hegel is that he does not go beyond false
movement - in other words, the abstract logical movement of 'mediation'.
They want to put metaphysics in motion, in action. They want to make it
act, and make it carry out immediate acts. It is not enough, therefore, for
them to propose a new representation of movement; representation is
already mediation. Rather, it is a question of producing within the work a
movement capable of affecting the mind outside of all representation; it is a
question of making movement itself a work, without interposition; of
substituting direct signs for mediate representations; of inventing
vibrations, rotations, whirlings, gravitations, dances or leaps which directly
touch the mind. This is the idea of a man of the theatre, the idea of a
director before his time. In this sense, something completely new begins
with Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. They no longer reflect on the theatre in
the Hegelian manner. Neither do they set up a philosophical theatre. They
invent an incredible equivalent of theatre within philosophy, thereby
founding simultaneously this theatre of the future and a new philosophy. It
will be said that, at least from the point of view of theatre, there was no
production: neither the profession of priest and Copenhagen around 1840,
nor the break with Wagner and Bayreuth, was a favourable condition. One
thing, however, is certain: when Kierkegaard speaks of ancient theatre and
modern drama, the environment has already changed; we are no longer in
the element of reflection. We find here a thinker who lives the problem of
masks, who experiences the inner emptiness of masks and seeks to fill it, to

Repetition and Difference

9

complete it, albeit with the 'absolutely different' - that is, by putting into it
all the difference between the finite and the infinite, thereby creating the
idea of a theatre of humour and of faith. When Kierkegaard explains that
the knight of faith so resembles a bourgeois in his Sunday best as to be
capable of being mistaken for one, this philosophical instruction must be
taken as the remark of a director showing how the knight of faith should
be played. And when he comments on Job or Abraham, when he imagines
the variations of Agnes and the Triton, he rewrites the tale in a manner
which is clearly that of a scenario. Mozart's music resonates even in
Abraham and Job; it is a matter of 'leaping' to the tune of this music. 'I
look only at movements' is the language of a director who poses the
highest theatrical problem, the problem of a movement which would
directly touch the soul, which would be that of the soul.
Even more so with Nietzsche. The Birth of Tragedy is not a reflection on
ancient theatre so much as the practical foundation of a theatre of the
future, the opening up of a path along which Nietzsche still thinks it
possible to push Wagner. The break with Wagner is not a matter of theory,
nor of music; it concerns the respective roles of text, history, noise, music,
light, song, dance and decor in this theatre of which Nietzsche dreams.
Zarathustra incorporates the two attempts at dramatizing Empedocles.
Moreover, if Bizet is better than Wagner, it is from the point of view of
theatre and for Zarathustra's dances. Nietzsche's reproach to Wagner is
that he inverted and distorted 'movement', giving us a nautical theatre in
which we must paddle and swim rather than one in which we can walk
and dance. Zarathustra is conceived entirely within philosophy, but also
entirely for the stage. Everything in it is scored and visualised, put in
motion and made to walk or dance. How can it be read without searching
for the exact sound of the cries of the higher man, how can the prologue be
read without staging the episode of the tightrope walker which opens the
whole story? At certain moments, it is a comic opera about terrible things;
and it is not by chance that Nietzsche speaks of the comic character of the
Overman. Remember the song of Ariadne from the mouth of the old
Sorcerer: here, two masks are superimposed - that of a young woman,
almost of a Kore, which has just been laid over the mask of a repugnant
old man. The actor must play the role of an old man playing the role of the
Kore. Here too, for Nietzsche, it is a matter of filling the inner emptiness of
the mask within a theatrical space: by multiplying the superimposed masks
and inscribing the omnipresence of Dionysus in that superimposition, by
inserting both the infinity of real movement and the form of the absolute
difference given in the repetition of eternal return. When Nietzsche says
that the Overman resembles Borgia rather than Parsifal, or when he
suggests that the Overman belongs at once to both the Jesuit Order and the
Prussian officer corps, we can understand these texts only by taking them

10

Difference and Repetition

for what they are: the remarks of a director indicating how the Overman
should be 'played'.
Theatre is real movement, and it extracts real movement from all the
arts it employs. This is what we are told: this movement, the essence and
the inferiority of movement, is not opposition, not mediation, but
repetition. Hegel is denounced as the one who proposes an abstract
movement of concepts instead of a movement of the Physis and the Psyche.
Hegel substitutes the abstract relation of the particular to the concept in
general for the true relation of the singular and the universal in the Idea.
He thus remains in the reflected element of 'representation', within simple
generality. He represents concepts instead of dramatizing Ideas: he creates
a false theatre, a false drama, a false movement. We must see how Hegel
betrays and distorts the immediate in order to ground his dialectic in that
incomprehension, and to introduce mediation in a movement which is no
more than that of his own thought and its generalities. When we say, on
the contrary, that movement is repetition and that this is our true theatre,
we are not speaking of the effort of the actor who 'repeats' because he has
not yet learned the part. We have in mind the theatrical space, the
emptiness of that space, and the manner in which it is filled and
determined by the signs and masks through which the actor plays a role
which plays other roles; we think of how repetition is woven from one
distinctive point to another, including the differences within itself. (When
Marx also criticizes the abstract false movement or mediation of the
Hegelians, he finds himself drawn to an idea, which he indicates rather
than develops, an essentially 'theatrical' idea: to the extent that history is
theatre, then repetition, along with the tragic and the comic within
repetition, forms a condition of movement under which the 'actors' or the
'heroes' produce something effectively new in history.) The theatre of
repetition is opposed to the theatre of representation, just as movement is
opposed to the concept and to representation which refers it back to the
concept. In the theatre of repetition, we experience pure forces, dynamic
lines in space which act without intermediary upon the spirit, and link it
directly with nature and history, with a language which speaks before
words, with gestures which develop before organised bodies, with masks
before faces, with spectres and phantoms before characters - the whole
apparatus of repetition as a 'terrible power'.
It then becomes easy to speak of the differences between Kierkegaard
and Nietzsche. Even this question, however, must no longer be posed at the
speculative level of the ultimate nature of the God of Abraham or the
Dionysus of Zarathustra. It is rather a matter of knowing what it means to
'produce movement', to repeat or to obtain repetition. Is it a matter of
leaping, as Kierkegaard believes? Or is it rather a matter of dancing, as
Nietzsche thinks? He does not like the confusion of dancing and leaping
(only Zarathustra's ape, his demon, his dwarf, his buffoon, leaps).

Repetition and Difference

11

Kierkegaard offers us a theatre of faith; he opposes spiritual movement, the
movement of faith, to logical movement. He can thus invite us to go
beyond all aesthetic repetition, beyond irony and even humour, all the
while painfully aware that he offers us only the aesthetic, ironic and
humoristic image of such a going-beyond. With Nietzsche, it is a theatre of
unbelief, of movement as Physis, already a theatre of cruelty. Here,
humour and irony are indispensable and fundamental operations of nature.
And what would eternal return be, if we forgot that it is a vertiginous
movement endowed with a force: not one which causes the return of the
Same in general, but one which selects, one which expels as well as creates,
destroys as well as produces? Nietzsche's leading idea is to ground the
repetition in eternal return on both the death of God and the dissolution of
the self. However, it is a quite different alliance in the theatre of faith:
Kierkegaard dreams of an alliance between a God and a self rediscovered.
All sorts of differences follow: is the movement in the sphere of the mind,
or in the entrails of the earth which knows neither God nor self? Where
will it be better protected against generalities, against mediations? Is
repetition supernatural, to the extent that it is over and above the laws of
nature? Or is it rather the most natural will of Nature in itself and willing
itself as Physis, because Nature is by itself superior to its own kingdoms
and its own laws? Has Kierkegaard not mixed all kinds of things together
in his condemnation of 'aesthetic' repetition: a pseudo-repetition
attributable to general laws of nature and a true repetition in nature itself;
a pathological repetition of the passions and a repetition in art and the
work of art? We cannot now resolve any of these problems; it has been
enough for us to find theatrical confirmation of an irreducible difference
between generality and repetition.
Repetition and generality are opposed from the point of view of conduct
and from the point of view of law. It remains to specify a third opposition
from the point of view of concepts or representation. Let us pose a question quid juris: a concept may be in principle the concept of a particular
existing thing, thus having an infinite comprehension. Infinite comprehension is the correlate of an extension = 1. It is very important that this infinity of comprehension be supposed actual, not virtual or simply
indefinite. It is on this condition that predicates in the form of moments of
concepts are preserved, and have an effect on the subject to which they are
attributed. Infinite comprehension thus makes possible remembering and
recognition, memory and self-consciousness (even when these two faculties
are not themselves infinite). The relation of a concept to its object under
this double aspect, in the form that it assumes in this memory and this selfconsciousness, is called representation. From this may be drawn the principles of a vulgarized Leibnizianism. According to a principle of difference,

12

Difference and Repetition

every determination is conceptual in the last instance, or actually belongs
to the comprehension of a concept. According to a principle of sufficient
reason, there is always one concept per particular thing. According to the
reciprocal principle of the identity of indiscernibles, there is one and only
one thing per concept. Together, these principles expound a theory of difference as conceptual difference, or develop the account of representation
as mediation.
However, a concept can always be blocked at the level of each of its
determinations or each of the predicates that it includes. In so far as it
serves as a determination, a predicate must remain fixed in the concept
while becoming something else in the thing (animal becomes something
other in man and in horse; humanity something other in Peter and in Paul).
This is why the comprehension of the concept is infinite; having become
other in the thing, the predicate is like the object of another predicate in
the concept. But this is also why each determination remains general or
defines a resemblance, to the extent that it remains fixed in the concept and
applicable by right to an infinity of things. Here, the concept is thus
constituted in such a fashion that, in its real use, its comprehension extends
to infinity, but in its logical use, this comprehension is always liable to an
artificial blockage. Every logical limitation of the comprehension of a
concept endows it with an extension greater than 1, in principle infinite,
and thus of a generality such that no existing individual can correspond to
it hic et nunc (rule of the inverse relation of comprehension and extension).
Thus, the principle of difference understood as difference in the concept
does not oppose but, on the contrary, allows the greatest space possible for
the apprehension of resemblances. Even from the point of view of
conundrums, the question 'What difference is there?' may always be
transformed into: 'What resemblance is there?' But above all, in
classification, the determination of species implies and supposes a
continual evaluation of resemblances. Undoubtedly, resemblance is not a
partial identity, but that is only because the predicate in the concept is not,
by virtue of its becoming other in the thing, a part of that thing.
We wish to indicate the difference between this type of artificial
blockage and a quite different type which must be called a natural
blockage of the concept. One refers to logic pure and simple, but the other
refers to a transcendental logic or a dialectic of existence. Let us suppose
that a concept, taken at a particular moment when its comprehension is
finite, is forcibly assigned a place in space and time - that is, an existence
corresponding normally to the extension = 1. We would say, then, that a
genus or species passes into existence hic et nunc without any
augmentation of comprehension. There is a rift between that extension = 1
imposed upon the concept and the extension = 8 that its weak
comprehension demands in principle. The result will be a 'discrete
extension' - that is, a pullulation of individuals absolutely identical in

Repetition and Difference

13

respect of their concept, and participating in the same singularity in
existence (the paradox of doubles or twins). This phenomenon of discrete
extension implies a natural blockage of the concept, different in kind from
a logical blockage: it forms a true repetition in existence rather than an
order of resemblance in thought. There is a significant difference between
generality, which always designates a logical power of concepts, and
repetition, which testifies to their powerlessness or their real limits.
Repetition is the pure fact of a concept with finite comprehension being
forced to pass as such into existence: can we find examples of such a
passage? Epicurean atoms would be one: individuals localised in space,
they nevertheless have a meagre comprehension, which is made up for in
discrete extension, to the point where there exists an infinity of atoms of
the same shape and size. The existence of Epicurean atoms may be
doubted. On the other hand, the existence of words, which are in a sense
linguistic atoms, cannot be doubted. Words possess a comprehension
which is necessarily finite, since they are by nature the objects of a merely
nominal definition. We have here a reason why the comprehension of the
concept cannot extend to infinity: we define a word by only a finite
number of words. Nevertheless, speech and writing, from which words are
inseparable, give them an existence hic et nunc; a genus thereby passes into
existence as such; and here again extension is made up for in dispersion, in
discreteness, under the sign of a repetition which forms the real power of
language in speech and writing.
The question is: are there other natural blockages besides those of
discrete extension and finite comprehension? Let us assume a concept with
indefinite comprehension (virtually infinite). However far one pursues that
comprehension, one can always think that it subsumes perfectly identical
objects. By contrast with the actual infinite, where the concept is sufficient
by right to distinguish its object from every other object, in this case the
concept can pursue its comprehension indefinitely, always subsuming a
plurality of objects which is itself indefinite. Here again, the concept is the
Same - indefinitely the same - for objects which are distinct. We must
therefore recognise the existence of non-conceptual differences between
these objects. It is Kant who best indicates the correlation between objects
endowed with only an indefinite specification, and purely spatio-temporal
or oppositional, non-conceptual determinations (the paradox of
symmetrical objects). However, these determinations are precisely only
the figures of repetition: space and time are themselves repetitive milieux;
and real opposition is not a maximum of difference but a minimum of
repetition - a repetition reduced to two, echoing and returning on itself; a
repetition which has found the means to define itself. Repetition thus
appears as difference without a concept, repetition which escapes
indefinitely continued conceptual difference. It expresses a power peculiar
to the existent, a stubbornness of the existent in intuition, which resists

14

Difference and Repetition

every specification by concepts no matter how far this is taken. However
far you go in the concept, Kant says, you can always repeat - that is, make
several objects correspond to it, or at least two: one for the left and one for
the right, one for the more and one for the less, one for the positive and
one for the negative.
Such a situation may be better understood if we consider that concepts
with indefinite comprehension are concepts of Nature. As such, they are
always in something else: they are not in Nature but in the mind which
contemplates it or observes it, and represents it to itself. That is why it is
said that Nature is alienated mind or alienated concept, opposed to itself.
Corresponding to such concepts are those objects which themselves lack
memory - that is, which neither possess nor collect in themselves their own
moments. The question is asked why Nature repeats: because it is partes
extra partes, mens momentanea. Novelty then passes to the mind which
represents itself: because the mind has a memory or acquires habits, it is
capable of forming concepts in general and of drawing something new, of
subtracting something new from the repetition that it contemplates.
Concepts with finite comprehension are nominal concepts; concepts
with indefinite comprehension but without memory are concepts of
Nature. Yet these two cases still do not exhaust the examples of natural
blockage. Take an individual notion or a particular representation with
infinite comprehension, endowed with memory but lacking selfconsciousness. The comprehensive representation is indeed in-itself, the
memory is there, embracing all the particularity of an act, a scene, an event
or a being. What is missing, however, for a determinate natural reason, is
the for-itself of consciousness or recognition. What is missing in the
memory is remembrance - or rather, the working through of memory.
Consciousness establishes between the I and the representation a relation
much more profound than that which appears in the expression 'I have a
representation': it relates the representation to the I as if to a free faculty
which does not allow itself to be confined within any one of its products,
but for which each product is already thought and recognised as past, the
occasion of a determinant change in inner meaning. When the
consciousness of knowledge or the working through of memory is missing,
the knowledge in itself is only the repetition of its object: it is played, that
is to say repeated, enacted instead of being known. Repetition here appears
as the unconscious of the free concept, of knowledge or of memory, the
unconscious of representation. It fell to Freud to assign the natural reason
for such a blockage: repression or resistance, which makes repetition itself
a veritable 'constraint', a 'compulsion'. Here, then, is a third case of
blockage, one which concerns, this time, the concepts of freedom. Here
too, from the standpoint of a certain Freudianism, we can discover the
principle of an inverse relation between repetition and consciousness,
repetition and remembering, repetition and recognition (the paradox of the

Repetition and Difference

15

'burials' or buried objects): the less one remembers, the less one is
conscious of remembering one's past, the more one repeats it - remember
and work through the memory in order not to repeat it. Self-consciousness
in recognition appears as the faculty of the future or the function of the
future, the function of the new. Is it not true that the only dead who return
are those whom one has buried too quickly and too deeply, without paying
them the necessary respects, and that remorse testifies less to an excess of
memory than to a powerlessness or to a failure in the working through of a
memory?
There is a tragic and a comic repetition. Indeed, repetition always
appears twice, once in the tragic destiny and once in the comic aspect. In
the theatre, the hero repeats precisely because he is separated from an
essential, infinite knowledge. This knowledge is in him, it is immersed in
him and acts in him, but acts like something hidden, like a blocked
representation. The difference between the comic and the tragic pertains to
two elements: first, the nature of the repressed knowledge - in the one case
immediate natural knowledge, a simple given of common sense, in the
other terrible esoteric knowledge; second, as a result, the manner in which
the character is excluded from this knowledge, the manner in which 'he
does not know that he knows'. In general the practical problem consists in
this: this unknown knowledge must be represented as bathing the whole
scene, impregnating all the elements of the play and comprising in itself all
the powers of mind and nature, but at the same time the hero cannot
represent it to himself - on the contrary, he must enact it, play it and
repeat it until the acute moment that Aristotle called 'recognition'. At this
point, repetition and representation confront one another and merge,
without, however, confusing their two levels, the one reflecting itself in and
being sustained by the other, the knowledge as it is represented on stage
and as repeated by the actor then being recognised as the same.
The discrete, the alienated and the repressed are the three cases of natural
blockage, corresponding respectively to nominal concepts, concepts of nature and concepts of freedom. In all these cases, however, conceptual identity or Sameness of representation is invoked to account for repetition:
repetition is attributed to elements which are really distinct but nevertheless share strictly the same concept. Repetition thus appears as a difference,
but a difference absolutely without concept; in this sense, an indifferent difference. The words 'really', 'strictly', 'absolutely' are supposed to refer to
the phenomenon of natural blockage, in opposition to logical blockage
which only determines a generality. However, an important drawback
compromises this whole endeavour. As long as we invoke absolute conceptual identity for distinct objects, we suggest a purely negative explanation,
an explanation by default. The fact that this default should be grounded in

16

Difference and Repetition

the nature of concepts or representations themselves changes nothing. In
the first case, repetition occurs because nominal concepts naturally possess
a finite comprehension. In the second case, repetition occurs because concepts of nature are naturally devoid of memory, alienated and outside
themselves. In the third case, because the concept of freedom remains
unconscious while memories and representations remain repressed. In
all these cases, that which repeats does so only by dint of not
'comprehending', not remembering, not knowing or not being conscious.
Throughout, the inadequacy of concepts and of their representative concomitants (memory and self-consciousness, remembrance and recognition)
is supposed to account for repetition. Such is therefore the default of every
argument grounded in the form of identity in the concept: these arguments
give us only a nominal definition and a negative explanation of repetition.
No doubt the formal identity which corresponds to simple logical blockage
may be opposed to real identity (the Same) as this appears in natural blockage. But natural blockage itself requires a positive supra-conceptual force
capable of explaining it, and of thereby explaining repetition.
Let us return to the example of psychoanalysis: we repeat because we
repress ... Freud was never satisfied with such a negative schema, in which
repetition is explained by amnesia. It is true that, from the beginning,
repression was considered a positive power. However, he borrowed this
positivity from the pleasure principle or from the reality principle: it was
merely a derived positivity, one of opposition. The turning point of
Freudianism appears in Beyond the Pleasure Principle: the death instinct is
discovered, not in connection with the destructive tendencies, not in
connection with aggressivity, but as a result of a direct consideration of
repetition phenomena. Strangely, the death instinct serves as a positive,
originary principle for repetition; this is its domain and its meaning. It
plays the role of a transcendental principle, whereas the pleasure principle
is only psychological. For this reason, it is above all silent (not given in
experience), whereas the pleasure principle is noisy. The first question,
then, is: How is it that the theme of death, which appears to draw together
the most negative elements of psychological life, can be in itself the most
positive element, transcendentally positive, to the point of affirming
repetition? How can it be related to a primordial instinct? But a second
question immediately arises: Under what form is repetition affirmed and
prescribed by the death instinct? Ultimately, it is a question of the relation
between repetition and disguises. Do the disguises found in the work of
dreams or symptoms - condensation, displacement, dramatisation rediscover while attenuating a bare, brute repetition (repetition of the
Same)? From the first theory of repression, Freud indicated another path:
Dora elaborates her own role, and repeats her love for the father, only
through other roles filled by others, which she herself adopts in relation to
those others (K., Frau K., the governess ...). The disguises and the

Repetition and Difference

17

variations, the masks or costumes, do not come 'over and above': they are,
on the contrary, the internal genetic elements of repetition itself, its integral
and constituent parts. This path would have been able to lead the analysis
of the unconscious towards a veritable theatre. However, if it did not do
so, this was because Freud was unable to prevent himself maintaining the
model of a brute repetition, at least as a tendency. We see this when he
attributes fixation to the Id: disguise is then understood from the
perspective of a simple opposition of forces; disguised repetition is only the
fruit of a secondary compromise between the opposed forces of the Ego
and the Id. Even beyond the pleasure principle, the form of a bare
repetition persists, since Freud interprets the death instinct as a tendency to
return to the state of inanimate matter, one which upholds the model of a
wholly physical or material repetition.
Death has nothing to do with a material model. On the contrary, the
death instinct may be understood in relation to masks and costumes.
Repetition is truly that which disguises itself in constituting itself, that
which constitutes itself only by disguising itself. It is not underneath the
masks, but is formed from one mask to another, as though from one
distinctive point to another, from one privileged instant to another, with
and within the variations. The masks do not hide anything except other
masks. There is no first term which is repeated, and even our childhood
love for the mother repeats other adult loves with regard to other women,
rather like the way in which the hero of In Search of Lost Time replays
with his mother Swann's passion for Odette. There is therefore nothing
repeated which may be isolated or abstracted from the repetition in which
it was formed, but in which it is also hidden. There is no bare repetition
which may be abstracted or inferred from the disguise itself. The same
thing is both disguising and disguised. A decisive moment in
psychoanalysis occurred when Freud gave up, in certain respects, the
hypothesis of real childhood events, which would have played the part of
ultimate disguised terms, in order to substitute the power of fantasy which
is immersed in the death instinct, where everything is already masked and
disguised. In short, repetition is in its essence symbolic; symbols or
simulacra are the letter of repetition itself. Difference is included in
repetition by way of disguise and by the order of the symbol. This is why
the variations do not come from without, do not express a secondary
compromise between a repressing instance and a repressed instance, and
must not be understood on the basis of the still negative forms of
opposition, reversal or overturning. The variations express, rather, the
differential mechanisms which belong to the essence and origin of that
which is repeated. We should even overturn the relations between 'covered'
and 'uncovered' within repetition. Take an uncovered or bare repetition
(repetition of the Same) such as an obsessional ceremony or a
schizophrenic stereotype: the mechanical element in the repetition, the

18

Difference and Repetition

element of action apparently repeated, serves as a cover for a more
profound repetition, which is played in another dimension, a secret
verticality in which the roles and masks are furnished by the death instinct.
Theatre of terror, Binswanger said of schizophrenia. There, the 'never seen'
is not the contrary of the 'already seen': both signify the same thing, and
are lived each in the other. Nerval's Sylvie already introduced us into this
theatre, and the Gradiva, so close to a Nervalian inspiration, shows us the
hero who lives at once both repetition as such and the repeated which is
always disguised in the repetition. In the analysis of obsession, the
appearance of the theme of death coincides with the moment at which the
obsessed has command of all the characters of his drama and brings them
together in a repetition of which the 'ceremony' is only the external
envelope. The mask, the costume, the covered is everywhere the truth of
the uncovered. The mask is the true subject of repetition. Because
repetition differs in kind from representation, the repeated cannot be
represented: rather, it must always be signified, masked by what signifies it,
itself masking what it signifies.
I do not repeat because I repress. I repress because I repeat, I forget
because I repeat. I repress, because I can live certain things or certain
experiences only in the mode of repetition. I am determined to repress
whatever would prevent me from living them thus: in particular, the
representation which mediates the lived by relating it to the form of a
similar or identical object. Eros and Thanatos are distinguished in that Eros
must be repeated, can be lived only through repetition, whereas Thanatos
(as transcendental principle) is that which gives repetition to Eros, that
which submits Eros to repetition. Only such a point of view is capable of
advancing us in the obscure problems of the origin of repression, its nature,
its causes and the exact terms on which it bears. For when Freud shows beyond repression 'properly speaking', which bears upon representations the necessity of supposing a primary repression which concerns first and
foremost pure presentations, or the manner in which the drives are
necessarily lived, we believe that he comes closest to a positive internal
principle of repetition. This later appears to him determinable in the form
of the death instinct, and it is this which, far from being explained by it,
must explain the blockage of representation in repression properly
speaking. This is why the law of an inverse relation between repetition and
remembering is in every respect hardly satisfactory, in so far as it makes
repetition depend upon repression.
Freud noted from the beginning that in order to stop repeating it was
not enough to remember in the abstract (without affect), nor to form a
concept in general, nor even to represent the repressed event in all its
particularity: it was necessary to seek out the memory there where it was,
to install oneself directly in the past in order to accomplish a living
connection between the knowledge and the resistance, the representation

Repetition and Difference

19

and the blockage. We are not, therefore, healed by simple anamnesis, any
more than we are made ill by amnesia. Here as elsewhere, becoming
conscious counts for little. The more theatrical and dramatic operation by
which healing takes place - or does not take place - has a name:
transference. Now transference is still repetition: above all it is repetition.10
If repetition makes us ill, it also heals us; if it enchains and destroys us, it
also frees us, testifying in both cases to its 'demonic' power. All cure is a
voyage to the bottom of repetition. There is indeed something analogous to
scientific experimentation in transference, since the patient is supposed to
repeat the whole of his disturbance in privileged, artificial conditions,
taking the person of the analyst as 'object'. In transference, however,
repetition does not so much serve to identify events, persons and passions
as to authenticate the roles and select the masks. Transference is not an
experiment but a principle which grounds the entire analytic experience.
The roles themselves are by nature erotic, but the verification of these roles
appeals to the highest principle and the most profound judge, the death
instinct. In effect, reflection on transference was a determinant motive
behind the discovery of a 'beyond'. In this sense, repetition constitutes by
itself the selective game of our illness and our health, of our loss and our
salvation. How can this game be related to the death instinct? No doubt in
a sense close to that in which Miller, in his wonderful book on Rimbaud,
says: 'I realized that I was free, that the death I had gone through had
liberated me.'11 It seems that the idea of a death instinct must be
understood in terms of three paradoxical and complementary
requirements: to give repetition an original, positive principle, but also an
autonomous disguising power; and finally, to give it an immanent meaning
in which terror is closely mingled with the movement of selection and
freedom.
Our problem concerns the essence of repetition. It is a question of knowing
why repetition cannot be explained by the form of identity in concepts or
representations; in what sense it demands a superior 'positive' principle.
This enquiry must embrace all the concepts of nature and freedom. Consider, on the border between these two cases, the repetition of a decorative
motif: a figure is reproduced, while the concept remains absolutely identical.... However, this is not how artists proceed in reality. They do not juxtapose instances of the figure, but rather each time combine an element of
one instance with another element of a following instance. They introduce
a disequilibrium into the dynamic process of construction, an instability,
dissymmetry or gap of some kind which disappears only in the overall effect. Commenting on such a case, Lévi-Strauss writes: 'These elements interlock with each other through dislocation, and it is only at the end that
the pattern achieves a stability which both confirms and belies the dynamic

20

Difference and Repetition

process according to which it has been carried out.'12 These remarks stand
for the notion of causality in general. For it is not the elements of symmetry
present which matter for artistic or natural causality, but those which are
missing and are not in the cause; what matters is the possibility of the cause
having less symmetry than the effect. Moreover, causality would remain
eternally conjectural, a simple logical category, if that possibility were not
at some moment or other effectively fulfilled. For this reason, the logical
relation of Causality is inseparable from a physical process of signalling,
without which it would not be translated into action. By 'signal' we mean a
system with orders of disparate size, endowed with elements of dissymmetry; by 'sign' we mean what happens within such a system, what flashes
across the intervals when a communication takes place between disparates.
The sign is indeed an effect, but an effect with two aspects: in one of these
it expresses, qua sign, the productive dissymmetry; in the other it tends to
cancel it. The sign is not entirely of the order of the symbol; nevertheless, it
makes way for it by implying an internal difference (while leaving the conditions of its reproduction still external).
The negative expression 'lack of symmetry' should not mislead us: it
indicates the origin and positivity of the causal process. It is positivity itself.
For us, as the example of the decorative motif suggests, it is essential to
break down the notion of causality in order to distinguish two types of
repetition: one which concerns only the overall, abstract effect, and the
other which concerns the acting cause. One is a static repetition, the other
is dynamic. One results from the work, but the other is like the 'evolution'
of a bodily movement. One refers back to a single concept, which leaves
only an external difference between the ordinary instances of a figure; the
other is the repetition of an internal difference which it incorporates in
each of its moments, and carries from one distinctive point to another. One
could try to assimilate these two repetitions by saying that the difference
between the first and the second is only a matter of a change in the content
of the concept, or of the figure being articulated differently, but this would
be to fail to recognise the respective order of each repetition. For in the
dynamic order there is no representative concept, nor any figure
represented in a pre-existing space. There is an Idea, and a pure dynamism
which creates a corresponding space.
Studies on rhythm or symmetry confirm this duality. A distinction is
drawn between arithmetic symmetry, which refers back to a scale of whole
or fractional coefficients, and geometric symmetry, based upon proportions
or irrational ratios; a static symmetry which is cubic or hexagonal, and a
dynamic symmetry which is pentagonal and appears in a spiral line or in a
geometrically progressing pulsation - in short, in a living and mortal
'evolution'. Now, the second of these is at the heart of the first; it is the
vital, positive, active procedure. In a network of double squares, we
discover radiating lines which have the centre of a pentagon or a

Repetition and Difference

21

pentagram as their asymmetrical pole. The network is like a fabric
stretched upon a framework, 'but the outline, the principal rhythm of that
framework, is almost always a theme independent of the network': such
elements of dissymmetry serve as both genetic principle and principle of
reflection for symmetrical figures. The static repetition in the network of
double squares thus refers back to a dynamic repetition, formed by a
pentagon and 'the decreasing series of pentagrams which may be naturally
inscribed therein'. Similarly, the study of rhythm allows us immediately to
distinguish two kinds of repetition. Cadence-repetition is a regular division
of time, an isochronic recurrence of identical elements. However, a period
exists only in so far as it is determined by a tonic accent, commanded by
intensities. Yet we would be mistaken about the function of accents if we
said that they were reproduced at equal intervals. On the contrary, tonic
and intensive values act by creating inequalities or incommensurabilities
between metrically equivalent periods or spaces. They create distinctive
points, privileged instants which always indicate a poly-rhythm. Here
again, the unequal is the most positive element. Cadence is only the
envelope of a rhythm, and of a relation between rhythms. The reprise of
points of inequality, of inflections or of rhythmic events, is more profound
than the reproduction of ordinary homogeneous elements. As a result, we
should distinguish cadence-repetition and rhythm-repetition in every case,
the first being only the outward appearance or the abstract effect of the
second. A bare, material repetition (repetition of the Same) appears only in
the sense that another repetition is disguised within it, constituting it and
constituting itself in disguising itself. Even in nature, isochronic rotations
are only the outward appearance of a more profound movement, the
revolving cycles are only abstractions: placed together, they reveal
evolutionary cycles or spirals whose principle is a variable curve, and the
trajectory of which has two dissymmetrical aspects, as though it had a right
and a left. It is always in this gap, which should not be confused with the
negative, that creatures weave their repetition and receive at the same time
the gift of living and dying.
Finally, to return to nominal concepts: is it the identity of the nominal
concept which explains the repetition of a word? Take the example of
rhyme: it is indeed verbal repetition, but repetition which includes the
difference between two words and inscribes that difference at the heart of a
poetic Idea, in a space which it determines. Nor does its meaning lie in
marking equal intervals, but rather, as we see in a notion of strong rhyme,
in putting tonal values in the service of tonic rhythm, and contributing to
the independence of tonic rhythms from arithmetic rhythms. As for the
repetition of a single word, we must understand this as a 'generalised
rhyme', not rhyme as a restricted repetition. This generalisation can
proceed in two ways: either a word taken in two senses ensures a
resemblance or a paradoxical identity between the two senses; or a word

22

Difference and Repetition

taken in one sense exercises an attractive force on its neighbours,
communicating an extraordinary gravity to them until one of the
neighbouring words takes up the baton and becomes in turn a centre of
repetition. Raymond Roussel and Charles Péguy were the great repeaters of
literature, able to lift the pathological power of language to a higher
artistic level. Roussel takes ambiguous words or homonyms and fills the
entire distance between their meanings with a story presented twice and
with objects themselves doubled. He thereby overcomes homonymity on its
own ground and inscribes the maximum difference within repetition,
where this is the space opened up in the heart of a word. This space is still
presented by Roussel as one of masks and death, in which is developed
both a repetition which enchains and a repetition which saves - which
saves above all from the one which enchains. Roussel creates an
after-language where, once everything has been said, everything is repeated
and recommenced. Péguy's technique is very different: it substitutes
repetition not for homonymity but for synonymity; it concerns what
linguists call the function of contiguity rather than that of similarity; it
forms a before-language, an auroral language in which the step-by-step
creation of an internal space within words proceeds by tiny differences.
This time, everything leads to the problem of aging and premature deaths,
but in relation to this problem also to the extraordinary chance to affirm a
repetition which saves against that which enchains. Both Péguy and
Roussel take language to one of its limits: in the case of Roussel, that of
similarity and selection, the 'distinctive feature' between billard and pillard;
in the case of Péguy, that of contiguity or combination, the famous tapestry
points. Both substitute a vertical repetition of distinctive points, which
takes us inside the words, for the horizontal repetition of ordinary words
repeated. Both substitute a positive repetition, one which flows from the
excess of a linguistic and stylistic Idea, for a repetition by default which
results from the inadequacy of nominal concepts or verbal representations.
How does death inspire language, given that it is always present when
repetition is affirmed?
The reproduction of the Same is not a motor of bodily movements. We
know that even the simplest imitation involves a difference between inside
and outside. Moreover, imitation plays only a secondary and regulatory
role in the acquisition of a behaviour: it permits the correction of
movements being made, but not their instigation. Learning takes place not
in the relation between a representation and an action (reproduction of the
Same) but in the relation between a sign and a response (encounter with
the Other). Signs involve heterogeneity in at least three ways: first, in the
object which bears or emits them, and is necessarily on a different level, as
though there were two orders of size or disparate realities between which
the sign flashes; secondly, in themselves, since a sign envelops another
'object' within the limits of the object which bears it, and incarnates a

Repetition and Difference

23

natural or spiritual power (an Idea); finally, in the response they elicit,
since the movement of the response does not 'resemble' that of the sign.
The movement of the swimmer does not resemble that of the wave, in
particular, the movements of the swimming instructor which we reproduce
on the sand bear no relation to the movements of the wave, which we learn
to deal with only by grasping the former in practice as signs. That is why it
is so difficult to say how someone learns: there is an innate or acquired
practical familiarity with signs, which means that there is something
amorous - but also something fatal - about all education. We learn
nothing from those who say: 'Do as I do'. Our only teachers are those who
tell us to 'do with me', and are able to emit signs to be developed in
heterogeneity rather than propose gestures for us to reproduce. In other
words, there is no ideo-motivity, only sensory-motivity. When a body
combines some of its own distinctive points with those of a wave, it
espouses the principle of a repetition which is no longer that of the Same,
but involves the Other - involves difference, from one wave and one
gesture to another, and carries that difference through the repetitive space
thereby constituted. To learn is indeed to constitute this space of an
encounter with signs, in which the distinctive points renew themselves in
each other, and repetition takes shape while disguising itself.
Apprenticeship always gives rise to images of death, on the edges of the
space it creates and with the help of the heterogeneity it engenders. Signs
are deadly when they are lost in the distance, but also when they strike us
with full force. Oedipus receives a sign once from too far away, once from
too close, and between the two a terrible repetition of the crime is woven.
Zarathustra receives his 'sign' either from too near or from too far, and
only at the end does he foresee the correct distance which will turn that
which in eternal return makes him ill into a liberatory and redemptive
repetition. Signs are the true elements of theatre. They testify to the
spiritual and natural powers which act beneath the words, gestures,
characters and objects represented. They signify repetition as real
movement, in opposition to representation which is a false movement of
the abstract.
We are right to speak of repetition when we find ourselves confronted
by identical elements with exactly the same concept. However, we must
distinguish between these discrete elements, these repeated objects, and a
secret subject, the real subject of repetition, which repeats itself through
them. Repetition must be understood in the pronominal; we must find the
Self of repetition, the singularity within that which repeats. For there is no
repetition without a repeater, nothing repeated without a repetitious soul.
As a result, rather than the repeated and the repeater, the object and the
subject, we must distinguish two forms of repetition. In every case
repetition is difference without a concept. But in one case, the difference is
taken to be only external to the concept; it is a difference between objects

24

Difference and Repetition

represented by the same concept, falling into the indifference of space and
time. In the other case, the difference is internal to the Idea; it unfolds as
pure movement, creative of a dynamic space and time which correspond to
the Idea. The first repetition is repetition of the Same, explained by the
identity of the concept or representation; the second includes difference,
and includes itself in the alterity of the Idea, in the heterogeneity of an
'a-presentation'. One is negative, occurring by default in the concept; the
other affirmative, occurring by excess in the Idea. One is conjectural, the
other categorical. One is static, the other dynamic. One is repetition in the
effect, the other in the cause. One is extensive, the other intensive. One is
ordinary, the other distinctive and singular. One is horizontal, the other
vertical. One is developed and explicated, the other enveloped and in need
of interpretation. One is revolving, the other evolving. One involves
equality, commensurability and symmetry; the other is grounded in
inequality, incommensurability and dissymmetry. One is material, the
other spiritual, even in nature and in the earth. One is inanimate, the other
carries the secret of our deaths and our lives, of our enchainments and our
liberations, the demonic and the divine. One is a 'bare' repetition, the other
a covered repetition, which forms itself in covering itself, in masking and
disguising itself. One concerns accuracy, the other has authenticity as its
criterion.
The two repetitions are not independent. One is the singular subject, the
inferiority and the heart of the other, the depths of the other. The other is
only the external envelope, the abstract effect. The repetition of
dissymmetry is hidden within symmetrical ensembles or effects; a repetition
of distinctive points underneath that of ordinary points; and everywhere
the Other in the repetition of the Same. This is the secret, the most
profound repetition: it alone provides the principle of the other one, the
reason for the blockage of concepts. In this domain, as in Sartor Resartus,
it is the masked, the disguised or the costumed which turns out to be the
truth of the uncovered. Necessarily, since this repetition is not hidden by
something else but forms itself by disguising itself; it does not pre-exist its
own disguises and, in forming itself, constitutes the bare repetition within
which it becomes enveloped. Important consequences follow from this.
When we are confronted by a repetition which proceeds masked, or
comprises displacements, quickenings, slowdowns, variants or differences
which are ultimately capable of leading us far away from the point of
departure, we tend to see a mixed state in which repetition is not pure but
only approximative: the very word repetition seems to be employed
symbolically, by analogy or metaphor. It is true that we have strictly
defined repetition as difference without concept. However, we would be
wrong to reduce it to a difference which falls back into exteriority, because
the concept embodies the form of the Same, without seeing that it can be
internal to the Idea and possess in itself all the resources of signs, symbols

Repetition and Difference

25

and alterity which go beyond the concept as such. The examples invoked
above concern the most diverse kinds of case, from nominal concepts to
concepts of nature and freedom, and we could be charged with having
mixed up all kinds of physical and psychical repetitions, even with having
run together stereotypical repetitions and latent, symbolic repetitions in the
psychical domain. However, we wished to show the coexistence of these
instances in every repetitive structure, to show how repetition displays
identical elements which necessarily refer back to a latent subject which
repeats itself through these elements, forming an 'other' repetition at the
heart of the first. We therefore suggest that this other repetition is in no
way approximative or metaphorical. It is, on the contrary, the spirit of
every repetition. It is the very letter of every repetition, its watermark or
constitutive cipher. It forms the essence of that in which every repetition
consists: difference without a concept, non-mediated difference. It is both
the literal and spiritual primary sense of repetition. The material sense
results from this other, as if secreted by it like a shell.
We began by distinguishing generality and repetition. Then we
distinguished two forms of repetition. These two distinctions are linked:
the consequences of the first are unfolded only in the second. For if we
were content to treat repetition abstractly and as devoid of any interior, we
would remain incapable of understanding why and how a concept could be
naturally blocked, allowing a repetition which has nothing to do with
generality to appear. Conversely, when we discover the literal interior of
repetition, we have the means not only to understand the outer repetition
as a cover, but also to recapture the order of generality (and, following
Kierkegaard's wish, to carry out the reconciliation of the singular with the
general). For to the extent that the internal repetition projects itself through
a bare repetition which covers it, the differences that it includes appear to
be so many factors which oppose repetition, which attenuate it and vary it
according to 'general' laws. Beneath the general operation of laws,
however, there always remains the play of singularities. Cyclical
generalities in nature are the masks of a singularity which appears through
their interferences; and beneath the generalities of habit in moral life we
rediscover singular processes of learning. The domain of laws must be
understood, but always on the basis of a Nature and a Spirit superior to
their own laws, which weave their repetitions in the depths of the earth
and of the heart, where laws do not yet exist. The interior of repetition is
always affected by an order of difference: it is only to the extent that
something is linked to a repetition of an order other than its own that the
repetition appears external and bare, and the thing itself subject to the
categories of generality. It is the inadequation between difference and
repetition which gives rise to the order of generality. Gabriel Tarde
suggested in this sense that resemblance itself was only displaced repetition:
real repetition is that which corresponds directly to a difference of the same

26

Difference and Repetition

degree as itself. Better than anyone, Tarde was able to elaborate a new
dialectic by discovering in mind and nature the secret effort to establish an
ever more perfect correspondence between difference and repetition.
So long as we take difference to be conceptual difference, intrinsically conceptual, and repetition to be an extrinsic difference between objects represented by the same concept, it appears that the problem of their relation
may be resolved by the facts. Are there repetitions - yes or no? Or is every
difference indeed intrinsic and conceptual in the last instance? Hegel ridiculed Leibniz for having invited the court ladies to undertake experimental
metaphysics while walking in the gardens, to see whether two leaves of a
tree could not have the same concept. Replace the court ladies by forensic
scientists: no two grains of dust are absolutely identical, no two hands have
the same distinctive points, no two typewriters have the same strike, no
two revolvers score their bullets in the same manner .... Why, however, do
we feel that the problem is not properly defined so long as we look for the
criterion of a principium individuationis in the facts? It is because a difference can be internal, yet not conceptual (as the paradox of symmetrical objects shows). A dynamic space must be defined from the point of view of
an observer tied to that space, not from an external position. There are internal differences which dramatise an Idea before representing an object.
Difference here is internal to an Idea, even though it be external to the concept which represents an object. That is why the opposition between Kant
and Leibniz seems much less strong to the extent that one takes account of
the dynamic factors present in the two doctrines. If, in the forms of intuition, Kant recognised extrinsic differences not reducible to the order of
concepts, these are no less 'internal' even though they cannot be regarded
as 'intrinsic' by the understanding, and can be represented only in their external relation to space as a whole. In other words, following certain
neo-Kantian interpretations, there is a step-by-step, internal, dynamic construction of space which must precede the 'representation' of the whole as
a form of exteriority. The element of this internal genesis seems to us to
consist of intensive quantity rather than schema, and to be related to Ideas
rather than to concepts of the understanding. If the spatial order of extrinsic differences and the conceptual order of intrinsic differences are finally
in harmony, as the schema shows they are, this is ultimately due to this intensive differential element, this synthesis of continuity at a given moment
which, in the form of a continua repetitio, first gives rise internally to the
space corresponding to Ideas. With Leibniz, the affinity between extrinsic
differences and intrinsic conceptual differences already appealed to the internal process of a continua repetitio, grounded upon an intensive differential element which ensures the synthesis of continuity at a point in order to
engender space from within.

Repetition and Difference

27

There are repetitions which are not only extrinsic differences, just as
there are internal differences which are neither intrinsic nor conceptual. We
are thus in a better position to identify the source of the preceding
ambiguities. When we define repetition as difference without concept, we
are drawn to conclude that only extrinsic difference is involved in
repetition; we consider, therefore, that any internal 'novelty' is sufficient to
remove us from repetition proper and can be reconciled only with an
approximative repetition, so-called by analogy. Nothing of the sort is true.
For we do not yet know what is the essence of repetition, what is positively
denoted by the expression 'difference without concept', or the nature of the
inferiority it may imply. Conversely, when we define difference as
conceptual difference, we believe we have done enough to specify the
concept of difference as such. Nevertheless, here again we have no idea of
difference, no concept of difference as such. Perhaps the mistake of the
philosophy of difference, from Aristotle to Hegel via Leibniz, lay in
confusing the concept of difference with a merely conceptual difference, in
remaining content to inscribe difference in the concept in general. In
reality, so long as we inscribe difference in the concept in general we have
no singular Idea of difference, we remain only with a difference already
mediated by representation. We therefore find ourselves confronted by two
questions: what is the concept of difference - one which is not reducible to
simple conceptual difference but demands its own Idea, its own singularity
at the level of Ideas? On the other hand, what is the essence of repetition one which is not reducible to difference without concept, and cannot be
confused with the apparent character of objects represented by the same
concept, but bears witness to singularity as a power of Ideas? The meeting
between these two notions, difference and repetition, can no longer be
assumed: it must come about as a result of interferences and intersections
between these two lines: one concerning the essence of repetition, the other
the idea of difference.

Chapter I
Difference in Itself
Indifference has two aspects: the undifferenciated abyss, the black nothingness, the indeterminate animal in which everything is dissolved - but also
the white nothingness, the once more calm surface upon which float unconnected determinations like scattered members: a head without a neck,
an arm without a shoulder, eyes without brows. The indeterminate is completely indifferent, but such floating determinations are no less indifferent
to each other. Is difference intermediate between these two extremes? Or is
it not rather the only extreme, the only moment of presence and precision?
Difference is the state in which one can speak of determination as such.
The difference 'between' two things is only empirical, and the corresponding determinations are only extrinsic. However, instead of something distinguished from something else, imagine something which distinguishes
itself - and yet that from which it distinguishes itself does not distinguish
itself from it. Lightning, for example, distinguishes itself from the black sky
but must also trail it behind, as though it were distinguishing itself from
that which does not distinguish itself from it. It is as if the ground rose to
the surface, without ceasing to be ground. There is cruelty, even monstrosity, on both sides of this struggle against an elusive adversary, in which the
distinguished opposes something which cannot distinguish itself from it but
continues to espouse that which divorces it. Difference is this state in which
determination takes the form of unilateral distinction. We must therefore
say that difference is made, or makes itself, as in the expression 'make the
difference'. This difference or determination as such is also cruelty. The
Platonists used to say that the not-One distinguished itself from the One,
but not the converse, since the One does not flee that which flees it; and at
the other pole, form distinguishes itself from matter or from the ground,
but not the converse, since distinction itself is a form. In truth, all the forms
are dissolved when they are reflected in this rising ground. It has ceased to
be the pure indeterminate which remains below, but the forms also cease to
be the coexisting or complementary determinations. The rising ground is
no longer below, it acquires autonomous existence; the form reflected in
this ground is no longer a form but an abstract line acting directly upon the
soul. When the ground rises to the surface, the human face decomposes in
this mirror in which both determinations and the indeterminate combine in
a single determination which 'makes' the difference. It is a poor recipe for
producing monsters to accumulate heteroclite determinations or to overdetermine the animal. It is better to raise up the ground and dissolve the
28

Difference in Itself

29

form. Goya worked with aquatint and etching, the grisaille of the one and
the severity of the other. Odilon Redon used chiaroscuro and the abstract
line. The abstract line acquires all its force from giving up the model - that
is to say, the plastic symbol of the form - and participates in the ground all
the more violently in that it distinguishes itself from it without the ground
distinguishing itself from the line. At this point, in such a mirror, faces are
distorted. Nor is it certain that it is only the sleep of reason which gives rise
to monsters: it is also the vigil, the insomnia of thought, since thought is
that moment in which determination makes itself one, by virtue of maintaining a unilateral and precise relation to the indeterminate. Thought
'makes' difference, but difference is monstrous. We should not be surprised
that difference should appear accursed, that it should be error, sin or the
figure of evil for which there must be expiation. There is no sin other than
raising the ground and dissolving the form. Recall Artaud's idea: cruelty is
nothing but determination as such, that precise point at which the determined maintains its essential relation with the undetermined, that rigorous
abstract line fed by chiaroscuro.
To rescue difference from its maledictory state seems, therefore, to be
the project of the philosophy of difference. Cannot difference become a
harmonious organism and relate determination to other determinations
within a form - that is to say, within the coherent medium of an organic
representation? There are four principal aspects to 'reason' in so far as it is
the medium of representation: identity, in the form of the undetermined
concept; analogy, in the relation between ultimate determinable concepts;
opposition, in the relation between determinations within concepts;
resemblance, in the determined object of the concept itself. These forms are
like the four heads or the four shackles of mediation. Difference is
'mediated' to the extent that it is subjected to the fourfold root of identity,
opposition, analogy and resemblance. On the basis of a first impression
(difference is evil), it is proposed to 'save' difference by representing it, and
to represent it by relating it to the requirements of the concept in general. It
is therefore a question of determining a propitious moment - the Greek
propitious moment - at which difference is, as it were, reconciled with the
concept. Difference must leave its cave and cease to be a monster; or at
least only that which escapes at the propitious moment must persist as a
monster, that which constitutes only a bad encounter, a bad occasion. At
this point the expression 'make the difference' changes its meaning. It now
refers to a selective test which must determine which differences may be
inscribed within the concept in general, and how. Such a test, such a
selection, seems to be effectively realised by the Large and the Small. For
the Large and the Small are not naturally said of the One, but first and
foremost of difference. The question arises, therefore, how far the
difference can and must extend - how large? how small? - in order to
remain within the limits of the concept, neither becoming lost within nor

30

Difference and Repetition

escaping beyond it. It is obviously difficult to know whether the problem is
well posed in this way: is difference really an evil in itself? Must the
question have been posed in these moral terms? Must difference have been
'mediated' in order to render it both livable and thinkable? Must the
selection have consisted in that particular test? Must the test have been
conceived in that manner and with that aim? But we can answer these
questions only once we have more precisely determined the supposed
nature of the propitious moment.
Aristotle says: there is a difference which is at once the greatest and the
most perfect, megiste and teleios. Difference in general is distinguished
from diversity or otherness. For two terms differ when they are other, not
in themselves, but in something else; thus when they also agree in something else: in genus when they are differences in species, in species for differences in number, or even 'in being, according to the analogy' for
differences in genus. Under these conditions, what is the greatest difference? The greatest difference is always an opposition, but of all the
forms of opposition, which is the most perfect, the most complete, that
which 'agrees' best? Related terms belong to one another; contradiction already belongs to a subject, but only in order to make its subsistence impossible and to qualify the change by which it begins or ceases to be;
privation again expresses a determinate incapacity on behalf of an existing
subject. Contrariety alone expresses the capacity of a subject to bear opposites while remaining substantially the same (in matter or in genus). Under
what conditions, however, does contrariety impart its perfection to difference? So long as we consider the concrete being with respect to its matter, the contrarieties which affect it are corporeal modifications which give
us only the empirical, accidental concept of a still extrinsic difference [extra
quidditatem}. Accidents may be separable from the subject, as 'white' and
'black' are from 'man'; or inseparable, as 'male' and 'female' are from 'animal': accordingly, the difference will be called either communis or propria,
but in so far as it pertains to matter, it will always be accidental. Thus,
only a contrariety in the essence or in the form gives us the concept of a
difference that is itself essential [differentia essentialis aut propriissima].
Contraries in this case are modifications which affect a subject with respect
to its genus. Genera are in effect divided by differences in essence which
take the form of contraries, such as 'with feet' and 'with wings'. In short,
contrariety in the genus is the perfect and maximal difference, and contrariety in the genus is specific difference. Above and below that, difference
tends to become simple otherness and almost to escape the identity of the
concept: generic difference is too large, being established between uncombinable objects which do not enter into relations of contrariety; while indi-

Difference in Itself

31

vidual difference is too small, being between indivisible objects which have
no contrariety either.
It seems indeed, on the other hand, that specific difference meets all the
requirements of a harmonious concept and an organic representation. It is
pure because it is formal, intrinsic because it applies to the essence. It is
qualitative, and to the extent that the genus designates the essence,
difference is even a very special quality 'according to the essence', a quality
of the essence itself. It is synthetic, since the determination of species is
composition, and the difference is actually added to the genus in which it
was hitherto only virtually included. It is mediated, it is itself mediation,
the middle term in person. It is productive, since genera are not divided
into differences but divided by differences which give rise to corresponding
species. That is why it is always a cause, the formal cause: the shortest
distance is the specific difference of the straight line, compression the
specific difference of the colour black, dissociation that of the colour white.
That is also why it is a predicate of such a peculiar type, since it is
attributed to the species but at the same time attributes the genus to it and
constitutes the species to which it is attributed. Such a synthetic and
constitutive predicate, attributive more than attributed, a veritable rule of
production, has one final property: that of carrying with itself that which it
attributes. In effect, the quality of the essence is sufficiently special to make
the genus something other, and not simply of another quality. It is thus in
the nature of genera to remain the same in themselves while becoming
other in the differences which divide them. Difference carries with itself the
genus and all the intermediary differences. The determination of species
links difference with difference across the successive levels of division, like
a transport of difference, a diaphora (difference) of diaphora, until a final
difference, that of the infitna species (lowest species), condenses in the
chosen direction the entirety of the essence and its continued quality,
gathers them under an intuitive concept and grounds them along with the
term to be defined, thereby becoming itself something unique and
indivisible [atomon, adiaphoron, eidos]. In this manner, therefore, the
determination of species ensures coherence and continuity in the
comprehension of the concept.
Return to the expression 'the greatest difference'. It is now evident that
specific difference is the greatest only in an entirely relative sense.
Absolutely speaking, contradiction is greater than contrariety - and above
all, generic difference is greater than specific. Already, the manner in which
Aristotle distinguishes between difference and diversity or otherness points
the way: only in relation to the supposed identity of a concept is specific
difference called the greatest. Furthermore, it is in relation to the form of
identity in the generic concept that difference goes as far as opposition,
that it is pushed as far as contrariety. Specific difference, therefore, in no
way represents a universal concept (that is to say, an Idea) encompassing

32

Difference and Repetition

all the singularities and turnings of difference, but rather refers to a
particular moment in which difference is merely reconciled with the
concept in general. Thus Aristotle's diaphora of the diaphora is only a false
transport: it never shows difference changing its nature, we never discover
in it a differenciator of difference which would relate, in their respective
immediacy, the most universal and the most singular. Specific difference
refers only to an entirely relative maximum, a point of accommodation for
the Greek eye - in particular for the Greek eye which sees the mean, and
has lost the sense of Dionysian transports and metamorphoses. Here we
find the principle which lies behind a confusion disastrous for the entire
philosophy of difference: assigning a distinctive concept of difference is
confused with the inscription of difference within concepts in general - the
determination of the concept of difference is confused with the inscription
of difference in the identity of an undetermined concept. This is the sleight
of hand involved in the propitious moment (and perhaps everything else
follows: the subordination of difference to opposition, to analogy, and to
resemblance, all the aspects of mediation). Difference then can be no more
than a predicate in the comprehension of a concept. Aristotle constantly
reminds us of this predicative character of specific difference, but he is
forced to lend it strange powers such as that of attributing as much as that
of being attributed, or of altering the genus as much as of modifying its
quality. All of the ways in which specific difference seems to satisfy the
requirements of a distinctive concept (purity, inferiority, productivity,
transportivity ...) are thus shown to be illusory, even contradictory, on the
basis of this fundamental confusion.
Specific difference is thus small in relation to a larger difference which
concerns the genera themselves. Even in biological classification, it
becomes quite small in relation to the large genera; no doubt not a material
difference, but nevertheless a simple difference 'in' the material, one which
works through the more and the less. The fact is that specific difference is
maximal and perfect, but only on condition of the identity of an
undetermined concept (genus). It is insignificant, by contrast, in
comparison with the difference between genera as ultimate determinable
concepts (categories), for these latter are not subject to the condition that
they share an identical concept or a common genus. Remember the reason
why Being itself is not a genus: it is, Aristotle says, because differences are
(the genus must therefore be able to attribute itself to its differences in
themselves: as if animal was said at one time of the human species, but at
another of the difference 'rational' in constituting another species ...). It is
therefore an argument borrowed from the nature of specific difference
which allows him to conclude that generic differences are of another
nature. It is as though there were two 'Logoi', differing in nature but
intermingled with one another: the logos of Species, the logos of what we
think and say, which rests upon the condition of the identity or univocity

Difference in Itself

33

of concepts in general taken as genera; and the logos of Genera, the logos
of what is thought and said through us, which is free of that condition and
operates both in the equivocity of Being and in the diversity of the most
general concepts. When we speak the univocal, is it not still the equivocal
which speaks within us? Must we not recognise here a kind of fracture
introduced into thought, one which will not cease to widen in another
atmosphere (non-Aristotelian)? But above all, is this not already a new
chance for the philosophy of difference? Will it not lead towards an
absolute concept, once liberated from the condition which made difference
an entirely relative maximum?
Nothing of the kind, however, occurs with Aristotle. The fact is that
generic or categorial difference remains a difference in the Aristotelian
sense and does not collapse into simple diversity or otherness. An identical
or common concept thus still subsists, albeit in a very particular manner.
This concept of Being is not collective, like a genus in relation to its species,
but only distributive and hierarchical: it has no content in itself, only a
content in proportion to the formally different terms of which it is
predicated. These terms (categories) need not have an equal relation to
being: it is enough that each has an internal relation to being. The two
characteristics of the concept of being - having no more than a distributive
common sense and having a hierarchical primary sense - show clearly that
being does not have, in relation to the categories, the role of a genus in
relation to univocal species. They also show that the equivocity of being is
quite particular: it is a matter of analogy. Now, if we ask what is the
instance capable of proportioning the concept to the terms or to the
subjects of which it is affirmed, it is clear that it is judgement. For
judgement has precisely two essential functions, and only two: distribution,
which it ensures by the partition of concepts; and hierarchization, which it
ensures by the measuring of subjects. To the former corresponds the faculty
of judgement known as common sense; to the latter the faculty known as
good sense (or first sense). Both constitute just measure or 'justice' as a
value of judgement. In this sense, every philosophy of categories takes
judgement for its model - as we see in the case of Kant, and still even in the
case of Hegel. With its common sense and first sense, however, the analogy
of judgement allows the identity of a concept to subsist, either in implicit
and confused form or in virtual form. Analogy is itself the analogue of
identity within judgement. Analogy is the essence of judgement, but the
analogy within judgement is the analogy of the identity of concepts. That is
why we cannot expect that generic or categorial difference, any more than
specific difference, will deliver us a proper concept of difference. Whereas
specific difference is content to inscribe difference in the identity of the
indeterminate concept in general, generic (distributive and hierarchical)
difference is content in turn to inscribe difference in the quasi-identity of
the most general determinable concepts; that is, in the analogy within

34

Difference and Repetition

judgement itself. The entire Aristotelian philosophy of difference is
contained in this complementary double inscription, both grounded in the
same postulate and together drawing the arbitrary boundaries of the
propitious moment.
Generic and specific differences are tied together by their complicity in
representation. Not that they in any way share the same nature: genus is
determinable only by specific difference from without; and the identity of
the genus in relation to the species contrasts with the impossibility for
Being of forming a similar identity in relation to the genera themselves.
However, it is precisely the nature of the specific differences (the fact that
they are) which grounds that impossibility, preventing generic differences
from being related to being as if to a common genus (if being were a genus,
its differences would be assimilable to specific differences, but then one
could no longer say that they 'are', since a genus is not in itself attributed
to its differences). In this sense, the univocity of species in a common genus
refers back to the equivocity of being in the various genera: the one reflects
the other. We see this clearly in the requirements of the ideal of
classification: at once the large units - gene megista, which will eventually
be called branches - are determined according to relations of analogy,
which suppose a choice of characters carried out by judgement in the
abstract representation, and the small units, the little genera or species, are
determined by a direct perception of resemblances, which suppose a
continuity of sensible intuition in the concrete representation. Even
neo-evolutionism will rediscover these two related aspects of the categories
of the Large and the Small, when it distinguishes the large precocious
embryological differenciations from the small, tardy, adult, species or
intraspecies differenciations. Alternatively, these two aspects enter into
conflict according to whether the large genera or the species are taken to be
concepts of Nature, both constituting the limits of organic representation,
and the requisites equally necessary for classification: methodological
continuity in the perception of resemblances is no less indispensable than
systematic distribution in the judgement of analogy. However, from one
point of view as from the other, Difference appears only as a reflexive
concept. In effect, difference allows the passage from similar neighbouring
species to the identity of a genus which subsumes them - that is, the
extraction or cutting out of generic identities from the flux of a continuous
perceptible series. At the other pole, it allows the passage from respectively
identical genera to the relations of analogy which obtain between them in
the intelligible. As a concept of reflection, difference testifies to its full
submission to all the requirements of representation, which becomes
thereby 'organic representation'. In the concept of reflection, mediating
and mediated difference is in effect fully subject to the identity of the
concept, the opposition of predicates, the analogy of judgement and the
resemblance of perception. Here we rediscover the necessarily quadripartite

Difference in Itself

35

character of representation. The question is to know whether, under all
these reflexive aspects, difference does not lose both its own concept and
its own reality. In effect, difference ceases to be reflexive and recovers an
effectively real concept only to the extent that it designates catastrophes:
either breaks of continuity in the series of resemblances or impassable
fissures between the analogical structures. It ceases to be reflexive only in
order to become catastrophic. No doubt it cannot be the one without the
other. But does not difference as catastrophe precisely bear witness to an
irreducible ground which continues to act under the apparent equilibrium
of organic representation?
There has only ever been one ontological proposition: Being is univocal.
There has only ever been one ontology, that of Duns Scotus, which gave
being a single voice. We say Duns Scotus because he was the one who elevated univocal being to the highest point of subtlety, albeit at the price of
abstraction. However, from Parmenides to Heidegger it is the same voice
which is taken up, in an echo which itself forms the whole deployment of
the univocal. A single voice raises the clamour of being. We have no difficulty in understanding that Being, even if it is absolutely common, is nevertheless not a genus. It is enough to replace the model of judgement with
that of the proposition. In the proposition understood as a complex entity
we distinguish: the sense, or what is expressed in the proposition; the designated (what expresses itself in the proposition); the expressors or designators, which are numerical modes - that is to say, differential factors
characterising the elements endowed with sense and designation. We can
conceive that names or propositions do not have the same sense even while
they designate exactly the same thing (as in the case of the celebrated
examples: morning star - evening star, Israel-Jacob, plan-blanc). The distinction between these senses is indeed a real distinction [distinctio realis],
but there is nothing numerical - much less ontological - about it: it is a formal, qualitative or semiological distinction. The question whether categories are directly assimilable to such senses, or - more probably - derive
from them, must be left aside for the moment. What is important is that we
can conceive of several formally distinct senses which none the less refer to
being as if to a single designated entity, ontologically one. It is true that
such a point of view is not sufficient to prevent us from considering these
senses as analogues and this unity of being as an analogy. We must add
that being, this common designated, in so far as it expresses itself, is said in
turn in a single and same sense of all the numerically distinct designators
and expressors. In the ontological proposition, not only is that which is
designated ontologically the same for qualitatively distinct senses, but also
the sense is ontologically the same for individuating modes, for numerically

36

Difference and Repetition

distinct designators or expressors: the ontological proposition involves a
circulation of this kind (expression as a whole).
In effect, the essential in univocity is not that Being is said in a single and
same sense, but that it is said, in a single and same sense, of all its
individuating differences or intrinsic modalities. Being is the same for all
these modalities, but these modalities are not the same. It is 'equal' for all,
but they themselves are not equal. It is said of all in a single sense, but they
themselves do not have the same sense. The essence of univocal being is to
include individuating differences, while these differences do not have the
same essence and do not change the essence of being - just as white
includes various intensities, while remaining essentially the same white.
There are not two 'paths', as Parmenides' poem suggests, but a single
'voice' of Being which includes all its modes, including the most diverse,
the most varied, the most differenciated. Being is said in a single and same
sense of everything of which it is said, but that of which it is said differs: it
is said of difference itself.
No doubt there is still hierarchy and distribution in univocal being, in
relation to the individuating factors and their sense, but distribution and
even hierarchy have two completely different, irreconcilable acceptations.
Similarly for the expressions logos and nomos, in so far as these refer to
problems of distribution. We must first of all distinguish a type of
distribution which implies a dividing up of that which is distributed: it is a
matter of dividing up the distributed as such. It is here that in judgement
the rules of analogy are all-powerful. In so far as common sense and good
sense are qualities of judgement, these are presented as principles of
division which declare themselves the best distributed. A distribution of
this type proceeds by fixed and proportional determinations which may be
assimilated to 'properties' or limited territories within representation. The
agrarian question may well have been very important for this organisation
of judgement as the faculty which distinguishes parts ('on the one hand and
on the other hand'). Even among the gods, each has his domain, his
category, his attributes, and all distribute limits and lots to mortals in
accordance with destiny. Then there is a completely other distribution
which must be called nomadic, a nomad nomos, without property,
enclosure or measure. Here, there is no longer a division of that which is
distributed but rather a division among those who distribute themselves in
an open space - a space which is unlimited, or at least without precise
limits. Nothing pertains or belongs to any person, but all persons are
arrayed here and there in such a manner as to cover the largest possible
space. Even when it concerns the serious business of life, it is more like a
space of play, or a rule of play, by contrast with sedentary space and
nomos. To fill a space, to be distributed within it, is very different from
distributing the space. It is an errant and even 'delirious' distribution, in
which things are deployed across the entire extensity of a univocal and

Difference in Itself

37

undistributed Being. It is not a matter of being which is distributed
according to the requirements of representation, but of all things being
divided up within being in the univocity of simple presence (the One - All).
Such a distribution is demonic rather than divine, since it is a peculiarity of
demons to operate in the intervals between the gods' fields of action, as it
is to leap over the barriers or the enclosures, thereby confounding the
boundaries between properties. Oedipus' chorus cries: 'Which demon has
leapt further than the longest leap?' The leap here bears witness to the
unsettling difficulties that nomadic distributions introduce into the
sedentary structures of representation. The same goes for hierarchy. There
is a hierarchy which measures beings according to their limits, and
according to their degree of proximity or distance from a principle. But
there is also a hierarchy which considers things and beings from the point
of view of power: it is not a question of considering absolute degrees of
power, but only of knowing whether a being eventually 'leaps over' or
transcends its limits in going to the limit of what it can do, whatever its
degree. 'To the limit', it will be argued, still presupposes a limit. Here, limit
[peras] no longer refers to what maintains the thing under a law, nor to
what delimits or separates it from other things. On the contrary, it refers to
that on the basis of which it is deployed and deploys all its power; hubris
ceases to be simply condemnable and the smallest becomes equivalent to
the largest once it is not separated from what it can do. This enveloping
measure is the same for all things, the same also for substance, quality,
quantity, etc., since it forms a single maximum at which the developed
diversity of all degrees touches the equality which envelops them. This
ontological measure is closer to the immeasurable state of things than to
the first kind of measure; this ontological hierarchy is closer to the hubris
and anarchy of beings than to the first hierarchy. It is the monster which
combines all the demons. The words 'everything is equal' may therefore
resound joyfully, on condition that they are said of that which is not equal
in this equal, univocal Being: equal being is immediately present in
everything, without mediation or intermediary, even though things reside
unequally in this equal being. There, however, where they are borne by
hubris, all things are in absolute proximity, and whether they are large or
small, inferior or superior, none of them participates more or less in being,
nor receives it by analogy. Univocity of being thus also signifies equality of
being. Univocal Being is at one and the same time nomadic distribution
and crowned anarchy.
Nevertheless, can we not conceive a reconciliation between analogy and
univocity? For if being, as being, is univocal in itself, is it not 'analogous' in
relation to its intrinsic modes or individuating factors (what we called
above expressors or designators)? If it is equal in relation to itself, is it not
unequal in relation to the modalities which reside within it? If it designates
a common entity, is this not for existents which have nothing 'really' in

38

Difference and Repetition

common? If its metaphysical state is univocal, does it not have a physical
state of analogy? Finally, if analogy recognises an identical quasi-concept,
does not univocity recognise a quasi-judgement of analogy, if only in order
to relate being to these particular existents? However, such questions risk
distorting the two theses they attempt to bring together. For analogy, as we
have seen, rests essentially upon a certain complicity between generic and
specific differences (despite their difference in kind): being cannot be
supposed a common genus without destroying the reason for which it was
supposed thus; that is, the possibility of being for specific differences. ... It
is not, therefore, surprising that from the standpoint of analogy, everything
happens in the middle regions of genus and species in terms of mediation
and generality - identity of the concept in general and analogy of the most
general concepts. It is henceforth inevitable that analogy falls into an
unresolvable difficulty: it must essentially relate being to particular
existents, but at the same time it cannot say what constitutes their
individuality. For it retains in the particular only that which conforms to
the general (matter and form), and seeks the principle of individuation in
this or that element of the fully constituted individuals. By contrast, when
we say that univocal being is related immediately and essentially to
individuating factors, we certainly do not mean by the latter individuals
constituted in experience, but that which acts in them as a transcendental
principle: as a plastic, anarchic and nomadic principle, contemporaneous
with the process of individuation, no less capable of dissolving and
destroying individuals than of constituting them temporarily; intrinsic
modalities of being, passing from one 'individual' to another, circulating
and communicating underneath matters and forms. The individuating is
not the simple individual. In these conditions, it is not enough to say that
individuation differs in kind from the determination of species. It is not
even enough to say this in the manner of Duns Scotus, who was
nevertheless not content to analyse the elements of an individual but went
as far as the conception of individuation as the 'ultimate actuality of form'.
We must show not only how individuating difference differs in kind from
specific difference, but primarily and above all how individuation properly
precedes matter and form, species and parts, and every other element of the
constituted individual. Univocity of being, in so far as it is immediately
related to difference, demands that we show how individuating difference
precedes generic, specific and even individual differences within being; how
a prior field of individuation within being conditions at once the
determination of species of forms, the determination of parts and their
individual variations. If individuation does not take place either by form or
by matter, neither qualitatively nor extensionally, this is not only because it
differs in kind but because it is already presupposed by the forms, matters
and extensive parts.
Thus it is not at all in the same manner that in the analogy of being,

Difference in Itself

39

generic and specific differences are in general mediated in relation to
individuating differences, and that in univocity, univocal being is said
immediately of individual differences or the universal is said of the most
singular independently of any mediation. If it is true that analogy denies
being the status of a common genus because the (specific) differences 'are',
then conversely, univocal being is indeed common in so far as the
(individuating) differences 'are not' and must not be. No doubt we shall see
that they are not, in a very particular sense: if in univocal being they are
not, it is because they depend upon a non-being without negation. With
univocity, however, it is not the differences which are and must be: it is
being which is Difference, in the sense that it is said of difference.
Moreover, it is not we who are univocal in a Being which is not; it is we
and our individuality which remains equivocal in and for a univocal Being.
There are three principal moments in the history of the philosophical
elaboration of the univocity of being. The first is represented by Duns
Scotus. In the greatest book of pure ontology, the Opus Oxoniense, being
is understood as univocal, but univocal being is understood as neutral,
neuter, indifferent to the distinction between the finite and the infinite, the
singular and the universal, the created and the uncreated. Scotus therefore
deserves the name 'subtle doctor' because he saw being on this side of the
intersection between the universal and the singular. In order to neutralise
the forces of analogy in judgement, he took the offensive and neutralised
being itself in an abstract concept. That is why he only thought univocal
being. Moreover, we can see the enemy he tried to escape in accordance
with the requirements of Christianity: pantheism, into which he would
have fallen if the common being were not neutral. Nevertheless, he was
able to define two types of distinction which relate that indifferent, neutral
being to difference. Formal distinction is, in effect, a real distinction, since
it is grounded in being or in the object; but it is not necessarily a numerical
distinction because it is established between essences or senses, between
'formal reasons' which may allow the persistence of the unity of the subject
to which they are attributed. In this manner, not only is the univocity of
being (in relation to God and to creatures) extended in the univocity of its
'attributes', but, given his infinity, God can possess his formally distinct
univocal attributes without losing anything of his unity. The other type of
distinction, modal distinction, is established between being or the attributes
on the one hand, and the intensive variations of which these are capable on
the other. These variations, like degrees of whiteness, are individuating
modalities of which the finite and the infinite constitute precisely singular
intensities. From the point of view of its own neutrality, univocal being
therefore does not only implicate distinct attributes or qualitative forms
which are themselves univocal, it also relates these and itself to intensive
factors or individuating degrees which vary the mode of these attributes or
forms without modifying their essence in so far as this is being. If it is true

40

Difference and Repetition

that distinction in general relates being to difference, formal distinction and
modal distinction are two types under which univocal being is related, by
itself, to difference in itself.
With the second moment, Spinoza marks a considerable progress.
Instead of understanding univocal being as neutral or indifferent, he makes
it an object of pure affirmation. Univocal being becomes identical with
unique, universal and infinite substance: it is proposed as Deus sive
Natura. Moreover, the struggle undertaken against Descartes by Spinoza is
not unrelated to that which Duns Scotus led against Saint Thomas. Against
the Cartesian theory of substances thoroughly imbued with analogy, and
against the Cartesian conception of distinctions which runs together the
ontological, the formal and the numerical (substance, quality and
quantity), Spinoza organises a remarkable division into substance,
attributes and modes. From the opening pages of the Ethics, he shows that
real distinctions are never numerical but only formal - that is, qualitative
or essential (essential attributes of the unique substance); and conversely,
that numerical distinctions are never real, but only modal (intrinsic modes
of the unique substance and its attributes). The attributes behave like real
qualitatively different senses which relate to substance as if to a single and
same designated; and substance in turn behaves like an ontologically
unique sense in relation to the modes which express it, and inhabit it like
individuating factors or intrinsic and intense degrees. From this follows a
determination of modes as degrees of power, and a single 'obligation' for
such modes: to deploy all their power or their being within the limit itself.
Attributes are thus absolutely common to substance and the modes, even
though modes and substance do not have the same essence. Being itself is
said in a single unique sense of substance and the modes, even though the
modes and substance do not have the same sense or do not have that being
in the same manner [in se and in alio]. Any hierarchy or pre-eminence is
denied in so far as substance is equally designated by all the attributes in
accordance with their essence, and equally expressed by all the modes in
accordance with their degree of power. With Spinoza, univocal being
ceases to be neutralised and becomes expressive; it becomes a truly
expressive and affirmative proposition.
Nevertheless, there still remains a difference between substance and the
modes: Spinoza's substance appears independent of the modes, while the
modes are dependent on substance, but as though on something other than
themselves. Substance must itself be said of the modes and only of the
modes. Such a condition can be satisfied only at the price of a more general
categorical reversal according to which being is said of becoming, identity
of that which is different, the one of the multiple, etc. That identity not be
first, that it exist as a principle but as a second principle, as a principle
become; that it revolve around the Different: such would be the nature of a
Copernican revolution which opens up the possibility of difference having

Difference in Itself

41

its own concept, rather than being maintained under the domination of a
concept in general already understood as identical. Nietzsche meant
nothing more than this by eternal return. Eternal return cannot mean the
return of the Identical because it presupposes a world (that of the will to
power) in which all previous identities have been abolished and dissolved.
Returning is being, but only the being of becoming. The eternal return does
not bring back 'the same', but returning constitutes the only Same of that
which becomes. Returning is the becoming-identical of becoming itself.
Returning is thus the only identity, but identity as a secondary power; the
identity of difference, the identical which belongs to the different, or turns
around the different. Such an identity, produced by difference, is
determined as 'repetition'. Repetition in the eternal return, therefore,
consists in conceiving the same on the basis of the different. However, this
conception is no longer merely a theoretical representation: it carries out a
practical selection among differences according to their capacity to produce
- that is, to return or to pass the test of the eternal return. The selective
character of eternal return appears clearly in Nietzsche's idea: it is not the
Whole, the Same or the prior identity in general which returns. Nor is it
the small or the large, either as parts of the whole or as elements of the
same. Only the extreme forms return - those which, large or small, are
deployed within the limit and extend to the limit of their power,
transforming themselves and changing one into another. Only the extreme,
the excessive, returns; that which passes into something else and becomes
identical. That is why the eternal return is said only of the theatrical world
of the metamorphoses and masks of the Will to power, of the pure
intensities of that Will which are like mobile individuating factors
unwilling to allow themselves to be contained within the factitious limits of
this or that individual, this or that Self. Eternal return or returning
expresses the common being of all these metamorphoses, the measure and
the common being of all that is extreme, of all the realised degrees of
power. It is the being-equal of all that is unequal and has been able to fully
realise its inequality. All that is extreme and becoming the same
communicates in an equal and common Being which determines its return.
That is why the Overman is defined as the superior form of everything that
'is'. We must discover what Nietzsche means by noble: he borrows the
language of energy physics and calls noble that energy which is capable of
transforming itself. When Nietzsche says that hubris is the real problem of
every Heraclitan, or that hierarchy is the problem of free spirits, he means
one - and only one - thing: that it is in hubris that everyone finds the being
which makes him return, along with that sort of crowned anarchy, that
overturned hierarchy which, in order to ensure the selection of difference,
begins by subordinating the identical to the different.8 In all these respects,
eternal return is the univocity of being, the effective realisation of that
univocity. In the eternal return, univocal being is not only thought and

42

Difference and Repetition

even affirmed, but effectively realised. Being is said in a single and same
sense, but this sense is that of eternal return as the return or repetition of
that of which it is said. The wheel in the eternal return is at once both
production of repetition on the basis of difference and selection of
difference on the basis of repetition.
The test of the Small and the Large seemed to us to misconstrue selection
because it renounced any concept of difference itself in favour of the requirements of the identity of the concept in general. By inscribing itself
within the identical concept or within analogous concepts (minimum and
maximum), it only fixed the limits within which determination became difference. That is why the selection which consists of 'making the difference'
seemed to us to have another sense: to allow the extreme forms to appear
and be deployed in the simple presence of a univocal Being, rather than to
measure and to divide up the average forms according to the requirements
of organic representation. Even so, can it be said that we have exhausted
all the resources of the Small and the Large in so far as they apply to difference? Or will we not rediscover them as an alternative characteristic of
the extreme forms themselves? For it seems that the extreme can be defined
by the infinite, in the small or in the large. The infinite, in this sense, even
signifies the identity of the small and the large, the identity of extremes.
When representation discovers the infinite within itself, it no longer appears as organic representation but as orgiastic representation: it discovers
within itself the limits of the organised; tumult, restlessness and passion
underneath apparent calm. It rediscovers monstrosity. Henceforth it is no
longer a question of a propitious moment which marks determination's entrance into and exit from the concept in general, the relative maximum and
minimum, the punctum proximum and the punctum remotem. On the contrary, a short-sighted and a long-sighted eye are required in order for the
concept to take upon itself all moments: the concept is now the Whole,
either in the sense that it extends its benediction to all parts or in the sense
that the division between the parts and their misery are reflected back on
the Whole, granting them a kind of absolution. The concept thus follows
and espouses determination in all its metamorphoses, from one end to the
other, and represents it as pure difference in delivering it up to a ground in
relation to which it no longer matters whether one is before a relative minimum or maximum, a large or a small, nor before a beginning or an end,
since the two coincide in this ground which is like a single and unique
'total' moment, simultaneously the moment of the evanescence and production of difference, of disappearance and appearance.
In this sense, it is noticeable how far Hegel, no less than Leibniz,
attaches importance to the infinite movement of evanescence as such - that
is, to the moment at which difference both vanishes and is produced. The

Difference in Itself

43

signification of the very notion of limit changes completely: it no longer
refers to the limits of finite representation, but on the contrary to the
womb in which finite determination never ceases to be born and to
disappear, to be enveloped and deployed within orgiastic representation. It
no longer refers to the limitation of a form, but to the convergence towards
a ground; no longer to the distinction of forms but to the correlation of the
grounded and the ground; no longer to the arrestation of power but to the
element in which power is effectuated, on which it is grounded. In effect,
differential calculus no less than the dialectic is a matter of 'power' and of
the power of the limit. If we consider the limits of finite representation to
be two abstract mathematical determinations, the Small and the Large, we
notice that it is a matter of complete indifference to Leibniz (as to Hegel) to
know whether the determined is large or small, the largest or the smallest.
By subjecting it to an architectonic element which discovers the most
perfect or the best grounded in every case, consideration of the infinite
renders the determined independent of that question. It is in this sense that
orgiastic representation must be said to make the difference, because it
selects it by introducing this infinite which relates it to the ground (either
grounding by the Good which functions as a rule of the game or principle
of choice, or grounding by negativity which functions as suffering and
labour). Moreover, if the limits of finite representation, the Small and the
Large, are considered with regard to the character or the concrete content
given to them by the genus and species, then here again the introduction of
the infinite into representation renders the determined independent of the
genus as determinable and the species as determination, by retaining in a
middle term both the true universality which escapes the genus and the
authentic singularity which escapes the species. In short, orgiastic
representation has the ground as its principle and the infinite as its element,
by contrast with organic representation which retains form as its principle
and the finite as its element. It is the infinite which renders determination
conceivable and selectable: difference thus appears as the orgiastic
representation of determination and no longer as its organic representation.
Instead of animating judgements about things, orgiastic representation
makes things themselves so many expressions or so many propositions:
infinite analytic or synthetic propositions. Why, then, is there a choice
within orgiastic representation, given that the two points, the small and the
large, the maximum and the minimum, have become indifferent or
identical in the infinite, while difference has become completely
independent of them in the ground? It is because the infinite is not the
point at which finite determination disappears (that would be to project a
mistaken conception of limit on to the infinite). Orgiastic representation
can discover the infinite within itself only by allowing finite determination
to subsist: better, by saying the infinite of that finite determination itself, by
representing it not as having vanished and disappeared but as vanishing

44

Difference and Repetition

and on the point of disappearing, thus as also being engendered in the
infinite. This representation is such that the infinite and the finite have here
the same 'restlessness', which is precisely what allows the one to be
represented in the other. However, when the infinite is said of the finite
itself under the conditions of representation, there are two ways in which it
can be said: either as infinitely small or as infinitely large. These two ways,
these two 'differences', are by no means symmetrical. Thus duality is
reintroduced into orgiastic representation, no longer in the form of a
complementarity or a reflection of two finite assignable moments (as was
the case for specific difference and generic difference) but in the form of a
choice between two infinite, unassignable processes - in the form of a
choice between Leibniz and Hegel. If it is true that the small and the large
become identical in the infinite, the infinitely small and the infinitely large
separate once more, even more sharply in so far as the infinite is said of the
finite. Leibniz and Hegel separately both escape the choice between the
Large and the Small, but together they fall back into the choice between
the infinitely small and the infinitely large. That is why orgiastic
representation involves a duality which only increases its restlessness, or is
even the real reason for it, and divides it into two kinds.
It seems that, according to Hegel, 'contradiction' poses very few
problems. It serves a quite different purpose: contradiction resolves itself
and, in resolving itself, resolves difference by relating it to a ground.
Difference is the only problem. The criticism that Hegel addresses to his
predecessors is that they stopped at a purely relative maximum without
reaching the absolute maximum of difference, namely contradiction; they
stopped before reaching the infinite (as infinitely large) of contradiction.
They dared not go all the way:
Difference as such is already implicitly contradiction. ... Only when the
manifold terms have been driven to the point of contradiction do they
become active and lively towards one another, receiving in contradiction
the negativity which is the indwelling pulsation of self-movement and
spontaneous activity. ... More precisely, when the difference of reality is
taken into account, it develops from difference into opposition, and
from this into contradiction, so that in the end the sum total of all realities simply becomes absolute contradiction within itself.
Like Aristotle, Hegel determines difference by the opposition of extremes
or of contraries. However, opposition remains abstract so long as it does
not extend to the infinite, and the infinite remains abstract every time it is
posed outside of finite oppositions: the introduction of the infinite here entails the identity of contraries, or makes the contrary of the Other a contrary of the Self. It is true that contrariety represents only the movement of
inferiority in the infinite. This movement allows indifference to subsist,
since each determination, in so far as it contains the other, is independent

Difference in Itself

45

of the other as though of a relation with the outside. Each contrary must
further expel its other, therefore expel itself, and become the other it expels. Such is the movement of contradiction as it constitutes the true pulsation of the infinite, the movement of exteriority or real objectivation. This
goes beyond the simple identity of contraries as the identity of the positive
and negative. For it is not in the same manner that the positive and the negative are the Same: the negative is now at once both the becoming of the
positive when the positive is denied, and the return of the positive when it
denies or excludes itself. No doubt each of the contraries determined as
positive and negative was already contradiction, 'But the Positive is only
implicitly this contradiction, whereas the negative is the contradiction posited. ...' Difference finds its own concept in the posited contradiction: it
is here that it becomes pure, intrinsic, essential, qualitative, synthetic and
productive; here that it no longer allows indifference to subsist. To maintain or to raise contradiction is the selective test which 'makes' the difference (between the effectively real and the passing or contingent
phenomenon). In this manner, difference is pushed to the limit - that is, to
the ground which is no less its return or its reproduction than its annihilation.
Even though it is said of opposition or of finite determination, this
Hegelian infinite remains the infinitely large of theology, of the Ens quo
nihil majus. We should even consider that the nature of real contradiction,
in so far as it distinguishes a thing from everything that it is not, was
formulated for the first time by Kant, under the name of 'complete
determination'. He made it depend upon the positing of a whole of reality
as an Ens summum. There is therefore no reason to expect a mathematical
treatment of this theological infinitely large, this sublime of the infinitely
large. This is not the case with Leibniz. For in order to avoid any
admixture of God and his creatures, for the modesty of those creatures,
Leibniz introduces the infinite into the finite only in the form of the
infinitely small. Nevertheless, we hesitate to say that he does not go as far
as Hegel in this sense. He too goes beyond organic representation towards
orgiastic representation, albeit by another route. If Hegel discovers in
serene representation the intoxication and restlessness of the infinitely
large, Leibniz discovers in the clear, finite idea the restlessness of the
infinitely small, a restlessness also made up of intoxication, giddiness,
evanescence and even death. It seems, therefore, that the difference
between Hegel and Leibniz is a matter of two ways of going beyond the
organic. Certainly, the essential and the inessential are inseparable: they are
like the one and the many, the equal and the unequal, the identical and the
different. However, Hegel begins with the essential as a genus, and treats
the infinite as that which divides the genus and suppresses division in the
species. The genus is thus itself and the species, the whole is itself and the
part. Henceforth, it contains the other essentially, it contains it in

46

Difference and Repetition

essence. Leibniz, on the other hand, begins with the inessential so far as
phenomena are concerned, with movement, inequality and difference. By
virtue of the infinitely small, it is the inessential which is now posed as
species and genus, and terminates as such in the 'opposing quasi-species'.
This implies that it does not contain the other in essence but only with
respect to properties, in cases. It is a mistake to impose upon infinitesimal
analysis the alternative of being either a language of essences or a
convenient fiction. For the subsumption under 'cases', or the language of
properties, has its own originality. This procedure of the infinitely small,
which maintains the distinction between essences (to the extent that one
plays the role of inessential to the other), is quite different to contradiction.
We should therefore give it a special name, that of 'vice-diction'. In the
infinitely large, the equal contradicts the unequal to the extent that it
possesses it in essence, and contradicts itself to the extent that it denies
itself in denying the unequal. In the infinitely small, however, the unequal
vice-diets the equal and vice-diets itself to the extent that it includes in the
case what it excludes in essence. The inessential includes the essential in the
case, whereas the essential contains the inessential in essence.
Must we say that vice-diction does not go as far as contradiction, on the
grounds that it concerns only properties? In reality, the expression
'infinitely small difference' does indeed indicate that the difference vanishes
so far as intuition is concerned. Once it finds its concept, however, it is
rather intuition itself which disappears in favour of the differential relation,
as is shown by saying that dx is minimal in relation to x, as dy is in relation
to y, but that dy/dx is the internal qualitative relation, expressing the
universal of a function independently of its particular numerical values.
However, if this relation has no numerical determinations, it does have
degrees of variation corresponding to diverse forms and equations. These
degrees are themselves like the relations of the universal, and the
differential relations, in this sense, are caught up in a process of reciprocal
determination which translates the interdependence of the variable
coefficients. But once again, reciprocal determination expresses only the
first aspect of a veritable principle of reason; the second aspect is complete
determination. For each degree or relation, regarded as the universal of a
given function, determines the existence and distribution of distinctive
points on the corresponding curve. We must take great care here not to
confuse 'complete' with 'completed'. The difference is that, for the
equation of a curve, for example, the differential relation refers only to
straight lines determined by the nature of the curve. It is already a complete
determination of the object, yet it expresses only a part of the entire object,
namely the part regarded as 'derived' (the other part, which is expressed by
the so-called primitive function, can be found only by integration, which is
not simply the inverse of differentiation. Similarly, it is integration which
defines the nature of the previously determined distinctive points). That is

Difference in Itself

47

why an object can be completely determined - ens omni modo
determinatum - without, for all that, possessing the integrity which alone
constitutes its actual existence. Under the double aspect of reciprocal
determination and complete determination, however it appears already as
if the limit coincides with the power itself. The limit is defined by
convergence. The numerical values of a function find their limit in the
differential relation; the differential relations find their limit in the degrees
of variation; and at each degree the distinctive points are the limits of series
which are analytically continued one into the other. Not only is the
differential relation the pure element of potentiality, but the limit is the
power of the continuous, as continuity is the power of these limits
themselves. Difference thus finds its concept in a negative, but a negative of
pure limitation, a nihil respectivum (dx is nothing in relation to x). From
all these points of view, the distinction between the distinctive and the
ordinary, the singular and the regular, forms the two categories of the
inessential in the continuous. They inform the whole language of limits and
properties, they constitute the structure of phenomena as such. We see in
this sense all that philosophy must expect from a distribution of distinctive
points and ordinary points for the description of experience. But already
the two kinds of point prepare and determine, in the inessential, the
constitution of the essences themselves. The inessential here refers not to
that which lacks importance but, on the contrary, to the most profound, to
the universal matter or continuum from which the essences are finally
made.
In effect, Leibniz, for his part, never saw any contradiction between the
law of continuity and the principle of indiscernibles. The one governs
properties, affections or complete cases; the other rules essences understood
as completed individual notions. We know that each one of these
completed notions (monads) expresses the totality of the world: but it
expresses it precisely under a certain differential relation and around
certain distinctive points which correspond to this relation. It is in this
sense that the differential relations and distinctive points already indicate
centres of envelopment within the continuum, centres of possible
implication or involution which are brought about by individual essences.
It suffices to show that the continuum of affections and properties in a
sense precedes the constitution of these individual essences (which amounts
to saying that the distinctive points are themselves pre-individual
singularities; this in no way contradicts the idea that individuation precedes
the actual determination of species, even though it is preceded by the whole
differential continuum). This condition is fulfilled in Leibniz's philosophy
in the following manner: the world, as that which is expressed in common
by all monads, pre-exists its expressions. It is nevertheless true that it does
not exist apart from that which expresses it, apart from the monads
themselves; but these expressions refer to the expressed as though to the

48

Difference and Repetition

requisite of their constitution. It is in this sense (as Leibniz constantly
reminds us in his letters to Arnauld) that the inherence of predicates in
each subject supposes the compossibility of the world expressed by all
these subjects: God did not create Adam as a sinner, but rather the world
in which Adam sinned. It is undoubtedly continuity which defines the
compossibility of each world; and if the real world is the best, this is to the
extent that it presents a maximum of continuity in a maximum number of
cases, in a maximum number of relations and distinctive points. That is to
say: for each world a series which converges around a distinctive point is
capable of being continued in all directions in other series converging
around other points, while the incompossibility of worlds, by contrast, is
defined by the juxtaposition of points which would make the resultant
series diverge. We can see why the notion of incompossibility in no way
reduces to contradiction and does not even imply real opposition: it implies
only divergence, while compossibility is only an analytic continuation
which translates the originality of the process of vice-diction. In the
continuum of a compossible world, differential relations and distinctive
points thus determine expressive centres (essences or individual substances)
in which, at each moment, the entire world is contained from a certain
point of view. Conversely, the action and unfolding of these centres
restores the world in which they themselves play the role of simple
distinctive points and of 'cases' in the expressed continuum. The law of
continuity appears here as a law of properties or cases of the world, a law
of development which applies to the expressed world, but also to the
monads in the world themselves. The principle of indiscernibles is a
principle of essences and a principle of envelopment which applies to
expressions - that is, to monads and to the world within the monads. The
two languages continually translate into one another. Together they relate
difference, both as infinitely small difference and as finite difference, to
sufficient reason as the foundation which selects or chooses the best world
- in this sense, the best of all worlds does indeed imply a comparison, but it
is not a comparative: since each world is finite, it is a superlative which
carries difference to an absolute maximum through the very test of the
infinitely small. Finite difference is determined in a monad as that part of
the world clearly expressed, infinitely small difference as the confused
ground which underpins that clarity. In these two ways, orgiastic
representation mediates determination and makes it a concept of difference
by assigning it a 'reason'.
Finite representation is that of a form which contains a matter, but a
secondary matter in so far as it is defined by contraries. We have seen that
it represented difference by mediating it, by subordinating it to identity as
the genus, and by ensuring that subordination by means of analogy among
the genera themselves, by means of the logical opposition of
determinations and the resemblance of properly material contents. It is not

Difference in Itself

49

the same with infinite representation, since this includes the Whole or
ground as primary matter and the essence as subject, absolute form or Self.
Infinite representation relates at once both the essence and the ground, and
the difference between the two, to a foundation or sufficient reason.
Mediation itself has become foundation. However, in the one case the
ground is the infinite continuity of the properties of the universal which is
itself contained in finite particular Selves considered as essences. In the
other case, particulars are only properties or figures which are developed in
the infinite universal ground, but refer to essences as the true
determinations of a pure Self, or rather a 'Self enveloped by this ground.
In both cases, infinite representation is the object of a double discourse:
that of properties and that of essences - that of physical points and
metaphysical points or points of view in the case of Leibniz; that of figures
and moments or categories in the case of Hegel. It cannot be said that
Leibniz does not go as far as Hegel: there is even a greater depth in his
case, more orgiastic or bacchanalian delirium, in the sense that the ground
plays a greater role. In both cases, as well, it seems that infinite
representation does not suffice to render the thought of difference
independent of the simple analogy of essences, or the simple similarity of
properties. The point is that in the last resort infinite representation does
not free itself from the principle of identity as a presupposition of
representation. That is why it remains subject to the condition of the
convergence of series in the case of Leibniz and to the condition of the
monocentring of circles in the case of Hegel. Infinite representation invokes
a foundation. While this foundation is not the identical itself, it is
nevertheless a way of taking the principle of identity particularly seriously,
giving it an infinite value and rendering it coextensive with the whole, and
in this manner allowing it to reign over existence itself. It matters little
whether identity (as the identity of the world and the self) be considered
analytic, in the form of the infinitely small, or synthetic, in the form of the
infinitely large. In the former case, the foundation or sufficient reason is
that which vice-diets identity; in the latter case, it is that which contradicts
it. In all cases, however, the foundation or sufficient reason employs the
infinite only to lead the identical to exist in its very identity. Moreover,
what is apparent here with Leibniz is no less so with Hegel. Hegelian
contradiction does not deny identity or non-contradiction: on the contrary,
it consists in inscribing the double negation of wow-contradiction within the
existent in such a way that identity, under that condition or on that basis,
is sufficient to think the existent as such. Those formulae according to
which 'the object denies what it is not', or 'distinguishes itself from
everything that it is not', are logical monsters (the Whole of everything
which is not the object) in the service of identity. It is said that difference is
negativity, that it extends or must extend to the point of contradiction once
it is taken to the limit. This is true only to the extent that difference is

50

Difference and Repetition

already placed on a path or along a thread laid out by identity. It is true
only to the extent that it is identity that pushes it to that point. Difference
is the ground, but only the ground for the demonstration of the identical.
Hegel's circle is not the eternal return, only the infinite circulation of the
identical by means of negativity. Hegel's innovation is the final and most
powerful homage rendered to the old principle. Between Leibniz and Hegel
it matters little whether the supposed negative of difference is understood
as a vice-dieting limitation or a contradicting limitation, any more than it
matters whether infinite identity be considered analytic or synthetic. In
either case, difference remains subordinated to identity, reduced to the
negative, incarcerated within similitude and analogy. That is why, in
infinite representation, the delirium is only a pre-formed false delirium
which poses no threat to the repose or serenity of the identical. Infinite
representation, therefore, suffers from the same defect as finite
representation: that of confusing the concept of difference in itself with the
inscription of difference in the identity of the concept in general (even
though it treats identity as a pure infinite principle instead of treating it as
a genus, and extends the rights of the concept in general to the whole
instead of fixing their limits).
There is a crucial experience of difference and a corresponding experiment:
every time we find ourselves confronted or bound by & limitation or an opposition, we should ask what such a situation presupposes. It presupposes
a swarm of differences, a pluralism of free, wild or untamed differences; a
properly differential and original space and time; all of which persist alongside the simplifications of limitation and opposition. A more profound real
element must be defined in order for oppositions of forces or limitations of
forms to be drawn, one which is determined as an abstract and potential
multiplicity. Oppositions are roughly cut from a delicate milieu of overlapping perspectives, of communicating distances, divergences and disparities,
of heterogeneous potentials and intensities. Nor is it primarily a question of
dissolving tensions in the identical, but rather of distributing the disparities
in a multiplicity. Limitations correspond to a simple first-order power - in
a space with a single dimension and a single direction, where, as in Leibniz's example of boats borne on a current, there may be collisions, but
these collisions necessarily serve to limit and to equalise, but not to neutralise or to oppose. As for opposition, it represents in turn the secondorder power, where it is as though things were spread out upon a flat
surface, polarised in a single plane, and the synthesis itself took place only
in a false depth - that is, in a fictitious third dimension added to the others
which does no more than double the plane. In any case, what is missing is
the original, intensive depth which is the matrix of the entire space and the
first affirmation of difference: here, that which only afterwards appears as

every time we find ourselves confronted or bound by & limitation or an op-

51

linear limitation and flat opposition lives and simmers in the form of free
differences. Everywhere, couples and polarities presuppose bundles and
networks, organised oppositions presuppose radiations in all directions.
Stereoscopic images form no more than an even and flat opposition, but
they depend upon something quite different: an arrangement of coexistent,
tiered, mobile planes, a 'disparateness' within an original depth. Everywhere, the depth of difference is primary. It is no use rediscovering depth
as a third dimension unless it has already been installed at the beginning,
enveloping the other two and enveloping itself as third. Space and time display oppositions (and limitations) only on the surface, but they presuppose
in their real depth far more voluminous, affirmed and distributed differences which cannot be reduced to the banality of the negative. It is as
though we were in Lewis Carroll's mirror where everything is contrary and
inverted on the surface, but 'different' in depth. We shall see that it is the
same with every space: geometrical, physical, biophysical, social and linguistic (in this respect, how unlikely Trubetzkoy's declaration of principle
appears: 'the idea of difference presupposes the idea of opposition ...').
There is a false profundity in conflict, but underneath conflict, the space of
the play of differences. The negative is the image of difference, but a flattened and inverted image, like the candle in the eye of the ox - the eye of
the dialectician dreaming of a futile combat?
In this sense, too, Leibniz goes further or deeper than Hegel when he
distributes the distinctive points and the differential elements of a multiplicity
throughout the ground, and when he discovers a play in the creation of the
world. It seems, therefore, as though the first dimension, that of the limit,
despite all its imperfection, remains closest to the original depth. Leibniz's only
error was to have linked difference to the negative of limitation, because he
maintained the dominance of the old principle, because he linked the series to
a principle of convergence, without seeing that divergence itself was an object
of affirmation, or that the incompossibles belonged to the same world and
were affirmed as the greatest crime and the greatest virtue of the one and only
world, that of the eternal return.
It is not difference which presupposes opposition but opposition which
presupposes difference, and far from resolving difference by tracing it back
to a foundation, opposition betrays and distorts it. Our claim is not only
that difference in itself is not 'already' contradiction, but that it cannot be
reduced or traced back to contradiction, since the latter is not more but
less profound than difference. On what condition is difference traced or
projected on to a flat space? Precisely when it has been forced into a
previously established identity, when it has been placed on the slope of the
identical which makes it reflect or desire identity, and necessarily takes it
where identity wants it to go - namely, into the negative. The imprint of
the Hegelian dialectic on the beginnings of Phenomenology has often been
noted: the here and the now are posited as empty identities, as abstract

52

Difference and Repetition

universalities which claim to draw difference along with them, when in fact
difference does not by any means follow and remains attached in the
depths of its own space, in the here-now of a differential reality always
made up of singularities. It is said that there were thinkers who explained
that movement was impossible, but that this did not prevent movement
from occurring. With Hegel it is the other way round: he creates
movement, even the movement of the infinite, but because he creates it
with words and representations it is a false movement, and nothing
follows. It is the same every time there is mediation or representation. The
representant says: 'Everyone recognises that ...', but there is always an
unrepresented singularity who does not recognise precisely because it is not
everyone or the universal. 'Everyone' recognises the universal because it is
itself the universal, but the profound sensitive conscience which is
nevertheless presumed to bear the cost, the singular, does not recognise it.
The misfortune in speaking is not speaking, but speaking for others or
representing something. The sensitive conscience (that is, the particular,
difference or ta alia) refuses. One can always mediate, pass over into the
antithesis, combine the synthesis, but the thesis does not follow: it subsists
in its immediacy, in its difference which itself constitutes the true
movement. Difference is the true content of the thesis, the persistence of
the thesis. The negative and negativity do not even capture the
phenomenon of difference, only the phantom or the epiphenomenon. The
whole of Phenomenology is an epiphenomenology.
This is what the philosophy of difference refuses: otnnis determinatio
negatio. ... We refuse the general alternative proposed by infinite
representation: the indeterminate, the indifferent, the undifferenciated or a
difference already determined as negation, implying and enveloping the
negative (by the same token, we also refuse the particular alternative:
negative of limitation or negative of opposition). In its essence, difference is
the object of affirmation or affirmation itself. In its essence, affirmation is
itself difference. At this point, does the philosophy of difference not risk
appearing as a new version of the beautiful soul? The beautiful soul is in
effect the one who sees differences everywhere and appeals to them only as
respectable, reconcilable or federative differences, while history continues
to be made through bloody contradictions. The beautiful soul behaves like
a justice of the peace thrown on to a field of battle, one who sees in the
inexpiable struggles only simple 'differends' or perhaps misunderstandings.
Conversely, however, it is not enough to harden oneself and invoke the
well-known complementarities between affirmation and negation, life and
death, creation and destruction (as if these were sufficient to ground a
dialectic of negativity) in order to throw the taste for pure differences back
at the beautiful soul, and to weld the fate of real differences to that of the
negative and contradiction. For such complementarities as yet tell us
nothing about the relation between one term and the other (does the

Difference in Itself

53

determined affirmation result from an already negative and negating
difference, or does the negative result from an already differential
affirmation?). In very general terms, we claim that there are two ways to
appeal to 'necessary destructions': that of the poet, who speaks in the name
of a creative power, capable of overturning all orders and representations
in order to affirm Difference in the state of permanent revolution which
characterizes eternal return; and that of the politician, who is above all
concerned to deny that which 'differs', so as to conserve or prolong an
established historical order, or to establish a historical order which already
calls forth in the world the forms of its representation. The two may
coincide in particularly agitated moments, but they are never the same. No
one passes less for a beautiful soul than Nietzsche. His soul is extremely
beautiful, but not in the sense of the beautiful soul: no one is more
endowed than he with a sense for cruelty or a taste for destruction.
Moreover, throughout his work he never ceases to contrast two
conceptions of the affirmation-negation relation.
In one case, it is negation which is the motor and driving force.
Affirmation results from it - like an ersatz, as it were. It may well be that
two negations are not too many to produce a phantom of affirmation. But
how would affirmation result from negation unless it conserved that which
is denied? Accordingly, Nietzsche indicates the terrifying conservatism of
such a conception. Affirmation is indeed produced, but in order to say yes
to all that is negative and negating, to all that can be denied. Thus
Zarathustra's Ass says yes, but for him to affirm is to bear, to assume or to
shoulder a burden. He bears everything: the burdens with which he is laden
(divine values), those which he assumes himself (human values), and the
weight of his tired muscles when he no longer has anything to bear (the
absence of values). This Ass and the dialectical ox leave a moral
aftertaste. They have a terrifying taste for responsibility, as though one
could affirm only by expiating, as though it were necessary to pass through
the misfortunes of rift and division in order to be able to say yes. It is as
though Difference were evil and already negative, so that it could produce
affirmation only by expiation - that is, by assuming at once both the
weight of that which is denied and negation itself. Always the same old
malediction which resounds from the heights of the principle of identity:
alone will be saved not that which is simply represented, but the infinite
representation (the concept) which conserves all the negative finally to
deliver difference up to the identical. Of all the senses of Aufheben, none is
more important than that of 'raise up'. There is indeed a dialectical circle,
but this infinite circle has everywhere only a single centre; it retains within
itself all the other circles, all the other momentary centres. The reprises or
repetitions of the dialectic express only the conservation of the whole, all
the forms and all the moments, in a gigantic Memory. Infinite
representation is a memory which conserves. In this case, repetition is no

54

Difference and Repetition

more than a conservatory, a power of memory itself. There is indeed a
circular dialectical selection, but one which always works to the advantage
of that which is conserved in infinite representation - that which bears and
that which is borne. The selection works in reverse, and mercilessly
eliminates whatever would render the circle tortuous or shatter the
transparence of memory. In infinite representation, the bearer and the
borne incessantly enter, leaving only to re-enter, like the shadows in the
cave, and by this means they claim to have assumed themselves the
properly dialectical power.
According to the other conception, difference is primary: it affirms
difference and distance. Difference is light, aerial and affirmative. To
affirm is not to bear but, on the contrary, to discharge and to lighten. It is
no longer the negative which produces a phantom of affirmation like an
ersatz, but rather a No which results from affirmation. This is also in turn
a shadow, but rather in the sense of a consequence - one could say a
Nachfolge. The negative is an epiphenomenon. Negation, like the ripples in
a pond, is the effect of an affirmation which is too strong or too different.
Perhaps two affirmations are necessary in order to produce the shadow of
negation as a Nachfolge. Moreover, perhaps there are two moments at
which the shadow disappears: difference as midnight and as noon. It is in
this sense that Nietzsche opposes the Yes and the No of the Ass to the Yes
and the No of Dionysus-Zarathustra: the point of view of the slave who
draws from 'No' the phantom of an affirmation, and the point of view of
the 'master' who draws from 'Yes' a consequence of negation and
destruction; the point of view of the conservers of old values and that of
the creators of new values. Those whom Nietzsche calls masters are
certainly powerful men, but not men of power, since power is in the gift of
the values of the day. A slave does not cease to be a slave by taking power,
and it is even the way of the world, or the law of its surface, to be led by
slaves. Nor must the distinction between established values and creation be
understood as implying an historical relativism, as though the established
values were new in their day, while the new ones had to be established
once their time had come. On the contrary, the difference is one of kind,
like the difference between the conservative order of representation and a
creative disorder or inspired chaos which can only ever coincide with a
historical moment but never be confused with it. The most profound
difference in kind is between the average forms and the extreme forms
(new values): the extreme is not reached by carrying the average forms to
infinity or by using their opposition in the finite to affirm their identity in
the infinite. Pseudo-affirmation in infinite representation does not escape
the average forms. Thus Nietzsche reproaches all those selection
procedures based upon opposition or conflict with working to the
advantage of the average forms and operating to the benefit of the 'large
number'. Eternal return alone effects the true selection, because it

Difference in Itself

55

eliminates the average forms and uncovers 'the superior form of everything
that is'. The extreme is not the identity of opposites, but rather the
univocity of the different; the superior form is not the infinite, but rather
the eternal formlessness of the eternal return itself, throughout its
metamorphoses and transformations. Eternal return 'makes' the difference
because it creates the superior form. Eternal return employs negation like a
Nachfolge and invents a new formula for the negation of the negation:
everything which can be denied is and must be denied. The genius of
eternal return lies not in memory but in waste, in active forgetting. All that
is negative and all that denies, all those average affirmations which bear
the negative, all those pale and unwelcome 'Yeses' which come from 'Nos',
everything which cannot pass the test of eternal return - all these must be
denied. If eternal return is a wheel, then it must be endowed with a violent
centrifugal movement which expels everything which 'can' be denied,
everything which cannot pass the test. Nietzsche announces only a light
punishment for those who do not 'believe' in eternal return: they will have,
and be aware of, only an ephemeral life! They will be aware of themselves
and know themselves for what they are: epiphenomena. This will be their
absolute Knowledge. In this manner, negation as a consequence, as the
result of full affirmation, consumes all that is negative, and consumes itself
at the mobile centre of eternal return. For if eternal return is a circle, then
Difference is at the centre and the Same is only on the periphery: it is a
constantly decentred, continually tortuous circle which revolves only
around the unequal.
Negation is difference, but difference seen from its underside, seen from
below. Seen the right way up, from top to bottom, difference is
affirmation. This proposition, however, means many things: that difference
is an object of affirmation; that affirmation itself is multiple; that it is
creation but also that it must be created, as affirming difference, as being
difference in itself. It is not the negative which is the motor. Rather, there
are positive differential elements which determine the genesis of both the
affirmation and the difference affirmed. It is precisely the fact that there is
a genesis of affirmation as such which escapes us every time we leave
affirmation in the undetermined, or put determination in the negative.
Negation results from affirmation: this means that negation arises in the
wake of affirmation or beside it, but only as the shadow of the more
profound genetic element - of that power or 'will' which engenders the
affirmation and the difference in the affirmation. Those who bear the
negative know not what they do: they take the shadow for the reality, they
encourage phantoms, they uncouple consequences from premisses and they
give epiphenomena the value of phenomena and essences.
Representation fails to capture the affirmed world of difference.
Representation has only a single centre, a unique and receding perspective,
and in consequence a false depth. It mediates everything, but mobilises and

56

Difference and Repetition

moves nothing. Movement, for its part, implies a plurality of centres, a
superposition of perspectives, a tangle of points of view, a coexistence of
moments which essentially distort representation: paintings or sculptures
are already such 'distorters', forcing us to create movement - that is, to
combine a superficial and a penetrating view, or to ascend and descend
within the space as we move through it. Is it enough to multiply
representations in order to obtain such effects? Infinite representation
includes precisely an infinity of representations - either by ensuring the
convergence of all points of view on the same object or the same world, or
by making all moments properties of the same Self. In either case it
maintains a unique centre which gathers and represents all the others, like
the unity of a series which governs or organises its terms and their relations
once and for all. The fact is that infinite representation is indissociable
from a law which renders it possible: the form of the concept as a form of
identity which constitutes on the one hand the in-itself of the represented
(A is A) and on the other the for-itself of the representant (Self = Self). The
prefix RE- in the word representation signifies this conceptual form of the
identical which subordinates differences. The immediate, defined as
'sub-representative', is therefore not attained by multiplying representations
and points of view. On the contrary, each composing representation must be
distorted, diverted and torn from its centre. Each point of view must itself
be the object, or the object must belong to the point of view. The object
must therefore be in no way identical, but torn asunder in a difference in
which the identity of the object as seen by a seeing subject vanishes.
Difference must become the element, the ultimate unity; it must therefore
refer to other differences which never identify it but rather differenciate it.
Each term of a series, being already a difference, must be put into a
variable relation with other terms, thereby constituting other series devoid
of centre and convergence. Divergence and decentring must be affirmed in
the series itself. Every object, every thing, must see its own identity
swallowed up in difference, each being no more than a difference between
differences. Difference must be shown differing. We know that modern art
tends to realise these conditions: in this sense it becomes a veritable theatre
of metamorphoses and permutations. A theatre where nothing is fixed, a
labyrinth without a thread (Ariadne has hung herself). The work of art
leaves the domain of representation in order to become 'experience',
transcendental empiricism or science of the sensible.
It is strange that aesthetics (as the science of the sensible) could be
founded on what can be represented in the sensible. True, the inverse
procedure is not much better, consisting of the attempt to withdraw the
pure sensible from representation and to determine it as that which remains
once representation is removed (a contradictory flux, for example, or a
rhapsody of sensations). Empiricism truly becomes transcendental, and
aesthetics an apodictic discipline, only when we apprehend directly in the

Difference in Itself

57

sensible that which can only be sensed, the very being of the sensible:
difference, potential difference and difference in intensity as the reason
behind qualitative diversity. It is in difference that movement is produced
as an 'effect', that phenomena flash their meaning like signs. The intense
world of differences, in which we find the reason behind qualities and the
being of the sensible, is precisely the object of a superior empiricism. This
empiricism teaches us a strange 'reason', that of the multiple, chaos and
difference (nomadic distributions, crowned anarchies). It is always
differences which resemble one another, which are analogous, opposed or
identical: difference is behind everything, but behind difference there is
nothing. Each difference passes through all the others; it must 'will' itself or
find itself through all the others. That is why eternal return does not
appear second or come after, but is already present in every
metamorphosis, contemporaneous with that which it causes to return.
Eternal return relates to a world of differences implicated one in the other,
to a complicated, properly chaotic world without identity. Joyce presented
the vicus of recirculation as causing a chaosmos to turn; and Nietzsche had
already said that chaos and eternal return were not two distinct things but
a single and same affirmation. The world is neither finite nor infinite as
representation would have it: it is completed and unlimited. Eternal return
is the unlimited of the finished itself, the unhocal being which is said of
difference. With eternal return, chao-errancy is opposed to the coherence
of representation; it excludes both the coherence of a subject which
represents itself and that of an object represented. Re-petition opposes
re-presentation: the prefix changes its meaning, since in the one case
difference is said only in relation to the identical, while in the other it is the
univocal which is said of the different. Repetition is the formless being of
all differences, the formless power of the ground which carries every object
to that extreme 'form' in which its representation comes undone. The
ultimate element of repetition is the disparate [dispars], which stands
opposed to the identity of representation. Thus, the circle of eternal return,
difference and repetition (which undoes that of the identical and the
contradictory) is a tortuous circle in which Sameness is said only of that
which differs. The poet Blood expresses transcendental empiricism's
profession of faith as a veritable aesthetic:
Nature is contingent, excessive and mystical essentially. ... We have realised the highest divine thought of itself, and there is in it as much of
wonder as of certainty. ... Not unfortunately the universe is wild - game
flavoured as a hawk's wing. Nature is miracle all. She knows no laws;
the same returns not, save to bring the different. The slow round of the
engraver's lathe gains but the breadth of a hair, but the difference is distributed back over the whole curve, never an instant true - ever not
quite.18

58

Difference and Repetition

It is sometimes argued that a considerable philosophical change took place
between pre- and post-Kantianism - the former being defined by the negative of limitation, the latter by the negative of opposition; the one by analytic identity, the other by synthetic identity; the one from the point of view
of infinite substance, the other from the point of view of the finite Self. In
the grand Leibnizian analysis, it is the finite Self which is introduced into
the development of the infinite, whereas in the grand Hegelian synthesis, it
is the infinite which is reintroduced into the operation of the finite Self.
However, the importance of such changes is open to question. For a philosophy of difference, it matters little whether the negative is understood in
terms of limitation or opposition, or whether identity is taken to be analytic or synthetic, once difference is already reduced to the negative and
subordinated to identity. The oneness and identity of the divine substance
are in truth the only guarantee of a unique and identical Self, and God is
retained so long as the Self is preserved. Finite synthetic Self or divine analytic substance: it amounts to the same thing. That is why the Man-God
permutations are so disappointing, and do not advance matters one step.
Nietzsche seems to have been the first to see that the death of God becomes
effective only with the dissolution of the Self. What is then revealed is
being, which is said of differences which are neither in substance nor in a
subject: so many subterranean affirmations. If eternal return is the highest,
the most intense thought, this is because its own extreme coherence, at the
highest point, excludes the coherence of a thinking subject, of a world
which is thought of as a guarantor God. Rather than being concerned
with what happens before and after Kant (which amounts to the same
thing), we should be concerned with a precise moment within Kantianism,
a furtive and explosive moment which is not even continued by Kant,
much less by post-Kantianism - except, perhaps, by Holderlin in the experience and the idea of a 'categorical abduction'. For when Kant puts rational theology into question, in the same stroke he introduces a kind of
disequilibrium, a fissure or crack in the pure Self of the 'I think', an alienation in principle, insurmountable in principle: the subject can henceforth
represent its own spontaneity only as that of an Other, and in so doing invoke a mysterious coherence in the last instance which excludes its own namely, that of the world and God. A Cogito for a dissolved Self: the Self
of 'I think' includes in its essence a receptivity of intuition in relation to
which / is already an other. It matters little that synthetic identity - and,
following that, the morality of practical reason - restore the integrity of the
self, of the world and of God, thereby preparing the way for post-Kantian
syntheses: for a brief moment we enter into that schizophrenia in principle
which characterises the highest power of thought, and opens Being directly
on to difference, despite all the mediations, all the reconciliations, of the
concept.

Difference in Itself

59

The task of modern philosophy has been defined: to overturn Platonism.
That this overturning should conserve many Platonic characteristics is not
only inevitable but desirable. It is true that Platonism already represents the
subordination of difference to the powers of the One, the Analogous, the
Similar and even the Negative. It is like an animal in the process of being
tamed, whose final resistant movements bear witness better than they
would in a state of freedom to a nature soon to be lost: the Heraclitan
world still growls in Platonism. With Plato, the issue is still in doubt: mediation has not yet found its ready-made movement. The Idea is not yet the
concept of an object which submits the world to the requirements of representation, but rather a brute presence which can be invoked in the world
only in function of that which is not 'representable' in things. The Idea has
therefore not yet chosen to relate difference to the identity of a concept in
general: it has not given up hope of finding a pure concept of difference in
itself. The labyrinth or chaos is untangled, but without thread or the assistance of a thread. Aristotle indeed saw what is irreplaceable in Platonism,
even though he made it precisely the basis of a criticism of Plato: the dialectic of difference has its own method - division - but this operates without mediation, without middle term or reason; it acts in the immediate and
is inspired by the Ideas rather than by the requirements of a concept in general. It is true that division is a capricious, incoherent procedure which
jumps from one singularity to another, by contrast with the supposed identity of a concept. Is this not its strength from the point of view of the Idea?
Far from being one dialectical procedure among others which must be
completed or relayed by others, is not division the one which replaces all
the other procedures from the moment it appears, and gathers up all the dialectical power in favour of a genuine philosophy of difference? Is it not simultaneously the measure of both Platonism and the possibility of
overturning Platonism?
Our mistake lies in trying to understand Platonic division on the basis of
Aristotelian requirements. According to Aristotle, it is a question of
dividing a genus into opposing species: but then this procedure not only
lacks 'reason' by itself, it lacks a reason in terms of which we could decide
whether something falls into one species rather than another. For example,
we divide art into arts of production and arts of acquisition: but then why
is fishing among the arts of acquisition? What is missing here is mediation
- that is, the identity of a concept capable of serving as middle term.
However, this objection clearly fails if Platonic division in no way proposes
to determine the species of a genus - or if, rather, it proposes to do so, but
superficially and even ironically, the better to hide under this mask its true
secret. Division is not the inverse of a 'generalisation'; it is not a
determination of species. It is in no way a method of determining species,
but one of selection. It is not a question of dividing a determinate genus
into definite species, but of dividing a confused species into pure lines of

60

Difference and Repetition

descent, or of selecting a pure line from material which is not. We could
speak of 'Platens' as opposed to 'Aristotelons', in the same manner that
biologists oppose 'Jordanons' and 'Linnaeons', since Aristotelian species
are large, whereas Platonic division deals with small species or lines of
descent. Even the indivisible, infima species in Aristotle remains a large
species, while Platonic division operates in a quite different domain. Its
point of departure can therefore be either a genus or a species, but this
genus or this large species is understood as an undifferenciated logical
matter, an indifferent material, a mixture, an indefinite representing
multiplicity which must be eliminated in order to bring to light the Idea
which constitutes a pure line of descent. The search for gold provides the
model for this process of division. Difference is not between species,
between two determinations of a genus, but entirely on one side, within the
chosen line of descent: there are no longer contraries within a single genus,
but pure and impure, good and bad, authentic and inauthentic, in a
mixture which gives rise to a large species. Pure difference, the pure
concept of difference, not difference mediated within the concept in
general, in the genus and the species. The meaning and the goal of the
method of division is selection among rivals, the testing of claimants - not
antiphasis but antisbetesis (we can see this clearly in Plato's two principal
examples of division: in The Statesman, where the statesman is defined as
the one who knows 'the pastoral care of men', but many introduce
themselves by saying 'I am the true shepherd of men', including merchants,
farmers, bakers, as well as athletes and the entire medical profession; and
in the Phaedrus, where it is a question of defining the good madness and
the true lover, but many claimants cry: 'I am love, I am the lover'). There is
no question here of species, except ironically. There is nothing in common
with the concerns of Aristotle: it is a question not of identifying but of
authenticating. The one problem which recurs throughout Plato's
philosophy is the problem of measuring rivals and selecting claimants. This
problem of distinguishing between things and their simulacra within a
pseudo-genus or a large species presides over his classification of the arts
and sciences. It is a question of making the difference, thus of operating in
the depths of the immediate, a dialectic of the immediate. It is a dangerous
trial without thread and without net, for according to the ancient custom
of myth and epic, false claimants must die.
Our question is not yet that of knowing whether the selective difference
is indeed between the true and false claimants, as Plato says it is, but rather
of knowing how Plato establishes the difference thanks to the method of
division. To the reader's great surprise, he does so by introducing a 'myth'.
It is as though division, once it abandons the mask of determining species
and discloses its true goal, nevertheless renounces the realisation of this
goal and is instead relayed by the simple 'play' of a myth. In effect, once
the question of the claimants is reached, The Statesman invokes the image

Difference in Itself

61

of an ancient God who ruled the world and men: strictly speaking, only
this God deserves the name of shepherd-King of mankind. None of the
claimants is his equal, but there is a certain 'care' of the human community
which devolves to the statesman par excellence, since he is closest to the
model of the archaic shepherd-God. The claimants find themselves in a
sense measured according to an order of elective participation, and among
the statesman's rivals we can distinguish (according to the ontological
measure afforded by the myth) parents, servants, auxiliaries and, finally,
charlatans and counterfeits. The procedure in the Phaedrus is the same:
when it becomes a question of distinguishing the different 'madnesses',
Plato suddenly invokes a myth. He describes the circulation of souls before
their incarnation, along with the memory which they carry of the Ideas
they have been able to contemplate. It is the nature and degree of this
mythic contemplation, but also the kind of occasions necessary for
remembering, which determine the value and the order of different types of
present madness. We can determine who is the false lover and who is the
true lover. We can even determine which - lover, poet, priest, soothsayer
or philosopher - is elected to participation in reminiscence and
contemplation: which is the true claimant, the true participant, and in what
order the others follow. (It will be objected that the third important text
concerning division, the Sophist, presents no such myth. The point is that
in this text, by a paradoxical utilisation of the method, a
counter-utilisation, Plato proposes to isolate the false claimant par
excellence, the one who lays claim to everything without any right: the
'sophist'.)
This introduction of myth appears, however, to confirm all Aristotle's
objections: in the absence of any mediation, division lacks probative force;
it has to be relayed by a myth which provides an imaginary equivalent of
mediation. Here again, however, we betray the sense of this so-mysterious
method. For if it is true that, within Platonism in general, myth and
dialectic are distinct forces, this distinction no longer matters once dialectic
discovers its true method in division. Division overcomes this duality and
integrates myth into the dialectic; it makes myth an element of the dialectic
itself. The structure of this myth in Plato is clear: it is a circle, with two
dynamic functions - namely, turning and returning, distributing and
allocation: the allocation of lots is carried out by the turning wheel of an
eternally recurring metempsychosis. The reasons which establish that Plato
is certainly not a protagonist of eternal return do not concern us here. It is
nevertheless true that in the Phaedrus - as in The Statesman and elsewhere
- myth establishes the model of a partial circulation in which appears a
suitable ground on which to base the difference, on which to measure the
roles or claims. In the Phaedrus, this ground appears as the Ideas, such as
these are contemplated by the souls which circulate above the celestial
vault. In The Statesman, it appears in the form of the shepherd-God who

62

Difference and Repetition

presides over the circular movement of the universe. The ground may be
either the centre or the motor of the circle. It is constituted by the myth as
the principle of a test or selection which imparts meaning to the method of
division by fixing the degrees of an elective participation. Thus, in
accordance with the oldest tradition, the circular myth is indeed the
story-repetition of a foundation. Division demands such a foundation as
the ground capable of making the difference. Conversely, the foundation
demands division as the state of difference in that which must be grounded.
Division is the true unity of dialectic and mythology, of the myth as
foundation and of the logos as logos tomeus.
This role of the ground appears in all clarity in the Platonic conception
of participation. (And no doubt it is this foundation which provides
division with the mediation it seems to lack and, at the same time, relates
difference to the One, but in such a peculiar manner... ). To participate
means to have part in, to have after, to have in second place. What
possesses in first place is the ground itself. Justice alone is just, says Plato.
As for those whom we call the just, they possess the quality of being just in
second, third or fourth place ... or in simulacral fashion. That justice alone
should be just is not a simple analytic proposition. It is the designation of
the Idea as the ground which possesses in first place. The function of the
ground is then to allow participation, to give in second place. Thus, that
which participates more or less in varying degrees is necessarily a claimant.
The claimant calls for a ground; the claim must be grounded (or
denounced as groundless). Laying claim is not one phenomenon among
others, but the nature of every phenomenon. The ground is a test which
permits claimants to participate in greater or lesser degree in the object of
the claim. In this sense the ground measures and makes the difference. We
must therefore distinguish between Justice, which is the ground; the quality
of justice, which is the object of the claim possessed by that which grounds;
and the just, who are the claimants who participate unequally in the object.
That is why the Neo-Platonists provide us with such a profound
understanding of Platonism in setting out their sacred triad: the
Imparticipable, the Participated, and the Participants. The grounding
principle is imparticipable but nevertheless provides something to be
participated in, which it gives to the participant, who is the possessor in
second place, the claimant who has been able to pass the grounding test.
One could say: the father, the daughter and the suitor. Moreover, since the
triad is reproduced throughout a whole series of participations, and since
the claimants participate within an order and in degrees which represent
difference in action, the Neo-Platonists indeed saw the essential point: that
the aim of division was not the broad distinction among species but the
establishment of a serial dialectic, of series or lines of descent in depth
which mark the operations of a selective foundation or an elective
participation (Zeus I, Zeus II, etc.). It seems, then, that contradiction, far

Difference in Itself

63

from signifying the founding test itself, represents instead the state of an
ungrounded claim at the limit of participation. If the true claimant (the first
grounded, the well grounded, the authentic) has rivals who are like
parents, auxiliaries or servants, all participating in his claim in various
capacities, he also has simulacra or counterfeits who would be exposed
by the test. Such, according to Plato, is the 'sophist', the buffoon,
centaur or satyr who lays claim to everything, and who, in laying such
claims to everything, is never grounded but contradicts everything,
including himself...
However, in what, exactly, does the grounding test consist? Myth tells
us that it always involves a further task to be performed, an enigma to be
resolved. The oracle is questioned, but the oracle's response is itself a
problem. The dialectic is ironic, but irony is the art of problems and
questions. Irony consists in treating things and beings as so many responses
to hidden questions, so many cases for problems yet to be resolved. We
recall that Plato defined the dialectic as proceeding by 'problems', by
means of which one attains the pure grounding principle - that is, the
principle which measures the problems as such and distributes the
corresponding solutions. Memory is discussed in the Meno only in
connection with a geometric problem which must be understood before it
can be resolved, and must have the solution it deserves according to the
manner in which the rememberer has understood it. We are not concerned
at the moment with the distinction which should be drawn between the
two instances of the problem and the question, but rather with the essential
role which both together play in the Platonic dialectic - a role comparable
to that which the negative will play later, for example in the Hegelian
dialectic. However, it is precisely not the negative which plays this role in
Plato - so much so that we must consider whether or not the celebrated
thesis of the Sophist, despite certain ambiguities, should be understood as
follows: 'non' in the expression 'non-being' expresses something other than
the negative. On this point, the mistake of the traditional accounts is to
impose upon us a dubious alternative: in seeking to dispel the negative, we
declare ourselves satisfied if we show that being is full positive reality
which admits no non-being; conversely, in seeking to ground negation, we
are satisfied if we manage to posit, in being itself or in relation to being,
some sort of non-being (it seems to us that this non-being is necessarily the
being of the negative or the ground of negation). The alternative is thus the
following: either there is no non-being and negation is illusory and
ungrounded, or there is non-being, which puts the negative in being and
grounds negation. Perhaps, however, we have reasons to say both that
there is non-being and that the negative is illusory.
Neither the problem nor the question is a subjective determination
marking a moment of insufficiency in knowledge. Problematic structure is
part of objects themselves, allowing them to be grasped as signs, just as the

64

Difference and Repetition

questioning or problematising instance is a part of knowledge allowing its
positivity and its specificity to be grasped in the act of learning. More
profoundly still, Being (what Plato calls the Idea) 'corresponds' to the
essence of the problem or the question as such. It is as though there were
an 'opening', a 'gap', an ontological 'fold' which relates being and the
question to one another. In this relation, being is difference itself. Being is
also non-being, but non-being is not the being of the negative-, rather, it is
the being of the problematic, the being of problem and question. Difference
is not the negative; on the contrary, non-being is Difference: heteron, not
enantion. For this reason non-being should rather be written (non)-being
or, better still, ?-being. In this sense, it turns out that the infinitive, the esse,
designates less a proposition than the interrogation to which the
proposition is supposed to respond. This (non)-being is the differential
element in which affirmation, as multiple affirmation, finds the principle of
its genesis. As for negation, this is only the shadow of the highest principle,
the shadow of the difference alongside the affirmation produced. Once we
confuse (non)-being with the negative, contradiction is inevitably carried
into being; but contradiction is only the appearance or the epiphenomenon,
the illusion projected by the problem, the shadow of a question which
remains open and of a being which corresponds as such to that question
(before it has been given a response). Is it not already in this sense that for
Plato contradiction characterises only the so-called aporetic dialogues?
Beyond contradiction, difference - beyond wow-being, (non)-being; beyond
the negative, problems and questions.
Note on Heidegger's Philosophy of Difference
It seems that the principal misunderstandings which Heidegger denounced
as misreadings of his philosophy after Being and Time and 'What is Metaphysics?' have to do with the following: the Heideggerian Not refers not to
the negative in Being but to Being as difference; it refers not to negation
but to questioning. When Sartre analysed interrogation at the beginning of
Being and Nothingness, he made it a preliminary to the discovery of the
negative and negativity. This was, in a sense, the opposite of Heidegger's
procedure. None the less, it involved no misunderstanding, since Sartre did
not set out to write a commentary on Heidegger. Merleau-Ponty, on the
other hand, undoubtedly followed a more thoroughly Heideggerian inspiration in speaking of 'folds' and 'pleating' (by contrast with Sartrean
'holes' and 'lakes of non-being') from The Phenomenology of Perception
onwards, and in returning to an ontology of difference and questioning in
his posthumous book The Visible and the Invisible.
It seems that Heidegger's theses may be summarised as follows:
1. The not expresses not the negative but the difference between Being and
being. See the preface to The Essence of Reasons, 3rd edn, 1949, transl.

Difference in Itself

2.

3.
4.

5.

65

Terrence Malick, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1969, p.
3: 'The Ontological Difference is the Not between being and Being'; and
the postscript to 'What is Metaphysics?', in Existence and Being, London: Vision Press, 1949, p. 384, where Heidegger asks: 'whether that
which never and nowhere "is" discloses itself as that which differs from
everything that "is", i.e. what we call "Being"'.
This difference is not 'between' in the ordinary sense of the word. It is
the Fold, Zwiefalt. It is constitutive of Being and of the manner in which
Being constitutes being, in the double movement of 'clearing' and
'veiling'. Being is truly the differenciator of difference - whence the expression 'ontological difference'. See 'Overcoming Metaphysics', transl.
Joan Stambaugh, in The End of Philosophy, New York: Harper &
Row, 1973, pp. 91 ff.
Ontological Difference corresponds to questioning. It is the being of
questions, which become problems, marking out the determinant fields
of existence. See The Essence of Reasons.
Understood in this manner, difference is not an object of representation.
As the element of metaphysics, representation subordinates difference to
identity, if only in relating it to a third term as the centre of a comparison between two supposedly different terms (Being and being). Heidegger recognises that this point of view of metaphysical representation is
still present in The Essence of Reasons (see the French translation, p. 59,
where the third term is found in the 'transcendence of being-there'). But
metaphysics is unable to think difference in itself, or the importance of
that which separates as much as of that which unites (the differenciator).
There is no synthesis, mediation or reconciliation in difference, but
rather a stubborn differenciation. This is the 'turning' beyond metaphysics: 'Being itself can open out in its truth the difference of Being and beings preserved in itself only when the difference explicitly takes place'
('Overcoming Metaphysics', p. 91). On this point, see Beda Alleman,
Holderlin et Heidegger, French translation, Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France, pp. 157-62, 168-72; Jean Beaufret, Introduction to Poeme
de Parmenide, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1955, pp. 69-72,
455.
Difference cannot, therefore, be subordinated to the Identical or the
Equal but must be thought as the Same, in the Same. See Identity and
Difference, transl. Joan Stambaugh, New York: Harper 8c Row, 1969;
and 'Poetically Man Dwells...' in Poetry, Language, Thought, transl.
Albert Hofstadter, New York: Harper & Row, 1971, pp. 218-19:
The same never coincides with the equal, not even in the empty indifferent oneness of what is merely identical. The equal or identical always
moves toward the absence of difference, so that everything may be reduced to a common denominator. The same, by contrast, is the belong-

66

Difference and Repetition
ing together of what differs, through a gathering by way of the difference. We can only say 'the same' if we think difference. ... The same
banishes all zeal always to level what is different into the equal or identical. The same gathers what is distinct into an original being-at-one. The
equal, on the contrary, disperses them into the dull unity of mere uniformity.

We regard as fundamental this 'correspondence' between difference and
questioning, between ontological difference and the being of the question.
It can nevertheless be asked whether Heidegger did not himself encourage
the misunderstandings, by his conception of 'Nothing' as well as by his
manner of 'striking through' Being instead of parenthesising the (non) of
non-Being. Moreover, is it enough to oppose the Same and the Identical in
order to think original difference and to disconnect this from all mediations? If it is true that some commentators have found Thomist echos in
Husserl, Heidegger, by contrast, follows Duns Scotus and gives renewed
splendour to the Univocity of Being. But does he effectuate the conversion
after which univocal Being belongs only to difference and, in this sense, revolves around being? Does he conceive of being in such a manner that it
will be truly disengaged from any subordination in relation to the identity
of representation? It would seem not, given his critique of the Nietzschean
eternal return.
The four figures of the Platonic dialectic are therefore: the selection of difference, the installation of a mythic circle, the establishment of a foundation, and the position of a question-problem complex. However, difference
is still related to the Same or to the One through these figures. No doubt
the same should not be confused with the identity of the concept in general: rather, it characterises the Idea as the thing itself. Nevertheless, to the
extent that it plays the role of a true ground, it is difficult to see what its effect is if not to make that which is grounded 'identical', to use difference in
order to make the identical exist. In reality, the distinction between the
same and the identical bears fruit only if one subjects the Same to a conversion which relates it to the different, while at the same time the things and
beings which are distinguished in the different suffer a corresponding radical destruction of their identity. Only on this condition is difference
thought in itself, neither represented nor mediated. The whole of Platonism, by contrast, is dominated by the idea of drawing a distinction between
'the thing itself and the simulacra. Difference is not thought in itself but related to a ground, subordinated to the same and subject to mediation in
mythic form. Overturning Platonism, then, means denying the primacy of
original over copy, of model over image; glorifying the reign of simulacra
and reflections. Pierre Klossowski has clearly noted this point in the articles

Difference in Itself

67

referred to above: taken in its strict sense, eternal return means that each
thing exists only in returning, copy of an infinity of copies which allows
neither original nor origin to subsist. That is why the eternal return is
called 'parodic': it qualifies as simulacrum that which it causes to be (and
to return). When eternal return is the power of (formless) Being, the simulacrum is the true character or form - the 'being' - of that which is. When
the identity of things dissolves, being escapes to attain univocity, and begins to revolve around the different. That which is or returns has no prior
constituted identity: things are reduced to the difference which fragments
them, and to all the differences which are implicated in it and through
which they pass. In this sense, the simulacrum and the symbol are one; in
other words, the simulacrum is the sign in so far as the sign interiorises the
conditions of its own repetition. The simulacrum seizes upon a constituent
disparity in the thing from which it strips the rank of model. If, as we have
seen, eternal return serves to establish a difference in kind between the average and the superior forms, then there is also a difference in kind between the average or moderate positions of the eternal return (whether
these involve partial cycles or approximate global return in specie) and its
strict or categorical position. For eternal return, affirmed in all its power,
allows no installation of a foundation-ground. On the contrary, it swallows up or destroys every ground which would function as an instance responsible for the difference between the original and the derived, between
things and simulacra. It makes us party to a universal ungrounding. By
'ungrounding' we should understand the freedom of the non-mediated
ground, the discovery of a ground behind every other ground, the relation
between the groundless and the ungrounded, the immediate reflection of
the formless and the superior form which constitutes the eternal return.
Every thing, animal or being assumes the status of simulacrum; so that the
thinker of eternal return - who indeed refuses to be drawn out of the cave,
finding instead another cave beyond, always another in which to hide - can
rightly say that he is himself burdened with the superior form of everything
that is, like the poet 'burdened with humanity, even that of the animals'.
These words themselves have their echo in the superposed caves. Moreover, that cruelty which at the outset seemed to us monstrous, demanding
expiation, and could be alleviated only by representative mediation, now
seems to us to constitute the pure concept or Idea of difference within overturned Platonism: the most innocent difference, the state of innocence and
its echo.
Plato gave the establishment of difference as the supreme goal of
dialectic. However, difference does not lie between things and simulacra,
models and copies. Things are simulacra themselves, simulacra are the
superior forms, and the difficulty facing everything is to become its own
simulacrum, to attain the status of a sign in the coherence of eternal return.
Plato opposed eternal return to chaos as though chaos were a

68

Difference and Repetition

contradictory state which must be subject to order or law from outside, as
it is when the Demiurge subjugates a rebellious matter. He reduced the
Sophist to contradiction, to that supposed state of chaos, the lowest power
and last degree of participation. In reality the 'nth' power does not pass
through two, three or four: it is immediately affirmed in order to constitute
the highest power; it is affirmed of chaos itself and, as Nietzsche said,
chaos and eternal return are not two different things. The sophist is not the
being (or the non-being) of contradiction, but the one who raises
everything to the level of simulacra and maintains them in that state. Was
it not inevitable that Plato should push irony to that point - to parody?
Was it not inevitable that Plato should be the first to overturn Platonism,
or at least to show the direction such an overturning should take? We are
reminded of the grand finale of the Sophist: difference is displaced, division
turns back against itself and begins to function in reverse, and, as a result
of being applied to simulacra themselves (dreams, shadows, reflections,
paintings), shows the impossibility of distinguishing them from originals or
from models. The Eleatic Stranger gives a definition of the sophist such
that he can no longer be distinguished from Socrates himself: the ironic
imitator who proceeds by brief arguments (questions and problems). Each
moment of difference must then find its true figure: selection, repetition,
ungrounding, the question-problem complex.
We have contrasted representation with a different kind of formation.
The elementary concepts of representation are the categories defined as the
conditions of possible experience. These, however, are too general or too
large for the real. The net is so loose that the largest fish pass through. No
wonder, then, that aesthetics should be divided into two irreducible
domains: that of the theory of the sensible which captures only the real's
conformity with possible experience; and that of the theory of the
beautiful, which deals with the reality of the real in so far as it is thought.
Everything changes once we determine the conditions of real experience,
which are not larger than the conditioned and which differ in kind from
the categories: the two senses of the aesthetic become one, to the point
where the being of the sensible reveals itself in the work of art, while at the
same time the work of art appears as experimentation. The fault of
representation lies in not going beyond the form of identity, in relation to
both the object seen and the seeing subject. Identity is no less conserved in
each component representation than in the whole of infinite representation
as such. Infinite representation may well multiply points of view and
organise these in series; these series are no less subject to the condition of
converging upon the same object, upon the same world. Infinite
representation may well multiply figures and moments and organise these
into circles endowed with self-movement; these circles no less turn around
a single centre which is that of the great circle of consciousness. By
contrast, when the modern work of art develops its permutating series and

Difference in Itself

69

its circular structures, it indicates to philosophy a path leading to the
abandonment of representation. It is not enough to multiply perspectives in
order to establish perspectivism. To every perspective or point of view
there must correspond an autonomous work with its own self-sufficient
sense: what matters is the divergence of series, the decentring of circles,
'monstrosity'. The totality of circles and series is thus a formless
ungrounded chaos which has no law other than its own repetition, its own
reproduction in the development of that which diverges and decentres. We
know how these conditions are already satisfied in such works as
Mallarme's Book or Joyce's Finnegans Wake: these are by nature
problematic works. The identity of the object read really dissolves into
divergent series defined by esoteric words, just as the identity of the
reading subject is dissolved into the decentred circles of possible multiple
readings. Nothing, however, is lost; each series exists only by virtue of the
return of the others. Everything has become simulacrum, for by
simulacrum we should not understand a simple imitation but rather the act
by which the very idea of a model or privileged position is challenged and
overturned. The simulacrum is the instance which includes a difference
within itself, such as (at least) two divergent series on which it plays, all
resemblance abolished so that one can no longer point to the existence of
an original and a copy. It is in this direction that we must look for the
conditions, not of possible experience, but of real experience (selection,
repetition, etc.). It is here that we find the lived reality of a
sub-representative domain. If it is true that representation has identity as its
element and similarity as its unit of measure, then pure presence such as it
appears in the simulacrum has the 'disparate' as its unit of measure - in
other words, always a difference of difference as its immediate element.

Chapter II
Repetition for Itself
Repetition changes nothing in the object repeated, but does change something in the mind which contemplates it. Hume's famous thesis takes us to
the heart of a problem: since it implies, in principle, a perfect independence
on the part of each presentation, how can repetition change something in
the case of the repeated element? The rule of discontinuity or instantaneity
in repetition tells us that one instance does not appear unless the other has
disappeared - hence the status of matter as mens momentanea. However,
given that repetition disappears even as it occurs, how can we say 'the
second', 'the third' and 'it is the same'? It has no in-itself. On the other
hand, it does change something in the mind which contemplates it. This is
the essence of modification. Hume takes as an example the repetition of
cases of the type AB, AB, AB, A .... Each case or objective sequence AB is
independent of the others. The repetition (although we cannot yet properly
speak of repetition) changes nothing in the object or the state of affairs AB.
On the other hand, a change is produced in the mind which contemplates:
a difference, something new in the mind. Whenever A appears, I expect the
appearance of B. Is this the for-itself of repetition, an originary subjectivity
which necessarily enters into its constitution? Does not the paradox of repetition lie in the fact that one can speak of repetition only by virtue of the
change or difference that it introduces into the mind which contemplates
it? By virtue of a difference that the mind draws from repetition?
What does this change comprise? Hume explains that the independent
identical or similar cases are grounded in the imagination. The imagination
is defined here as a contractile power: like a sensitive plate, it retains one
case when the other appears. It contracts cases, elements, agitations or
homogeneous instants and grounds these in an internal qualitative
impression endowed with a certain weight. When A appears, we expect B
with a force corresponding to the qualitative impression of all the
contracted ABs. This is by no means a memory, nor indeed an operation of
the understanding: contraction is not a matter of reflection. Properly
speaking, it forms a synthesis of time. A succession of instants does not
constitute time any more than it causes it to disappear; it indicates only its
constantly aborted moment of birth. Time is constituted only in the
originary synthesis which operates on the repetition of instants. This
synthesis contracts the successive independent instants into one another,
thereby constituting the lived, or living, present. It is in this present that
time is deployed. To it belong both the past and the future: the past in so
70

Repetition for Itself

71

far as the preceding instants are retained in the contraction; the future
because its expectation is anticipated in this same contraction. The past
and the future do not designate instants distinct from a supposed present
instant, but rather the dimensions of the present itself in so far as it is a
contraction of instants. The present does not have to go outside itself in
order to pass from past to future. Rather, the living present goes from the
past to the future which it constitutes in time, which is to say also from the
particular to the general: from the particulars which it envelops by
contraction to the general which it develops in the field of its expectation
(the difference produced in the mind is generality itself in so far as it forms
a living rule for the future). In any case, this synthesis must be given a
name: passive synthesis. Although it is constitutive it is not, for all that,
active. It is not carried out by the mind, but occurs in the mind which
contemplates, prior to all memory and all reflection. Time is subjective, but
in relation to the subjectivity of a passive subject. Passive synthesis or
contraction is essentially asymmetrical: it goes from the past to the future
in the present, thus from the particular to the general, thereby imparting
direction to the arrow of time.
In considering repetition in the object, we remain within the conditions
which make possible an idea of repetition. But in considering the change in
the subject, we are already beyond these conditions, confronting the
general form of difference. The ideal constitution of repetition thus implies
a kind of retroactive movement between these two limits. It is woven
between the two. This is the movement which Hume so profoundly
analyses when he shows that the cases contracted or grounded in the
imagination remain no less distinct in the memory or in the understanding.
Not that we return to the state of matter which produces one case only
when the other has disappeared. Rather, on the basis of the qualitative
impression in the imagination, memory reconstitutes the particular cases as
distinct, conserving them in its own 'temporal space'. The past is then no
longer the immediate past of retention but the reflexive past of
representation, of reflected and reproduced particularity. Correlatively, the
future also ceases to be the immediate future of anticipation in order to
become the reflexive future of prediction, the reflected generality of the
understanding (the understanding weights the expectation in the
imagination in proportion to the number of distinct similar cases observed
and recalled). In other words, the active syntheses of memory and
understanding are superimposed upon and supported by the passive
synthesis of the imagination. The constitution of repetition already implies
three instances: the in-itself which causes it to disappear as it appears,
leaving it unthinkable; the for-itself of the passive synthesis; and, grounded
upon the latter, the reflected representation of a 'for-us' in the active
syntheses. Associationism possesses an irreplaceable subtlety. It is not
surprising that Bergson rediscovers Hume's analyses once he encounters an

72

Difference and Repetition

analogous problem: four o'clock strikes ... each stroke, each disturbance or
excitation, is logically independent of the other, mens momentanea.
However, quite apart from any memory or distinct calculation, we contract
these into an internal qualitative impression within this living present or
passive synthesis which is duration. Then we restore them in an auxiliary
space, a derived time in which we may reproduce them, reflect on them or
count them like so many quantifiable external-impressions.
No doubt Bergson's example is not the same as Hume's. One refers to a
closed repetition, the other to an open one. Moreover, one refers to a
repetition of elements of the type A A A A ... (tick, tick, tick, tick ...), the
other to a repetition of cases such as AB AB AB A ... (tick-tock, tick-tock,
tick-tock, tick ...). The principal distinction between these two forms rests
upon the fact that in the second case difference not only appears in the
contraction of the elements in general but also occurs in each particular
case, between two elements which are both determined and joined together
by a relation of opposition. The function of opposition here is to impose a
limit on the elementary repetition, to enclose it upon the simplest group, to
reduce it to a minimum of two (tock being the inverse of tick). Difference
therefore appears to abandon its first figure of generality and to be
distributed in the repeating particular, but in such a way as to give rise to
new living generalities. Repetition finds itself enclosed in the 'case', reduced
to the pair, while a new infinity opens up in the form of the repetition of
the cases themselves. It would be wrong, therefore, to believe that every
repetition of cases is open by nature, while every repetition of elements is
closed. The repetition of cases is open only by virtue of the closure of a
binary opposition between elements. Conversely, the repetition of elements
is closed only by virtue of a reference to structures of cases in which as a
whole it plays itself the role of one of the two opposed elements: not only
is four a generality in relation to four strokes, but 'four o'clock' enters into
a duality with the preceding or the following half-hour, or even, on the
horizon of the perceptual universe, with the corresponding four o'clock in
the morning or afternoon. In the case of passive synthesis, the two forms of
repetition always refer back to one another: repetition of cases presupposes
that of elements, but that of elements necessarily extends into that of cases
(whence the natural tendency of passive synthesis to experience tick-tick as
tick-tock).
That is why what matters even more than the distinction between the
two forms is the distinction between the levels on which both operate,
separately and in combination. Hume's example no less than Bergson's
leaves us at the level of sensible and perceptual syntheses. The sensed
quality is indistinguishable from the contraction of elementary excitations,
but the object perceived implies a contraction of cases such that one quality
may be read in the other, and a structure in which the form of the object
allies itself with the quality at least as an intentional part. However, in the

Repetition for Itself

73

order of constituent passivity, perceptual syntheses refer back to organic
syntheses which are like the sensibility of the senses; they refer back to a
primary sensibility that we are. We are made of contracted water, earth,
light and air - not merely prior to the recognition or representation of
these, but prior to their being sensed. Every organism, in its receptive and
perceptual elements, but also in its viscera, is a sum of contractions, of
retentions and expectations. At the level of this primary vital sensibility,
the lived present constitutes a past and a future in time. Need is the manner
in which this future appears, as the organic form of expectation. The
retained past appears in the form of cellular heredity. Furthermore, by
combining with the perceptual syntheses built upon them, these organic
syntheses are redeployed in the active syntheses of a psycho-organic
memory and intelligence (instinct and learning). We must therefore
distinguish not only the forms of repetition in relation to passive synthesis
but also the levels of passive synthesis and the combinations of these levels
with one another and with active syntheses. All of this forms a rich domain
of signs which always envelop heterogeneous elements and animate
behaviour. Each contraction, each passive synthesis, constitutes a sign
which is interpreted or deployed in active syntheses. The signs by which an
animal 'senses' the presence of water do not resemble the elements which
its thirsty organism lacks. The manner in which sensation and perception along with need and heredity, learning and instinct, intelligence and
memory - participate in repetition is measured in each case by the
combination of forms of repetition, by the levels on which these
combinations take place, by the relationships operating between these
levels and by the interference of active syntheses with passive syntheses.
What is in question throughout this domain that we have had to extend
to include the organic as such? Hume says precisely that it is a question of
the problem of habit. However, how are we to explain the fact that - in the
case of Bergson's clock-strokes no less than with Hume's causal sequences
- we feel ourselves in effect so close to the mystery of habit, yet recognise
nothing of what is 'habitually' called habit? Perhaps the reason lies in the
illusions of psychology, which made a fetish of activity. Its unreasonable
fear of introspection allowed it to observe only that which moved. It asks
how we acquire habits in acting, but the entire theory of learning risks
being misdirected so long as the prior question is not posed - namely,
whether it is through acting that we acquire habits ... or whether, on the
contrary, it is through contemplating? Psychology regards it as established
that the self cannot contemplate itself. This, however, is not the question.
The question is whether or not the self itself is a contemplation, whether it
is not in itself a contemplation, and whether we can learn, form behaviour
and form ourselves other than through contemplation.
Habit draws something new from repetition - namely, difference (in the
first instance understood as generality). In essence, habit is contraction.

74

Difference and Repetition

Language testifies to this in allowing us to speak of 'contracting' a habit,
and in allowing the verb 'to contract' only in conjunction with a
complement capable of constituting a habitude. It will be objected that the
heart no more has (or no more is) a habit when it contracts than when it
dilates. This, however, is to confuse two quite different kinds of
contraction: contraction may refer to one of the two active elements, one
of the two opposing moments in a tick-tock type series, the other element
being relaxation or dilation. But contraction also refers to the fusion of
successive tick-tocks in a contemplative soul. Passive synthesis is of the
latter kind: it constitutes our habit of living, our expectation that 'it' will
continue, that one of the two elements will appear after the other, thereby
assuring the perpetuation of our case. When we say that habit is a
contraction we are speaking not of an instantaneous action which
combines with another to form an element of repetition, but rather of the
fusion of that repetition in the contemplating mind. A soul must be
attributed to the heart, to the muscles, nerves and cells, but a
contemplative soul whose entire function is to contract a habit. This is no
mystical or barbarous hypothesis. On the contrary, habit here manifests its
full generality: it concerns not only the sensory-motor habits that we have
(psychologically), but also, before these, the primary habits that we are; the
thousands of passive syntheses of which we are organically composed. It is
simultaneously through contraction that we are habits, but through
contemplation that we contract. We are contemplations, we are
imaginations, we are generalities, claims and satisfactions. The
phenomenon of claiming is nothing but the contracting contemplation
through which we affirm our right and our expectation in regard to that
which we contract, along with our self-satisfaction in so far as we
contemplate. We do not contemplate ourselves, but we exist only in
contemplating - that is to say, in contracting that from which we come.
Whether pleasure is itself a contraction or a tension, or whether it is always
tied to a process of relaxation, is not a well-formed question: elements of
pleasure may be found in the active succession of relaxations and
contractions produced by excitants, but it is a quite different question to
ask why pleasure is not simply an element or a case within our psychic life,
but rather a principle which exercises sovereign rule over the latter in every
case. Pleasure is a principle in so far as it is the emotion of a fulfilling
contemplation which contracts in itself cases of relaxation and contraction.
There is a beatitude associated with passive synthesis, and we are all
Narcissus in virtue of the pleasure (auto-satisfaction) we experience in
contemplating, even though we contemplate things quite apart from
ourselves. We are always Actaeon by virtue of what we contemplate, even
though we are Narcissus in relation to the pleasure we take from it. To
contemplate is to draw something from. We must always first contemplate

Repetition for Itself

75

something else - the water, or Diana, or the woods - in order to be filled
with an image of ourselves.
No one has shown better than Samuel Butler that there is no continuity
apart from that of habit, and that we have no other continuities apart from
those of our thousands of component habits, which form within us so
many superstitious and contemplative selves, so many claimants and
satisfactions: 'for even the corn in the fields grows upon a superstitious
basis as to its own existence, and only turns the earth and moisture into
wheat through the conceit of its own ability to do so, without which faith
it were powerless ...'. Only an empiricist can happily risk such formulae.
What we call wheat is a contraction of the earth and humidity, and this
contraction is both a contemplation and the auto-satisfaction of that
contemplation. By its existence alone, the lily of the field sings the glory of
the heavens, the goddesses and gods - in other words, the elements that it
contemplates in contracting. What organism is not made of elements and
cases of repetition, of contemplated and contracted water, nitrogen,
carbon, chlorides and sulphates, thereby intertwining all the habits of
which it is composed? Organisms awake to the sublime words of the third
Ennead: all is contemplation! Perhaps it is irony to say that everything is
contemplation, even rocks and woods, animals and men, even Actaeon and
the stag, Narcissus and the flower, even our actions and our needs. But
irony in turn is still a contemplation, nothing but a contemplation. ...
Plotinus says that one determines one's own image, and appreciates it, only
by turning back to contemplate that from which one comes.
It is easy to multiply reasons which make habit independent of
repetition: to act is never to repeat, whether it be an action in process or an
action already completed. As we have seen, action has, rather, the
particular as its variable and generality as its element. However, while
generality may well be quite different from repetition, it nevertheless refers
to repetition as the hidden basis on which it is constructed. Action is
constituted, in the order of generality and in the field of variables which
correspond to it, only by the contraction of elements of repetition. This
contraction, however, takes place not in the action itself, but in a
contemplative self which doubles the agent. Moreover, in order to integrate
actions within a more complex action, the primary actions must in turn
play the role of elements of repetition within a 'case', but always in relation
to a contemplative soul adjacent to the subject of the compound action.
Underneath the self which acts are little selves which contemplate and
which render possible both the action and the active subject. We speak of
our 'self only in virtue of these thousands of little witnesses which
contemplate within us: it is always a third party who says 'me'. These
contemplative souls must be assigned even to the rat in the labyrinth and to
each muscle of the rat. Given that contemplation never appears at any
moment during the action - since it is always hidden, and since it 'does'

76

Difference and Repetition

nothing (even though something is done through it, something completely
novel) - it is easy to forget it and to interpret the entire process of
excitation and reaction without any reference to repetition - the more so
since this reference appears only in the relation in which both excitations
and reactions stand to the contemplative souls.
The role of the imagination, or the mind which contemplates in its
multiple and fragmented states, is to draw something new from repetition,
to draw difference from it. For that matter, repetition is itself in essence
imaginary, since the imagination alone here forms the 'moment' of the vis
repetitiva from the point of view of constitution: it makes that which it
contracts appear as elements or cases of repetition. Imaginary repetition is
not a false repetition which stands in for the absent true repetition: true
repetition takes place in imagination. Between a repetition which never
ceases to unravel itself and a repetition which is deployed and conserved
for us in the space of representation there was difference, the for-itself of
repetition, the imaginary. Difference inhabits repetition. On the one hand lengthwise, as it were - difference allows us to pass from one order of
repetition to another: from the instantaneous repetition which unravels
itself to the actively represented repetition through the intermediary of
passive synthesis. On the other hand - in depth, as it were - difference
allows us to pass from one order of repetition to another and from one
generality to another within the passive syntheses themselves. The nods of
the chicken's head accompany its cardiac pulsations in an organic synthesis
before they serve as pecks in the perceptual synthesis with grain. And
already in the series of passive syntheses, the generality originally formed
by the contraction of 'ticks' is redistributed in the form of particularities in
the more complex repetition of 'tick-tocks', which are in turn contracted.
In every way, material or bare repetition, so-called repetition of the same,
is like a skin which unravels, the external husk of a kernel of difference and
more complicated internal repetitions. Difference lies between two
repetitions. Is this not also to say, conversely, that repetition lies between
two differences, that it allows us to pass from one order of difference to
another? Gabriel Tarde described dialectical development in this manner: a
process of repetition understood as the passage from a state of general
differences to singular difference, from external differences to internal
difference - in short, repetition as the differenciator of difference.
The synthesis of time constitutes the present in time. It is not that the
present is a dimension of time: the present alone exists. Rather, synthesis
constitutes time as a living present, and the past and the future as
dimensions of this present. This synthesis is none the less intratemporal,
which means that this present passes. We could no doubt conceive of a
perpetual present, a present which is coextensive with time: it would be
sufficient to consider contemplation applied to the infinite succession of
instants. But such a present is not physically possible: the contraction

Repetition for Itself

77

implied in any contemplation always qualifies an order of repetition
according to the elements or cases involved. It necessarily forms a present
which may be exhausted and which passes, a present of a certain duration
which varies according to the species, the individuals, the organisms and
the parts of organisms under consideration. Two successive presents may
be contemporaneous with a third present, more extended by virtue of the
number of instants it contracts. The duration of an organism's present, or
of its various presents, will vary according to the natural contractile range
of its contemplative souls. In other words, fatigue is a real component of
contemplation. It is correctly said that those who do nothing tire
themselves most. Fatigue marks the point at which the soul can no longer
contract what it contemplates, the moment at which contemplation and
contraction come apart. We are made up of fatigues as much as of
contemplations. That is why a phenomenon such as need can be
understood in terms of 'lack', from the point of view of action and the
active syntheses which it determines, but as an extreme 'satiety' or 'fatigue'
from the point of view of the passive synthesis by which it is conditioned.
More precisely, need marks the limits of the variable present. The present
extends between two eruptions of need, and coincides with the duration of
a contemplation. The repetition of need, and of everything which depends
upon it, expresses the time which belongs to the synthesis of time, the
intratemporal character of that synthesis. Repetition is essentially inscribed
in need, since need rests upon an instance which essentially involves
repetition: which forms the for-itself of repetition and the for-itself of a
certain duration. All our rhythms, our reserves, our reaction times, the
thousand intertwinings, the presents and fatigues of which we are
composed, are defined on the basis of our contemplations. The rule is that
one cannot go faster than one's own present - or rather, one's presents.
Signs as we have defined them - as habitudes or contractions referring to
one another - always belong to the present. One of the great strengths of
Stoicism lies in having shown that every sign is a sign of the present, from
the point of view of the passive synthesis in which past and future are
precisely only dimensions of the present itself. A scar is the sign not of a
past wound but of 'the present fact of having been wounded': we can say
that it is the contemplation of the wound, that it contracts all the instants
which separate us from it into a living present. Or rather, that we find here
the true meaning of the distinction between natural and artificial: natural
signs are signs founded upon passive synthesis; they are signs of the
present, referring to the present in which they signify. Artificial signs, by
contrast, are those which refer to the past or the future as distinct
dimensions of the present, dimensions on which the present might in turn
depend. Artificial signs imply active syntheses - that is to say, the passage
from spontaneous imagination to the active faculties of reflective
representation, memory and intelligence.

78

Difference and Repetition

Need itself is therefore very imperfectly understood in terms of negative
structures which relate it to activity. It is not even enough to invoke
activity in the process of occurring or taking place, so long as the
contemplative base on which it occurs has not been determined. Here
again, with regard to this base, we cannot avoid seeing in the negative
(need as lack) the shadow of a higher instance. Need expresses the
openness of a question before it expresses the non-being or the absence of a
response. To contemplate is to question. Is it not the peculiarity of
questions to 'draw' a response? Questions present at once both the
stubbornness or obstinacy and the lassitude or fatigue which correspond to
need. 'What difference is there...?' This is the question the contemplative
soul puts to repetition, and to which it draws a response from repetition.
Contemplations are questions, while the contractions which occur in them
and complete them are so many finite affirmations produced in the same
way as presents are produced out of the perpetual present by means of the
passive synthesis of time. Conceptions of the negative come from our haste
to understand need in relation to active syntheses, which in fact are
elaborated only on this basis. Moreover, if we reconsider the active
syntheses themselves in the light of this basis which they presuppose, we
see that they signify rather the constitution of problematic fields in relation
to questions. The whole domain of behaviour, the intertwining of artificial
and natural signs, the intervention of instinct and learning, memory and
intelligence, shows how the questions involved in contemplation are
developed in the form of active problematic fields. To the first synthesis of
time there corresponds a first question-problem complex as this appears in
the living present (the urgency of life). This living present, and with it the
whole of organic and psychic life, rests upon habit. Following Condillac,
we must regard habit as the foundation from which all other psychic
phenomena derive. All these other phenomena either rest upon
contemplations or are themselves contemplations: even need, even
questions, even 'irony'.
These thousands of habits of which we are composed - these
contractions, contemplations, pretensions, presumptions, satisfactions,
fatigues; these variable presents - thus form the basic domain of passive
syntheses. The passive self is not defined simply by receptivity - that is, by
means of the capacity to experience sensations - but by virtue of the
contractile contemplation which constitutes the organism itself before it
constitutes the sensations. This self, therefore, is by no means simple: it is
not enough to relativise or pluralise the self, all the while retaining for it a
simple attenuated form. Selves are larval subjects; the world of passive
syntheses constitutes the system of the self, under conditions yet to be
determined, but it is the system of a dissolved self. There is a self wherever
a furtive contemplation has been established, whenever a contracting
machine capable of drawing a difference from repetition functions

Repetition for Itself

79

somewhere. The self does not undergo modifications, it is itself a
modification - this term designating precisely the difference drawn. Finally,
one is only what one has: here, being is formed or the passive self «, by
having. Every contraction is a presumption, a claim - that is to say, it gives
rise to an expectation or a right in regard to that which it contracts, and
comes undone once its object escapes. In all his novels, Samuel Beckett has
traced the inventory of peculiarities pursued with fatigue and passion by
larval subjects: Molloy's series of stones, Murphy's biscuits, Malone's
possessions - it is always a question of drawing a small difference, a weak
generality, from the repetition of elements or the organisation of cases. It is
undoubtedly one of the more profound intentions of the 'new novel' to
rediscover, below the level of active syntheses, the domain of passive
syntheses which constitute us, the domain of modifications, tropisms and
little peculiarities. In all its component fatigues, in all its mediocre
auto-satisfactions, in all its derisory presumptions, in its misery and its
poverty, the dissolved self still sings the glory of God - that is, of that
which it contemplates, contracts and possesses.
Although it is originary, the first synthesis of time is no less intratemporal.
It constitutes time as a present, but a present which passes. Time does not
escape the present, but the present does not stop moving by leaps and
bounds which encroach upon one another. This is the paradox of the present: to constitute time while passing in the time constituted. We cannot
avoid the necessary conclusion - that there must be another time in which
the first synthesis of time can occur. This refers us to a second synthesis. By
insisting upon the finitude of contraction, we have shown the effect; we
have by no means shown why the present passes, or what prevents it from
being coextensive with time. The first synthesis, that of habit, is truly the
foundation of time; but we must distinguish the foundation from the
ground. The foundation concerns the soil: it shows how something is established upon this soil, how it occupies and possesses it; whereas the ground
comes rather from the sky, it goes from the summit to the foundations, and
measures the possessor and the soil against one another according to a title
of ownership. Habit is the foundation of time, the moving soil occupied by
the passing present. The claim of the present is precisely that it passes.
However, it is what causes the present to pass, that to which the present
and habit belong, which must be considered the ground of time. It is memory that grounds time. We have seen how memory, as a derived active synthesis, depended upon habit: in effect, everything depends upon a
foundation. But this does not tell us what constitutes memory. At the moment when it grounds itself upon habit, memory must be grounded by another passive synthesis distinct from that of habit. The passive synthesis of
habit in turn refers to this more profound passive synthesis of memory:

80

Difference and Repetition

Habitus and Mnemosyne, the alliance of the sky and the ground. Habit is
the originary synthesis of time, which constitutes the life of the passing
present; Memory is the fundamental synthesis of time which constitutes the
being of the past (that which causes the present to pass).
At first sight, it is as if the past were trapped between two presents: the
one which it has been and the one in relation to which it is past. The past is
not the former present itself but the element in which we focus upon the
latter. Particularity, therefore, now belongs to that on which we focus - in
other words, to that which 'has been'; whereas the past itself, the 'was', is
by nature general. The past in general is the element in which each former
present is focused upon in particular and as a particular. In accordance
with Husserlian terminology, we must distinguish between retention and
reproduction. However, what we earlier called the retention of habit was
the state of successive instants contracted in a present present of a certain
duration. These instants formed a particularity - in other words, an
immediate past naturally belonging to the present present, while the
present itself, which remains open to the future in the form of expectation,
constitutes the general. By contrast, from the point of view of the
reproduction involved in memory, it is the past (understood as the
mediation of presents) which becomes general while the (present as well as
former) present becomes particular. To the degree to which the past in
general is the element in which each former present preserves itself and
may be focused upon, the former present finds itself 'represented' in the
present one. The limits of this representation or reproduction are in fact
determined by the variable relations of resemblance and contiguity known
as forms of association. In order to be represented the former present must
resemble the present one, and must be broken up into partially
simultaneous presents with very different durations which are then
contiguous with one another and, even at the limit, contiguous with the
present present. The great strength of associationism lies in having founded
a whole theory of artificial signs on these relations of association.
Now the former present cannot be represented in the present one
without the present one itself being represented in that representation. It is
of the essence of representation not only to represent something but to
represent its own representativity. The present and former presents are not,
therefore, like two successive instants on the line of time; rather, the
present one necessarily contains an extra dimension in which it represents
the former and also represents itself. The present present is treated not as
the future object of a memory but as that which reflects itself at the same
time as it forms the memory of the former present. Active synthesis,
therefore, has two correlative - albeit non-symmetrical - aspects:
reproduction and reflection, remembrance and recognition, memory and
understanding. It has often been pointed out that reflection implies
something more than reproduction: this something more is only this

Repetition for Itself

81

supplementary dimension in which every present reflects itself as present
while at the same time representing the former. 'Every conscious state
requires a dimension in addition to the one of which it implies the
memory.' As a result, the active synthesis of memory may be regarded as
the principle of representation under this double aspect: reproduction of
the former present and reflection of the present present. This active
synthesis of memory is founded upon the passive synthesis of habit, since
the latter constitutes the general possibility of any present. But the two
syntheses are profoundly different: the asymmetry here follows from the
constant augmentation of dimensions, their infinite proliferation. The
passive synthesis of habit constituted time as a contraction of instants with
respect to a present, but the active synthesis of memory constitutes it as the
embedding of presents themselves. The whole problem is: with respect to
what? It is with respect to the pure element of the past, understood as the
past in general, as an a priori past, that a given former present is
reproducible and the present present is able to reflect itself. Far from being
derived from the present or from representation, the past is presupposed by
every representation. In this sense, the active synthesis of memory may well
be founded upon the (empirical) passive synthesis of habit, but on the other
hand it can be grounded only by another (transcendental) passive synthesis
which is peculiar to memory itself. Whereas the passive synthesis of habit
constitutes the living present in time and makes the past and the future two
asymmetrical elements of that present, the passive synthesis of memory
constitutes the pure past in time, and makes the former and the present
present (thus the present in reproduction and the future in reflection) two
asymmetrical elements of this past as such. However, what do we mean in
speaking of the pure, a priori past, the past in general or as such? If Matter
and Memory is a great book, it is perhaps because Bergson profoundly
explored the domain of this transcendental synthesis of a pure past and
discovered all its constitutive paradoxes.
It is futile to try to reconstitute the past from the presents between which
it is trapped, either the present which it was or the one in relation to which
it is now past. In effect, we are unable to believe that the past is constituted
after it has been present, or because a new present appears. If a new
present were required for the past to be constituted as past, then the former
present would never pass and the new one would never arrive. No present
would ever pass were it not past 'at the same time' as it is present; no past
would ever be constituted unless it were first constituted 'at the same time'
as it was present. This is the first paradox: the contemporaneity of the past
with the present that it was. It gives us the reason for the passing of the
present. Every present passes, in favour of a new present, because the past
is contemporaneous with itself as present. A second paradox emerges: the
paradox of coexistence. If each past is contemporaneous with the present
that it was, then all of the past coexists with the new present in relation to

82

Difference and Repetition

which it is now past. The past is no more 'in' this second present than it is
'after' the first - whence the Bergsonian idea that each present present is
only the entire past in its most contracted state. The past does not cause
one present to pass without calling forth another, but itself neither passes
nor comes forth. For this reason the past, far from being a dimension of
time, is the synthesis of all time of which the present and the future are
only dimensions. We cannot say that it was. It no longer exists, it does not
exist, but it insists, it consists, it is. It insists with the former present, it
consists with the new or present present. It is the in-itself of time as the
final ground of the passage of time. In this sense it forms a pure, general, a
priori element of all time. In effect, when we say that it is
contemporaneous with the present that it was, we necessarily speak of a
past which never was present, since it was not formed 'after'. Its manner of
being contemporaneous with itself as present is that of being posed as
already-there, presupposed by the passing present and causing it to pass. Its
manner of coexisting with the new present is one of being posed in itself,
conserving itself in itself and being presupposed by the new present which
comes forth only by contracting this past. The paradox of pre-existence
thus completes the other two: each past is contemporaneous with the
present it was, the whole past coexists with the present in relation to which
it is past, but the pure element of the past in general pre-exists the passing
present. There is thus a substantial temporal element (the Past which was
never present) playing the role of ground. This is not itself represented. It is
always the former or present present which is represented. The
transcendental passive synthesis bears upon this pure past from the triple
point of view of contemporaneity, coexistence and pre-existence. By
contrast, the active synthesis is the representation of the present under the
dual aspect of the reproduction of the former and the reflection of the new.
The latter synthesis is founded upon the former, and if the new present is
always endowed with a supplementary dimension, this is because it is
reflected in the element of the pure past in general, whereas it is only
through this element that we focus upon the former present as a particular.
If we compare the passive synthesis of habit and the passive synthesis of
memory, we see how much the distribution of repetition and contraction
changes from one to the other. No doubt, in either case, the present
appears to be the result of a contraction, but this relates to quite different
dimensions. In one case, the present is the most contracted state of
successive elements or instants which are in themselves independent of one
another. In the other case, the present designates the most contracted
degree of an entire past, which is itself like a coexisting totality. Let us
suppose, in effect, in accordance with the conditions of the second
paradox, that the past is not conserved in the present in relation to which it
is past, but is conserved in itself, the present present being only the
maximal contraction of all this past which coexists with it. It must first be

Repetition for Itself

83

the case that this whole past coexists with itself, in varying degrees of
relaxation ... and of contraction. The present can be the most contracted
degree of the past which coexists with it only if the past first coexists with
itself in an infinity of diverse degrees of relaxation and contraction at an
infinity of levels (this is the meaning of the famous Bergsonian metaphor of
the cone, the fourth paradox in relation to the past). Consider what we
call repetition within a life - more precisely, within a spiritual life. Presents
succeed, encroaching upon one another. Nevertheless, however strong the
incoherence or possible opposition between successive presents, we have
the impression that each of them plays out 'the same life' at different levels.
This is what we call destiny. Destiny never consists in step-by-step
deterministic relations between presents which succeed one another
according to the order of a represented time. Rather, it implies between
successive presents non-localisable connections, actions at a distance,
systems of replay, resonance and echoes, objective chances, signs, signals
and roles which transcend spatial locations and temporal successions. We
say of successive presents which express a destiny that they always play out
the same thing, the same story, but at different levels: here more or less
relaxed, there more or less contracted. This is why destiny accords so badly
with determinism but so well with freedom: freedom lies in choosing the
levels. The succession of present presents is only the manifestation of
something more profound - namely, the manner in which each continues
the whole life, but at a different level or degree to the preceding, since all
levels and degrees coexist and present themselves for our choice on the
basis of a past which was never present. What we call the empirical
character of the presents which make us up is constituted by the relations
of succession and simultaneity between them, their relations of contiguity,
causality, resemblance and even opposition. What we call their noumenal
character is constituted by the relations of virtual coexistence between the
levels of a pure past, each present being no more than the actualisation or
represention of one of these levels. In short, what we live empirically as a
succession of different presents from the point of view of active synthesis is
also the ever-increasing coexistence of levels of the past within passive
synthesis. Each present contracts a level of the whole, but this level is
already one of relaxation or contraction. In other words, the sign of the
present is a passage to the limit, a maximal contraction which comes to
sanction the choice of a particular level as such, which is in itself
contracted or relaxed among an infinity of other possible levels. Moreover,
what we say of a life may be said of several lives. Since each is a passing
present, one life may replay another at a different level, as if the
philosopher and the pig, the criminal and the saint, played out the same
past at different levels of a gigantic cone. This is what we call
metempsychosis. Each chooses his pitch or his tone, perhaps even his lyrics,

84

Difference and Repetition

but the tune remains the same, and underneath all the lyrics the same
tra-la-la, in all possible tones and all pitches.
Between the two repetitions, the material and the spiritual, there is a vast
difference. The former is a repetition of successive independent elements or
instants; the latter is a repetition of the Whole on diverse coexisting levels
(as Leibniz said, 'everything can be said to be the same at all times and
places except in degrees of perfection' ). As a result, the two repetitions
stand in very different relations to 'difference' itself. Difference is drawn
from one in so far as the elements or instants are contracted within a living
present. It is included in the other in so far as the Whole includes the
difference between its levels. One is bare, the other clothed; one is
repetition of parts, the other of the whole; one involves succession, the
other coexistence; one is actual, the other virtual; one is horizontal, the
other vertical. The present is always contracted difference, but in one case
it contracts indifferent instants; in the other case, by passing to the limit, it
contracts a differential level of the whole which is itself a matter of
relaxation and contraction. In consequence, the difference between
presents themselves is that between the two repetitions: that of the
elementary instants from which difference is subtracted, and that of the
levels of the whole in which difference is included. And following the
Bergsonian hypothesis, the bare repetition must be understood as the
external envelope of the clothed: that is, the repetition of successive
instants must be understood as the most relaxed of the coexistent levels,
matter as a dream or as mind's most relaxed past. Neither of these two
repetitions is, strictly speaking, representable. Material repetition comes
undone even as it occurs, and can be represented only by the active
synthesis which projects its elements into a space of conservation and
calculation. At the same time, however, once it has become an object of
representation, this repetition is subordinated to the identity of the
elements or to the resemblance of the conserved and added cases. Spiritual
repetition unfolds in the being in itself of the past, whereas representation
concerns and reaches only those presents which result from active
synthesis, thereby subordinating all repetition, to the identity of the present
present in reflection, or to the resemblance of the former present in
reproduction.
The passive syntheses are obviously sub-representative. The question for
us, however, is whether or not we can penetrate the passive synthesis of
memory; whether we can in some sense live the being in itself of the past in
the same way that we live the passive synthesis of habit. The entire past is
conserved in itself, but how can we save it for ourselves, how can we
penetrate that in-itself without reducing it to the former present that it was,
or to the present present in relation to which it is past? How can we save it
for ourselves} It is more or less at this point that Proust intervenes, taking
up the baton from Bergson. Moreover, it seems that the response has long

Repetition for Itself

85

been known: reminiscence. In effect, this designates a passive synthesis, an
involuntary memory which differs in kind from any active synthesis
associated with voluntary memory. Combray reappears, not as it was or as
it could be, but in a splendour which was never lived, like a pure past
which finally reveals its double irreducibility to the two presents which it
telescopes together: the present that it was, but also the present present
which it could be. Former presents may be represented beyond forgetting
by active synthesis, in so far as forgetting is empirically overcome. Here,
however, it is within Forgetting, as though immemorial, that Combray
reappears in the form of a past which was never present: the in-itself of
Combray. If there is an in-itself of the past, then reminiscence is its
noumenon or the thought with which it is invested. Reminiscence does not
simply refer us back from a present present to former ones, from recent
loves to infantile ones, from our lovers to our mothers. Here again, the
relation between passing presents does not account for the pure past
which, with their assistance, takes advantage of their passing in order to
reappear underneath representation: beyond the lover and beyond the
mother, coexistent with the one and contemporary with the other, lies the
never-lived reality of the Virgin. The present exists, but the past alone
insists and provides the element in which the present passes and successive
presents are telescoped. The echo of the two presents forms only a
persistent question, which unfolds within representation like a field of
problems, with the rigorous imperative to search, to respond, to resolve.
However, the response always comes from elsewhere: every reminiscence,
whether of a town or a woman, is erotic. It is always Eros, the noumenon,
who allows us to penetrate this pure past in itself, this virginal repetition
which is Mnemosyne. He is the companion, the fiance, of Mnemosyne.
Where does he get this power? Why is the exploration of the pure past
erotic? Why is it that Eros holds both the secret of questions and answers,
and the secret of an insistence in all our existence? Unless we have not yet
found the last word, unless there is a third synthesis of time ....
Temporally speaking - in other words, from the point of view of the theory
of time - nothing is more instructive than the difference between the Kantian and the Cartesian Cogito. It is as though Descartes's Cogito operated
with two logical values: determination and undetermined existence. The
determination (I think) implies an undetermined existence (I am, because
'in order to think one must exist') - and determines it precisely as the existence of a thinking subject: I think therefore I am, I am a thing which
thinks. The entire Kantian critique amounts to objecting against Descartes
that it is impossible for determination to bear directly upon the undetermined. The determination ('I think') obviously implies something undetermined ('I am'), but nothing so far tells us how it is that this undetermined

86

Difference and Repetition

is determinable by the 'I think': 'in the consciousness of myself in mere
thought I am the being itself, although nothing in myself is thereby given
for thought.' Kant therefore adds a third logical value: the determinable,
or rather the form in which the undetermined is determinable (by the determination). This third value suffices to make logic a transcendental instance.
It amounts to the discovery of Difference - no longer in the form of an empirical difference between two determinations, but in the form of a transcendental Difference between the Determination as such and what it
determines; no longer in the form of an external difference which separates, but in the form of an internal Difference which establishes an a priori
relation between thought and being. Kant's answer is well known: the form
under which undetermined existence is determinable by the 'I think' is that
of time ... The consequences of this are extreme: my undetermined existence can be determined only within time as the existence of a phenomenon, of a passive, receptive phenomenal subject appearing within time. As
a result, the spontaneity of which I am conscious in the 'I think' cannot be
understood as the attribute of a substantial and spontaneous being, but
only as the affection of a passive self which experiences its own thought its own intelligence, that by virtue of which it can say / - being exercised in
it and upon it but not by it. Here begins a long and inexhaustible story: / is
an other, or the paradox of inner sense. The activity of thought applies to a
receptive being, to a passive subject which represents that activity to itself
rather than enacts it, which experiences its effect rather than initiates it,
and which lives it like an Other within itself. To 'I think' and 'I am' must
be added the self - that is, the passive position (what Kant calls the receptivity of intuition); to the determination and the undetermined must be
added the form of the determinable, namely time. Nor is 'add' entirely the
right word here, since it is rather a matter of establishing the difference and
interiorising it within being and thought. It is as though the / were fractured from one end to the other: fractured by the pure and empty form of
time. In this form it is the correlate of the passive self which appears in
time. Time signifies a fault or a fracture in the / and a passivity in the self,
and the correlation between the passive self and the fractured I constitutes
the discovery of the transcendental, the element of the Copernican Revolution.
Descartes could draw his conclusion only by expelling time, by reducing
the Cogito to an instant and entrusting time to the operation of continuous
creation carried out by God. More generally, the supposed identity of the I
has no other guarantee than the unity of God himself. For this reason, the
substitution of the point of view of the T for the point of view of 'God' has
much less importance than is commonly supposed, so long as the former
retains an identity that it owes precisely to the latter. God survives as long
as the I enjoys a subsistence, a simplicity and an identity which express the
entirety of its resemblance to the divine. Conversely, the death of God does

Repetition for Itself

87

not leave the identity of the I intact, but installs and interiorises within it an
essential dissimilarity, a 'demarcation' in place of the mark or the seal of
God. This is what Kant saw so profoundly in the Critique of Pure Reason,
at least at one point: the manner in which the speculative death of God
entails the fracture of the I, the simultaneous disappearance of rational
theology and rational psychology. If the greatest initiative of
transcendental philosophy was to introduce the form of time into thought
as such, then this pure and empty form in turn signifies indissolubly the
death of God, the fractured I and the passive self. It is true that Kant did
not pursue this initiative: both God and the I underwent a practical
resurrection. Even in the speculative domain, the fracture is quickly filled
by a new form of identity - namely, active synthetic identity; whereas the
passive self is defined only by receptivity and, as such, endowed with no
power of synthesis. On the contrary, we have seen that receptivity,
understood as a capacity for experiencing affections, was only a
consequence, and that the passive self was more profoundly constituted by
a synthesis which is itself passive (contemplation-contraction). The
possibility of receiving sensations or impressions follows from this. It is
impossible to maintain the Kantian distribution, which amounts to a
supreme effort to save the world of representation: here, synthesis is
understood as active and as giving rise to a new form of identity in the I,
while passivity is understood as simple receptivity without synthesis. The
Kantian initiative can be taken up, and the form of time can support both
the death of God and the fractured I, but in the course of a quite different
understanding of the passive self. In this sense, it is correct to claim that
neither Fichte nor Hegel is the descendant of Kant - rather, it is Holderlin,
who discovers the emptiness of pure time and, in this emptiness,
simultaneously the continued diversion of the divine, the prolonged
fracture of the I and the constitutive passion of the self. Holderlin saw in
this form of time both the essence of tragedy and the adventure of
Oedipus, as though these were complementary figures of the same death
instinct. Is it possible that Kantian philosophy should thus be the heir of
Oedipus?
Nevertheless, is it really Kant's prestigious contribution to have
introduced time into thought as such? Platonic reminiscence would seem
already to have implied this. Innateness is a myth, no less so than
reminiscence, but it is a myth of instantaneity, which is why it suited
Descartes. When Plato expressly opposes reminiscence and innateness, he
means that the latter represents only the abstract image of knowledge,
whereas the real movement of learning implies a distinction within the soul
between a 'before' and an 'after'; in other words, it implies the
introduction of a first time, in which we forget what we knew, since there
is a second time in which we recover what we have forgotten. But the
question is: In what form does reminiscence introduce time? Even for the

88

Difference and Repetition

soul, it is a matter of physical time, of a periodic or circular time which is
that of the Physis and is subordinate to events which occur within it, to
movements which it measures or to events which punctuate it. This time
undoubtedly finds its ground in an in-itself - that is, in the pure past of the
Ideas which arranges the order of presents in a circle according to their
decreasing or increasing resemblances to the ideal, but also removes from
the circle those souls which have been able to preserve or recover the realm
of the in-itself. The Ideas none the less remain the ground on which the
successive presents are organised into the circle of time, so that the pure
past which defines them is itself still necessarily expressed in terms of a
present, as an ancient mythical present. This equivocation, all the
ambiguity of Mnemosyne, was already implicit in the second synthesis of
time. For the latter, from the height of its pure past, surpassed and
dominated the world of representation: it is the ground, the in-itself,
noumenon and Form. However, it still remains relative to the
representation that it grounds. It elevates the principles of representation namely, identity, which it treats as an immemorial model, and
resemblance, which it treats as a present image: the Same and the Similar.
It is irreducible to the present and superior to representation, yet it serves
only to render the representation of presents circular or infinite (even with
Leibniz or Hegel, it is still Mnemosyne which grounds the deployment of
representation in the infinite). The shortcoming of the ground is to remain
relative to what it grounds, to borrow the characteristics of what it
grounds, and to be proved by these. It is in this sense that it creates a circle:
it introduces movement into the soul rather than time into thought. Just as
the ground is in a sense 'bent' and must lead us towards a beyond, so the
second synthesis of time points beyond itself in the direction of a third
which denounces the illusion of the in-itself as still a correlate of
representation. The in-itself of the past and the repetition in reminiscence
constitute a kind of 'effect', like an optical effect, or rather the erotic effect
of memory itself.
What does this mean: the empty form of time or third synthesis? The
Northern Prince says 'time is out of joint'. Can it be that the Northern
philosopher says the same thing: that he should be Hamletian because he is
Oedipal? The joint, cardo, is what ensures the subordination of time to
those properly cardinal points through which pass the periodic movements
which it measures (time, number of the movement, for the soul as much as
for the world). By contrast, time out of joint means demented time or time
outside the curve which gave it a god, liberated from its overly simple
circular figure, freed from the events which made up its content, its relation
to movement overturned; in short, time presenting itself as an empty and
pure form. Time itself unfolds (that is, apparently ceases to be a circle)
instead of things unfolding within it (following the overly simple circular
figure). It ceases to be cardinal and becomes ordinal, a pure order of time.

Repetition for Itself

89

Holderlin said that it no longer 'rhymed', because it was distributed
unequally on both sides of a 'caesura', as a result of which beginning and
end no longer coincided. We may define the order of time as this purely
formal distribution of the unequal in the function of a caesura. We can
then distinguish a more or less extensive past and a future in inverse
proportion, but the future and the past here are not empirical and dynamic
determinations of time: they are formal and fixed characteristics which
follow a priori from the order of time, as though they comprised a static
synthesis of time. The synthesis is necessarily static, since time is no longer
subordinated to movement; time is the most radical form of change, but
the form of change does not change. The caesura, along with the before
and after which it ordains once and for all, constitutes the fracture in the I
(the caesura is exactly the point at which the fracture appears).
Having abjured its empirical content, having overturned its own ground,
time is defined not only by a formal and empty order but also by a totality
and a series. In the first place, the idea of a totality of time must be
understood as follows: the caesura, of whatever kind, must be determined
in the image of a unique and tremendous event, an act which is adequate to
time as a whole. This image itself is divided, torn into two unequal parts.
Nevertheless, it thereby draws together the totality of time. It must be
called a symbol by virtue of the unequal parts which it subsumes and
draws together, but draws together as unequal parts. Such a symbol
adequate to the totality of time may be expressed in many ways: to throw
time out of joint, to make the sun explode, to throw oneself into the
volcano, to kill God or the father. This symbolic image constitutes the
totality of time to the extent that it draws together the caesura, the before
and the after. However, in so far as it carries out their distribution within
inequality, it creates the possibility of a temporal series. In effect, there is
always a time at which the imagined act is supposed 'too big for me'. This
defines a priori the past or the before. It matters little whether or not the
event itself occurs, or whether the act has been performed or not: past,
present and future are not distributed according to this empirical criterion.
Oedipus has already carried out the act, Hamlet has not yet done so, but in
either case the first part of the symbol is lived in the past, they are in the
past and live themselves as such so long as they experience the image of the
act as too big for them. The second time, which relates to the caesura itself,
is thus the present of metamorphosis, a becoming-equal to the act and a
doubling of the self, and the projection of an ideal self in the image of the
act (this is marked by Hamlet's sea voyage and by the outcome of
Oedipus's enquiry: the hero becomes 'capable' of the act). As for the third
time in which the future appears, this signifies that the event and the act
possess a secret coherence which excludes that of the self; that they turn
back against the self which has become their equal and smash it to pieces,
as though the bearer of the new world were carried away and dispersed by

90

Difference and Repetition

the shock of the multiplicity to which it gives birth: what the self has
become equal to is the unequal in itself. In this manner, the I which is
fractured according to the order of time and the Self which is divided
according to the temporal series correspond and find a common
descendant in the man without name, without family, without qualities,
without self or I, the 'plebeian' guardian of a secret, the already-Overman
whose scattered members gravitate around the sublime image.
All is repetition in the temporal series, in relation to this symbolic image.
The past itself is repetition by default, and it prepares this other repetition
constituted by the metamorphosis in the present. Historians sometimes
look for empirical correspondences between the present and the past, but
however rich it may be, this network of historical correspondences involves
repetition only by analogy or similitude. In truth, the past is in itself
repetition, as is the present, but they are repetition in two different modes
which repeat each other. Repetition is never a historical fact, but rather the
historical condition under which something new is effectively produced. It
is not the historian's reflection which demonstrates a resemblance between
Luther and Paul, between the Revolution of 1789 and the Roman
Republic, etc. Rather, it is in the first place for themselves that the
revolutionaries are determined to lead their lives as 'resuscitated Romans',
before becoming capable of the act which they have begun by repeating in
the mode of a proper past, therefore under conditions such that they
necessarily identify with a figure from the historical past. Repetition is a
condition of action before it is a concept of reflection. We produce
something new only on condition that we repeat - once in the mode which
constitutes the past, and once more in the present of metamorphosis.
Moreover, what is produced, the absolutely new itself, is in turn nothing
but repetition: the third repetition, this time by excess, the repetition of the
future as eternal return. For even though the doctrine of eternal return may
be expounded as though it affected the whole series or the totality of time,
the past and the present no less than the future, such an exposition remains
purely introductory. It has no more than a problematic and indeterminate
value, no function beyond that of posing the problem of eternal return.
Eternal return, in its esoteric truth, concerns - and can concern - only the
third time of the series. Only there is it determined. That is why it is
properly called a belief of the future, a belief in the future. Eternal return
affects only the new, what is produced under the condition of default and
by the intermediary of metamorphosis. However, it causes neither the
condition nor the agent to return: on the contrary, it repudiates these and
expels them with all its centrifugal force. It constitutes the autonomy of the
product, the independence of the work. It is repetition by excess which
leaves intact nothing of the default or the becoming-equal. It is itself the
new, complete novelty. It is by itself the third time in the series, the future
as such. As Klossowski says, it is the secret coherence which establishes

Repetition for Itself

91

itself only by excluding my own coherence, my own identity, the identity of
the self, the world and God. It allows only the plebeian to return, the man
without a name. It draws into its circle the dead god and the dissolved self.
It does not allow the sun to return, since it presupposes its explosion; it
concerns only the nebulae, for which alone it moves and from which it
becomes indistinguishable. For this reason, as Zarathustra says at one
point to the demon, we simplify matters in expounding the doctrine of
eternal return as though it affected the totality of time; we make a
hurdy-gurdy song of it, as he says at another point to his animals. In other
words, we rely upon the overly simple circle which has as its content the
passing present and as its shape the past of reminiscence. However, the
order of time, time as a pure and empty form, has precisely undone that
circle. It has undone it in favour of a less simple and much more secret,
much more tortuous, more nebulous circle, an eternally excentric circle, the
decentred circle of difference which is re-formed uniquely in the third time
of the series. The order of time has broken the circle of the Same and
arranged time in a series only in order to re-form a circle of the Other at
the end of the series. The 'once and for all' of the order is there only for the
'every time' of the final esoteric circle. The form of time is there only for
the revelation of the formless in the eternal return. The extreme formality
is there only for an excessive formlessness (Holderlin's Unformliche). In
this manner, the ground has been superseded by a groundlessness, a
universal ungrounding which turns upon itself and causes only the
yet-to-come to return.

Note on the Three Repetitions
Marx's theory of historical repetition, as it appears notably in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, turns on the following principle
which does not seem to have been sufficiently understood by historians:
historical repetition is neither a matter of analogy nor a concept produced
by the reflection of historians, but above all a condition of historical action
itself. Harold Rosenberg illuminates this point in some fine pages: historical actors or agents can create only on condition that they identify themselves with figures from the past. In this sense, history is theatre: 'their
action became a spontaneous repetition of an old role. ... It is the revolutionary crisis, the compelled striving for "something entirely new", that
causes history to become veiled in myth ...' (Harold Rosenberg, The
Tradition of the New, London: Thames & Hudson, 1962, ch.12, 'The
Resurrected Romans', pp. 155-6).
According to Marx, repetition is comic when it falls short - that is, when
instead of leading to metamorphosis and the production of something new,
it forms a kind of involution, the opposite of an authentic creation. Comic

92

Difference and Repetition

travesty replaces tragic metamorphosis. However, it appears that for Marx
this comic or grotesque repetition necessarily comes after the tragic,
evolutive and creative repetition ('all great events and historical personages
occur, as it were, twice ... the first time as tragedy, the second as farce').
This temporal order does not, however, seem to be absolutely justified.
Comic repetition works by means of some defect, in the mode of the past
properly so called. The hero necessarily confronts this repetition so long as
'the act is too big for him': Polonius's murder by mistake is comic, as is
Oedipus's enquiry. The moment of metamorphosis, tragic repetition,
follows. It is true that these two moments are not independent, existing as
they do only for the third moment beyond the comic and the tragic: the
production of something new entails a dramatic repetition which excludes
even the hero. However, once the first two elements acquire an abstract
independence or become genres, then the comic succeeds the tragic as
though the failure of metamorphosis, raised to the absolute, presupposed
an earlier metamorphosis already completed.
Note that the three-stage structure of repetition is no less that of Hamlet
than that of Oedipus. Holderlin showed this with incomparable rigour in
the case of Oedipus: the before, the caesura and the after. He indicated that
the relative dimensions of the before and after could vary according to the
position of the caesura (for example, the sudden death of Antigone by
contrast with Oedipus's long wandering). The essential point, however, is
the persistence of the triadic structure. In this regard, Rosenberg interprets
Hamlet in a manner which conforms completely to Holderlin's schema, the
caesura being constituted by the the sea voyage: Rosenberg, The Tradition
of the New, ch. 11, 'Character Change and the Drama', pp. 135-53.
Hamlet resembles Oedipus by virtue of not only the content but also the
dramatic form.
Drama has but a single form involving all three repetitions. Nietzsche's
Zarathustra is clearly a drama, a theatrical work. The largest part of the
book is taken up with the before, in the mode of a defect or of the past:
this act is too big for me (compare the idea of 'criminal blame', or the
whole comic story of the death of God, or Zarathustra's fear before the
revelation of eternal return - 'your fruits are ripe but you are not ripe for
your fruits'). Then comes the moment of the caesura or the metamorphosis,
The Sign', when Zarathustra becomes capable. The third moment remains
absent: this is the moment of the revelation and affirmation of eternal
return, and implies the death of Zarathustra. We know that Nietzsche did
not have time to write this projected part. That is why it has been
constantly supposed that the Nietzschean doctrine of eternal return was
never stated but reserved for a future work: Nietzsche gave us only the past
condition and the present metamorphosis, but not the unconditioned
which was to have resulted as the 'future'.
We rediscover, or find already, this theme of three temporal stages in

Repetition for Itself

93

most cyclical conceptions, such as the three Testaments of Joachim of
Flora, or the three ages of Vico: the age of gods, the age of heroes and the
age of men. The first is necessarily by default, and as though closed upon
itself; the second is open and witness to a heroic metamorphosis; but the
most important and mysterious lies in the third, which plays the role of
'signified' in relation to the other two (thus Joachim wrote: There are two
signifying things and one signified': L'Evangile eternel, transl. Aegester,
Paris: Editions Rieder, 1928, p. 42). Pierre Ballanche, who owes much to
both Joachim and Vico together, attempts to specify this third age as that
of the plebeian, of Ulysses or 'no one', 'the man without name', the
regicide or the modern Oedipus who 'searches for the scattered members of
the great victim' (see his strange Essais de palingenesie sociale, Paris:
Didot, 1827).
From this point of view, we must distinguish several possible repetitions
which cannot be exactly reconciled:
1. An intracyclic repetition, which involves the manner in which the first
two ages repeat one another - or rather, repeat one and the same 'thing',
act or event yet to come. This is above all the thesis of Joachim, who establishes a table of concordances between the Old Testament and the
New; but it is a thesis which cannot go beyond simple analogies of reflection.
2. A cyclic repetition in which it is supposed that, at the end of the third
age and at the end of a process of dissolution, everything recommences
with the first age: here, the analogies are drawn between two cycles
(Vico).
3. The problem remains: isn't there a repetition peculiar to the third age,
which alone merits the name of eternal return? For the two first ages do
no more than repeat something which appears for itself only in the
third, but in the third this 'thing' repeats itself. The two 'significations'
are already repetitive, but the signified itself is pure repetition. This superior repetition, understood as an eternal return in the third state, is
precisely what is needed both to correct the intracyclical hypothesis and
to contradict the cyclical hypothesis. In effect, on the one hand, the
repetition in the first two moments no longer expresses analogies of reflection, but the conditions under which eternal return is effectively produced by means of some action or other; on the other hand, these first
two moments do not return, being on the contrary eliminated by the reproduction of the eternal return in the third. From these two points of
view, Nietzsche is profoundly correct to oppose 'his' conception to every
cyclical conception (see Kroner, XII, part 1, para. 106).
We see, then, that in this final synthesis of time, the present and future
are in turn no more than dimensions of the future: the past as condition,
the present as agent. The first synthesis, that of habit, constituted time as a

94

Difference and Repetition

living present by means of a passive foundation on which past and future
depended. The second synthesis, that of memory, constituted time as a
pure past, from the point of view of a ground which causes the passing of
one present and the arrival of another. In the third synthesis, however, the
present is no more than an actor, an author, an agent destined to be
effaced; while the past is no more than a condition operating by default.
The synthesis of time here constitutes a future which affirms at once both
the unconditioned character of the product in relation to the conditions of
its production, and the independence of the work in relation to its author
or actor. In all three syntheses, present, past and future are revealed as
Repetition, but in very different modes. The present is the repeater, the
past is repetition itself, but the future is that which is repeated.
Furthermore, the secret of repetition as a whole lies in that which is
repeated, in that which is twice signified. The future, which subordinates
the other two to itself and strips them of their autonomy, is the royal
repetition. The first synthesis concerns only the content and the foundation
of time; the second, its ground; but beyond these, the third ensures the
order, the totality of the series and the final end of time. A philosophy of
repetition must pass through all these 'stages', condemned to repeat
repetition itself. However, by traversing these stages it ensures its
programme of making repetition the category of the future: making use of
the repetition of habit and that of memory, but making use of them as
stages and leaving them in its wake; struggling on the one hand against
Habitus, on the other against Mnemosyne; refusing the content of a
repetition which is more or less able to 'draw off difference (Habitus);
refusing the form of a repetition which includes difference, but in order
once again to subordinate it to the Same and the Similar (Mnemosyne);
refusing the overly simple cycles, the one followed by a habitual present
(customary cycle) as much as the one described by a pure past (memorial
or immemorial cycle); changing the ground of memory into a simple
condition by default, but also the foundation of habit into a failure of
'habitus', a metamorphosis of the agent; expelling the agent and the
condition in the name of the work or product; making repetition, not that
from which one 'draws off a difference, nor that which includes difference
as a variant, but making it the thought and the production of the 'absolutely
different'; making it so that repetition is, for itself, difference in itself.
The majority of these points stimulated a research programme which
was both Protestant and Catholic: that of Kierkegaard and Peguy. No one
opposed his 'own' repetition to that of habit and that of memory more
than these two authors. No one more ably denounced the inadequacy of a
past or present repetition, the simplicity of cycles, the trap of
reminiscences, the status of differences that one was supposed to 'draw'
from repetition - or, on the contrary, understand as simple variants. No
one appealed to repetition as the category of the future more than these

Repetition for Itself

95

two. No one more surely rejected the ancient ground, Mnemosyne, and
with it Platonic reminiscence. The ground is no more than a condition by
default, one lost in sin which must be recovered in Christ. The present
foundation of Habitus is no less rejected: it does not escape the
metamorphosis of the actor or the agent in the modern world, in which he
may well lose his coherence, his life, his habits.
However, although Kierkegaard and Peguy may be the great repeaters,
they were not ready to pay the necessary price. They entrusted this
supreme repetition, repetition as a category of the future, to faith.
Undoubtedly, faith possesses sufficient force to undo habit and
reminiscence, and with them the habitual self and the god of reminiscences,
as well as the foundation and the ground of time. However, faith invites us
to rediscover once and for all God and the self in a common resurrection.
Kierkegaard and Peguy are the culmination of Kant, they realise
Kantianism by entrusting to faith the task of overcoming the speculative
death of God and healing the wound in the self. This is their problem, from
Abraham to Joan of Arc: the betrothal of a self rediscovered and a god
recovered, in such a manner that it is no longer possible truly to escape
from either the condition or the agent. Even further: habit is renovated and
memory is refreshed. However, there is an adventure of faith, according to
which one is always the clown of one's own faith, the comedian of one's
ideal. For faith has its own Cogito which in turn conditions the sentiment
of grace, like an interior light. Moreover, it is in this very particular Cogito
that faith reflects upon itself and discovers by experiment that its condition
can be given to it only as 'recovered', and that it is not only separated from
that condition but doubled in it. Hence the believer does not lead his life
only as a tragic sinner in so far as he is deprived of the condition, but as a
comedian and clown, a simulacrum of himself in so far as he is doubled in
the condition. Two believers cannot observe each other without laughing.
Grace excludes no less when it is given than when it is lacking. Indeed,
Kierkegaard said that he was a poet of the faith rather than a knight - in
short, a 'humorist'. This was not his fault but that of the concept of faith;
and Gogol's terrible adventure is perhaps more exemplary still. How could
faith not be its own habit and its own reminiscence, and how could the
repetition it takes for its object - a repetition which, paradoxically, takes
place once and for all - not be comical? Beneath it rumbles another,
Nietzschean, repetition: that of eternal return. Here, a different and more
mortuary betrothal between the dead God and the dissolved self forms the
true condition by default and the true metamorphosis of the agent, both of
which disappear in the unconditioned character of the product. Eternal
return is not a faith, but the truth of faith: it has isolated the double or the
simulacrum, it has liberated the comic in order to make this an element of
the superhuman. That is why - again as Klossowski says - it is not a
doctrine but the simulacrum of every doctrine (the highest irony); it is not a

96

Difference and Repetition

belief but the parody of every belief (the highest humour): a belief and a
doctrine eternally yet to come. We have too often been invited to judge the
atheist from the viewpoint of the belief or the faith that we suppose still
drives him - in short, from the viewpoint of grace; not to be tempted by
the inverse operation - to judge the believer by the violent atheist by which
he is inhabited, the Antichrist eternally given 'once and for all' within
grace.
Biopsychical life implies a field of individuation in which differences in intensity are distributed here and there in the form of excitations. The quantitative and qualitative process of the resolution of such differences is what
we call pleasure. A totality of this kind - a mobile distribution of differences and local resolutions within an intensive field - corresponds to what
Freud called the Id, or at least the primary layer of the Id. The word 'id'
[£a] in this sense is not only a pronoun referring to some formidable unknown, but also an adverb referring to a mobile place, a 'here and there'
[£a et la] of excitations and resolutions. It is here that Freud's problem begins: it is a question of knowing how pleasure ceases to be a process in
order to become a principle, how it ceases to be a local process in order to
assume the value of an empirical principle which tends to organise
biopsychical life in the Id. Obviously pleasure is pleasing, but this is not a
reason for its assuming a systematic value according to which it is what we
seek 'in principle'. This is the primary concern of Beyond the Pleasure
Principle: not the exceptions to this principle, but rather the determination
of the conditions under which pleasure effectively becomes a principle. The
Freudian answer is that excitation in the form of free difference must, in
some sense, be 'invested', 'tied' or bound in such a manner that its resolution becomes systematically possible. This binding or investment of difference is what makes possible in general, not pleasure itself, but the value
taken on by pleasure as a principle: we thereby pass from a state of scattered resolution to a state of integration, which constitutes the second layer
of the Id and the beginnings of an organisation.
This binding is a genuine reproductive synthesis, a Habitus. An animal
forms an eye for itself by causing scattered and diffuse luminous excitations
to be reproduced on a privileged surface of its body. The eye binds light, it
is itself a bound light. This example is enough to show the complexity of
synthesis. For there is indeed an activity of reproduction which takes as its
object the difference to be bound; but there is more profoundly a passion
of repetition, from which emerges a new difference (the formed eye or the
seeing subject). Excitation as a difference was already the contraction of an
elementary repetition. To the extent that the excitation becomes in turn the
element of a repetition, the contracting synthesis is raised to a second
power, one precisely represented by this binding or investment.

Repetition for Itself

97

Investments, bindings or integrations are passive syntheses or
contemplations-contractions in the second degree. Drives are nothing more
than bound excitations. At the level of each binding, an ego is formed in
the Id; a passive, partial, larval, contemplative and contracting ego. The Id
is populated by local egos which constitute the time peculiar to the Id, the
time of the living present there where the binding integrations are carried
out. The fact that these egos should be immediately narcissistic is readily
explained if we consider narcissism to be not a contemplation of oneself
but the fulfilment of a self-image through the contemplation of something
else: the eye or the seeing ego is filled with an image of itself in
contemplating the excitation that it binds. It produces itself or 'draws itself
from what it contemplates (and from what it contracts and invests by
contemplation). This is why the satisfaction which flows from binding is
necessarily a 'hallucinatory' satisfaction of the ego itself, even though
hallucination here in no way contradicts the effectivity of the binding. In
all these senses, binding represents a pure passive synthesis, a Habitus
which confers on pleasure the value of being a principle of satisfaction in
general. Habit underlies the organisation of the Id.
The problem of habit is therefore badly framed so long as it is
subordinated to pleasure. On the one hand, the repetition involved in habit
is supposed to be explained by the desire to reproduce a pleasure obtained;
on the other hand, it is supposed to concern tensions which are
disagreeable in themselves, but may be mastered with a view to obtaining
pleasure. Clearly, both hypotheses already presuppose the pleasure
principle: the idea of pleasure obtained and the idea of pleasure to be
obtained act only under this principle to form the two applications, past
and future. On the contrary, habit, in the form of a passive binding
synthesis, precedes the pleasure principle and renders it possible. The idea
of pleasure follows from it in the same way that, as we have seen, past and
future follow from the synthesis of the living present. The effect of binding
is to install the pleasure principle; it cannot have as its object something
which presupposes that principle. When pleasure acquires the dignity of a
principle, then and only then does the idea of pleasure act in accordance
with that principle, in memory or in projects. Pleasure then exceeds its own
instantaneity in order to assume the allure of satisfaction in general (the
attempts to substitute 'objective' concepts for the instance of pleasure
considered too subjective, such as those of achievement or success, only
bear witness to this extension conferred by the principle, here under
conditions such that the idea of pleasure is merely transposed into the mind
of the experimenter). Occasionally we may empirically experience
repetition as subordinated to a pleasure obtained or to be obtained, but in
the order of conditions the relation is reversed. Binding synthesis cannot be
explained by the intention or the effort to master an excitation, even
though it may have that effect. Once again, we must beware of confusing

98

Difference and Repetition

the activity of reproduction with the passion for repetition which underlies
it. The repetition of an excitation has as its true object the elevation of the
passive synthesis to a power which implies the pleasure principle along
with its future and past applications. Repetition in habit or the passive
synthesis of binding is thus 'beyond' the principle.
This first beyond already constitutes a kind of Transcendental Aesthetic.
If this aesthetic appears more profound to us than that of Kant, it is for the
following reasons: Kant defines the passive self in terms of simple
receptivity, thereby assuming sensations already formed, then merely
relating these to the a priori forms of their representation which are
determined as space and time. In this manner, not only does he unify the
passive self by ruling out the possibility of composing space step by step,
not only does he deprive this passive self of all power of synthesis
(synthesis being reserved for activity), but moreover he cuts the Aesthetic
into two parts: the objective element of sensation guaranteed by space and
the subjective element which is incarnate in pleasure and pain. The aim of
the preceding analyses, on the contrary, has been to show that receptivity
must be defined in terms of the formation of local selves or egos, in terms
of the passive syntheses of contemplation or contraction, thereby
accounting simultaneously for the possibility of experiencing sensations,
the power of reproducing them and the value that pleasure assumes as a
principle.
On the basis of passive synthesis, however, a twofold development
appears, in two very different directions. On the one hand, an active
synthesis is established upon the foundation of the passive syntheses: this
consists in relating the bound excitation to an object supposed to be both
real and the end of our actions (synthesis of recognition, supported by the
passive synthesis of reproduction). Active synthesis is defined by the test of
reality in an 'objectal' relation, and it is precisely according to the reality
principle that the Ego tends to 'be activated', to be actively unified, to unite
all its small composing and contemplative passive egos, and to be
topologically distinguished from the Id. The passive egos were already
integrations, but only local integrations, as mathematicians say; whereas
the active self is an attempt at global integration. It would be completely
wrong to consider the positing of reality to be an effect induced by the
external world, or even the result of failures encountered by passive
syntheses. On the contrary, the test of reality mobilises, drives and inspires
all the activity of the ego: not so much in the form of a negative judgement,
but in moving beyond the binding in the direction of a 'substantive' which
serves as a support for the connection. It would also be wrong to suppose
that the reality principle is opposed to the pleasure principle, limiting it and
imposing renunciations upon it. The two principles are on the same track,
even though one goes further than the other. The renunciations of
immediate pleasure are already implicit in the role of principle which

Repetition for Itself

99

pleasure assumes, in the role that the idea of pleasure assumes in relation to
a past and a future. A principle is not without duties. Reality and the
renunciations that it inspires within us only populate the margins, they
work only within the extensions acquired by the pleasure principle; and the
reality principle determines an active synthesis only in so far as it is
founded upon the preceding passive syntheses.
However, the real objects, the objects proposed as reality or as support
for the connection, are not the only objects of the ego, any more than they
exhaust the totality of so-called objectal relations. We can distinguish two
simultaneous dimensions in such a way that there is no movement beyond
the passive synthesis towards an active synthesis without the former also
being extended in another direction, one in which it utilises the bound
excitation in order to attain something else - albeit in a manner different
from the reality principle - even while it remains a passive and contemplative
synthesis. Moreover, it seems that active syntheses would never be erected
on the basis of passive syntheses unless these persisted simultaneously,
unless they did not develop on their own account at the same time, finding
new formulae at once both dissymmetrical and complementary with the
activity. A child who begins to walk does not only bind excitations in a
passive synthesis, even supposing that these were endogenous excitations
born of its own movements. No one has ever walked endogenously. On the
one hand, the child goes beyond the bound excitations towards the
supposition or the intentionality of an object, such as the mother, as the
goal of an effort, the end to be actively reached 'in reality' and in relation
to which success and failure may be measured. But on the other hand and
at the same time, the child constructs for itself another object, a quite
different kind of object which is a virtual object or centre and which then
governs and compensates for the progresses and failures of its real activity:
it puts several fingers in its mouth, wraps the other arm around this virtual
centre, and appraises the whole situation from the point of view of this
virtual mother. The fact that the child's glance may be directed at the real
mother and that the virtual object may be the goal of an apparent activity
(for example, sucking) may inspire an erroneous judgement on the part of
the observer. Sucking occurs only in order to provide a virtual object to
contemplate in the context of extending the passive synthesis; conversely,
the real mother is contemplated only in order to provide a goal for the
activity, and a criterion by which to evaluate the activity, in the context of
an active synthesis. There is no need to speak of an egocentrism on the part
of the child. The child who begins to handle a book by imitation, without
being able to read, invariably holds it back to front. It is as though the
book were being held out to the other, the real end of the activity, even
though the child seizing the book back to front is the virtual centre of its
passion, of its own extended contemplation. Widely diverse phenomena,
such as left-handedness, mirror-writing, certain forms of stuttering, certain

100

Difference and Repetition

stereotypes, may be explained on the basis of this duality of centres in the
infant world. What is important, however, is that neither one of these two
centres is the ego. The same lack of understanding leads to the
interpretation of the child's behaviour as stemming from a supposed
'egocentrism' and to the interpretation of infantile narcissism as excluding
the contemplation of other things. In fact the child is constructed within a
double series: on the basis of the passive synthesis of connection and on the
basis of the bound excitations. Both series are objectal: one series
comprises real objects which serve as correlates of active synthesis; the
other virtual objects which serve as correlates of an extension of passive
synthesis. The extended passive ego fulfils itself with a narcissistic image in
contemplating the virtual centres. One series would not exist without the
other, yet they do not resemble one another. For this reason, Henri
Maldiney is correct to say, in analysing children's movement, that the
infantile world is in no way circular or egocentric but elliptical; that it has
two centres and that these differ in kind, both nevertheless being objective
or objectal. In virtue of their dissimilarity, perhaps a crossing, a twist, a
helix or a figure 8 is even formed between the two centres. What, then,
would be the ego, where would it be, given its topological distinction from
the Id, if not at the crossing of the 8, at the point of connection between
these two intersecting asymmetrical circles, the circle of real objects and
that of the virtual objects or centres?
The differenciation between self-preservative and sexual drives must be
related to this duality between two correlative series. The self-preservative
drives are, after all, inseparable from the constitution of the reality
principle, from the foundation of active synthesis and the active global ego,
and from the relations with the real object perceived as satisfying or
menacing. The sexual drives are no less inseparable from the constitution
of virtual centres, or the extension of passive syntheses and the passive egos
which correspond to them: in pre-genital sexuality, actions are always
observations or contemplations, but it is always the virtual which is
contemplated or observed. The fact that the two series cannot exist
without each other indicates not only that they are complementary, but
that by virtue of their dissimilarity and their difference in kind they borrow
from and feed into one another. We see both that the virtuals are deducted
from the series of reals and that they are incorporated in the series of reals.
This derivation implies, first, an isolation or suspension which freezes the
real in order to extract a pose, an aspect or a part. This isolation, however,
is qualitative: it does not consist simply in subtracting a part of the real
object, since the subtracted part acquires a new nature in functioning as a
virtual object. The virtual object is a partial object - not simply because it
lacks a part which remains in the real, but in itself and for itself because it
is cleaved or doubled into two virtual parts, one of which is always missing
from the other. In short, the virtual is never subject to the global character

Repetition for Itself

101

which affects real objects. It is - not only by its origin but by its own
nature - a fragment, a shred or a remainder. It lacks its own identity. The
good and the bad mother - or, in terms of the paternal duality, the serious
and the playful father - are not two partial objects but the same object in
so far as it has lost its identity in the double. Whereas active synthesis
points beyond passive synthesis towards global integrations and the
supposition of identical totalisable objects, passive synthesis, as it develops,
points beyond itself towards the contemplation of partial objects which
remain non-totalisable. These partial or virtual objects are encountered
under various names, such as Melanie Klein's good and bad object, the
'transitional' object, the fetish-object, and above all Lacan's object a. Freud
definitively showed how pre-genital sexuality consisted of partial drives
deducted from the exercise of self-preservative drives; such a derivation
presupposes the constitution of objects which are themselves partial and
which function as so many virtual centres, so many poles always doubled
with sexuality.
Conversely, these virtual objects are incorporated in the real objects. In
this sense they can correspond to parts of the subject's body, to another
person, or even to very special objects such as toys or fetishes. This
incorporation is in no way an identification, or even an introjection, since
it exceeds the limits of the subject. Far from opposing itself to the process
of isolation, it complements it. Whatever the reality in which the virtual
object is incorporated, it does not become integrated: it remains planted or
stuck there, and does not find in the real object the half which completes it,
but rather testifies to the other virtual half which the real continues to lack.
When Melanie Klein shows how many virtual objects the maternal body
contains, it must not be thought that it totalises or englobes them, or
possesses them, but rather that they are planted in it like trees from another
world, like Gogol's nose or Deucalion's stones. Incorporation nevertheless
remains the condition under which the self-preservative drives and the
active synthesis which corresponds to them can - in turn, and with their
own resources - fold sexuality back on to the series of real objects and,
from without, integrate it into the domain ruled by the reality principle.
Virtual objects belong essentially to the past. In Matter and Memory',
Bergson proposed the schema of a world with two centres, one real and the
other virtual, from which emanate on the one hand a series of
'perception-images', and on the other a series of 'memory-images', the two
series collaborating in an endless circuit. The virtual object is not a former
present, since the quality of the present and the modality of its passing here
affect exclusively the series of the real as this is constituted by active
synthesis. However, the pure past as it was defined above does qualify the
virtual object; that is, the past as contemporaneous with its own present, as
pre-existing the passing present and as that which causes the present to
pass. Virtual objects are shreds of pure past. It is from the height of my

102

Difference and Repetition

contemplation of virtual centres that I am present at and preside over my
passing present, along with the succession of real objects in which those
centres are incorporated. The reason for this may be found in the nature of
these centres. Although it is deducted from the present real object, the
virtual object differs from it in kind: not only does it lack something in
relation to the real object from which it is subtracted, it lacks something in
itself, since it is always half of itself, the other half being different as well as
absent. This absence, as we shall see, is the opposite of a negative. Eternal
half of itself, it is where it is only on condition that it is not where it should
be. It is where we find it only on condition that we search for it where it is
not. It is at once not possessed by those who have it and had by those who
do not possess it. It is always a 'was.' In this sense, Lacan's pages
assimilating the virtual object to Edgar Allan Poe's purloined letter seem to
us exemplary. Lacan shows that real objects are subjected to the law of
being or not being somewhere, by virtue of the reality principle; whereas
virtual objects, by contrast, have the property of being and not being where
they are, wherever they go:
what is hidden is never but what is missing from its place, as the call slip
puts it when speaking of a volume lost in the library. And even if the
book be on an adjacent shelf or in the next slot, it would be hidden
there, however visibly it may appear. For it can literally be said that
something is missing from its place only of what can change it: the symbolic. For the real, whatever upheaval we subject it to, is always in its
place; it carries it glued to its heel, ignorant of what might exile it from
it.15
The passing present which bears itself away has never been better opposed
to the pure past which perpetually differs from itself and whose universal
mobility and universal ubiquity cause the present to pass. The virtual object is never past in relation to a new present, any more than it is past in relation to a present which it was. It is past as the contemporary of the
present which it is, in a frozen present; as though lacking on the one hand
the part which, on the other hand, it is at the same time; as though displaced while still in place. This is why virtual objects exist only as fragments of themselves: they are found only as lost; they exist only as
recovered. Loss or forgetting here are not determinations which must be
overcome; rather, they refer to the objective nature of that which we recover, as lost, at the heart of forgetting. Contemporaneous with i'tself as
present, being itself its own past, pre-existing every present which passes in
the real series, the virtual object belongs to the pure past. It is pure fragment and fragment of itself. As in a physical experiment, however, the incorporation of this pure fragment changes the quality and causes the
present to pass into the series of real objects.
This is the link between Eros and Mnemosyne. Eros tears virtual objects

Repetition for Itself

103

out of the pure past and gives them to us in order that they may be lived.
Lacan discovers the 'phallus', understood as a symbolic organ, behind all
these virtual or partial objects. He is able to give this extension to the
concept of the phallus (such that it subsumes all the virtual objects)
because the concept effectively comprises the preceding characteristics:
testifying to its own absence and to itself as past, being essentially
displaced in relation to itself, being found only as lost, being possessed of
an always fragmentary identity which loses its identity in the double; since
it may be searched for and discovered only on the side of the mother, and
since it has the paradoxical property of changing its place, not being
possessed by those who have a 'penis', yet being possessed by those who do
not have one, as the theme of castration shows. The symbolic phallus
signifies no less the erotic mode of the pure past than the immemorial of
sexuality. The symbol is the always-displaced fragment, standing for a past
which was never present: the object = x. But what is the meaning of this
idea that virtual objects refer, in the last instance, to an element which is
itself symbolic?
Undoubtedly, the whole psychoanalytic - or, in other words, amorous game of repetition is at issue here. The question is whether repetition may
be understood as operating from one present to another in the real series,
from a present to a former present. In this case, the former present would
play the role of a complex point, like an ultimate or original term which
would remain in place and exercise a power of attraction: it would be the
one which provides the thing that is to be repeated, the one which
conditions the whole process of repetition, and in this sense would remain
independent of it. The concepts of fixation and regression, along with
trauma and the primal scene, express this first element. As a consequence,
repetition would in principle conform to the model of a material, bare and
brute repetition, understood as the repetition of the same: the idea of an
'automatism' in this context expresses the modality of a fixated drive, or
rather, of repetition conditioned by fixation or regression. And if this
material model is in fact perturbed and covered over with all kinds of
disguises, with a thousand and one forms of disguise or displacement, then
these are only secondary even if they are necessary: the distortion in the
majority of cases does not belong to the fixation, or even to the repetition,
but is added or superimposed on to these; it necessarily clothes them, but
from without, and may be explained by the repression which translates the
conflict (within the repetition) between the repeater and what is repeated.
The three very different concepts of fixation, automatic repetition and
repression testify to this distribution between a supposed last or first term
in relation to repetition, a repetition which is supposed to be bare
underneath the disguises which cover it, and the disguises which are
necessarily added by the force of a conflict. Even - and above all - the
Freudian conception of the death instinct, understood as a return to

104

Difference and Repetition

inanimate matter, remains inseparable from the positing of an ultimate
term, the model of a material and bare repetition and the conflictual
dualism between life and death. It matters little whether or not the former
present acts in its objective reality, or rather, in the form in which it was
lived or imagined. For imagination intervenes here only in order to gather
up the resonances and ensure the disguises between the two presents in the
series of the real as lived reality. Imagination gathers the traces of the
former present and models the new present upon the old. The traditional
theory of the compulsion to repeat in psychoanalysis remains essentially
realist, materialist and subjective or individualist. It is realist because
everything 'happens' between presents. It is materialist because the model
of a brute, automatic repetition is presupposed. It is individualist,
subjective, solipsistic or monadic because both the former present - in
other words, the repeated or disguised element - and the new present - in
other words, the present terms of the disguised repetition - are considered
to be only the conscious or unconscious, latent or manifest, repressed or
repressing representations of the subject. The whole theory of repetition is
thereby subordinated to the requirements of simple representation, from
the standpoint of its realism, materialism and subjectivism. Repetition is
subjected to a principle of identity in the former present and a rule of
resemblance in the present one. Nor do we believe that the Freudian
discovery of a phylogenesis or the Jungian discovery of archetypes can
correct the weaknesses of such a conception. Even if the rights of the
imaginary as a whole are opposed to the facts of reality, it remains a
question of a 'psychic' reality considered to be ultimate or original; even if
we oppose spirit and matter, it remains a question of a bare, uncovered
spirit resting upon its own identity and supported by its derived analogies;
even if we oppose a collective or cosmic unconscious to the individual
unconscious, the former can act only through its power to inspire
representations in a solipsistic subject, whether this be the subject of a
culture or a world.
The difficulties of conceptualising the process of repetition have often
been emphasized. Consider the two presents, the two scenes or the two
events (infantile and adult) in their reality, separated by time: how can the
former present act at a distance upon the present one? How can it provide
a model for it, when all its effectiveness is retrospectively received from the
later present? Furthermore, if we invoke the indispensable imaginary
operations required to fill the temporal space, how could these operations
fail ultimately to absorb the entire reality of the two presents, leaving the
repetition to subsist only as the illusion of a solipsistic subject? However,
while it may seem that the two presents are successive, at a variable
distance apart in the series of reals, in fact they form, rather, two real series
which coexist in relation to a virtual object of another kind, one which
constantly circulates and is displaced in them (even if the characters, the

Repetition for Itself

105

subjects which give rise to the positions, the terms and the relations of each
series, remain, for their part, temporally distinct). Repetition is constituted
not from one present to another, but between the two coexistent series that
these presents form in function of the virtual object (object = x). It is
because this object constantly circulates, always displaced in relation to
itself, that it determines transformations of terms and modifications of
imaginary relations within the two real series in which it appears, and
therefore between the two presents. The displacement of the virtual object
is not, therefore, one disguise among others, but the principle from which,
in reality, repetition follows in the form of disguised repetition. Repetition
is constituted only with and through the disguises which affect the terms
and relations of the real series, but it is so because it depends upon the
virtual object as an immanent instance which operates above all by
displacement. In consequence, we cannot suppose that disguise may be
explained by repression. On the contrary, it is because repetition is
necessarily disguised, by virtue of the characteristic displacement of its
determinant principle, that repression occurs in the form of a consequence
in regard to the representation of presents. Freud, no doubt, was aware of
this, since he did search for a more profound instance than that of
repression, even though he conceived of it in similar terms as a so-called
'primary' repression. We do not repeat because we repress, we repress
because we repeat. Moreover - which amounts to the same thing - we do
not disguise because we repress, we repress because we disguise, and we
disguise by virtue of the determinant centre of repetition. Repetition is no
more secondary in relation to a supposed ultimate or originary fixed term
than disguise is secondary in relation to repetition. For if the two presents,
the former and the present one, form two series which coexist in the
function of the virtual object which is displaced in them and in relation to
itself, neither of these two series can any longer be designated as the
original or the derived. They put a variety of terms and subjects into play
in a complex intersubjectivity in which each subject owes its role and
function in the series to the timeless position that it occupies in relation to
the virtual object. As for this object itself, it can no longer be treated as
an ultimate or original term: this would be to assign it a fixed place and an
identity repugnant to its whole nature. If it can be 'identified' with the
phallus, this is only to the extent that the latter, in Lacan's terms, is always
missing from its place, from its own identity and from its representation. In
short, there is no ultimate term - our loves do not refer back to the mother;
it is simply that the mother occupies a certain place in relation to the
virtual object in the series which constitutes our present, a place which is
necessarily filled by another character in the series which constitutes the
present of another subjectivity, always taking into account the
displacements of that object = x. In somewhat the same manner, by loving
his mother the hero of In Search of Lost Time repeats Swann's love for

106

Difference and Repetition

Odette. The parental characters are not the ultimate terms of individual
subjecthood but the middle terms of an intersubjectivity, forms of
communication and disguise from one series to another for different
subjects, to the extent that these forms are determined by the displacement
of the virtual object. Behind the masks, therefore, are further masks, and
even the most hidden is still a hiding place, and so on to infinity. The only
illusion is that of unmasking something or someone. The symbolic organ of
repetition, the phallus, is no less a mask than it is itself hidden. For the
mask has two senses. 'Give me, please, give me ... what then? another
mask.' In the first place, the mask means the disguise which has an
imaginary effect on the terms and relations of the two real series which
properly coexist. More profoundly, however, it signifies the displacement
which essentially affects the virtual symbolic object, both in its series and
in the real series in which it endlessly circulates. (Thus, the displacement
which makes the eyes of the bearer correspond with the mouth of the
mask, or shows the face of the bearer only as a headless body, allowing
that a head may none the less, in turn, appear upon that body.)
Repetition is thus in essence symbolic, spiritual, and intersubjective or
monadological. A final consequence follows with regard to the nature of
the unconscious. The phenomena of the unconscious cannot be understood
in the overly simple form of opposition or conflict. For Freud, it is not only
the theory of repression but the dualism in the theory of drives which
encourages the primacy of a conflictual model. However, the conflicts are
the result of more subtle differential mechanisms (displacements and
disguises). And if the forces naturally enter into relations of opposition, this
is on the basis of differential elements which express a more profound
instance. The negative, under its double aspect of limitation and
opposition, seemed to us in general secondary in relation to the instance of
problems and questions: in other words, the negative expresses only within
consciousness the shadow of fundamentally unconscious questions and
problems, and owes its apparent power to the inevitable place of the 'false'
in the natural positing of these problems and questions. It is true that the
unconscious desires, and only desires. However, just as desire finds the
principle of its difference from need in the virtual object, so it appears
neither as a power of negation nor as an element of an opposition, but
rather as a questioning, problematising and searching force which operates
in a different domain than that of desire and satisfaction. Questions and
problems are not speculative acts, and as such completely provisional and
indicative of the momentary ignorance of an empirical subject. On the
contrary, they are the living acts of the unconscious, investing special
objectivities and destined to survive in the proviiional and partial state
characteristic of answers and solutions. The problems 'correspond' to the
reciprocal disguise of the terms and relations which constitute the reality
series. The questions or sources of problems correspond to the

Repetition for Itself

107

displacement of the virtual object which causes the series to develop. The
phallus as virtual object is always located by enigmas and riddles in a place
where it is not, because it is indistinguishable from the space in which it is
displaced. Even Oedipus's conflicts depend upon the Sphinx's question.
Birth and death, and the difference between the sexes, are the complex
themes of problems before they are the simple terms of an opposition.
(Before the opposition between the sexes, determined by the possession or
lack of the penis, there is the 'question' of the phallus which determines the
differential position of sexed characters in each series.) It may be that there
is necessarily something mad in every question and every problem, as there
is in their transcendence in relation to answers, in their insistence through
solutions and the manner in which they maintain their own openness.
It is enough that the question be posed with sufficient force, as it is by
Dostoyevsky or Shestov, in order to quell rather than incite any response. It
is here that it discovers its properly ontological import, the (non)-being of
the question which cannot be reduced to the non-being of the negative.
There are no ultimate or original responses or solutions, there are only
problem-questions, in the guise of a mask behind every mask and a
displacement behind every place. It would be naive to think that the
problems of life and death, love and the difference between the sexes are
amenable to their scientific solutions and positings, even though such
positings and solutions necessarily arise without warning, even though they
must necessarily emerge at a certain moment in the unfolding process of
the development of these problems. The problems concern the eternal
disguise; questions, the eternal displacement. Neuropaths and psychopaths
perhaps explore this original ultimate ground, at the cost of their suffering,
the former asking how to shift the problem, the latter where to pose the
question. Precisely their suffering, their pathos, is the only response to a
question which in itself is endlessly shifted, to a problem which in itself is
endlessly disguised. It is not what they say or what they think but their life
which is exemplary, and is larger than they are. They bear witness to that
transcendence, and to the most extraordinary play of the true and the false
which occurs not at the level of answers and solutions but at the level of
the problems themselves, in the questions themselves - in other words, in
conditions under which the false becomes the mode of exploration of the
true, the very space of its essential disguises or its fundamental
displacement: the pseudos here becomes the pathos of the True. The power
of the questions always comes from somewhere else than the answers, and
benefits from a free depth which cannot be resolved. The insistence, the
transcendence and the ontological bearing of questions and problems is
expressed not in the form of the finality of a sufficient reason (to what end?
why?) but in the discrete form of difference and repetition: what difference
is there? and 'repeat a little'. There is never any difference - not because it
comes down to the same in the answer, but because it is never anywhere

108

Difference and Repetition

but in the question, and in the repetition of the question, which ensures its
movement and its disguise. Problems and questions thus belong to the
unconscious, but as a result the unconscious is differential and iterative by
nature; it is serial, problematic and questioning. To ask whether the
unconscious is ultimately oppositional or differential, an unconscious of
great forces in conflict or one of little elements in series, one of opposing
great representations or differenciated little perceptions, appears to
resuscitate earlier hesitations and earlier polemics between the Leibnizian
tradition and the Kantian tradition. However, if Freud was completely on
the side of an Hegelian post-Kantianism - in other words, of an
unconscious of opposition - why did he pay so much homage to the
Leibnizian Fechner and to his 'symptomologist's' differential finesse? In
truth, it is not at all a question of knowing whether the unconscious
implies a non-being of logical limitation or a non-being of real opposition.
Both these two forms of non-being are, in any case, figures of the negative.
The unconscious is neither an unconscious of degradation nor an
unconscious of contradiction; it involves neither limitation nor opposition;
it concerns, rather, problems and questions in their difference in kind from
answers-solutions: the (non)-being of the problematic which rejects equally
the two forms of negative non-being which govern only propositions of
consciousness. The celebrated phrase 'the unconscious knows no negative',
must be taken literally. Partial objects are the elements of little perceptions.
The unconscious is differential, involving little perceptions, and as such it is
different in kind from consciousness. It concerns problems and questions
which can never be reduced to the great oppositions or the overall effects
that are felt in consciousness (we shall see that Leibnizian theory already
indicated this path).
We have thus encountered a second beyond the pleasure principle, a
second synthesis of time in the unconscious itself. The first passive
synthesis, that of Habitus, presented repetition as a binding, in the
constantly renewed form of a living present. It ensured the foundation of
the pleasure principle in two complementary senses, since it led both to the
general value of pleasure as an instance to which psychic life was
henceforth subordinated in the Id, and to the particular hallucinatory
satisfaction which filled each passive ego with a narcissistic image of itself.
The second synthesis, that of Eros-Mnemosyne, posits repetition as
displacement and disguise, and functions as the ground of the pleasure
principle: in effect, it is then a question of knowing how this principle
applies to what it governs, under what conditions of use and at the cost of
what limitations and what extensions. The answer is given in two
directions: one is that of a general law of reality, according to which the
first synthesis points beyond itself in the direction of an active synthesis
and ego; in the other direction, by contrast, the first synthesis is extended
in the form of a second passive synthesis which gathers up the particular

Repetition for Itself

109

narcissistic satisfaction and relates it to the contemplation of virtual
objects. The pleasure principle here receives new conditions, as much in
regard to a produced reality as to a constituted sexuality. Drives, which are
defined only as bound excitation, now appear in differenciated form: as
self-preservative drives following the active line of reality, as sexual drives
in this new passive extension. If the first passive synthesis constitutes an
'aesthetic', the second may properly be defined as the equivalent of an
'analytic'. If the first passive synthesis concerns the present, the second
concerns the past. If the first makes use of repetition in order to draw off a
difference, the second passive synthesis includes difference at the heart of
repetition, since the two figures of difference, movement and disguise - the
displacement which symbolically affects the virtual object and the disguises
which affect, in imaginary fashion, the real objects in which it is
incorporated - have become the elements of repetition itself. This is why
Freud experienced some difficulty in distributing difference and repetition
from the point of view of Eros, to the extent that he maintains the
opposition between these two factors and understands repetition on the
material model of cancelled difference, while defining Eros by the
introduction, or even the production, of new differences. In fact, Eros's
force of repetition derives directly from a power of difference - one which
Eros borrows from Mnemosyne, one which affects virtual objects like so
many fragments of a pure past. As Janet in some ways suspected, it is not
amnesia but rather a hypernesia which explains the role of erotic repetition
and its combination with difference. The 'never-seen' which characterises
an always displaced and disguised object is immersed in the 'already-seen'
of the pure past in general, from which that object is extracted. We do not
know when or where we have seen it, in accordance with the objective
nature of the problematic; and ultimately, it is only the strange which is
familiar and only difference which is repeated.
It is true that the synthesis of Eros and Mnemosyne still suffers from an
ambiguity. In relation to the first passive synthesis of Habitus, the series of
the real (or the presents which pass in the real) and the series of the virtual
(or of a past which differs in kind from any present) form two divergent
circular lines, two circles or even two arcs of the same circle. But in
relation to the object = x taken as the immanent limit of the series of
virtuals, and as the principle of the second passive synthesis, these are the
successive presents of the reality which now forms coexistent series, circles
or even arcs of the same circle. It is inevitable that the two references
become confused, the pure past assuming thereby the status of a former
present, albeit mythical, and reconstituting the illusion it was supposed to
denounce, resuscitating the illusion of an original and a derived, of an
identity in the origin and a resemblance in the derived. Moreover, Eros
leads its life as a cycle, or as an element within a cycle, where the opposing
element can only be Thanatos at the base of memory, the two combining

110

Difference and Repetition

like love and hate, construction and destruction, attraction and repulsion.
Always the same ambiguity on the part of the ground: to represent itself in
the circle that it imposes on what it grounds, to return as an element in the
circuit of representation that it determines in principle.
The essentially lost character of virtual objects and the essentially
disguised character of real objects are powerful motivations of narcissism.
However, it is by interiorising the difference between the two lines and by
experiencing itself as perpetually displaced in the one, perpetually disguised
in the other, that the libido returns or flows back into the ego and the
passive ego becomes entirely narcissistic. The narcissistic ego is inseparable
not only from a constitutive wound but from the disguises and
displacements which are woven from one side to the other, and constitute
its modification. The ego is a mask for other masks, a disguise under other
disguises. Indistinguishable from its own clowns, it walks with a limp on
one green and one red leg. Nevertheless, the importance of the
reorganisation which takes place at this level, in opposition to the
preceding stage of the second synthesis, cannot be overstated. For while the
passive ego becomes narcissistic, the activity must be thought. This can
occur only in the form of an affection, in the form of the very modification
that the narcissistic ego passively experiences on its own account.
Thereafter, the narcissistic ego is related to the form of an I which operates
upon it as an 'Other'. This active but fractured I is not only the basis of the
superego but the correlate of the passive and wounded narcissistic ego,
thereby forming a complex whole that Paul Ricoeur aptly named an
'aborted cogito'. Moreover, there is only the aborted Cogito, only the
larval subject. We saw above that the fracture of the I was no more than
the pure and empty form of time, separated from its content. The
narcissistic ego indeed appears in time, but does not constitute a temporal
content: the narcissistic libido, the reflux of the libido into the ego,
abstracts from all content. The narcissistic ego is, rather, the phenomenon
which corresponds to the empty form of time without filling it, the spatial
phenomenon of that form in general (it is this phenomenon of space which
is presented in a different manner in neurotic castration and psychotic
fragmentation). The form of time in the I determines an order, a whole and
a series. The formal static order of before, during and after marks the
division of the narcissistic ego in time, or the conditions of its
contemplation. The whole of time is gathered in the image of the
formidable action as this is simultaneously presented, forbidden and
predicted by the superego: the action = x. The temporal series designates
the confrontation of the divided narcissistic ego with the whole of time or
the image of the action. The narcissistic ego repeats once in the form of the
before or lack, in the form of the Id (this action is too big for me); a second
time in the form of an infinite becoming-equal appropriate to the ego ideal;
a third time in the form of the after which realises the prediction of the

Repetition for Itself

111

superego (the id and the ego, the condition and the agent, will themselves
be annihilated)! For the practical law itself signifies nothing other than that
empty form of time.
When the narcissistic ego takes the place of the virtual and real objects,
when it assumes the displacement of the former and the disguise of the
latter, it does not replace one content of time with another. On the
contrary, we enter into the third synthesis. It is as though time had
abandoned all possible mnemic content, and in so doing had broken the
circle into which it was lead by Eros. It is as though it had unrolled,
straightened itself and assumed the ultimate shape of the labyrinth, the
straight-line labyrinth which is, as Borges says, 'invisible, incessant'. Time
empty and out of joint, with its rigorous formal and static order, its
crushing unity and its irreversible series, is precisely the death instinct. The
death instinct does not enter into a cycle with Eros, but testifies to a
completely different synthesis. It is by no means the complement or
antagonist of Eros, nor in any sense symmetrical with him. The correlation
between Eros and Mnemosyne is replaced by that between a narcissistic
ego without memory, a great amnesiac, and a death instinct desexualised
and without love. The narcissistic ego has no more than a dead body,
having lost the body at the same time as the objects. It is by means of the
death instinct that it is reflected in the ego ideal and has a presentiment of
its end in the superego, as though in two fragments of the fractured I. It is
this relation between the narcissistic ego and the death instinct that Freud
indicated so profoundly in saying that there is no reflux of the libido on to
the ego without it becoming desexualised and forming a neutral
displaceable energy, essentially capable of serving Thanatos. Why,
however, did Freud thus propose a death instinct existing prior to that
desexualised energy, independent of it in principle? Undoubtedly for two
reasons - one relating to the persistance of a dualistic and conflictual
model which inspired the entire theory of drives; the other to the material
model which presided over the theory of repetition. That is why Freud
insisted on the one hand on the difference in kind between Eros and
Thanatos, according to which Thanatos should be addressed in his own
terms in opposition to Eros; and on the other hand on a difference in
rhythm or amplitude, as though Thanatos had returned to the state of
inanimate matter, thereby becoming identified with that power of bare or
brute repetition that the vital differences arising from Eros are supposed
only to cover or contradict. In any case, determined as the qualitative and
quantitative return of the living to inanimate matter, death has only an
extrinsic, scientific and objective definition. Freud strangely refused any
other dimension to death, any prototype or any presentation of death in
the unconscious, even though he conceded the existence of such prototypes
for birth and castration. This reduction of death to an objective
determination of matter displays the same prejudice according to which

112

Difference and Repetition

repetition must find its ultimate principle in an undifferenciated material
model, beyond the displacements and disguises of a secondary or opposed
difference. In truth, the structure of the unconscious is not conflictual,
oppositional or contradictory, but questioning and problematising. Nor is
repetition a bare and brute power behind the disguises, the latter affecting
it only secondarily, like so many variations: on the contrary, it is woven
from disguise and displacement, without any existence apart from these
constitutive elements. Death does not appear in the objective model of an
indifferent inanimate matter to which the living would 'return'; it is present
in the living in the form of a subjective and differenciated experience
endowed with its prototype. It is not a material state; on the contrary,
having renounced all matter, it corresponds to a pure form - the empty
form of time. (As a means of filling time, it makes no difference whether
repetition is subordinated to the extrinsic identity of a dead matter or to
the intrinsic identity of an immortal soul.) For death cannot be reduced to
negation, neither to the negative of opposition nor to the negative of
limitation. It is neither the limitation imposed by matter upon mortal life,
nor the opposition between matter and immortal life, which furnishes
death with its prototype. Death is, rather, the last form of the problematic,
the source of problems and questions, the sign of their persistence over and
above every response, the 'Where?' and 'When?' which designate this
(non)-being where every affirmation is nourished.
Blanchot rightly suggests that death has two aspects. One is personal,
concerning the I or the ego, something which I can confront in a struggle
or meet at a limit, or in any case encounter in a present which causes
everything to pass. The other is strangely impersonal, with no relation to
'me', neither present nor past but always coming, the source of an
incessant multiple adventure in a persistent question:
It is the fact of dying that includes a radical reversal, through which the
death that was the extreme form of my power not only becomes what
loosens my hold upon myself by casting me out of my power to begin
and even to finish, but also becomes that which is without any relation
to me, without power over me - that which is stripped of all possibility
- the unreality of the indefinite. I cannot represent this reversal to myself, I cannot even conceive of it as definitive. It is not the irreversible
step beyond which there would be no return, for it is that which is not
accomplished, the interminable and the incessant. ... It is inevitable but
inaccessible death; it is the abyss of the present, time without a present,
with which I have no relationships; it is that toward which I cannot go
forth, for in it / do not die, I have fallen from the power to die. In it they
die; they do not cease, and they do not finish dying ... not the term, but
the interminable, not proper but featureless death, and not true death
but, as Kafka says, "the sneer of its capital error".

Repetition for Itself

113

In confronting these two aspects, it is apparent that even suicide does not
make them coincide with one another or become equivalent. The first signifies the personal disappearance of the person, the annihilation of this difference represented by the I or the ego. This is a difference which existed
only in order to die, and the disappearance of which can be objectively represented by a return to inanimate matter, as though calculated by a kind of
entropy. Despite appearances, this death always comes from without, even
at the moment when it constitutes the most personal possibility, and from
the past, even at the moment when it is most present. The other death,
however, the other face or aspect of death, refers to the state of free differences when they are no longer subject to the form imposed upon them by
an I or an ego, when they assume a shape which excludes my own coherence no less than that of any identity whatsoever. There is always a 'one
dies' more profound than 'I die', and it is not only the gods who die endlessly and in a variety of ways; as though there appeared worlds in which
the individual was no longer imprisoned within the personal form of the I
and the ego, nor the singular imprisoned within the limits of the individual
- in short, the insubordinate multiple, which cannot be 'recognised' in the
first aspect. The Freudian conception refers to this first aspect, and for that
reason fails to discover the death instinct, along with the corresponding experience and prototype.
We see no reason to propose a death instinct which would be
distinguishable from Eros, either by a difference in kind between two
forces, or by a difference in rhythm or amplitude between two movements.
In both cases, the difference would already be given and Thanatos would
be independent as a result. It seems to us, on the contrary, that Thanatos is
completely indistinguishable from the desexualisation of Eros, with the
resultant formation of that neutral and displaceable energy of which Freud
speaks. This energy does not serve Thanatos, it constitutes him: there is no
analytic difference between Eros and Thanatos, no already given difference
such that the two would be combined or made to alternate within the same
'synthesis'. It is not that the difference is any less. On the contrary, being
synthetic, it is greater precisely because Thanatos stands for a synthesis of
time quite unlike that of Eros; all the more exclusive because it is drawn
from him, constructed upon his remains. It is all in the same movement
that there is a reflux of Eros on to the ego, that the ego takes upon itself
the disguises and displacements which characterise the objects in order to
construct its own fatal affection, that the libido loses all mnemic content
and Time loses its circular shape in order to assume a merciless and
straight form, and that the death instinct appears, indistinguishable from
that pure form, the desexualised energy of that narcissistic libido. The
complementarity between the narcissistic libido and the death instinct
defines the third synthesis as much as Eros and Mnemosyne defined the
second. Moreover, when Freud says that perhaps the process of thought in

114

Difference and Repetition

general should be attached to that desexualised energy which is the
correlative of the libido become narcissistic, we should understand that,
contrary to the old dilemma, it is no longer a question of knowing whether
thought is innate or acquired. It is neither innate nor acquired but genital in other words, desexualised and drawn from that reflux which opens us
on to empty time. In order to indicate this genesis of thought in an always
fractured I, Artaud said: 'I am an innate genital', meaning equally thereby a
'desexualised acquisition'. It is not a question of acquiring thought, nor of
exercising it as though it were innate, but of engendering the act of
thinking within thought itself, perhaps under the influence of a violence
which causes the reflux of libido on to the narcissistic ego, and in the same
movement both extracting Thanatos from Eros and abstracting time from
all content in order to separate out the pure form. There is an experience of
death which corresponds to this third synthesis.
Freud supposes the unconscious to be ignorant of three important
things: Death, Time and No. Yet it is a question only of time, death and no
in the unconscious. Does this mean merely that they are acted [agis]
without being represented? Furthermore, the unconscious is ignorant of no
because it lives off the (non)-being of problems and questions, rather than
the non-being of the negative which affects only consciousness and its
representations. It is ignorant of death because every representation of
death concerns its inadequate aspect, whereas the unconscious discovers
and seizes upon the other side, the other face. It is ignorant of time because
it is never subordinated to the empirical contents of a present which passes
in representation, but rather carries out the passive syntheses of an original
time. It is these three syntheses which must be understood as constitutive of
the unconscious. They correspond to the figures of repetition which appear
in the work of a great novelist: the binding, the ever renewed fine cord; the
ever displaced stain on the wall; the ever erased eraser. The
repetition-binding, the repetition-stain, the repetition-eraser: the three
beyonds of the pleasure principle. The first synthesis expresses the
foundation of time upon the basis of a living present, a foundation which
endows pleasure with its value as a general empirical principle to which is
subject the content of the psychic life in the Id. The second synthesis
expresses the manner in which time is grounded in a pure past, a ground
which conditions the application of the pleasure principle to the contents
of the Ego. The third synthesis, however, refers to the absence of ground
into which we are precipitated by the ground itself: Thanatos appears in
third place as this groundlessness, beyond the ground of Eros and the
foundation of Habitus. He therefore has a disturbing kind of relation with
the pleasure principle which is often expressed in the unfathomable
paradoxes of a pleasure linked to pain (when in fact it is a question of
something else altogether: the desexualisation which operates in this third
synthesis, in so far as it inhibits the application of the pleasure principle as

Repetition for Itself

115

the prior directive idea in order then to proceed to a resexualisation in
which pleasure is invested only in a pure, cold, apathetic and frozen
thought, as we see in the cases of sadism and masochism). In one sense the
third synthesis unites all the dimensions of time, past, present and future,
and causes them to be played out in the pure form. In another sense it
involves their reorganisation, since the past is treated in function of a
totality of time as the condition by default which characterises the Id, while
the present is defined by the metamorphosis of the agent in the ego ideal.
In a third sense, finally, the ultimate synthesis concerns only the future,
since it announces in the superego the destruction of the Id and the ego, of
the past as well as the present, of the condition and the agent. At this
extreme point the straight line of time forms a circle again, a singularly
tortuous one; or alternatively, the death instinct reveals an unconditional
truth hidden in its 'other' face - namely, the eternal return in so far as this
does not cause everything to come back but, on the contrary, affects a
world which has rid itself of the default of the condition and the equality
of the agent in order to affirm only the excessive and the unequal, the
interminable and the incessant, the formless as the product of the most
extreme formality. This is how the story of time ends: by undoing its too
well centred natural or physical circle and forming a straight line which
then, led by its own length, reconstitutes an eternally decentred circle.
The eternal return is a force of affirmation, but it affirms everything of
the multiple, everything of the different, everything of chance except what
subordinates them to the One, to the Same, to necessity, everything except
the One, the Same and the Necessary. It is said that the One subjugated the
multiple once and for all. But is this not the face of death? And does not
the other face cause to die in turn, once and for all, everything which
operates once and for all? If there is an essential relation between eternal
return and death, it is because it promises and implies 'once and for all' the
death of that which is one. If there is an essential relation with the future, it
is because the future is the deployment and explication of the multiple, of
the different and of the fortuitous, for themselves and 'for all times'.
Repetition in the eternal return excludes two determinations: the Same or
the identity of a subordinating concept, and the negative of the condition
which would relate the repeated to the same, and thereby ensure the
subordination. Repetition in the eternal return excludes both the
becoming-equal or the becoming-similar in the concept, and being
conditioned by lack of such a becoming. It concerns instead excessive
systems which link the different with the different, the multiple with the
multiple, the fortuitous with the fortuitous, in a complex of affirmations
always coextensive with the questions posed and the decisions taken. It is
claimed that man does not know how to play: this is because, even when
he is given a situation of chance or multiplicity, he understands his
affirmations as destined to impose limits upon it, his decisions as destined

116

Difference and Repetition

to ward off its effects, his reproductions as destined to bring about the
return of the same, given a winning hypothesis. This is precisely a losing
game, one in which we risk losing as much as winning because we do not
affirm the all of chance: the pre-established character of the rule which
fragments has as its correlate the condition by default in the player, who
never knows which fragment will emerge. The system of the future, by
contrast, must be called a divine game, since there is no pre-existing rule,
since the game bears already upon its own rules and since the child-player
can only win, all of chance being affirmed each time and for all times. Not
restrictive or limiting affirmations, but affirmations coextensive with the
questions posed and with the decisions from which these emanate: such a
game entails the repetition of the necessarily winning move, since it wins
by embracing all possible combinations and rules in the system of its own
return. On this question of the game of repetition and difference as
governed by the death instinct, no one has gone further than Borges,
throughout his astonishing work:
if the lottery is an intensification of chance, a periodic infusion of chaos
into the cosmos, would it not be desirable for chance to intervene at all
stages of the lottery and not merely in the drawing? Is it not ridiculous
for chance to dictate the death of someone, while the circumstances of
his death - its silent reserve or publicity, the time limit of one hour or
one century - should remain immune to hazard? ... The ignorant suppose that an infinite number of drawings require an infinite amount of
time; in reality, it is quite enough that time be infinitely subdivisible. ...
In all fiction, when a man is faced with alternatives he chooses one at
the expense of the others. In the almost unfathomable Ts'ui Pen, he
chooses - simultaneously - all of them. He thus creates various futures,
various times which start others that will in their turn branch out and
bifurcate in other times. This is the cause of the contradictions in the
novel. 'Fang, let us say, has a secret. A stranger knocks at his door. Fang
makes up his mind to kill him. Naturally there are various possible outcomes. Fang can kill the intruder, the intruder can kill Fang, both can be
saved, both can die and so on and so on. In Ts'ui Pen's work, all the
possible solutions occur, each one being the point of departure for other
bifurcations.'
What are these systems constituted by the eternal return? Consider the
two propositions: only that which is alike differs; and only differences are
alike. The first formula posits resemblance as the condition of difference.
It therefore undoubtedly demands the possibility of an identical concept for
the two things which differ on condition that they are alike; and implies an
analogy in the relation each thing has to this concept; and finally leads to
the reduction of the difference between them to an opposition determined
by these three moments. According to the other formula, by contrast,

Repetition for Itself

117

resemblance, identity, analogy and opposition can no longer be considered
anything but effects, the products of a primary difference or a primary
system of differences. According to this other formula, difference must
immediately relate the differing terms to one another. In accordance with
Heidegger's ontological intuition, difference must be articulation and
connection in itself; it must relate different to different without any
mediation whatsoever by the identical, the similar, the analogous or the
opposed. There must be a differenciation of difference, an in-itself which is
like a differentiator, a Sich-unterscheidende, by virtue of which the
different is gathered all at once rather than represented on condition of a
prior resemblance, identity, analogy or opposition. As for these latter
instances, since they cease to be conditions, they become no more than
effects of the primary difference and its differenciation, overall or surface
effects which characterise the distorted world of representation, and
express the manner in which the in-itself of difference hides itself by giving
rise to that which covers it. The question is whether these two formulae are
simply two manners of speaking which do not change things very much, or
whether they apply to completely different systems; or indeed whether,
while applying to the same systems (and ultimately to the world system),
they do not signify two incompatible interpretations of unequal value, one
of which is capable of changing everything.
It is under the same conditions that the in-itself of difference is hidden,
and that difference falls into the categories of representation. Under what
other conditions does difference develop this in-itself as a 'differenciator',
and gather the different outside of any possible representation? The first
characteristic seems to us to be organisation in series. A system must be
constituted on the basis of two or more series, each series being defined by
the differences between the terms which compose it. If we suppose that the
series communicate under the impulse of a force of some kind, then it is
apparent that this communication relates differences to other differences,
constituting differences between differences within the system. These
second-degree differences play the role of the 'differenciator' - in other
words, they relate the first-degree differences to one another. This state of
affairs is adequately expressed by certain physical concepts: coupling
between heterogeneous systems, from which is derived an internal
resonance within the system, and from which in turn is derived a forced
movement the amplitude of which exceeds that of the basic series
themselves. The nature of these elements whose value is determined at once
both by their difference in the series to which they belong, and by the
difference of their difference from one series to another, can be determined:
these are intensities, the peculiarity of intensities being to be constituted by
a difference which itself refers to other differences (E-E' where E refers to
e-e' and e to e-e' ...). The intensive character of the systems considered
should not prejudice their being characterized as mechanical, physical,

118

Difference and Repetition

biological, psychic, social, aesthetic or philosophical, etc. Each type of
system undoubtedly has its own particular conditions, but these conform to
the preceding characteristics even while they give them a structure
appropriate in each case: for example, words are genuine intensities within
certain aesthetic systems; concepts are also intensities from the point of
view of philosophical systems. Note, too, that according to the celebrated
1895 Freudian Project for a Scientific Psychology, biophysical life is
presented in the form of such an intensive field in which differences
determinable as excitations, and differences of differences determinable as
cleared paths, are distributed. Above all, however, the syntheses of the
Psyche incarnate on their own account the three dimensions of these
systems in general: psychic connection (Habitus) effects a coupling of series
of excitations; Eros designates the specific state of internal resonance which
results; and the death instinct amounts to the forced movement whose
psychic amplitude exceeds that of the resonating series themselves (whence
the difference in amplitude between the death instinct and the resonating
Eros).
Once communication between heterogeneous series is established, all
sorts of consequences follow within the system. Something 'passes'
between the borders, events explode, phenomena flash, like thunder and
lightning. Spatio-temporal dynamisms fill the system, expressing
simultaneously the resonance of the coupled series and the amplitude of the
forced movement which exceeds them. The system is populated by
subjects, both larval subjects and passive selves: passive selves because they
are indistinguishable from the contemplation of couplings and resonances;
larval subjects because they are the supports or the patients of the
dynamisms. In effect, a pure spatio-temporal dynamism, with its necessary
participation in the forced movement, can be experienced only at the
borders of the livable, under conditions beyond which it would entail the
death of any well-constituted subject endowed with independence and
activity. Embryology already displays the truth that there are systematic
vital movements, torsions and drifts, that only the embryo can sustain: an
adult would be torn apart by them. There are movements for which one
can only be a patient, but the patient in turn can only be a larva. Evolution
does not take place in the open air, and only the involuted evolves. A
nightmare is perhaps a psychic dynamism that could be sustained neither
awake nor even in dreams, but only in profound sleep, in a dreamless
sleep. In this sense, it is not even clear that thought, in so far as it
constitutes the dynamism peculiar to philosophical systems, may be related
to a substantial, completed and well-constituted subject, such as the
Cartesian Cogito: thought is, rather, one of those terrible movements
which can be sustained only under the conditions of a larval subject. These
systems admit only such subjects as these, since they alone can undertake
the forced movement by becoming the patient of the dynamisms which

Repetition for Itself

119

express it. Even the philosopher is a larval subject of his own system. Thus
we see that these systems are not defined only by the heterogeneous series
which border them, nor by the coupling, the resonance and the forced
movement which constitute their dimensions, but also by the subjects
which populate them and the dynamisms which fill them, and finally by the
qualities and extensities which develop on the basis of such dynamisms.
The most important difficulty, however, remains: is it really difference
which relates different to different in these intensive systems? Does the
difference between differences relate difference to itself without any other
intermediary? When we speak of communication between heterogeneous
systems, of coupling and resonance, does this not imply a minimum of
resemblance between the series, and an identity in the agent which brings
about the communication? Would not 'too much' difference between the
series render any such operation impossible? Are we not condemned to
rediscover a privileged point at which difference can be understood only by
virtue of a resemblance between the things which differ and the identity of
a third party? Here we must pay the greatest attention to the respective
roles of difference, resemblance and identity. To begin with, what is this
agent, this force which ensures communication? Thunderbolts explode
between different intensities, but they are preceded by an invisible,
imperceptible dark precursor, which determines their path in advance but
in reverse, as though intagliated. Likewise, every system contains its dark
precursor which ensures the communication of peripheral series. As we
shall see, given the variety among systems, this role is fulfilled by quite
diverse determinations. The question is to know in any given case how the
precursor fulfils this role. There is no doubt that there is an identity
belonging to the precursor, and a resemblance between the series which it
causes to communicate. This 'there is', however, remains perfectly
indeterminate. Are identity and resemblance here the preconditions of the
functioning of this dark precursor, or are they, on the contrary, its effects?
If the latter, might it necessarily project upon itself the illusion of a fictive
identity, and upon the series which it relates the illusion of a retrospective
resemblance? Identity and resemblance would then be no more than
inevitable illusions - in other words, concepts of reflection which would
account for our inveterate habit of thinking difference on the basis of the
categories of representation. All that, however, would be possible only
because the invisible precursor conceals itself and its functioning, and at
the same time conceals the in-itself or true nature of difference. Given two
heterogeneous series, two series of differences, the precursor plays the part
of the differenciator of these differences. In this manner, by virtue of its
own power, it puts them into immediate relation to one another: it is the
in-itself of difference or the 'differently different' - in other words,
difference in the second degree, the self-different which relates different to
different by itself. Because the path it traces is invisible and becomes visible

120

Difference and Repetition

only in reverse, to the extent that it is travelled over and covered by the
phenomena it induces within the system, it has no place other than that
from which it is 'missing', no identity other than that which it lacks: it is
precisely the object = x, the one which 'is lacking in its place' as it lacks its
own identity. As a result, the logical identity abstractly imputed to it by
reflection, along with the physical resemblance which reflection imputes to
the series which it relates, express only the statistical effect of its
functioning upon the system as a whole. In other words, these express only
the manner in which it conceals itself under its own effects, because of the
way it perpetually displaces itself within itself and perpetually disguises
itself in the series. We cannot, therefore, suppose that the identity of a third
party and the resemblance of the parties in question are a condition of the
being and thought of difference. These are only a condition of its
representation, which expresses a distortion of that being and that thought,
like an optical effect which disturbs the true, in-itself status of the condition.
We call this dark precursor, this difference in itself or difference in the
second degree which relates heterogeneous systems and even completely
disparate things, the disparate. In each case, the space in which it is
displaced and its process of disguise determine a relative size of the
differences brought into relation. It is well known that in certain cases (in
certain systems), the difference between the differences brought into play
may be 'very large'; in other systems it must be 'very small'. It would be
wrong, however, to see in this second case the pure expression of a
prior requirement of resemblance, which would then be relaxed in the
first case only by being extended to the world scale. For example, it is
insisted that disparate series must necessarily be almost similar, or that
the frequencies be neighbouring (w neighbour of wO) - in short, that
the difference be small. If, however, the identity of the agent which
causes the different things to communicate is presupposed, then there
are no differences which will not be 'small', even on the world scale.
We have seen that small and large apply badly to difference, because
they judge it according to the criteria of the Same and the similar. If
difference is related to its differenciator, and if we refrain from
attributing to the differenciator an identity that it cannot and does not
have, then the difference will be small or large according to its
possibilities of fractionation - that is, according to the displacements
and disguise of the differenciator. In no case will it be possible to claim
that a small difference testifies to a strict condition of resemblance, any
more than a large difference testifies to the persistence of a resemblance
which is simply relaxed. Resemblance is in any case an effect, a
functional product, an external result - an illusion which appears once
the agent arrogates to itself an identity that it lacked. The important
thing is not that the difference be small or large, and ultimately always
small in relation to a greater resemblance. The important thing, for the

Repetition for Itself

121

in-itself, is that the difference, whether small or large, be internal. There
are systems with large external resemblance and small internal difference.
The contrary is also possible: systems with small external resemblance and
large internal difference. What is impossible, however, is the contradictory:
resemblance is always exterior and difference, whether small or large,
forms the kernel of the system.
Take the following examples borrowed from very diverse literary
systems. In the work of Raymond Roussel, we find verbal series: the role of
precursor is filled by a homonym or quasi-homonym (biHard-pillard), but
this dark precursor is all the less visible and noticeable to the extent that
one or other of the two series remains hidden. Strange stories fill in the
difference between the two series in such a manner as to induce an effect of
resemblance and external identity. The precursor, however, by no means
acts by virtue of its identity, whether this be a nominal or a homonymic
identity: we see this clearly in the case of the quasi-homonym which
functions only by becoming indistinguishable from the differential
character which separates two words (b and p). Similarly, the homonym
appears here not as the nominal identity of a signifier but as the
differenciator of distinct signifieds which then produces secondarily an
effect of resemblance between the signifieds along with an effect of identity
in the signifier. It would therefore be inadequate to say that the system is
grounded upon a certain negative determination - namely, the default in
which words stand in relation to things and as a result of which single
words are condemned to designate several things. The same illusion leads
us to conceive of difference on the basis of a supposed prior resemblance
and identity, and makes it appear as negative. In fact, it is not by the
poverty of its vocabulary that language invents the form in which it plays
the role of dark precursor, but by its excess, by its most positive syntactic
and semantic power. In playing this role it differenciates the differences
between the different things spoken of, relating these immediately to one
another in series which it causes to resonate. For the same reason, as we
have seen, the repetition of words cannot be explained negatively, cannot
be presented as a bare repetition without difference. Joyce's work
obviously appeals to quite different procedures. However, it remains a
question of drawing together a maximum of disparate series (ultimately, all
the divergent series constitutive of the cosmos) by bringing into operation
linguistic dark precursors (here, esoteric words, portmanteau words) which
rely upon no prior identity, which are above all not 'identifiable' in
principle, but which induce a maximum of resemblance and identity into
the system as a whole, as though this were the result of the process of
differenciation of difference in itself (see the cosmic letter in Finnegans
Wake). What takes place in the system between resonating series under the
influence of the dark precursor is called 'epiphany'. The cosmic extension
coincides with the amplitude of a forced movement which sweeps aside

122

Difference and Repetition

and overruns the series, ultimately a death instinct, Stephen's 'No' which is
not the non-being of the negative but the (non)-being of a persistent
question to which the cosmic 'Yes' of Mrs Bloom corresponds, without
being a response, since it alone adequately occupies and fills that space.
Note on the Proustian experiences
These clearly have a quite different structure than Joyce's epiphanies. However, it is still a question of two series, that of a former present (Combray
as it was lived) and that of a present present. No doubt, to remain at a first
dimension of the experience, there is a resemblance between the two series
(the madeleine, breakfast), and even an identity (the taste as a quality
which is not only similar but self-identical across the two moments). Nevertheless, the secret does not lie there. The taste possesses a power only because it envelops something = x, something which can no longer be defined
by an identity: it envelops Combray as it is in itself, as a fragment of the
pure past, in its double irreducibility to the present that it has been (perception) and to the present present in which it might reappear or be reconstituted (voluntary memory). This Combray in itself is defined by its own
essential difference, that 'qualitative difference' which, according to Proust,
does not exist 'on the surface of the earth', but only at a particular depth. It
is this difference which, by enveloping itself, produces the identity of the
quality which constitutes the resemblance between the series. Identity and
resemblance are therefore once again the result of a differenciator. And if
the two series succeed one another, they nevertheless coexist in relation to
Combray in itself as the object = x which causes them to resonate. Moreover, the resonance of the series may give rise to a death instinct which
overruns them both: for example, the ankle-boot and the memory of the
grandmother. Eros is constituted by the resonance, but overcomes itself in
the direction of the death instinct which is constituted by the amplitude of
a forced movement (this death instinct finds its glorious issue in the work
of art, over and above the erotic experiences of the involuntary memory).
The Proustian formula 'a little time in its pure state' refers first to the pure
past, the in-itself of the past or the erotic synthesis of time, but more profoundly to the pure and empty form of time, the ultimate synthesis, that of
the death instinct which leads to the eternity of the return in time.
The question of whether psychic experience is structured like a language,
or even whether the physical world may be regarded as a book, depends
upon the nature of the dark precursors. A linguistic precursor or an esoteric word does not have an identity by itself, not even a nominal one, any
more than its significations have a resemblance, even an infinitely relaxed
one: it is not just a complex word or a simple gathering of words, but a

Repetition for Itself

123

word about words which is indistinguishable from the 'differenciator' of
first-degree words and from the 'dissembler' of their significations. Its
value, therefore, lies not in the extent to which it claims to say something
but in the extent to which it claims to state the sense of what it says. The
law of language which operates within representation excludes that possibility: the sense of a word can be stated only by another word which takes
the first as its object. Whence the following paradoxical situation: the linguistic precursor belongs to a kind of metalanguage and can be incarnated
only within a word devoid of sense from the point of view of the series of
first-degree verbal representations. It is the refrain. This double status of esoteric words, which state their own sense but do so only by representing it
and themselves as nonsense, clearly expresses the perpetual displacement of
sense and its disguise among the series. In consequence, esoteric words are
properly linguistic cases of the object = x, while the object = x structures
psychic experience like a language on condition that the perpetual, invisible
and silent displacement of linguistic sense is taken into account. In a sense,
everything speaks and has sense, on condition that speech is also that
which does not speak - or rather, speech is the sense which does not speak
in speech. Gombrowicz, in his fine novel Cosmos, shows how two series of
heterogeneous differences (that of hangings and that of mouths) call forth
their own communication through various signs, until the inauguration of a
dark precursor (the murder of the cat) which plays the role of differenciator of
their differences. This is like the sense, nevertheless incarnated in an absurd
representation, but on the basis of which dynamisms will be unleashed and
events produced in the Cosmos system which will culminate in a death instinct
which points beyond the series. In this manner, the conditions under which
a book is a cosmos or the cosmos is a book appear, and through a variety of
very different techniques the ultimate Joycean identity emerges, the one we
find in Borges and in Gombrowicz: chaos = cosmos.
Each series tells a story: not different points of view on the same story,
like the different points of view on the town we find in Leibniz, but
completely distinct stories which unfold simultaneously. The basic series
are divergent: not relatively, in the sense that one could retrace one's path
and find a point of convergence, but absolutely divergent in the sense that
the point or horizon of convergence lies in a chaos or is constantly
displaced within that chaos. This chaos is itself the most positive, just as
the divergence is the object of affirmation. It is indistinguishable from the
great work which contains all the complicated series, which affirms and
complicates all the series at once. (It is not surprising that Joyce should
have been so interested in Bruno, the theoretician of complicatio.) The
trinity complication-explication-implication accounts for the totality of
the system - in other words, the chaos which contains all, the divergent
series which lead out and back in, and the differenciator which relates
them one to another. Each series explicates or develops itself, but in its

124

Difference and Repetition

difference from the other series which it implicates and which implicate it,
which it envelops and which envelop it; in this chaos which complicates
everything. The totality of the system, the unity of the divergent series as
such, corresponds to the objectivity of a 'problem'. Hence the method of
questions-problems by means of which Joyce animates his work, and
before that the manner in which Lewis Carroll linked portmanteau words
to the status of the problematic.
The essential point is the simultaneity and contemporaneity of all the
divergent series, the fact that all coexist. From the point of view of the
presents which pass in representation, the series are certainly successive,
one 'before' and the other 'after'. It is from this point of view that the
second is said to resemble the first. However, this no longer applies from
the point of view of the chaos which contains them, the object = x which
runs through them, the precursor which establishes communication
between them or the forced movement which points beyond them: the
differenciator always makes them coexist. We have encountered several
times the paradox of presents which succeed one another, or series which
succeed one another in reality, but coexist symbolically in relation to the
pure past or the virtual object. When Freud shows that a phantasy is
constituted on the basis of at least two series, one infantile and pre-genital,
the other genital and post-pubescent, it is clear that the series succeed one
another in time from the point of view of the solipsistic unconscious of the
subject in question. The question then arises how to explain the
phenomenon of 'delay' which is involved in the time it takes for the
supposedly original infantile scene to produce its effect at a distance, in an
adult scene which resembles it and which we call 'derived'. It is indeed a
problem of resonance between two series, but the problem is not well
formulated so long as we do not take into account the instance in relation
to which the two series coexist in an intersubjective unconscious. In fact
the two series - one infantile, the other adult - are not distributed within
the same subject. The childhood event is not one of the two real series but,
rather, the dark precursor which establishes communication between the
basic series, that of the adults we knew as a child and that of the adult we
are among other adults and other children. So it is with the hero of In
Search of Lost Time: his infantile love for the mother is the agent of
communication between two adult series, that of Swann with Odette and
that of the hero become adult with Albertine - and always the same secret
in both cases, the eternal displacement, the eternal disguise of the prisoner,
which thereby indicates the point at which the series coexist in the
intersubjective unconscious. There is no question as to how the childhood
event acts only with a delay. It is this delay, but this delay itself is the pure
form of time in which before and after coexist. When Freud discovers that
phantasy is perhaps the ultimate reality and that it implicates something
which points beyond the series, we should not conclude that the childhood

Repetition for Itself

125

scene is unreal or imaginary, but rather that the empirical condition of
succession in time gives way in the phantasy to the coexistence of the two
series, that of the adult that we will be along with the adults that we 'have
been' (compare what Ferenczi called the identification of the child with the
aggressor). The phantasy is the manifestation of the child as dark
precursor. Moreover, what is originary in the phantasy is not one series in
relation to the other, but the difference between series in so far as this
relates one series of differences to another series of differences, in
abstraction from their empirical succession in time.
If it is no longer possible in the system of the unconscious to establish an
order of succession between series - in other words, if all series coexist then it is no longer possible to regard one as originary and the other as
derived, one as model and the other as copy. For it is in the same
movement that the series are understood as coexisting, outside any
condition of succession in time, and as different, outside any condition
under which one would enjoy the identity of a model and the other the
resemblance of a copy. When two divergent stories unfold simultaneously,
it is impossible to privilege one over the other: it is a case in which
everything is equal, but 'everything is equal' is said of the difference, and is
said only of the difference between the two. However small the internal
difference between the two series, the one story does not reproduce the
other, one does not serve as model for the other: rather, resemblance and
identity are only functional effects of that difference which alone is
originary within the system. It is therefore proper to say that the system
excludes the assignation of an originary and a derived as though these were
a first and second occurrence, because the sole origin is difference, and it
causes the differents which it relates
to other differents to coexist
"7 ft
independently of any resemblance. It is under this aspect, without doubt,
that the eternal return is revealed as the groundless 'law' of this system.
The eternal return does not cause the same and the similar to return, but is
itself derived from a world of pure difference. Each series returns, not only
in the others which imply it, but for itself, since it is not implied by the
others without being in turn fully restored as that which implies them. The
eternal return has no other sense but this: the absence of any assignable
origin - in other words, the assignation of difference as the origin, which
then relates different to different in order to make it (or them) return as
such. In this sense, the eternal return is indeed the consequence of a
difference which is originary, pure, synthetic and in-itself (which Nietzsche
called will to power). If difference is the in-itself, then repetition in the
eternal return is the for-itself of difference. Yet how can it be denied that
the eternal return is inseparable from the Same? Is it not itself the eternal
return of the Same? However, we must be aware of the (at least three)
different senses of the terms 'the same', 'the identical' and 'the similar'.
In the first sense, the Same designates a supposed subject of the eternal

126

Difference and Repetition

return. In this case it designates the identity of the One as a principle.
Precisely this, however, constitutes the greatest and the longest error.
Nietzsche correctly points out that if it were the One which returned, it
would have begun by being unable to leave itself; if it were supposed to
determine the many to resemble it, it would have begun by not losing its
identity in that degradation of the similar. Repetition is no more the
permanence of the One than the resemblance of the many. The subject of
the eternal return is not the same but the different, not the similar but the
dissimilar, not the one but the many, not necessity but chance. Moreover,
repetition in the eternal return implies the destruction of all forms which
hinder its operation, all the categories of representation incarnated in the
primacy of the Same, the One, the Identical and the Like. Alternatively, in
the second sense, the same and the similar are only an effect of the
operation of systems subject to eternal return. By this means, an identity
would be found to be necessarily projected, or rather retrojected, on to the
originary difference and a resemblance interiorised within the divergent
series. We should say of this identity and this resemblance that they are
'simulated': they are products of systems which relate different to different
by means of difference (which is why such systems are themselves
simulacra). The same and the similar are fictions engendered by the eternal
return. This time, there is no longer error but illusion: inevitable illusion
which is the source of error, but may nevertheless be distinguished from it.
Finally, in the third sense, the same and the similar are indistinguishable
from the eternal return itself. They do not exist prior to the eternal return:
it is not the same or the similar which returns but the eternal return which
is the only same and the only resemblance of that which returns. Nor can
they be abstracted from the eternal return in order to react upon the cause.
The same is said of that which differs and remains different. The eternal
return is the same of the different, the one of the multiple, the resemblant
of the dissimilar. Although it is the source of the preceding illusion, it
engenders and maintains it only in order to rejoice in it, and to admire
itself in it as though in its own optical effect, without ever falling into the
adjoining error.
These differential systems with their disparate and resonating series, their
dark precursor and forced movements, are what we call simulacra or phantasms. The eternal return concerns only simulacra, it causes only such
phantasms to return. Perhaps we find here the most significant point of
Platonism and anti-Platonism, the touchstone of both Platonism and the
overturning of Platonism. In Chapter I, we suggested that Plato's thought
turned upon a particularly important distinction: that between the original
and the image, the model and the copy. The model is supposed to enjoy an
originary superior identity (the Idea alone is nothing other than what it is:

Repetition for Itself

127

only Courage is courageous, Piety pious), whereas the copy is judged in
terms of a derived internal resemblance. Indeed, it is in this sense that difference comes only in third place, behind identity and resemblance, and
can be understood only in terms of these prior notions. Difference is understood only in terms of the comparative play of two similitudes: the exemplary similitude of an identical original and the imitative similitude of a
more or less accurate copy. This is the measure or test which decides between claimants. More profoundly, however, the true Platonic distinction
lies elsewhere: it is of another nature, not between the original and the
image but between two kinds of images [idoles], of which copies [icones]
are only the first kind, the other being simulacra [phantasmes]. The modelcopy distinction is there only in order to found and apply the copysimulacra distinction, since the copies are selected, justified and saved in
the name of the identity of the model and owing to their internal resemblance to this ideal model. The function of the notion of the model is not
to oppose the world of images in its entirety but to select the good images,
the icons which resemble from within, and eliminate the bad images or
simulacra. Platonism as a whole is erected on the basis of this wish to hunt
down the phantasms or simulacra which are identified with the Sophist
himself, that devil, that insinuator or simulator, that always disguised and
displaced false pretender. For this reason it seems to us that, with Plato, a
philosophical decision of the utmost importance was taken: that of subordinating difference to the supposedly initial powers of the Same and the
Similar, that of declaring difference unthinkable in itself and sending it,
along with the simulacra, back to the bottomless ocean. However, precisely
because Plato did not yet have at his disposition the constituted categories
of representation (these appeared with Aristotle), he had to base his decision on a theory of Ideas. What appears then, in its purest state, before the
logic of representation could be deployed, is a moral vision of the world. It
is in the first instance for these moral reasons that simulacra must be exorcized and difference thereby subordinated to the same and the similar. For
this reason, however, because Plato makes the decision, and because with
him the victory is not assured as it will be in the established world of representation, the rumbling of the enemy can still be heard. Insinuated
throughout the Platonic cosmos, difference resists its yoke. Heraclitus and
the Sophists make an infernal racket. It is as though there were a strange
double which dogs Socrates' footsteps and haunts even Plato's style, inserting itself into the repetitions and variations of that style.

Simulacra or phantasms are not simply copies of copies, degraded icones
involving infinitely relaxed relations of resemblance. The catechism, so
heavily influenced by the Platonic Fathers, has made us familiar with the
idea of an image without likeness: man is in the image and likeness of God,
but through sin we have lost the likeness while remaining in the image ...
simulacra are precisely demonic images, stripped of resemblance. Or

128

Difference and Repetition

rather, in contrast to icones, they have externalised resemblance and live
on difference instead. If they produce an external effect of resemblance,
this takes the form of an illusion, not an internal principle; it is itself
constructed on the basis of a disparity, having interiorised the dissimilitude
of its constituent series and the divergence of its points of view to the point
where it shows several things or tells several stories at once. This is its first
characteristic. Does this not mean, however, that if simulacra themselves
refer to a model, it is one which is not endowed with the ideal identity of
the Same but, on the contrary, is a model of the Other, an other model, the
model of difference in itself from which flows that interiorised
dissimilitude? Among the most extraordinary pages in Plato, demonstrating
the anti-Platonism at the heart of Platonism, are those which suggest that
the different, the dissimilar, the unequal - in short, becoming - may well be
not merely defects which affect copies like a ransom paid for their
secondary character or a counterpart to their resemblance, but rather
models themselves, terrifying models of the pseudos in which unfolds the
power of the false. This hypothesis is quickly put aside, silenced and
banished. Nevertheless it did appear, if only momentarily, like a flash of
lightning in the night, testifying to a persistent activity on the part of
simulacra, to their underground work and to the possibility of a world of
their own. Does this not mean, thirdly, that simulacra provide the means of
challenging both the notion of the copy and that of the model? The model
collapses into difference, while the copies disperse into the dissimilitude of
the series which they interiorise, such that one can never say that the one is
a copy and the other a model. Such is the ending of the Sophist, where we
glimpse the possibility of the triumph of the simulacra. For Socrates
distinguishes himself from the Sophist, but the Sophist does not distinguish
himself from Socrates, placing the legitimacy of such a distinction in
question. Twilight of the icones. Is this not to indicate the point at which
the identity of the model and the resemblance of the copy become errors,
the same and the similar no more than illusions born of the functioning of
simulacra? Simulacra function by themselves, passing and repassing the
decentred centres of the eternal return. It is no longer the Platonic project
of opposing the cosmos to chaos, as though the Circle were the imprint of a
transcendent Idea capable of imposing its likeness upon a rebellious
matter. It is indeed the very opposite: the immanent identity of chaos and
cosmos, being in the eternal return, a thoroughly tortuous circle. Plato
attempted to discipline the eternal return by making it an effect of the
Ideas - in other words, making it copy a model. However, in the infinite
movement of degraded likeness from copy to copy, we reach a point at
which everything changes nature, at which copies themselves flip over into
simulacra and at which, finally, resemblance or spiritual imitation gives
way to repetition.

Chapter III
The Image of Thought
Where to begin in philosophy has always - rightly - been regarded as a
very delicate problem, for beginning means eliminating all presuppositions.
However, whereas in science one is confronted by objective presuppositions which axiomatic rigour can eliminate, presuppositions in philosophy
are as much subjective as objective. By objective presuppositions we mean
concepts explicitly presupposed by a given concept. Descartes, for example,
in the Second Meditation, does not want to define man as a rational animal
because such a definition explicitly presupposes the concepts of rationality
and animality: in presenting the Cogito as a definition, he therefore claims
to avoid all the objective presuppositions which encumber those procedures that operate by genus and difference. It is clear, however, that he
does not escape presuppositions of another kind - subjective or implicit
presuppositions contained in opinions rather than concepts: it is presumed
that everyone knows, independently of concepts, what is meant by self,
thinking, and being. The pure self of 'I think' thus appears to be a beginning only because it has referred all its presuppositions back to the empirical self. Moreover, while Hegel criticized Descartes for this, he does not
seem, for his part, to proceed otherwise: pure being, in turn, is a beginning
only by virtue of referring all its presuppositions back to sensible, concrete,
empirical being. The same attitude of refusing objective presuppositions,
but on condition of assuming just as many subjective presuppositions
(which are perhaps the same ones in another form), appears when Heidegger invokes a pre-ontological understanding of Being. We may conclude
that there is no true beginning in philosophy, or rather that the true philosophical beginning, Difference, is in-itself already Repetition. However, this
formula, and the evocation of the idea of philosophy as a Circle, are subject to so many interpretations that we cannot be too prudent. For if it is a
question of rediscovering at the end what was there in the beginning, if it is
a question of recognising, of bringing to light or into the conceptual or the
explicit, what was simply known implicitly without concepts - whatever
the complexity of this process, whatever the differences between the procedures of this or that author - the fact remains that all this is still too
simple, and that this circle is truly not tortuous enough. The circle image
would reveal instead that philosophy is powerless truly to begin, or indeed
authentically to repeat.
We would do better to ask what is a subjective or implicit
presupposition: it has the form of 'Everybody knows ...'. Everybody
129

130

Difference and Repetition

knows, in a pre-philosophical and pre-conceptual manner ... everybody
knows what it means to think and to be. ... As a result, when the
philosopher says 'I think therefore I am', he can assume that the
universality of his premisses - namely, what it means to be and to think ...
- will be implicitly understood, and that no one can deny that to doubt is
to think, and to think is to be. ... Everybody knows, no one can deny, is
the form of representation and the discourse of the representative. When
philosophy rests its beginning upon such implicit or subjective
presuppositions, it can claim innocence, since it has kept nothing back except, of course, the essential - namely, the form of this discourse. It then
opposes the 'idiot' to the pedant, Eudoxus to Epistemon, good will to the
overfull understanding, the individual man endowed only with his natural
capacity for thought to the man perverted by the generalities of his time.1
The philosopher takes the side of the idiot as though of a man without
presuppositions. In fact, Eudoxus has no fewer presuppositions than
Epistemon, he simply has them in another, implicit or subjective form,
'private' and not 'public'; in the form of a natural capacity for thought
which allows philosophy to claim to begin, and to begin without
presuppositions.
But here and there isolated and passionate cries are raised. How could
they not be isolated when they deny what 'everybody knows...'? And
passionate, since they deny that which, it is said, nobody can deny? Such
protest does not take place in the name of aristocratic prejudices: it is not a
question of saying what few think and knowing what it means to think.
On the contrary, it is a question of someone - if only one - with the
necessary modesty not managing to know what everybody knows, and
modestly denying what everybody is supposed to recognise. Someone who
neither allows himself to be represented nor wishes to represent anything.
Not an individual endowed with good will and a natural capacity for
thought, but an individual full of ill will who does not manage to think,
either naturally or conceptually. Only such an individual is without
presuppositions. Only such an individual effectively begins and effectively
repeats. For this individual the subjective presuppositions are no less
prejudices than the objective presuppositions: Eudoxus and Epistemon are
one and the same misleading figure who should be mistrusted. At the risk
of playing the idiot, do so in the Russian manner: that of an underground
man who recognises himself no more in the subjective presuppositions of a
natural capacity for thought than in the objective presuppositions of a
culture of the times, and lacks the compass with which to make a circle.
Such a one is the Untimely, neither temporal nor eternal. Ah Shestov, with
the questions he poses, the ill will he manifests, the powerlessness to think
he puts into thought and the double dimension he develops in these
demanding questions concerning at once both the most radical beginning
and the most stubborn repetition.

The Image of Thought

131

Many people have an interest in saying that everybody knows 'this', that
everybody recognises this, or that nobody can deny it. (They triumph easily
so long as no surly interlocutor appears to reply that he does not wish to be
so represented, and that he denies or does not recognise those who speak in
his name.) The philosopher, it is true, proceeds with greater disinterest: all
that he proposes as universally recognised is what is meant by thinking,
being and self - in other words, not a particular this or that but the form of
representation or recognition in general. This form, nevertheless, has a
matter, but a pure matter or element. This element consists only of the
supposition that thought is the natural exercise of a faculty, of the
presupposition that there is a natural capacity for thought endowed with a
talent for truth or an affinity with the true, under the double aspect of a
good will on the part of the thinker and an upright nature on the part of
thought. It is because everybody naturally thinks that everybody is
supposed to know implicitly what it means to think. The most general
form of representation is thus found in the element of a common sense
understood as an upright nature and a good will (Eudoxus and
orthodoxy). The implicit presupposition of philosophy may be found in the
idea of a common sense as Cogitatio natura universalis. On this basis,
philosophy is able to begin. There is no point in multiplying the
declarations of philosophers, from 'Everybody has by nature the desire to
know' to 'Good sense is of all things in the world the most equally
distributed', in order to verify the existence of this presupposition, for its
importance lies less in the explicit declarations that it inspires than in its
persistence among those philosophers who precisely leave it hidden.
Postulates in philosophy are not propositions the acceptance of which the
philosopher demands; but, on the contrary, propositional themes which
remain implicit and are understood in a pre-philosophical manner. In this
sense, conceptual philosophical thought has as its implicit presupposition a
pre-philosophical and natural Image of thought, borrowed from the pure
element of common sense. According to this image, thought has an affinity
with the true; it formally possesses the true and materially wants the true.
It is in terms of this image that everybody knows and is presumed to know
what it means to think. Thereafter it matters little whether philosophy
begins with the object or the subject, with Being or with beings, as long as
thought remains subject to this Image which already prejudges everything:
the distribution of the object and the subject as well as that of Being and
beings.
We may call this image of thought a dogmatic, orthodox or moral
image. It certainly has variant forms: 'rationalists' and 'empiricists' do not
presume its construction in the same fashion. Moreover, as we shall see,
philosophers often have second thoughts and do not accept this implicit
image without adding further traits drawn from explicit reflection on
conceptual thought which react against it and tend to overturn it. In the

132

Difference and Repetition

realm of the implicit, it nevertheless holds fast, even if the philosopher
specifies that truth is not, after all, 'an easy thing to achieve and within
reach of all'. For this reason, we do not speak of this or that image of
thought, variable according to the philosophy in question, but of a single
Image in general which constitutes the subjective presupposition of
philosophy as a whole. When Nietzsche questions the most general
presuppositions of philosophy, he says that these are essentially moral,
since Morality alone is capable of persuading us that thought has a good
nature and the thinker a good will, and that only the good can ground the
supposed affinity between thought and the True. Who else, in effect, but
Morality, and this Good which gives thought to the true, and the true to
thought? ... As a result, the conditions of a philosophy which would be
without any kind of presuppositions appear all the more clearly: instead of
being supported by the moral Image of thought, it would take as its point
of departure a radical critique of this Image and the 'postulates' it implies.
It would find its difference or its true beginning, not in an agreement with
the pre-philosophical Image but in a rigorous struggle against this Image,
which it would denounce as non-philosophical. As a result, it would
discover its authentic repetition in a thought without Image, even at the
cost of the greatest destructions and the greatest demoralisations, and a
philosophical obstinacy with no ally but paradox, one which would have
to renounce both the form of representation and the element of common
sense. As though thought could begin to think, and continually begin
again, only when liberated from the Image and its postulates. It is futile to
claim to reformulate the doctrine of truth without first taking stock of the
postulates which project this distorting image of thought.
It cannot be regarded as a fact that thinking is the natural exercise of a faculty, and that this faculty is possessed of a good nature and a good will.
'Everybody' knows very well that in fact men think rarely, and more often
under the impulse of a shock than in the excitement of a taste for thinking.
Moreover, Descartes's famous suggestion that good sense (the capacity for
thought) is of all things in the world the most equally distributed rests
upon no more than an old saying, since it amounts to reminding us that
men are prepared to complain of lack of memory, imagination or even
hearing, but they always find themselves well served with regard to intelligence and thought. What makes Descartes a philosopher is that he makes
use of that saying in order to erect an image of thought as it is in principle:
good nature and an affinity with the true belong in principle to thought,
whatever the difficulty of translating this principle into fact or rediscovering it behind the facts. Natural good sense or common sense are thus taken
to be determinations of pure thought. Sense is able to adjudicate with regard to its own universality, and to suppose itself universal and communic-

The Image of Thought

133

able in principle. In order to impose or rediscover this principle - in other
words, to apply the mind so endowed - there must be an explicit method.
There is no doubt, therefore, that in fact it is difficult to think, but the most
difficult in fact may still be the easiest in principle. This is why the method
itself is said to be easy from the point of view of the nature of thought (it is
no exaggeration to say that this notion of ease poisons the whole of Cartesianism). When the presupposition of philosophy is found in an Image of
thought which is claimed to hold in principle, we can no longer be content
to oppose it with contrary facts. The discussion must be carried out on the
level of principle itself, in order to see whether this image does not betray
the very essence of thought as pure thought. To the extent that it holds in
principle, this image presupposes a certain distribution of the empirical and
the transcendental, and it is this distribution or transcendental model implied by the image that must be judged.
There is indeed a model, in effect: that of recognition. Recognition may
be defined by the harmonious exercise of all the faculties upon a supposed
same object: the same object may be seen, touched, remembered, imagined
or conceived. ... As Descartes says of the piece of wax: 'It is of course the
same wax which I see, which I touch, which I picture in my imagination, in
short the same wax which I thought it to be from the start.' No doubt
each faculty - perception, memory, imagination, understanding ... - has its
own particular given and its own style, its peculiar ways of acting upon the
given. An object is recognised, however, when one faculty locates it as
identical to that of another, or rather when all the faculties together relate
their given and relate themselves to a form of identity in the object.
Recognition thus relies upon a subjective principle of collaboration of the
faculties for 'everybody' - in other words, a common sense as a concordia
facultatum; while simultaneously, for the philosopher, the form of identity
in objects relies upon a ground in the unity of a thinking subject, of which
all the other faculties must be modalities. This is the meaning of the Cogito
as a beginning: it expresses the unity of all the faculties in the subject; it
thereby expresses the possibility that all the faculties will relate to a form of
object which reflects the subjective identity; it provides a philosophical
concept for the presupposition of a common sense; it is the common sense
become philosophical. For Kant as for Descartes, it is the identity of the
Self in the 'I think' which grounds the harmony of all the faculties and their
agreement on the form of a supposed Same object. The objection will be
raised that we never confront a formal, unspecified, universal object but
only this or that object delimited and specified by a determinate
contribution from the faculties. At this point, however, we must refer to
the precise difference between these two complementary instances,
common sense and good sense. For while common sense is the norm of
identity from the point of view of the pure Self and the form of the
unspecified object which corresponds to it, good sense is the norm of

134

Difference and Repetition

distribution from the point of view of the empirical selves and the objects
qualified as this or that kind of thing (which is why it is considered to be
universally distributed). Good sense determines the contribution of the
faculties in each case, while common sense contributes the form of the
Same. Furthermore, if the unspecified object exists only in so far as it is
qualified in a particular way, then conversely, qualification operates only
given the supposition of the unspecified object. We will see below how - in
an entirely necessary manner - good sense and common sense complete
each other in the image of thought: together they constitute the two halves
of the doxa. For the moment, it suffices to note the precipitation of the
postulates themselves: the image of a naturally upright thought, which
knows what it means to think; the pure element of common sense which
follows from this 'in principle'; and the model of recognition - or rather,
the form of recognition - which follows in turn. Thought is supposed to be
naturally upright because it is not a faculty like the others but the unity of
all the other faculties which are only modes of the supposed subject, and
which it aligns with the form of the Same in the model of recognition. The
model of recognition is necessarily included in the image of thought, and
whether one considers Plato's Theaetetus, Descartes's Meditations or
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, this model remains sovereign and defines
the orientation of the philosophical analysis of what it means to think.
Such an orientation is a hindrance to philosophy. The supposed three
levels - a naturally upright thought, an in principle natural common sense,
and a transcendental model of recognition - can constitute only an ideal
orthodoxy. Philosophy is left without means to realise its project of
breaking with doxa. No doubt philosophy refuses every particular doxa;
no doubt it upholds no particular propositions of good sense or common
sense. No doubt it recognises nothing in particular. Nevertheless, it retains
the essential aspect of doxa - namely, the form; and the essential aspect of
common sense - namely, the element; and the essential aspect of
recognition - namely, the model itself (harmony of the faculties grounded
in the supposedly universal thinking subject and exercised upon the
unspecified object). The image of thought is only the figure in which doxa
is universalised by being elevated to the rational level. However, so long as
one only abstracts from the empirical content of doxa, while maintaining
the operation of the faculties which corresponds to it and implicitly retains
the essential aspect of the content, one remains imprisoned by it. We may
well discover a supra-temporal form or even a sub-temporal primary
matter, an underground or Ur-doxa: we have not advanced a single step,
but remain imprisoned by the same cave or ideas of the times which we
only flatter ourselves with having 'rediscovered', by blessing them with the
sign of philosophy. The form of recognition has never sanctioned anything
but the recognisable and the recognised; form will never inspire anything
but conformities. Moreover, while philosophy refers to a common sense as

The Image of Thought

135

its implicit presupposition, what need has common sense of philosophy?
Common sense shows every day - unfortunately - that it is capable of
producing philosophy in its own way. Therein lies a costly double danger
for philosophy. On the one hand, it is apparent that acts of recognition
exist and occupy a large part of our daily life: this is a table, this is an
apple, this the piece of wax, Good morning Theaetetus. But who can
believe that the destiny of thought is at stake in these acts, and that when
we recognise, we are thinking? Like Bergson, we may well distinguish
between two kinds of recognition - that of the cow in the presence of
grass, and that of a man summoning his memories: the second can serve no
more than the first as a model for what it means to think. We said above
that the Image of thought must be judged on the basis of what it claims in
principle, not on the basis of empirical objections. However, the criticism
that must be addressed to this image of thought is precisely that it has
based its supposed principle upon extrapolation from certain facts,
particularly insignificant facts such as Recognition, everyday banality in
person; as though thought should not seek its models among stranger and
more compromising adventures. Take the example of Kant: of all
philosophers, Kant is the one who discovers the prodigious domain of the
transcendental. He is the analogue of a great explorer - not of another
world, but of the upper or lower reaches of this one. However, what does
he do? In the first edition of the Critique of Pure Reason he describes in
detail three syntheses which measure the respective contributions of the
thinking faculties, all culminating in the third, that of recognition, which is
expressed in the form of the unspecified object as correlate of the 'I think'
to which all the faculties are related. It is clear that, in this manner, Kant
traces the so-called transcendental structures from the empirical acts of a
psychological consciousness: the transcendental synthesis of apprehension
is directly induced from an empirical apprehension, and so on. In order to
hide this all too obvious procedure, Kant suppressed this text in the second
edition. Although it is better hidden, the tracing method, with all its
'psychologism', nevertheless subsists.
In the second place, recognition is insignificant only as a speculative
model. It ceases to be so with regard to the ends which it serves and to
which it leads us. What is recognised is not only an object but also the
values attached to an object (values play a crucial role in the distributions
undertaken by good sense). In so far as the practical finality of recognition
lies in the 'established values', then on this model the whole image of
thought as Cogitatio natura bears witness to a disturbing complacency. As
Nietzsche says, Truth may well seem to be 'a more modest being from
which no disorder and nothing extraordinary is to be feared: a
self-contented and happy creature which is continually assuring all the
powers that be that no one needs to be the least concerned on its account;
for it is, after all, only "pure knowledge".... What is a thought which

136

Difference and Repetition

harms no one, neither thinkers nor anyone else? Recognition is a sign of
the celebration of monstrous nuptials, in which thought 'rediscovers' the
State, rediscovers 'the Church' and rediscovers all the current values that it
subtly presented in the pure form of an eternally blessed unspecified eternal
object. Nietzsche's distinction between the creation of new values and the
recognition of established values should not be understood in a historically
relative manner, as though the established values were new in their time
and the new values simply needed time to become established. In fact it
concerns a difference which is both formal and in kind. The new, with its
power of beginning and beginning again, remains forever new, just as the
established was always established from the outset, even if a certain
amount of empirical time was necessary for this to be recognised. What
becomes established with the new is precisely not the new. For the new - in
other words, difference - calls forth forces in thought which are not the
forces of recognition, today or tomorrow, but the powers of a completely
other model, from an unrecognised and unrecognisable terra incognita.
What forces does this new bring to bear upon thought, from what central
bad nature and ill will does it spring, from what central ungrounding
which strips thought of its 'innateness', and treats it every time as
something which has not always existed, but begins, forced and under
constraint? By contrast, how derisory are the voluntary struggles for
recognition. Struggles occur only on the basis of a common sense and
established values, for the attainment of current values (honours, wealth
and power). A strange struggle among consciousnesses for the conquest of
the trophy constituted by the Cogitatio natura universalis, the trophy of
pure recognition and representation. Nietzsche laughed at the very idea
that what he called will to power could be concerned with this. He called
both Kant and Hegel 'philosophical labourers' because their philosophy
remained marked by this indelible model of recognition.
Kant, however, seemed equipped to overturn the Image of thought. For
the concept of error, he substituted that of illusion: internal illusions,
interior to reason, instead of errors from without which were merely the
effects of bodily causes. For the substantial self, he substituted a self
profoundly fractured by a line of time; while in the same movement God
and the self encountered a kind of speculative death. However, in spite of
everything, and at the risk of compromising the conceptual apparatus of
the three Critiques, Kant did not want to renounce the implicit
presuppositions. Thought had to continue to enjoy an upright nature, and
philosophy could go no further than - nor in directions other than those
taken by - common sense or 'common popular reason'. At most, therefore,
Critique amounts to giving civil rights to thought considered from the
point of view of its natural law: Kant's enterprise multiplies common
senses, making as many of them as there are natural interests of rational
thought. For while it is true that in general common sense always implies a

The Image of Thought

137

collaboration of the faculties upon a form of the Same or a model of
recognition, it is no less true that, depending upon the case, one active
faculty among others is charged with the task of providing that form or
that model, along with the contribution of the other faculties subjected to
it. Thus, imagination, reason and the understanding collaborate in the case
of knowledge and form a 'logical common sense'. Here, understanding is
the legislative faculty which provides the speculative model on which the
other two are summoned to collaborate. In the case of the practical model
of recognition, by contrast, reason legislates with regard to the moral
common sense. There remains a third model involving a properly aesthetic
common sense in which the faculties attain a free accord. While it is true
that in general all the faculties collaborate in recognition, the formulae of
that collaboration differ according to the nature of that which is to be
recognised: object of knowledge, moral value, aesthetic effect. ... Far from
overturning the form of common sense, Kant merely multiplied it. (Must
not the same be said of phenomenology? Does it not discover a fourth
common sense, this time grounded upon sensibility as a passive synthesis one which, even though it constitutes an Ur-doxa, remains no less prisoner
of the form of doxa? ) We see to what degree the Kantian Critique is
ultimately respectful: knowledge, morality, reflection and faith are
supposed to correspond to natural interests of reason, and are never
themselves called into question; only the use of the faculties is declared
legitimate or not in relation to one or other of these interests. Throughout,
the variable model of recognition fixes good usage in the form of a
harmony between the faculties determined by a dominant faculty under a
given common sense. For this reason, illegitimate usage (illusion) is
explained solely in the following manner: in its natural state, thought
confuses its interests and allows its various domains to encroach upon one
another. This does not prevent thought from having at its base a good
natural law, on which Critique bestows its civil sanction; nor does it mean
that the domains, interests, limits and properties are not sacred and
grounded upon inalienable right. Critique has everything - a tribunal of
justices of the peace, a registration room, a register - except the power of a
new politics which would overturn the image of thought. Even the dead
God and the fractured I are no more than a passing bad moment, the
speculative moment: they are resuscitated in a more integrated and certain
form than ever, more sure of themselves, but with other, practical or
moral, interests.
Such is the world of representation in general. We said above that
representation was defined by certain elements: identity with regard to
concepts, opposition with regard to the determination of concepts, analogy
with regard to judgement, resemblance with regard to objects. The identity
of the unspecified concept constitutes the form of the Same with regard to
recognition. The determination of the concept implies the comparison

138

Difference and Repetition

between possible predicates and their opposites in a regressive and
progressive double series, traversed on the one side by remembrance and
on the other by an imagination the aim of which is to rediscover or
re-create (memorial-imaginative reproduction). Analogy bears either upon
the highest determinable concepts or on the relations between determinate
concepts and their respective objects. It calls upon the power of
distribution present in judgement. As for the object of the concept, in itself
or in relation to other objects, it relies upon resemblance as a requirement
of perceptual continuity. Each element thus appeals to one particular
faculty, but is also established across different faculties within the context
of a given common sense (for example, the resemblance between a
perception and a remembrance). The 'I think' is the most general principle
of representation - in other words, the source of these elements and of the
unity of all these faculties: I conceive, I judge, I imagine, I remember and I
perceive - as though these were the four branches of the Cogito. On
precisely these branches, difference is crucified. They form quadripartite
fetters under which only that which is identical, similar, analogous or
opposed can be considered different: difference becomes an object of
representation always in relation to a conceived identity, a judged analogy,
an imagined opposition or a perceived similitude. Under these four
coincident figures, difference acquires a sufficient reason in the form of a
principium comparationis. For this reason, the world of representation is
characterised by its inability to conceive of difference in itself; and by the
same token, its inability to conceive of repetition for itself, since the latter
is grasped only by means of recognition, distribution, reproduction and
resemblance in so far as these alienate the prefix RE in simple generalities
of representation. The postulate of recognition was therefore a first step
towards a much more general postulate of representation.
'... some reports of our perceptions do not provoke thought to reconsideration because the judgment of them by sensation seems adequate, while
others always invite the intellect to reflection because the sensation yields
nothing that can be trusted. - You obviously mean distant appearances, or
things drawn in perspective. - You have quite missed my meaning ...'.
This text distinguishes two kinds of things: those which do not disturb
thought and (as Plato will later say) those which force us to think. The first
are objects of recognition: thought and all its faculties may be fully employed therein, thought may busy itself thereby, but such employment and
such activity have nothing to do with thinking. Thought is thereby filled
with no more than an image of itself, one in which it recognises itself the
more it recognises things: this is a finger, this is a table, Good morning
Theaetetus. Whence the question of Socrates' interlocutor: is it when we do
not recognise, when we have difficulty in recognising, that we truly think?

The Image of Thought

139

The interlocutor seems already Cartesian. It is clear, however, that the dubitable will not allow us to escape from the point of view of recognition.
Moreover, it will only give rise to a local scepticism - or, indeed, to a
generalised method - on condition that thought already has the will to recognise what essentially distinguishes doubt from certitude. The same goes
for dubitable as for certain things: they presuppose the good will of the
thinker along with the good nature of thought, where these are understood
to include an ideal form of recognition as well as a claimed affinity with
the true, that philia which predetermines at once both the image of thought
and the concept of philosophy. Certainties force us to think no more than
doubts. To realise that three angles of a triangle should be equal to two
right angles does suppose thought, it supposes the will to think, to think of
triangles and even to think of their angles: Descartes remarked that we cannot deny this equality should we think of it, but we can indeed think, even
of triangles, without thinking of that equality. All truths of that kind are
hypothetical, since they presuppose all that is in question and are incapable
of giving birth in thought to the act of thinking. In fact, concepts only ever
designate possibilities. They lack the claws of absolute necessity - in other
words, of an original violence inflicted upon thought; the claws of a
strangeness or an enmity which alone would awaken thought from its
natural stupor or eternal possibility: there is only involuntary thought,
aroused but constrained within thought, and all the more absolutely
necessary for being born, illegitimately, of fortuitousness in the world.
Thought is primarily trespass and violence, the enemy, and nothing presupposes philosophy: everything begins with misosophy. Do not count upon
thought to ensure the relative necessity of what it thinks. Rather, count
upon the contingency of an encounter with that which forces thought to
raise up and educate the absolute necessity of an act of thought or a
passion to think. The conditions of a true critique and a true creation are
the same: the destruction of an image of thought which presupposes itself
and the genesis of the act of thinking in thought itself.
Something in the world forces us to think. This something is an object
not of recognition but of a fundamental encounter. What is encountered
may be Socrates, a temple or a demon. It may be grasped in a range of
affective tones: wonder, love, hatred, suffering. In whichever tone, its
primary characteristic is that it can only be sensed. In this sense it is
opposed to recognition. In recognition, the sensible is not at all that which
can only be sensed, but that which bears directly upon the senses in an
object which can be recalled, imagined or conceived. The sensible is
referred to an object which may not only be experienced other than by
sense, but may itself be attained by other faculties. It therefore presupposes
the exercise of the senses and the exercise of the other faculties in a
common sense. The object of encounter, on the other hand, really gives rise
to sensibility with regard to a given sense. It is not an aistheton but an

140

Difference and Repetition

aistheteon. It is not a quality but a sign. It is not a sensible being but the
being of the sensible. It is not the given but that by which the given is
given. It is therefore in a certain sense the imperceptible [insensible]. It is
imperceptible precisely from the point of view of recognition - in other
words, from the point of view of an empirical exercise of the senses in
which sensibility grasps only that which also could be grasped by other
faculties, and is related within the context of a common sense to an object
which also must be apprehended by other faculties. Sensibility, in the
presence of that which can only be sensed (and is at the same time
imperceptible) finds itself before its own limit, the sign, and raises itself to
the level of a transcendental exercise: to the 'nth' power. Common sense is
there only in order to limit the specific contribution of sensibility to the
conditions of a joint labour: it thereby enters into a discordant play, its
organs become metaphysical.
Second character: that which can only be sensed (the sentiendum or the
being of the sensible) moves the soul, 'perplexes' it - in other words, forces
it to pose a problem: as though the object of encounter, the sign, were the
bearer of a problem - as though it were a problem. Must problems or
questions be identified with singular objects of a transcendental Memory,
as other texts of Plato suggest, so that there is the possibility of a training
aimed at grasping what can only be recalled? Everything points in this
direction: it is indeed true that Platonic reminiscence claims to grasp the
immemorial being of the past, the memorandum which is at the same time
afflicted with an essential forgetting, in accordance with that law of
transcendental exercise which insists that what can only be recalled should
also be empirically impossible to recall. There is a considerable difference
between this essential forgetting and an empirical forgetting. Empirical
memory is addressed to those things which can and even must be grasped:
what is recalled must have been seen, heard, imagined or thought. That
which is forgotten, in the empirical sense, is that which cannot be grasped
a second time by the memory which searches for it (it is too far removed;
forgetting has effaced or separated us from the memory). Transcendental
memory, by contrast, grasps that which from the outset can only be
recalled, even the first time: not a contingent past, but the being of the past
as such and the past of every time. In this manner, the forgotten thing
appears in person to the memory which essentially apprehends it. It does
not address memory without addressing the forgetting within memory. The
memorandum here is both unrememberable and immemorial. Forgetting is
no longer a contingent incapacity separating us from a memory which is
itself contingent: it exists within essential memory as though it were the
'nth' power of memory with regard to its own limit or to that which can
only be recalled. It was the same with sensibility: the contingently
imperceptible, that which is too small or too far for the empirical exercise
of our senses, stands opposed to an essentially imperceptible which is

The Image of Thought

141

indistinguishable from that which can be sensed only from the point of
view of a transcendental exercise. Thus sensibility, forced by the encounter
to sense the sentiendum, forces memory in its turn to remember the
memorandum, that which can only be recalled. Finally, the third
characteristic of transcendental memory is that, in turn, it forces thought to
grasp that which can only be thought, the cogitandum or noeteon, the
Essence: not the intelligible, for this is still no more than the mode in which
we think that which might be something other than thought, but the being
of the intelligible as though this were both the final power of thought and
the unthinkable. The violence of that which forces thought develops from
the sentiendum to the cogitandum. Each faculty is unhinged, but what are
the hinges if not the form of a common sense which causes all the faculties
to function and converge? Each one, in its own order and on its own
account, has broken the form of common sense which kept it within the
empirical element of doxa, in order to attain both its 'nth' power and the
paradoxical element within transcendental exercise. Rather than all the
faculties converging and contributing to a common project of recognising
an object, we see divergent projects in which, with regard to what concerns
it essentially, each faculty is in the presence of that which is its 'own'.
Discord of the faculties, chain of force and fuse along which each confronts
its limit, receiving from (or communicating to) the other only a violence
which brings it face to face with its own element, as though with its
disappearance or its perfection.
Let us pause, however, at the manner in which Plato determines the
nature of the limits in each case. The text of The Republic defines that
which is essentially encountered, and must be distinguished from all
recognition as the object of a 'contradictory perception'. Whereas a finger
always calls for recognition and is never more than a finger, that which is
hard is never hard without also being soft, since it is inseparable from a
becoming or a relation which includes the opposite within it (the same is
true of the large and the small, the one and the many). The sign or point of
departure for that which forces thought is thus the coexistence of
contraries, the coexistence of more and less in an unlimited qualitative
becoming. Recognition, by contrast, measures and limits the quality by
relating it to something, thereby interrupting the mad-becoming. In
defining the first instance by that form of qualitative opposition or
contrariety, however, does not Plato already confuse the being of the
sensible with a simple sensible being, with a pure qualitative being
[aistheton]? The suspicion is reinforced when we consider the second
instance, reminiscence. For reminiscence only appears to break with the
recognition model when in fact it is content to complicate the schema:
whereas recognition bears upon a perceptible or perceived object
reminiscence bears upon another object, supposed to be associated with or
rather enveloped within the first, which demands to be recognised for itself

142

Difference and Repetition

independently of any distinct perception. This other thing, enveloped
within the sign, must be at once never-seen and yet already-recognised, a
disturbing unfamiliarity. It is then tempting to say poetically that this has
been seen, but in another life, in a mythical present: You are the image of
... . By this means, however, everything is betrayed: first, the nature of the
encounter in so far as this does not merely propose a particularly difficult
test for recognition, an envelopment that is particularly difficult to unfold,
but instead opposes all possible recognition; second, the nature of the
transcendental memory and of that which can only be recalled. For this
second instance is only conceived in the form of similitude in the
reminiscence, to the point where the same objection arises: reminiscence
confuses the being of the past with a past being, and since it is unable to
assign an empirical moment at which this past was present, it invokes an
original or mythical present. The importance of the concept of
reminiscence (and the reason why it must be radically distinguished from
the Cartesian concept of innateness) consists in its manner of introducing
time or the duration of time into thought as such. By this means, it
establishes an opacity peculiar to thought, and testifies to the existence of
both a bad nature and an ill will which must be shaken by signs from
without. As we have seen, however, because time is introduced here only in
the form of a physical cycle, and not in its pure or essential form, thought
is still supposed to possess a good nature and a resplendent clarity which
are merely obscured or waylaid amidst the misadventures of the natural
cycle. Reminiscence is still a refuge for the recognition model, and Plato no
less than Kant traces the operation of the transcendental memory from the
outlines of its empirical exercise (we see this clearly in the account of the
Phaedo).
As for the third instance, that of pure thought or that which can only be
thought, Plato determines this instance in terms of separated contraries.
Thus, under the pressure of reminiscence, we are forced to think such
things as Largeness which is nothing but large, Smallness which is nothing
but small, Heaviness which is nothing but heavy, or Unity which is nothing
but one. According to Plato, therefore, the essence is defined by the form of
real Identity (the Same understood as auto kath' hauto). Everything
culminates in the great principle: that there is - before all else, and despite
everything - an affinity or a filiation - or perhaps it should be called a
philiation - of thought with the true; in short, a good nature and a good
desire, grounded in the last instance upon the form of analogy in the Good.
As a result, the Plato who wrote the passage from The Republic cited
above was also the first to erect the dogmatic and moralising image of
thought which neutralises that text and allows it to function only as a
'repentance'. Having discovered the superior or transcendent exercise of
the faculties, Plato subordinated this to the forms of opposition in the
sensible, similitude in reminiscence, identity in the essence and analogy in

The Image of Thought

143

the Good. In this manner he prepared the way for the world of
representation, carrying out a first distribution of its elements and already
covering the exercise of thought with a dogmatic image which both
presupposes and betrays it.
The transcendental form of a faculty is indistinguishable from its
disjointed, superior or transcendent exercise. Transcendent in no way
means that the faculty addresses itself to objects outside the world but, on
the contrary, that it grasps that in the world which concerns it exclusively
and brings it into the world. The transcendent exercise must not be traced
from the empirical exercise precisely because it apprehends that which
cannot be grasped from the point of view of common sense, that which
measures the empirical operation of all the faculties according to that
which pertains to each, given the form of their collaboration. That is why
the transcendental is answerable to a superior empiricism which alone is
capable of exploring its domain and its regions. Contrary to Kant's belief,
it cannot be induced from the ordinary empirical forms in the manner in
which these appear under the determination of common sense. Despite the
fact that it has become discredited today, the doctrine of the faculties is an
entirely necessary component of the system of philosophy. Its discredit may
be explained by the misrecognition of this properly transcendental
empiricism, for which was substituted in vain a tracing of the
transcendental from the empirical. Each faculty must be borne to the
extreme point of its dissolution, at which it falls prey to triple violence: the
violence of that which forces it to be exercised, of that which it is forced to
grasp and which it alone is able to grasp, yet also that of the ungraspable
(from the point of view of its empirical exercise). This is the threefold limit
of the final power. Each faculty discovers at this point its own unique
passion — in other words, its radical difference and its eternal repetition, its
differential and repeating element along with the instantaneous
engendering of its action and the eternal replay of its object, its manner of
coming into the world already repeating. We ask, for example: What forces
sensibility to sense? What is it that can only be sensed, yet is imperceptible
at the same time? We must pose this question not only for memory and
thought, but also for the imagination - is there an imaginandum, a
phantasteon, which would also be the limit, that which is impossible to
imagine?; for language - is there a loquendutn, that which would be silence
at the same time?; and for the other faculties which would find their place
in a complete doctrine - vitality, the transcendent object of which would
include monstrosity; and sociability, the transcendent object of which
would include anarchy - and even for faculties yet to be discovered, whose
existence is not yet suspected. For nothing can be said in advance, one
cannot prejudge the outcome of research: it may be that some well-known
faculties - too well known - turn out to have no proper limit, no verbal
adjective, because they are imposed and have an exercise only under the

144

Difference and Repetition

form of common sense. It may turn out, on the other hand, that new
faculties arise, faculties which were repressed by that form of common
sense. For a doctrine in general, there is nothing regrettable in this
uncertainty about the outcome of research, this complexity in the study of
the particular case of each faculty: on the contrary, transcendental
empiricism is the only way to avoid tracing the transcendental from the
outlines of the empirical.
Our concern here is not to establish such a doctrine of the faculties. We
seek only to determine the nature of its requirements. In this regard, the
Platonic determinations cannot be satisfactory. For it is not figures already
mediated and related to representation that are capable of carrying the
faculties to their respective limits but, on the contrary, free or untamed
states of difference in itself; not qualitative opposition within the sensible,
but an element which is in itself difference, and creates at once both the
quality in the sensible and the transcendent exercise within sensibility. This
element is intensity, understood as pure difference in itself, as that which is
at once both imperceptible for empirical sensibility which grasps intensity
only already covered or mediated by the quality to which it gives rise, and
at the same time that which can be perceived only from the point of view
of a transcendental sensibility which apprehends it immediately in the
encounter. Moreover, when sensibility transmits its constraint to the
imagination, when the imagination in turn is raised to the level of
transcendent exercise, it is the phantasm, the disparity within the
phantasm, which constitutes the phantasteon, which is both that which can
only be imagined and the empirically unimaginable. With regard to
memory, it is not similitude in the reminiscence but, on the contrary, the
dissimilar in the pure form of time which constitutes the immemorial of a
transcendent memory. Finally, it is an I fractured by this form of time
which finds itself constrained to think that which can only be thought; not
the Same, but that transcendent 'aleatory point', always Other by nature,
in which all the essences are enveloped like so many differentials of
thought, and which signifies the highest power of thought only by virtue of
also designating the unthinkable or the inability to think at the empirical
level. We recall Heidegger's profound texts showing that as long as
thought continues to presuppose its own good nature and good will, in the
form of a commoa sense, a ratio, a Cogitatio natura universalis, it will
think nothing at all but remain a prisoner to opinion, frozen in an abstract
possibility ... : 'Man can think in the sense that he possesses the possibility
to do so. This possibility alone, however, is no guarantee to us that we are
capable of thinking. It is true that on the path which leads to that which
is to be thought, all begins with sensibility. Between the intensive and
thought, it is always by means of an intensity that thought comes to us.
The privilege of sensibility as origin appears in the fact that, in an
encounter, what forces sensation and that which can only be sensed are

The Image of Thought

145

one and the same thing, whereas in other cases the two instances are
distinct. In effect, the intensive or difference in intensity is at once both the
object of the encounter and the object to which the encounter raises
sensibility. It is not the gods which we encounter: even hidden, the gods are
only the forms of recognition. What we encounter are the demons, the
sign-bearers: powers of the leap, the interval, the intensive and the instant;
powers which only cover difference with more difference. What is most
important, however, is that - between sensibility and imagination, between
imagination and memory, between memory and thought - when each
disjointed faculty communicates to another the violence which carries it to
its own limit, every time it is a free form of difference which awakens the
faculty, and awakens it as the different within that difference. So it is with
difference in intensity, disparity in the phantasm, dissemblance in the form
of time, the differential in thought. Opposition, resemblance, identity and
even analogy are only effects produced by these presentations of difference,
rather than being conditions which subordinate difference and make it
something represented. There is no philia which testifies to a desire, love,
good nature or good will by virtue of which the faculties already possess or
tend towards the object to which they are raised by violence, and by virtue
of which they would enjoy an analogy with it or a homology among
themselves. Each faculty, including thought, has only involuntary
adventures: involuntary operation remains embedded in the empirical. The
Logos breaks up into hieroglyphics, each one of which speaks the
transcendent language of a faculty. Even the point of departure - namely,
sensibility in the encounter with that which forces sensation - presupposes
neither affinity nor predestination. On the contrary, it is the fortuitousness
or the contingency of the encounter which guarantees the necessity of that
which it forces to be thought. There is no amicability, such as that between
the similar and the Same or even that which unites opposites, to link
sensibility to a sentiendum. The dark precursor is sufficient to enable
communication between difference as such, and to make the different
communicate with difference: the dark precursor is not a friend. President
Schreber reformulates Plato's three moments, in his own way and in
restoring them to their original communicative violence: the nerves and the
annexation of nerves, examined souls and the murder of souls, constrained
thought and the constraint to think.
The very principle of communication, even if this should be violence,
seems to maintain the form of a common sense. However, it is nothing of
the sort. There is indeed a serial connection between the faculties and an
order in that series. But neither the order nor the series implies any
collaboration with regard to the form of a supposed same object or to a
subjective unity in the nature of an 'I think'. It is a forced and broken
connection which traverses the fragments of a dissolved self as it does the
borders of a fractured I. The transcendental operation of the faculties is a

146

Difference and Repetition

properly paradoxical operation, opposed to their exercise under the rule of
a common sense. In consequence, the harmony between the faculties can
appear only in the form of a discordant harmony, since each communicates
to the other only the violence which confronts it with its own difference
17
and its divergence from the others. Kant was the first to provide the
example of such a discordant harmony, the relation between imagination
and thought which occurs in the case of the sublime. There is, therefore,
something which is communicated from one faculty to another, but it is
metamorphosed and does not form a common sense. We could just as well
say that there are Ideas which traverse all the faculties, but are the object of
none in particular. Perhaps in effect, as we shall see, it will be necessary to
reserve the name of Ideas not for pure cogitanda but rather for those
instances which go from sensibility to thought and from thought to
sensibility, capable of engendering in each case, according to their own
order, the limit- or transcendent-object of each faculty. Ideas are problems,
but problems only furnish the conditions under which the faculties attain
their superior exercise. Considered in this light, Ideas, far from having as
their milieu a good sense or a common sense, refer to a para-sense which
determines only the communication between disjointed faculties. Neither
are they illuminated by a natural light: rather, they shine like differential
flashes which leap and metamorphose. The very conception of a natural
light is inseparable from a certain value supposedly attached to the Idea namely, 'clarity and distinctness'; and from a certain supposed origin namely, 'innateness'. Innateness, however, only represents the good nature
of thought from the point of view of a Christian theology or, more
generally, the requirements of creation (which is why Plato opposed
reminiscence to innateness, criticising the latter for ignoring the role of a
form of time in the soul as a consequence of pure thought, or the necessity
of a formal distinction between a Before and an After capable of grounding
forgetting in that which forces thought). The 'clear and distinct' itself is
inseparable from the model of recognition which serves as the instrument
of every orthodoxy, even when it is rational. Clarity and distinctness form
the logic of recognition, just as innateness is the theology of common sense:
both have already pushed the Idea over into representation. The restitution
of the Idea in the doctrine of the faculties requires the explosion of the
clear and distinct, and the discovery of a Dionysian value according to
which the Idea is necessarily obscure in so far as it is distinct, all the more
obscure the more it is distinct. Distinction-obscurity becomes here the true
tone of philosophy, the symphony of the discordant Idea.
Nothing is more exemplary in this respect than the exchange of letters
between Jacques Riviere and Antonin Artaud. Riviere defended the image
of an autonomous thinking function, endowed in principle with its own
nature and will. In fact, we are confronted with great difficulties in
thinking: lack of method, technique or application, and even lack of health.

The Image of Thought

147

These, however, are fortunate difficulties: not only because they prevent
the nature of thought from devouring our own nature, not only because
they bring thought into relation with obstacles which are so many 'facts'
without which it would not manage to orientate itself, but also because our
efforts to overcome these obstacles allow us to maintain an ideal of the self
as it exists in pure thought, like a 'superior degree of identity with
ourselves', which persists through the factual variations, differences and
inequalities which constantly affect us. The reader notes with astonishment
that the more Riviere believes himself to be close to an understanding of
Artaud, the further away he is, and the more he speaks of something
altogether different. Rarely has there been such misunderstanding. Artaud
does not simply talk about his own 'case', but already in his youthful
letters shows an awareness that his case brings him into contact with a
generalised thought process which can no longer be covered by the
reassuring dogmatic image but which, on the contrary, amounts to the
complete destruction of that image. The difficulties he describes himself as
experiencing must therefore be understood as not merely in fact but as
difficulties in principle, concerning and affecting the essence of what it
means to think. Artaud said that the problem (for him) was not to
orientate his thought, or to perfect the expression of what he thought, or to
acquire application and method or to perfect his poems, but simply to
manage to think something. For him, this was the only conceivable 'work':
it presupposes an impulse, a compulsion to think which passes through all
sorts of bifurcations, spreading from the nerves and being communicated
to the soul in order to arrive at thought. Henceforth, thought is also forced
to think its central collapse, its fracture, its own natural 'powerlessness'
which is indistinguishable from the greatest power - in other words, from
those unformulated forces, the cogitanda, as though from so many thefts or
trespasses in thought. Artaud pursues in all this the terrible revelation of a
thought without image, and the conquest of a new principle which does
not allow itself to be represented. He knows that difficulty as such, along
with its cortege of problems and questions, is not a de facto state of affairs
but a de jure structure of thought; that there is an acephalism in thought
just as there is an amnesia in memory, an aphasia in language and an
agnosia in sensibility. He knows that thinking is not innate, but must be
engendered in thought. He knows that the problem is not to direct or
methodically apply a thought which pre-exists in principle and in nature,
but to bring into being that which does not yet exist (there is no other
work, all the rest is arbitrary, mere decoration). To think is to create there is no other creation - but to create is first of all to engender 'thinking'
in thought. For this reason Artaud opposes genitality to innateness in
thought, but equally to reminiscence, and thereby proposes the principle of
a transcendental empiricism:

148

Difference and Repetition

I am innately genital. ... There are some fools who think of themselves
as beings, as innately being. I am he who, in order to be, must whip his
innateness. One who innately must be a being, that is always whipping
this sort of non-existent kennel, O bitches of impossibility! ... Underneath grammar there lies thought, an infamy harder to conquer, an infinitely more shrewdish maid, rougher to overcome when taken as an
innate fact. For thought is a matron who has not always existed.
It is not a question of opposing to the dogmatic image of thought another
image borrowed, for example, from schizophrenia, but rather of remembering that schizophrenia is not only a human fact but also a possibility for
thought - one, moreover, which can only be revealed as such can through
the abolition of that image. It is noteworthy that the dogmatic image, for
its part, recognises only error as a possible misadventure of thought, and
reduces everything to the form of error. This, indeed, is the fifth postulate
that we should take into account: taking error to be the sole 'negative' of
thought. Without doubt this postulate belongs to the others as much as
they belong to it: what can befall a Cogitatio natura universalis which presupposes a good will on the part of the thinker along with a good nature on
the part of thought except that it be mistaken - in other words, that it take
the false for the true (the false according to nature for the true according to
the will)? Does not error itself testify to the form of a common sense, since
one faculty alone cannot be mistaken but two faculties can be, at least
from the point of view of their collaboration, when an object of one is confused with another object of the other? What is error if not always false
recognition? Whence does it come if not from a false distribution of the
elements of representation, from a false evaluation of opposition, analogy,
resemblance and identity? Error is only the reverse of a rational orthodoxy,
still testifying on behalf of that from which it is distanced - in other words,
on behalf of an honesty, a good nature and a good will on the part of the
one who is said to be mistaken. Error, therefore, pays homage to the 'truth'
to the extent that, lacking a form of its own, it gives the form of the true to
the false. It is in this sense that in the Theaetetus, under the sway of an apparently quite different inspiration from that in The Republic, Plato presents simultaneously both a positive model of recognition or common sense,
and a negative model of error. Not only does thought appropriate the ideal
of an 'orthodoxy', not only does common sense find its object in the categories of opposition, similitude, analogy and identity, but error itself implies this transcendence of a common sense with regard to sensations, and
of a soul with regard to all the faculties whose collaboration [syllogismos]
in relation to the form of the Same it determines. For if I cannot confuse
two things that I perceive or conceive, I can always confuse something I see
with something I conceive or remember - when, for example, I slip the

The Image of Thought

149

present object of my sensation into the engram of another object of my
memory - as in the case of 'Good morning Theodoras' when it is
Theaetetus who passes by. Error in all its misery, therefore, still testifies to
the transcendence of the Cogitatio natura. It is as though error were a kind
of failure of good sense within the form of a common sense which remains
integral and intact. It thereby confirms the preceding postulates of the dogmatic image as much as it derives from them, proving them by reductio ad
absurdum.
It is true that this proof is completely ineffectual, since it operates in the
same element as the postulates themselves. Yet it is perhaps easier to
reconcile the Theaetetus and the text from the Republic than it may at first
seem. It is not by chance that the Theaetetus is an aporetic dialogue, and
the aporia on which it closes is that of difference or diaphora (to the same
extent that thought requires that difference transcend 'opinion', opinion
requires for itself an immanence of difference). Theaetetus is the first great
theory of common sense, of recognition, representation and error as their
correlate. However, the aporia of difference exposes its failure from the
outset, along with the need to search in a quite different direction for a
doctrine of thought: perhaps the one indicated by Book VII of the
Republic? ... Always with the reservation that the Theaetetus model
continues to act in a subterranean manner, and that the persistent elements
of representation still compromise the new vision of the Republic.
According to the hypothesis of the Cogitatio natura universalis, error is
the 'negative' which develops naturally. Nevertheless, the dogmatic image
does not ignore the fact that thought has other misadventures besides error:
humiliations more difficult to overcome, negatives much more difficult to
unravel. It does not overlook the fact that the terrible Trinity of madness,
stupidity and malevolence can no more be reduced to error than they can
be reduced to any form of the same. Once again, however, these are no
more than facts for the dogmatic image. Stupidity, malevolence and
madness are regarded as facts occasioned by external causes, which bring
into play external forces capable of subverting the honest character of
thought from without - all this to the extent that we are not only thinkers.
The sole effect of these forces in thought is then assimilated precisely to
error, which is supposed in principle to include all the effects of factual
external causes. The reduction of stupidity, malevolence and madness to
the single figure of error must therefore be understood to occur in principle
- whence the hybrid character of this weak concept which would not have
a place within pure thought if thought were not diverted from without, and
would not be occasioned by this outside if the outside were not within pure
thought. For this reason, we cannot be content to invoke certain facts
against the in-principle dogmatic image of thought. As in the case of
recognition, we must pursue the discussion at the level of principle itself,
by questioning the legitimacy of the distribution of the empirical and the

150

Difference and Repetition

transcendental carried out by the dogmatic image. For it rather seems to us
that there are facts with regard to error, but which facts? Who says 'Good
morning Theodorus' when Theaetetus passes, 'It is three o'clock' when it is
three-thirty, and that 7 + 5 = 13? Answer: the myopic, the distracted and
the young child at school. These are effective examples of errors, but
examples which, like the majority of such 'facts', refer to thoroughly
artificial or puerile situations, and offer a grotesque image of thought
because they relate it to very simple questions to which one can and must
respond by independent propositions. Error acquires a sense only once
the play of thought ceases to be speculative and becomes a kind of radio
quiz. Everything must therefore be inverted: error is a fact which is then
arbitrarily extrapolated and arbitrarily projected into the transcendental.
As for the true transcendental structures of thought and the 'negative' in
which these are enveloped, perhaps these must be sought elsewhere, and in
figures other than those of error?
In one way or another, philosophers have always had a lively awareness
of this necessity. There are few who did not feel the need to enrich the
concept of error by means of determinations of a quite different kind. (To
cite some examples: the notion of superstition as this is elaborated by
Lucretius, Spinoza and the eighteenth-century philosophes, in particular
Fontanelle. It is clear that the 'absurdity' of a superstition cannot be
reduced to its kernel of error. Similarly, Plato's ignorance or forgetting are
distinguished from error as much as from innateness and reminiscence
itself. The Stoic notion of stultitia involves at once both madness and
stupidity. The Kantian idea of inner illusion, internal to reason, is radically
different from the extrinsic mechanism of error. The Hegelian idea of
alienation supposes a profound restructuring of the true-false relation. The
Schopenhauerian notions of vulgarity and stupidity imply a complete
reversal of the will-understanding relation.) What prevents these richer
determinations from being developed on their own account, however, is
the maintenance, despite everything, of the dogmatic image, along with the
postulates of common sense, recognition and representation which
comprise its cortege. The correctives can thus appear only as 'repentances'
which complicate or inconvenience the image without overturning its
implicit principle.
Stupidity [betise] is not animality. The animal is protected by specific
forms which prevent it from being 'stupid' [bete]. Formal correspondences
between the human face and the heads of animals have often been
composed; in other words, correspondences between individual differences
peculiar to humans and the specific differences of animals. Such
correspondences, however, take no account of stupidity as a specifically
human form of bestiality. When satirical poets proceed through the various
degrees of insult, they do not stop with animal forms but continue on to
more profound regressions, passing from carnivores to herbivores and

The Image of Thought

151

ending with cloaca as though with a universal leguminous and digestive
ground. The internal process of digestion is more profound than the
external gesture of attack or voracious movement: stupidity with peristaltic
movements. This is why tyrants have the heads not only of beasts but also
of pears, cauliflowers or potatoes. One is neither superior nor external to
that from which one benefits: a tyrant institutionalises stupidity, but he is
the first servant of his own system and the first to be installed within it.
Slaves are always commanded by another slave. Here too, how could the
concept of error account for this unity of stupidity and cruelty, of the
grotesque and the terrifying, which doubles the way of the world?
Cowardice, cruelty, baseness and stupidity are not simply corporeal
capacities or traits of character or society; they are structures of thought as
such. The transcendental landscape comes to life: places for the tyrant, the
slave and the imbecile must be found within it - without the place
resembling the figure who occupies it, and without the transcendental ever
being traced from the empirical figures which it makes possible. It is
always our belief in the postulates of the Cogitatio which prevents us from
making stupidity a transcendental problem. Stupidity can then be no more
than an empirical determination, referring back to psychology or to the
anecdotal - or worse, to polemic and insults - and to the especially
atrocious pseudo-literary genre of the sottisier. But whose fault is this?
Does not the fault lie first with philosophy, which has allowed itself to be
convinced by the concept of error even though this concept is itself
borrowed from facts, relatively insignificant and arbitrary facts? The worst
literature produces sottisiers, while the best (Flaubert, Baudelaire, Bloy)
was haunted by the problem of stupidity. By giving this problem all its
cosmic, encyclopaedic and gnoseological dimensions, such literature was
able to carry it as far as the entrance to philosophy itself. Philosophy could
have taken up the problem with its own means and with the necessary
modesty, by considering the fact that stupidity is never that of others but
the object of a properly transcendental question: how is stupidity (not
error) possible?
It is possible by virtue of the link between thought and individuation.
This link is much more profound than that which appears in the 'I think': it
is established in a field of intensity which already constitutes the sensibility
of the thinking subject. For the I and the Self are perhaps no more than
indices of the species: of humanity as a species with divisions. The species
has undoubtedly reached an implicit state in man. As a result, the form of
the / can serve as a universal principle for recognition and representation,
whereas the specific explicit forms are recognised only by means of this I,
and the determination of species is only the rule of one of the elements of
representation. The I is therefore not a species; rather - since it implicitly
contains what the species and kinds explicitly develop, in particular the
represented becoming of the form - they have a common fate, Eudoxus

152

Difference and Repetition

and Epistemon. Individuation, by contrast, has nothing to do with even the
continued process of determining species. Not only does it differ in kind
from all determination of species but, as we shall see, it precedes and
renders the latter possible. It involves fields of fluid intensive factors which
no more take the form of an I than of a Self. Individuation as such, as it
operates beneath all forms, is inseparable from a pure ground that it brings
to the surface and trails with it. It is difficult to describe this ground, or the
terror and attraction it excites. Turning over the ground is the most
dangerous occupation, but also the most tempting in the stupefied
moments of an obtuse will. For this ground, along with the individual, rises
to the surface yet assumes neither form nor figure. It is there, staring at us,
but without eyes. The individual distinguishes itself from it, but it does not
distinguish itself, continuing rather to cohabit with that which divorces
itself from it. It is the indeterminate, but the indeterminate in so far as it
continues to embrace determination, as the ground does the shoe. Animals
are in a sense forewarned against this ground, protected by their explicit
forms. Not so for the I and the Self, undermined by the fields of
individuation which work beneath them, defenceless against a rising of the
ground which holds up to them a distorted or distorting mirror in which all
presently thought forms dissolve. Stupidity is neither the ground nor the
individual, but rather this relation in which individuation brings the
ground to the surface without being able to give it form (this ground rises
by means of the I, penetrating deeply into the possibility of thought and
constituting the unrecognised in every recognition). All determinations
become bad and cruel when they are grasped only by a thought which
invents and contemplates them, flayed and separated from their living
form, adrift upon this barren ground. Everything becomes violence on this
passive ground. Everything becomes attack on this digestive ground. Here
the Sabbath of stupidity and malevolence takes place. Perhaps this is the
origin of that melancholy which weighs upon the most beautiful human
faces: the presentiment of a hideousness peculiar to the human face, of a
rising tide of stupidity, an evil deformity or a thought governed by
madness. For from the point of view of a philosophy of nature, madness
arises at the point at which the individual contemplates itself in this free
ground - and, as a result, stupidity in stupidity and cruelty in cruelty - to
the point that it can no longer stand itself. 'A pitiful faculty then emerges in
their minds, that of being able to see stupidity and no longer tolerate
it...'. It is true that this most pitiful faculty also becomes the royal faculty
when it animates philosophy as a philosophy of mind - in other words,
when it leads all the other faculties to that transcendent exercise which
renders possible a violent reconciliation between the individual, the ground
and thought. At this point, the intensive factors of individuation take
themselves as objects in such a manner as to constitute the highest element
of a transcendent sensibility, the sentiendum; and from faculty to faculty,

The Image of Thought

153

the ground is borne within thought - still as the unthought and unthinking,
but this unthought has become the necessary empirical form in which, in
the fractured I (Bouvard and Pecuchet), thought at last thinks the
cogitandutn; in other words, the transcendent element which can only be
thought ('the fact that we do not yet think' or 'What is stupidity?').
Teachers already know that errors or falsehoods are rarely found in homework (except in those exercises where a fixed result must be produced, or
propositions must be translated one by one). Rather, what is more frequently found - and worse - are nonsensical sentences, remarks without
interest or importance, banalities mistaken for profundities, ordinary
'points' confused with singular points, badly posed or distorted problems all heavy with dangers, yet the fate of us all. We doubt whether, when
mathematicians engage in polemic, they criticize one another for being mistaken in the results of their calculations. Rather, they criticize one another
for having produced an insignificant theorem or a problem devoid of sense.
Philosophy must draw the conclusions which follow from this. The element
of sense is well known to philosophy; it has even become very familiar to
philosophers. Nevertheless, this is perhaps not enough. Sense is defined as
the condition of the true, but since it is supposed that the condition must
retain an extension larger than that which is conditioned, sense does not
ground truth without also allowing the possibility of error. A false proposition remains no less a proposition endowed with sense. Non-sense would
then be the characteristic of that which can be neither true nor false. Two
dimensions may be distinguished in a proposition: expression, in which a
proposition says or expresses some idea; and designation, in which it indicates or designates the objects to which what is said or expressed applies.
One of these would then be the dimension of sense, the other the dimension of truth and falsity. However, in this manner sense would only found
the truth of a proposition while remaining indifferent to what it founds.
Truth and falsity would be matters of designation (as Russell says: 'The
question of truth and falsehood has to do with what words and sentences
indicate, not with what they express.' ). We are then in a strange situation: having discovered the domain of sense, we refer it only to a psychological trait or a logical formalism. If need be, a new value, that of the
nonsensical or the absurd, is added to the classical values of truth and falsity. However, the true and the false are supposed to continue in the same
state as before - in other words, as if they were independent of the condition assigned to them or of the new value which is added to them. Either
too much is said, or not enough: too much, because the search for a
ground forms the essential step of a 'critique' which should inspire in us
new ways of thinking; not enough, because so long as the ground remains
larger than the grounded, this critique serves only to justify traditional

154

Difference and Repetition

ways of thinking. The true and the false are supposed to remain unaffected
by the condition which grounds the one only by rendering the other
possible. By referring the true and the false back to the relation of designation within the proposition, we acquire a sixth postulate: the postulate of
designation or of the proposition itself, which both incorporates and follows from the preceding postulates (the relation of designation is only the
logical form of recognition).
In fact, the condition must be a condition of real experience, not of
possible experience. It forms an intrinsic genesis, not an extrinsic
conditioning. In every respect, truth is a matter of production, not of
adequation. It is a matter of genitality, not of innateness or reminiscence.
We cannot accept that the grounded remains the same as it was before, the
same as when it was not grounded, when it had not passed the test of
grounding. If sufficient reason or the ground has a 'twist', this is because it
relates what it grounds to that which is truly groundless. At this point, it
must be said, there is no longer recognition. To ground is to
metamorphose. Truth and falsity do not concern a simple designation,
rendered possible by a sense which remains indifferent to it. The relation
between a proposition and what it designates must be established within
sense itself: the nature of ideal sense is to point beyond itself towards the
object designated. Designation, in so far as it is achieved in the case of a
true proposition, would never be grounded unless it were understood as the
limit of the genetic series or the ideal connections which constitute sense. If
sense points beyond itself towards the object, the latter can no longer be
posited in reality exterior to sense, but only at the limit of its process.
Moreover, the proposition's relation to what it designates, in so far as this
relation is established, is constituted within the unity of sense, along with
the object which realises this unity. There is only a single case where the
designated stands alone and remains external to sense: precisely the case of
those singular propositions arbitrarily detached from their context and
employed as examples. Here too, however, how can we accept that such
puerile and artificial textbook examples justify an image of thought? Every
time a proposition is replaced in the context of living thought, it is
apparent that it has exactly the truth it deserves according to its sense, and
the falsity appropriate to the non-sense that it implies. We always have as
much truth as we deserve in accordance with the sense of what we say.
Sense is the genesis or the production of the true, and truth is only the
empirical result of sense. We rediscover in all the postulates of the
dogmatic image the same confusion: elevating a simple empirical figure to
the status of a transcendental, at the risk of allowing the real structures of
the transcendental to fall into the empirical.
Sense is what is expressed by a proposition, but what is this expressed?
It cannot be reduced either to the object designated or to the lived state of
the speaker. Indeed, we must distinguish sense and signification in the

The Image of Thought

155

following manner: signification refers only to concepts and the manner in
which they relate to the objects conditioned by a given field of
representation; whereas sense is like the Idea which is developed in the
sub-representative determinations. It is not surprising that it should be
easier to say what sense is not than to say what it is. In effect, we can never
formulate simultaneously both a proposition and its sense; we can never
say what is the sense of what we say. From this point of view, sense is the
veritable loquendum, that which in its empirical operation cannot be said,
even though it can be said only in its transcendental operation. The Idea
which runs throughout all the faculties nevertheless cannot be reduced to
sense, since in turn it is also non-sense. Nor is there any difficulty in
reconciling this double aspect by means of which the Idea is constituted of
structural elements which have no sense themselves, while it constitutes the
sense of all that it produces (structure and genesis). There is only one kind
of word which expresses both itself and its sense - precisely the nonsense
word: abraxas, snark or blituri. If sense is necessarily a nonsense for the
empirical function of the faculties, then conversely, the nonsenses so
frequent in the empirical operation are like the secret of sense for the
conscientious observer, all of whose faculties point towards a transcendent
limit. As so many authors have recognised in diverse ways (Flaubert, Lewis
Carroll), the mechanism of nonsense is the highest finality of sense, just as
the mechanism of stupidity is the highest finality of thought. While it is
true that we cannot express the sense of what we say, we can at least take
the sense of a proposition - in other words, the expressed, as the
designated of another proposition - of which in turn we cannot express the
sense, and so on to infinity. As a result, if we call each proposition of
consciousness a 'name', it is caught in an indefinite nominal regress, each
name referring to another name which designates the sense of the
preceding. However, the inability of empirical consciousness here
corresponds to the 'nth' power of the language and its transcendent
repetition to be able to speak infinitely of or about words themselves. In
any case, thought is betrayed by the dogmatic image and by the postulate
of propositions according to which philosophy would find a beginning in a
first proposition of consciousness: Cogito. But perhaps Cogito is the name
which has no sense and no object other than the power of reiteration in
indefinite regress (I think that I think that I think ... ). Every proposition of
consciousness implies an unconscious of pure thought which constitutes the
sphere of sense in which there is infinite regress.
The first paradox of sense, therefore, is that of proliferation, in which
that which is expressed by one 'name' is designated by another name which
doubles the first. No doubt this paradox may be avoided, but at the risk of
falling into another: this time, the proposition is suspended, immobilised,
just long enough to extract from it a double which retains only the ideal
content, the immanent given. The paradoxical repetition essential to

156

Difference and Repetition

language then no longer consists in a redoubling but in a doubling; no
longer in a precipitation but in a suspension. This double of the
proposition appears distinct at once from the proposition itself, the
formulator of the proposition and the object which it concerns. It is
distinguished from the subject and the object because it does not exist
outside of the proposition which expresses it. It is distinguished from the
proposition itself because it relates to the object as though it were its
logical attribute, its 'statable' or 'expressible'. It is the complex theme of
the proposition and, as such, the first term of knowledge. In order to
distinguish it at once both from the object (God or the sky, for example)
and from the proposition (God is, the sky is blue), it is stated in infinitive
or participial form: to-be-God or God-being, the being-blue of the sky.
This complex is an ideal event. It is an objective entity, but one of which
we cannot say that it exists in itself: it insists or subsists, possessing a
quasi-being or an extra-being, that minimum of being common to real,
possible and even impossible objects. In this way, however, we fall into a
nest of secondary difficulties, for how are we to avoid the consequence that
contradictory propositions have the same sense, given that affirmation and
negation are only prepositional modes? Or how are we to avoid the
consequence that an impossible object, one which is self-contradictory, has
a sense even though it has no 'signification' (the being-square of a circle)?
Or again, how are we to reconcile the transience of an object with the
eternity of its sense? Finally, how are we to avoid the following play of
mirrors: a proposition must be true because its expressible is true, while the
expressible is true only when the proposition itself is true? All these
difficulties stem from a common source: in extracting a double from the
proposition we have evoked a simple phantom. Sense so defined is only a
vapour which plays at the limit of things and words. Sense appears here as
the outcome of the most powerful logical effort, but as Ineffectual, a sterile
incorporeal deprived of its generative power. Lewis Carroll gave a
marvellous account of all these paradoxes: that of the neutralising doubling
appears in the form of the smile without a cat, while that of the
proliferating redoubling appears in the form of the knight who always
gives a new name to the name of the song - and between these two
extremes lie all the secondary paradoxes which form Alice's adventures.
Is anything gained by expressing sense in the interrogative rather than
the infinitive or participial form ('Is God?' rather than to-be-God or the
being of God)? At first glance the gain is slight. It is slight because a
question is always traced from givable, probable or possible responses. It is
therefore itself the neutralised double of a supposedly pre-existent
proposition which may or must serve as response. All the orator's art goes
into constructing questions in accordance with the responses he wishes to
evoke or the propositions of which he wants to convince us. Even when we
do not know the answer, we question only in supposing that in principle it

The Image of Thought

157

is already given, or that it already exists in another consciousness. That is
why - in accordance with its etymology - interrogation always takes place
within the framework of a community: to interrogate implies not only a
common sense but a good-sense, a distribution of knowledge and of the
given with respect to empirical consciousnesses in accordance with their
situations, their points of view, their positions and their skills, in such a
way that a given consciousness is supposed to know already what the other
does not (What time is it? - You who have a watch or are close to a clock.
When was Caesar born? - You who know Roman history). Despite this
weakness, the interrogative formula has at least one advantage: at the same
time as it invites us to consider the corresponding proposition as a
response, it opens up a new path for us. A proposition conceived as a
response is always a particular solution, a case considered for itself,
abstractly and apart from the superior synthesis which relates it, along with
other cases, to a problem as problem. Therefore interrogation, in turn,
expresses the manner in which a problem is dismembered, cashed out and
revealed, in experience and for consciousness, according to its diversely
apprehended cases of solution. Even though it gives us an insufficient idea,
it thereby inspires in us the presentiment of that which it dismembers.
Sense is located in the problem itself. Sense is constituted in the complex
theme, but the complex theme is that set of problems and questions in
relation to which the propositions serve as elements of response and cases
of solution. This definition, however, requires us to rid ourselves of an
illusion which belongs to the dogmatic image of thought: problems and
questions must no longer be traced from the corresponding propositions
which serve, or can serve, as responses. We know the agent of this illusion:
it is interrogation which, within the framework of a community,
dismembers problems and questions, and reconstitutes them in accordance
with the propositions of the common empirical consciousness - in other
words, according to the probable truths of a simple doxa. The great logical
dream of a combinatory or calculus of problems is compromised as a
result. It was believed that problems or questions were only the
neutralisation of a corresponding proposition. Consequently, how could it
not be believed that the theme or sense is only an ineffectual double, traced
from the type of proposition that it subsumes or even from an element
supposed to be common to all propositions (the indicative thesis)? The
failure to see that sense or the problem is extra-propositional, that it differs
in kind from every proposition, leads us to miss the essential: the genesis of
the act of thought, the operation of the faculties. Dialectic is the art of
problems and questions, the combinatory or calculus of problems as such.
However, dialectic loses its peculiar power when it remains content to
trace problems from propositions: thus begins the history of the long
perversion which places it under the power of the negative. Aristotle
writes:

158

Difference and Repetition

The difference between a problem and a proposition is a difference in
the turn of phrase. For if it be put in this way, 'Is two-footed terrestrial
animal the definition of man?' or 'Is animal the genus of man?' the result is a proposition; but if thus, 'Is two-footed terrestrial animal the definition of man or not?' and 'Is animal the genus of man or not?' the
result is a problem. Similarly too in other cases. Naturally, then, problems and propositions are equal in number; for out of every proposition
you will make a problem if you change the turn of phrase.
(The illusion wends its way into contemporary logic where the calculus of
problems is presented as extra-mathematical, which is true, since it is essentially logical or dialectical. It is still inferred, however, from a simple calculus of propositions, copied or traced from the propositions themselves.)
We are led to believe that problems are given ready-made, and that they
disappear in the responses or the solution. Already, under this double
aspect, they can be no more than phantoms. We are led to believe that the
activity of thinking, along with truth and falsehood in relation to that
activity, begins only with the search for solutions, that both of these
concern only solutions. This belief probably has the same origin as the
other postulates of the dogmatic image: puerile examples taken out of
context and arbitrarily erected into models. According to this infantile
prejudice, the master sets a problem, our task is to solve it, and the result is
accredited true or false by a powerful authority. It is also a social prejudice
with the visible interest of maintaining us in an infantile state, which calls
upon us to solve problems that come from elsewhere, consoling or
distracting us by telling us that we have won simply by being able to
respond: the problem as obstacle and the respondent as Hercules. Such is
the origin of the grotesque image of culture that we find in examinations
and government referenda as well as in newspaper competitions (where
everyone is called upon to choose according to his or her taste, on
condition that this taste coincides with that of everyone else). Be yourselves
- it being understood that this self must be that of others. As if we would
not remain slaves so long as we do not control the problems themselves, so
long as we do not possess a right to the problems, to a participation in and
management of the problems. The dogmatic image of thought supports
itself with psychologically puerile and socially reactionary examples (cases
of recognition, error, simple propositions and solutions or responses) in
order to prejudge what should be the most valued in regard to thought namely, the genesis of the act of thinking and the sense of truth and
falsehood. There is, therefore, a seventh postulate to add to the others: the
postulate of responses and solutions according to which truth and
falsehood only begin with solutions or only qualify responses. When,
however, a false problem is 'set' in a science examination, this propitious
scandal serves only to remind families that problems are not ready-made

The Image of Thought

159

but must be constituted and invested in their proper symbolic fields; and
that the master text necessarily requires a (necessarily fallible) master in
order to be written. Pedagogic experiments are proposed in order to allow
pupils, even very young pupils, to participate in the fabrication of
problems, in their constitution and their being posed as problems.
Moreover, everyone 'recognises' after a fashion that problems are the most
important thing. Yet it is not enough to recognise this in fact, as though
problems were only provisional and contingent movements destined to
disappear in the formation of knowledge, which owed their importance
only to the negative empirical conditions imposed upon the knowing
subject. On the contrary, this discovery must be raised to the
transcendental level, and problems must be considered not as 'givens'
(data) but as ideal 'objecticities' possessing their own sufficiency and
implying acts of constitution and investment in their respective symbolic
fields. Far from being concerned with solutions, truth and falsehood
primarily affect problems. A solution always has the truth it deserves
according to the problem to which it is a response, and the problem always
has the solution it deserves in proportion to its own truth or falsity - in
other words, in proportion to its sense. This is what is meant by such
famous formulae as: 'The really great problems are posed only once they
are solved' or 'Mankind always sets itself only such tasks as it can solve' not because practical or speculative problems are only the shadow of
pre-existing solutions but, on the contrary, because the solution necessarily
follows from the complete conditions under which the problem is
determined as a problem, from the means and the terms which are
employed in order to pose it. The problem or sense is at once both the site
of an originary truth and the genesis of a derived truth. The notions of
nonsense, false sense and misconstrual [contresens] must be related to
problems themselves (there are problems which are false through
indetermination, others through overdetermination, while stupidity, finally,
is the faculty for false problems; it is evidence of an inability to constitute,
comprehend or determine a problem as such). Philosophers and savants
dream of applying the test of truth and falsity to problems: this is the aim
of dialectics as a superior calculus or combinatory. However, as long as the
transcendental consequences are not explicitly drawn and the dogmatic
image of thought subsists in principle, this dream also functions as no more
than a 'repentance'.
The natural illusion (which involves tracing problems from propositions)
is in effect extended into a philosophical illusion. The critical requirement
is recognised, and the attempt is made to apply the test of truth and falsity
to problems themselves, but it is maintained that the truth of a problem
consists only in the possibility that it receive a solution. The new form of
the illusion and its technical character comes this time from the fact that
the form of problems is modelled upon the form of possibility of

160

Difference and Repetition

propositions. This is already the case with Aristotle. Aristotle assigned the
dialectic its real task, its only effective task: the art of problems and
questions. Whereas Analytics gives us the means to solve a problem already
given, or to respond to a question, Dialectics shows how to pose a question
legitimately. Analytics studies the process by which the syllogism
necessarily leads to a conclusion, while Dialectics invents the subjects of
syllogisms (precisely what Aristotle calls 'problems') and engenders the
elements of syllogisms concerning a given subject ('propositions').
However, in order to judge a problem, Aristotle invites us to consider 'the
opinions accepted by all men or by the majority among them, or by the
wise' in order to relate these to general (predicable) points of view, and
thereby form the places which allow them to be established or refuted in
discussion. The common places are thus the test of common sense itself:
every problem the corresponding proposition of which contains a logical
fault in regard to accident, genus, property or definition will be considered
a false proposition. If the dialectic appears devalued in Aristotle, reduced
to the simple probabilities of opinion or the doxa, this is not because he
misunderstood the essential task but, on the contrary, because he conceived
the realisation of that task badly. In the grip of the natural illusion, he
traced problems from the propositions of common sense; in the grip of the
philosophical illusion, he made the truth of problems depend upon the
common places - in other words, upon the logical possibility of finding a
solution (the propositions themselves designate cases of possible solutions).
At most, the form of possibility varies throughout the history of
philosophy. Thus, while the partisans of a mathematical method claim to
be opposed to the dialectic, they nevertheless retain the essential - namely,
the ideal of a combinatory or a calculus of problems. Instead of having
recourse to the logical form of the possible, however, they separate out
another, properly mathematical form of possibility - be it geometric or
algebraic. Problems, therefore, continue to be traced from the corresponding
propositions, and to be evaluated according to the possibility of their finding
a solution. More precisely, from a geometric and synthetic point of view,
problems are inferred from a particular type of proposition known as
theorems. Greek geometry has a general tendency on the one hand to limit
problems to the benefit of theorems, on the other to subordinate problems
to theorems themselves. The reason is that theorems seem to express and to
develop the properties of simple essences, whereas problems concern only
events and affections which show evidence of a deterioration or projection
of essences in the imagination. As a result, however, the genetic point of
view is forcibly relegated to an inferior rank: proof is given that something
cannot not be rather than that it is and why it is (hence the frequency in
Euclid of negative, indirect and reductio arguments, which serve to keep
geometry under the domination of the principle of identity and prevent it
from becoming a geometry of sufficient reason). Nor do the essential

The Image of Thought

161

aspects of the situation change with the shift to an algebraic and analytic
point of view. Problems are now traced from algebraic equations and
evaluated according to the possibility of carrying out a series of operations
on the coefficients of the equation which provide the roots. However, just
as in geometry we imagine the problem solved, so in algebra we operate
upon unknown quantities as if they were known: this is how we pursue the
hard work of reducing problems to the form of propositions capable of
serving as cases of solution. We see this clearly in Descartes. The Cartesian
method (the search for the clear and distinct) is a method for solving
supposedly given problems, not a method of invention appropriate to the
constitution of problems or the understanding of questions. The rules
concerning problems and questions have only an expressly secondary and
subordinate role. While combating the Aristotelian dialectic, Descartes has
nevertheless a decisive point in common with it: the calculus of problems
and questions remains inferred from a calculus of supposedly prior 'simple
propositions', once again the postulate of the dogmatic image.
The variations succeed one another, but all within the same perspective.
What do the empiricists do but invent a new form of possibility:
probability or the physical possibility of finding a solution? And Kant
himself? More than anyone, however, Kant wanted to apply the test of
truth and falsehood to problems and questions: he even defined Critique in
these terms. His profound theory of Ideas as problematising and
problematic allowed him to rediscover the real source of the dialectic, and
even to introduce problems into the geometrical exposition of Practical
Reason. However, because the Kantian critique remains dominated by
common sense or the dogmatic image, Kant still defines the truth of a
problem in terms of the possibility of its finding a solution: this time it is a
question of a transcendental form of possibility, in accordance with a
legitimate use of the faculties as this is determined in each case by this or
that organisation of common sense (to which the problem corresponds).
We always find the two aspects of the illusion: the natural illusion which
involves tracing problems from supposedly pre-existent propositions,
logical opinions, geometrical theorems, algebraic equations, physical
hypotheses or transcendental judgements; and the philosophical illusion
which involves evaluating problems according to their 'solvability' - in
other words, according to the extrinsic and variable form of the possibility
of their finding a solution. It is then fatal that the ground should itself be
no more than a simple external conditioning. A strange leap on the spot or
vicious circle by which philosophy, claiming to extend the truth of
solutions to problems themselves but remaining imprisoned by the
dogmatic image, refers the truth of problems to the possibility of their
solution. What is missed is the internal character of the problem as such,
the imperative internal element which decides in the first place its truth or
falsity and measures its intrinsic genetic power: that is, the very object of

162

Difference and Repetition

the dialectic or combinatory, the 'differential'. Problems are tests and
selections. What is essential is that there occurs at the heart of problems a
genesis of truth, a production of the true in thought. Problems are the
differential elements in thought, the genetic elements in the true. We can
therefore substitute for the simple point of view of conditioning a point of
view of effective genesis. The true and the false do not suffer the
indifference of the conditioned with regard to its condition, nor does the
condition remain indifferent with regard to what it renders possible. The
only way to take talk of 'true and false problems' seriously is in terms of a
production of the true and the false by means of problems, and in
proportion to their sense. To do so, it is sufficient to renounce copying
problems from possible propositions, and defining the truth of problems in
terms of the possibility of their finding a solution. On the contrary,
'solvability' must depend upon an internal characteristic: it must be
determined by the conditions of the problem, engendered in and by the
problem along with the real solutions. Without this reversal, the famous
Copernican Revolution amounts to nothing. Moreover, there is no
revolution so long as we remain tied to Euclidean geometry: we must move
to a geometry of sufficient reason, a Riemannian-type differential geometry
which tends to give rise to discontinuity on the basis of continuity, or to
ground solutions in the conditions of the problems.
Not only is sense ideal, but problems are Ideas themselves. There is
always a difference in kind between problems and propositions, an
essential hiatus. A proposition by itself is particular, and represents a
determinate response. A series of propositions can be distributed in such a
way that the responses they represent constitute a general solution (as in
the case of the values of an algebraic equation). But precisely, propositions,
whether general or particular, find their sense only in the subjacent
problem which inspires them. Only the Idea or problem is universal. It is
not the solution which lends its generality to the problem, but the problem
which lends its universality to the solution. It is never enough to solve a
problem with the aid of a series of simple cases playing the role of analytic
elements: the conditions under which the problem acquires a maximum of
comprehension and extension must be determined, conditions capable of
communicating to a given case of solution the ideal continuity appropriate
to it. Even for a problem which has only a single case of solution, the
proposition which designates this case would acquire its sense only within
a complex capable of comprehending imaginary situations and integrating
an ideal of continuity. To solve a problem is always to give rise to
discontinuities on the basis of a continuity which functions as Idea. Once
we 'forget' the problem, we have before us no more than an abstract
general solution, and since there is no longer anything to support that
generality, there is nothing to prevent the solution from fragmenting into
the particular propositions which constitute its cases. Once separated from

The Image of Thought

163

the problem, the propositions fall back into the status of particular
propositions whose sole value is designatory. Consciousness then attempts
to reconstitute the problem, but by way of the neutralised double of
particular propositions (interrogations, doubts, likelihoods, hypotheses)
and the empty form of general propositions (equations, theorems, theories
... ). So begins the double confusion which assimilates problems to the
series of hypotheticals and subordinates them to the series of categories.
The nature of the universal is lost, but with it equally the nature of the
singular, for the problem or the Idea is a concrete singularity no less than a
true universal. Corresponding to the relations which constitute the
universality of the problem is the distribution of singular points and
distinctive points which determine the conditions of the problem. Proclus,
even while maintaining the primacy of theorems over problems, rigorously
defined the conditions of the problem in terms of an order of events and
affections. Leibniz, too, clearly stated what separates problems and
propositions: all kinds of events, 'the how and the circumstances', from
which propositions draw their sense. These events, however, are ideal
events, more profound than and different in nature from the real events
which they determine in the order of solutions. Underneath the large noisy
events lie the small events of silence, just as underneath the natural light
there are the little glimmers of the Idea. Singularity is beyond particular
propositions no less than universality is beyond general propositions.
Problematic Ideas are not simple essences, but multiplicities or complexes
of relations and corresponding singularities. From the point of view of
thought, the problematic distinction between the ordinary and the singular,
and the nonsenses which result from a bad distribution among the
conditions of the problem, are undoubtedly more important than the
hypothetical or categorical duality of truth and falsehood along with the
'errors' which only arise from their confusion in cases of solution.
A problem does not exist, apart from its solutions. Far from
disappearing in this overlay, however, it insists and persists in these
solutions. A problem is determined at the same time as it is solved, but its
determination is not the same as its solution: the two elements differ in
kind, the determination amounting to the genesis of the concomitant
solution. (In this manner the distribution of singularities belongs entirely to
the conditions of the problem, while their specification already refers to
solutions constructed under these conditions.) The problem is at once both
transcendent and immanent in relation to its solutions. Transcendent,
because it consists in a system of ideal liaisons or differential relations
between genetic elements. Immanent, because these liaisons or relations are
incarnated in the actual relations which do not resemble them and are
defined by the field of solution. Nowhere better than in the admirable
work of Albert Lautman has it been shown how problems are first Platonic
Ideas or ideal liaisons between dialectical notions, relative to 'eventual

164

Difference and Repetition

situations of the existent'; but also how they are realised within the real
relations constitutive of the desired solution within a mathematical,
physical or other field. It is in this sense, according to Lautman, that
science always participates in a dialectic which points beyond it - in other
words, in a meta-mathematical and extra-propositional power - even
though the liaisons of this dialectic are incarnated only in effective
scientific propositions and theories. Problems are always dialectical. This
is why, whenever the dialectic 'forgets' its intimate relation with Ideas in
the form of problems, whenever it is content to trace problems from
propositions, it loses its true power and falls under the sway of the power
of the negative, necessarily substituting for the ideal objecticity of the
problematic a simple confrontation between opposing, contrary or
contradictory, propositions. This long perversion begins with the dialectic
itself, and attains its extreme form in Hegelianism. If it is true, however,
that it is problems which are dialectical in principle, and their solutions
which are scientific, we must distinguish completely between the following:
the problem as transcendental instance; the symbolic field in which the
immanent movement of the problem expresses its conditions; the field of
scientific solvability in which the problem is incarnated, and in terms of
which the preceding symbolism is defined. The relation between these
elements will be specifiable by only a general theory of problems and the
corresponding ideal synthesis.
Problems and their symbolic fields stand in a relationship with signs. It is
the signs which 'cause problems' and are developed in a symbolic field. The
paradoxical functioning of the faculties - including, in the first instance,
sensibility with respect to signs - thus refers to the Ideas which run
throughout all the faculties and awaken them each in turn. Conversely, the
Idea which itself offers sense to language refers each case to the paradoxical functioning of the faculty. The exploration of Ideas and the elevation of
each faculty to its transcendent exercise amounts to the same thing. These
are two aspects of an essential apprenticeship or process of learning. For,
on the one hand, an apprentice is someone who constitutes and occupies
practical or speculative problems as such. Learning is the appropriate name
for the subjective acts carried out when one is confronted with the objecticity of a problem (Idea), whereas knowledge designates only the generality
of concepts or the calm possession of a rule enabling solutions. A wellknown test in psychology involves a monkey who is supposed to find food
in boxes of one particular colour amidst others of various colours: there
comes a paradoxical period during which the number of 'errors' diminishes
even though the monkey does not yet possess the 'knowledge' or 'truth' of
a solution in each case: propitious moment in which the philosopher-monkey opens up to truth, himself producing the true, but only to the extent

The Image of Thought

165

that he begins to penetrate the coloured thickness of a problem. We see
here how the discontinuity among answers is engendered on the basis of
the continuity of an ideal apprenticeship; how truth and falsity are distributed according to what one understands of a problem; and how the final
truth, when it is obtained, emerges as though it were the limit of a problem
completely determined and entirely understood, or the product of those genetic series which constitute the sense, or the outcome of a genesis which
does not take place only in the head of a monkey. To learn is to enter into
the universal of the relations which constitute the Idea, and into their corresponding singularities. The idea of the sea, for example, as Leibniz
showed, is a system of liaisons or differential relations between particulars
and singularities corresponding to the degrees of variation among these relations - the totality of the system being incarnated in the real movement
of the waves. To learn to swim is to conjugate the distinctive points of our
bodies with the singular points of the objective Idea in order to form a
problematic field. This conjugation determines for us a threshold of consciousness at which our real acts are adjusted to our perceptions of the real
relations, thereby providing a solution to the problem. Moreover, problematic Ideas are precisely the ultimate elements of nature and the subliminal
objects of little perceptions. As a result, 'learning' always takes place in and
through the unconscious, thereby establishing the bond of a profound complicity between nature and mind.
The apprentice, on the other hand, raises each faculty to the level of its
transcendent exercise. With regard to sensibility, he attempts to give birth
to that second power which grasps that which can only be sensed. This is
the education of the senses. From one faculty to another is communicated a
violence which nevertheless always understands the Other through the
perfection of each. On the basis of which signs within sensibility, by which
treasures of the memory, under torsions determined by the singularities of
which Idea will thought be aroused? We never know in advance how
someone will learn: by means of what loves someone becomes good at
Latin, what encounters make them a philosopher, or in what dictionaries
they learn to think. The limits of the faculties are encased one in the other
in the broken shape of that which bears and transmits difference. There is
no more a method for learning than there is a method for finding treasures,
but a violent training, a culture or paideia which affects the entire
individual (an albino in whom emerges the act of sensing in sensibility, an
aphasic in whom emerges the act of speech in language, an acephalous
being in whom emerges the act of thinking in thought). Method is the
means of that knowledge which regulates the collaboration of all the
faculties. It is therefore the manifestation of a common sense or the
realisation of a Cogitatio natura, and presupposes a good will as though
this were a 'premeditated decision' of the thinker. Culture, however, is an
involuntary adventure, the movement of learning which links a sensibility,

166

Difference and Repetition

a memory and then a thought, with all the cruelties and violence necessary,
as Nietzsche said, precisely in order to 'train a "nation of thinkers" ' or to
'provide a training for the mind'.
Of course, the importance and dignity of learning are often recognised.
However, this takes the form of a homage to the empirical conditions of
knowledge: a nobility is discovered in this preparatory movement which
must nevertheless disappear in the result. Moreover, even if we insist upon
the specificity of learning and upon the time involved in apprenticeship,
this is in order to appease the scruples of a psychological conscience which
certainly does not allow itself to dispute the innate right of knowledge to
represent the entire transcendental realm. Learning is only the intermediary
between non-knowledge and knowledge, the living passage from one to the
other. We may well say that learning is, after all, an infinite task: it is none
the less cast with the circumstances and the acquisition of knowledge,
outside the supposedly simple essence of knowledge in the form of an
innate or a priori element, or even a regulative Idea. Finally, apprenticeship
falls rather on the side of the rat in the maze, while the philosopher outside
the cave carries off only the result - knowledge - in order to discover its
transcendental principles. Even in Hegel, the extraordinary apprenticeship
which we find in the Phenomenology remains subordinated, with regard to
its result no less than its principle, to the ideal of knowledge in the form of
absolute knowledge. It is true that, here again, Plato is the exception. For
him, learning is truly the transcendental movement of the soul, irreducible
as much to knowledge as to non-knowledge. It is from 'learning', not from
knowledge, that the transcendental conditions of thought must be drawn.
That is why Plato determines the conditions in the form of reminiscence,
not innateness. In this manner, time is introduced into thought, - not in the
form of the empirical time of the thinker subject to factual conditions, and
for whom it takes time to think, but in the form of an in-principle
condition or time of pure thought (time takes thought). Reminiscence then
finds its proper object, its memorandum, in the specific material of
apprenticeship - in other words, in questions and problems as such, in the
urgency of problems independently of their solutions, in the realm of the
Idea. Why should it be that so many fundamental principles concerning
what it means to think are compromised by reminiscence itself? For as we
have seen, Platonic time introduces difference, apprenticeship and
heterogeneity into thought only in order to subject them again to the
mythical form of resemblance and identity, and therefore to the image of
thought itself. As a result, the whole Platonic theory of apprenticeship
functions as a repentance, crushed by the emerging dogmatic image yet
bringing forth a groundlessness that it remains incapable of exploring. A
new Meno would say: it is knowledge that is nothing more than an
empirical figure, a simple result which continually falls back into
experience; whereas learning is the true transcendental structure which

The Image of Thought

167

unites difference to difference, dissimilarity to dissimilarity, without
mediating between them; and introduces time into thought - not in the
form of a mythical past or former present, but in the pure form of an
empty time in general. We always rediscover the necessity of reversing the
supposed relations or divisions between the empirical and the
transcendental. Moreover, we must regard the postulate of knowledge as
the eighth postulate of the dogmatic image, one which incorporates and
recapitulates all the others in a supposedly simple result.
We have listed eight postulates, each in two forms: (1) the postulate of
the principle, or the Cogitatio natura universalis (good will of the thinker
and good nature of thought); (2) the postulate of the ideal, or common
sense (common sense as the concordia facultatum and good sense as the
distribution which guarantees this concord); (3) the postulate of the model,
or of recognition (recognition inviting all the faculties to exercise
themselves upon an object supposedly the same, and the consequent
possibility of error in the distribution when one faculty confuses one of its
objects with a different object of another faculty); (4) the postulate of the
element, or of representation (when difference is subordinated to the
complementary dimensions of the Same and the Similar, the Analogous
and the Opposed); (5) the postulate of the negative, or of error (in which
error expresses everything which can go wrong in thought, but only as the
product of external mechanisms); (6) the postulate of logical function, or
the proposition (designation is taken to be the locus of truth, sense being
no more than the neutralised double or the infinite doubling of the
proposition); (7) the postulate of modality, or solutions (problems being
materially traced from propositions or, indeed, formally defined by the
possibility of their being solved); (8) the postulate of the end, or result, the
postulate of knowledge (the subordination of learning to knowledge, and
of culture to method). Each postulate has two forms, because they are both
natural and philosophical, appearing once in the arbitrariness of examples,
once in the presuppositions of the essence. The postulates need not be
spoken: they function all the more effectively in silence, in this
presupposition with regard to the essence as well as in the choice of
examples. Together they form the dogmatic image of thought. They crush
thought under an image which is that of the Same and the Similar in
representation, but profoundly betrays what it means to think and alienates
the two powers of difference and repetition, of philosophical
commencement and recommencement. The thought which is born in
thought, the act of thinking which is neither given by innateness nor
presupposed by reminiscence but engendered in its genitality, is a thought
without image. But what is such a thought, and how does it operate in the
world?

Chapter IV
Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference
Kant never ceased to remind us that Ideas are essentially 'problematic'.
Conversely, problems are Ideas. Undoubtedly, he shows that Ideas lead us
into false problems, but this is not their most profound characteristic: if,
according to Kant, reason does pose false problems and therefore itself
gives rise to illusion, this is because in the first place it is the faculty of posing problems in general. In its natural state such a faculty lacks the means
to distinguish what is true or false, what is founded or not, in any problem
it poses. The aim of the critical operation is precisely to provide this means,
since the science of metaphysics 'has to deal not with the objects of reason,
the variety of which is inexhaustible, but only with itself and the problems
which arise entirely from within itself ...'. We are told that false problems
result from an illegitimate employment of Ideas. It follows that not every
problem is false: in accordance with their properly understood critical
character, Ideas have a perfectly legitimate 'regulative' function in which
they constitute true problems or pose well-founded problems. That is why
'regulative' means 'problematic'. Ideas are themselves problematic or
problematising - and Kant tries to show the difference between, on the one
hand, 'problematic' and, on the other, 'hypothetical', 'fictitious', 'general'
or 'abstract', despite certain texts in which he assimilates the terms. In
what sense, then, does Kantian reason, in so far as it is the faculty of Ideas,
pose or constitute problems? The fact is that it alone is capable of drawing
together the procedures of the understanding with regard to a set of objects. The understanding by itself would remain entangled in its separate
and divided procedures, a prisoner of partial empirical enquiries or researches in regard to this or that object, never raising itself to the level of a
'problem' capable of providing a systematic unity for all its operations. The
understanding alone would obtain answers or results here and there, but
these would never constitute a 'solution'. For every solution presupposes a
problem - in other words, the constitution of a unitary and systematic field
which orientates and subsumes the researches or investigations in such a
manner that the answers, in turn, form precisely cases of solution. Kant
even refers to Ideas as problems 'to which there is no solution'. By that he
does not mean that Ideas are necessarily false problems and thus insoluble
but, on the contrary, that true problems are Ideas, and that these Ideas do
not disappear with 'their' solutions, since they are the indispensable condition without which no solution would ever exist. Ideas have legitimate uses
only in relation to concepts of the understanding; but conversely, the con168

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

169

cepts of the understanding find the ground of their (maximum) full experimental use only in the degree to which they are related to problematic
Ideas: either by being arranged upon lines which converge upon an ideal
focus which lies outside the bounds of experience, or by being conceived
on the basis of a common horizon which embraces them all. Such focal
points or horizons are Ideas - in other words, problems as such - whose
nature is at once both immanent and transcendent.
Problems have an objective value, while Ideas in some sense have an
object. 'Problematic' does not mean only a particularly important species
of subjective acts, but a dimension of objectivity as such which is occupied
by these acts. An object outside experience can be represented only in
problematic form; this does not mean that Ideas have no real object, but
that problems qua problems are the real objects of Ideas. The object of an
Idea, Kant reminds us, is neither fiction nor hypothesis nor object of
reason: it is an object which can be neither given nor known, but must be
represented without being able to be directly determined. Kant likes to say
that problematic Ideas are both objective and undetermined. The
undetermined is not a simple imperfection in our knowledge or a lack in
the object: it is a perfectly positive, objective structure which acts as a focus
or horizon within perception. In effect, the undetermined object, or object
as it exists in the Idea, allows us to represent other objects (those of
experience) which it endows with a maximum of systematic unity. Ideas
would not systematise the formal procedures of the understanding if their
objects did not lend a similar unity to the matter or content of phenomena.
In this manner, however, the undetermined is only the first objective
moment of the Idea. For on the other hand, the object of the Idea becomes
indirectly determined: it is determined by analogy with those objects of
experience upon which it confers unity, but which in return offer it a
determination 'analogous' to the relations it entertains with them. Finally,
the object of the Idea carries with it the ideal of a complete and infinite
determination, since it ensures a specification of the concepts of the
understanding, by means of which the latter comprise more and more
differences on the basis of a properly infinite field of continuity.
Ideas, therefore, present three moments: undetermined with regard to
their object, determinable with regard to objects of experience, and bearing
the ideal of an infinite determination with regard to concepts of the
understanding. It is apparent that Ideas here repeat the three aspects of the
Cogito: the / am as an indeterminate existence, time as the form under
which this existence is determinable, and the / think as a determination.
Ideas are exactly the thoughts of the Cogito, the differentials of thought.
Moreover, in so far as the Cogito refers to a fractured I, an I split from end
to end by the form of time which runs through it, it must be said that Ideas
swarm in the fracture, constantly emerging on its edges, ceaselessly coming
out and going back, being composed in a thousand different manners. It is

170

Difference and Repetition

not, therefore, a question of filling that which cannot be filled.
Nevertheless, just as difference immediately reunites and articulates that
which it distinguishes, and the fracture retains what it fractures, so Ideas
contain their dismembered moments. It is for the Idea to interiorise the
fracture and its antlike inhabitants. There is neither identification nor
confusion within the Idea, but rather an internal problematic objective
unity of the undetermined, the determinable and determination. Perhaps
this does not appear sufficiently clearly in Kant: according to him, two of
the three moments remain as extrinsic characteristics (if Ideas are in
themselves undetermined, they are determinable only in relation to objects
of experience, and bear the ideal of determination only in relation to
concepts of the understanding). Furthermore, Kant incarnated these
moments in distinct Ideas: the Self is above all undetermined, the World is
determinable, and God is the ideal of determination. It is here, perhaps,
that we should seek the real reasons for which, just as the post-Kantians
objected, Kant held fast to the point of view of conditioning without
attaining that of genesis. If the mistake of dogmatism is always to fill that
which separates, that of empiricism is to leave external what is separated,
and in this sense there is still too much empiricism in the Critique (and too
much dogmatism among the post-Kantians). The 'critical' point, the
horizon or focal point at which difference qua difference serves to reunite,
has not yet been assigned.
Just as we oppose difference in itself to negativity, so we oppose dx to notA, the symbol of difference [Differenzphilosophie] to that of contradiction.
It is true that contradiction seeks its Idea on the side of the greatest difference, whereas the differential risks falling into the abyss of the infinitely
small. This, however, is not the way to formulate the problem: it is a mistake to tie the value of the symbol dx to the existence of infinitesimals; but
it is also a mistake to refuse it any ontological or gnoseological value in the
name of a refusal of the latter. In fact, there is a treasure buried within the
old so-called barbaric or pre-scientific interpretations of the differential calculus, which must be separated from its infinitesimal matrix. A great deal
of heart and a great deal of truly philosophical naivety is needed in order
to take the symbol dx seriously: for their part, Kant and even Leibniz renounced the idea. Nevertheless, in the esoteric history of differential philosophy, three names shine forth like bright stars: Salomon Maimon - who,
paradoxically, sought to ground post-Kantianism upon a Leibnizian reinterpretation of the calculus (1790); Hoe'ne Wronski, a profound mathematician who developed a positivist, messianic and mystical system which
implied a Kantian interpretation of the calculus (1814); and Jean BordasDemoulin who, in the course of reflections upon Descartes, offered a Platonic interpretation of the calculus (1843). A Leibniz, a Kant and a Plato of

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

171

the calculus: the many philosophical riches to be found here must not be
sacrificed to modern scientific technique. The principle of a general differential philosophy must be the object of a rigorous exposition, and must
in no way depend upon the infinitely small. The symbol dx appears as simultaneously undetermined, determinable and determination. Three principles which together form a sufficient reason correspond to these three
aspects: a principle of determinability corresponds to the undetermined as
such (dx, dy]\ a principle of reciprocal determination corresponds to the really determinable (dy/dx); a principle of complete determination corresponds
to the effectively determined (values of dy/dx). In short, dx is the Idea - the
Platonic, Leibnizian or Kantian Idea, the 'problem' and its being.
The Idea of fire subsumes fire in the form of a single continuous mass
capable of increase. The Idea of silver subsumes its object in the form of a
liquid continuity of fine metal. However, while it is true that
continuousness must be related to Ideas and to their problematic use, this is
on condition that it be no longer defined by characteristics borrowed from
sensible or even geometric intuition, as it still is when one speaks of the
interpolation of intermediaries, of infinite intercalary series or parts which
are never the smallest possible. Continuousness truly belongs to the realm
of Ideas only to the extent that an ideal cause of continuity is determined.
Taken together with its cause, continuity forms the pure element of
quantitability, which must be distinguished both from the fixed quantities
of intuition [quantum] and from variable quantities in the form of concepts
of the understanding [quantitas]. The symbol which expresses it is
therefore completely undetermined: dx is strictly nothing in relation to x,
as dy is in relation to y. The whole problem, however, lies in the
signification of these zeros. Quanta as objects of intuition always have
particular values; and even when they are united in a fractional relation,
each maintains a value independently of the relation. As a concept of the
understanding, quantitas has a general value; generality here referring to an
infinity of possible particular values: as many as the variable can assume.
However, there must always be a particular value charged with
representing the others, and with standing for them: this is the case with
the algebraic equation for the circle, x + y - R =0. The same does not
hold for ydy + xdx = 0, which signifies 'the universal of the circumference
or of the corresponding function'. The zeros involved in dx and dy express
the annihilation of the quantum and the quantitas, of the general as well as
the particular, in favour of 'the universal and its appearance'. The force of
the interpretation given by Bordas-Demoulin is as follows: it is not the
differential quantities which are cancelled in dy/dx or 0/0 but rather the
individual and the individual relations within the function (by 'individual',
Bordas means both the particular and the general). We have passed from
one genus to another, as if to the other side of the mirror: having lost its
mutable part or the property of variation, the function represents only the

172

Difference and Repetition

immutable along with the operation which uncovered it. 'That which is
cancelled changes in it, and in being cancelled allows a glimpse beyond of
that which does not change.' In short, the limit must be conceived not as
the limit of a function but as a genuine cut [coupure], a border between the
changeable and the unchangeable within the function itself. Newton's
mistake, therefore, is that of making the differentials equal to zero, while
Leibniz's mistake is to identify them with the individual or with variability.
In this respect, Bordas is already close to the modern interpretation of
calculus: the limit no longer presupposes the ideas of a continuous variable
and infinite approximation. On the contrary, the notion of limit grounds a
new, static and purely ideal definition of continuity, while its own
definition implies no more than number, or rather, the universal in
number. Modern mathematics then specifies the nature of this universal of
number as consisting in the 'cut' (in the sense of Dedekind): in this sense, it
is the cut which constitutes the next genus of number, the ideal cause of
continuity or the pure element of quantitability.
In relation to x, dx is completely undetermined, as dy is to y, but they
are perfectly determinable in relation to one another. For this reason, a
principle of determinability corresponds to the undetermined as such. The
universal is not a nothing since there are, in Bordas's expression, 'relations
of the universal', dx and dy are completely undifferenciated
[indifferencies], in the particular and in the general, but completely
differentiated [differenties] in and by the universal. The relation ^y/dx is not
like a fraction which is established between particular quanta in intuition,
but neither is it a general relation between variable algebraic magnitudes or
quantities. Each term exists absolutely only in its relation to the other: it is
no longer necessary, or even possible, to indicate an independent variable.
For this reason, a principle of reciprocal determinability as such here
corresponds to the determinability of the relation. The effectively synthetic
function of Ideas is presented and developed by means of a reciprocal
synthesis. The whole question, then, is: in what form is the differential
relation determinable? It is determinable first in qualitative form, and in
this connection it expresses a function which differs in kind from the
so-called primitive function. When the primitive function expresses the
curve, dy/dx - - (x/y) expresses the trigonometric tangent of the angle made
by the tangent of the curve and the axis of the abscissae. The importance of
this qualitative difference or 'change of function' within the differential has
often been emphasized. In the same way, the cut designates the irrational
numbers which differ in kind from the terms of the series of rational
numbers. This is only a first aspect, however, for in so far as it expresses
another quality, the differential relation remains tied to the individual
values or to the quantitative variations corresponding to that quality (for
example, tangent). It is therefore differentiable in turn, and testifies only to
the power of Ideas to give rise to Ideas of Ideas. The universal in relation to

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

173

a quality must not, therefore, be confused with the individual values it
takes in relation to another quality. In its universal function it expresses
not simply that other quality but a pure element of qualitability. In this
sense the Idea has the differential relation as its object: it then integrates
variation, not as a variable determination of a supposedly constant relation
('variability') but, on the contrary, as a degree of variation of the relation
itself ('variety') to which corresponds, for example, the qualified series of
curves. If the Idea eliminates variability, this is in favour of what must be
called variety or multiplicity. The Idea as concrete universal stands
opposed to concepts of the understanding, and possesses a comprehension
all the more vast as its extension is great. This is what defines the universal
synthesis of the Idea (Idea of the Idea, etc.): the reciprocal dependence of
the degrees of the relation, and ultimately the reciprocal dependence of the
relations themselves.
It is Salomon Maimon who proposes a fundamental reformulation of the
Critique and an overcoming of the Kantian duality between concept and
intuition. Such a duality refers us back to the extrinsic criterion of
constructibility and leaves us with an external relation between the
determinable (Kantian space as a pure given) and the determination (the
concept in so far as it is thought). That the one should be adapted to the
other by the intermediary of the schematism only reinforces the paradox
introduced into the doctrine of the faculties by the notion of a purely
external harmony: whence the reduction of the transcendental instance to a
simple conditioning and the renunciation of any genetic requirement. In
Kant, therefore, difference remains external and as such empirical and
impure, suspended outside the construction 'between' the determinable
intuition and the determinant concept. Mai'mon's genius lies in showing
how inadequate the point of view of conditioning is for a transcendental
philosophy: both terms of the difference must equally be thought - in other
words, determinability must itself be conceived as pointing towards a
principle of reciprocal determination. The concepts of the understanding
recognize reciprocal determination, if only in a completely formal and
reflexive manner; for example, in the cases of causality and reciprocal
influence. The reciprocal synthesis of differential relations as the source of
the production of real objects - this is the substance of Ideas in so far as
they bathe in the thought-element of qualitability. A triple genesis follows
from this: that of qualities, produced in the form of differences between
real objects of knowledge; that of space and time in the form of conditions
for the knowledge of differences; that of concepts in the form of conditions
for the difference or the distinction between knowledges themselves.
Physical judgement thus tends to ensure its primacy over mathematical
judgement, while the origin of extensity is inseparable from the origin of
the objects which populate it. Ideas appear in the form of a system of ideal
connections - in other words, a system of differential relations between

174

Difference and Repetition

reciprocally determined genetic elements. The Cogito incorporates all the
power of a differential unconscious, an unconscious of pure thought which
internalizes the difference between the determinable Self and the
determining I, and injects into thought as such something unthought,
without which its operation would always remain impossible and empty.
Maimon writes:
When I say, for example: red is different from green, the concept of the
difference in so far as this is a pure concept of the understanding is not
considered to be the relation between the sensible qualities (otherwise
the Kantian question quid juris would still apply). Rather: either, in accordance with Kant's theory, it is considered to be the relation between
their spaces as a priori forms, or, in accordance with my own theory, it
is considered to be the relation between their differentials which are a
priori Ideas. ... A particular object is the result of the particular rule of
its production or the mode of its differential, and the relations between
different objects result from the relations between their differentials.
In order to understand better the alternative offered by Maimon, let us return to a famous example: the straight line is the shortest path. 'Shortest'
may be understood in two ways: from the point of view of conditioning, as
a schema of the imagination which determines space in accordance with
the concept (the straight line defined as that which in all parts may be superimposed upon itself) - in this case the difference remains external, incarnated in a rule of construction which is established 'between' the concept
and the intuition. Alternatively, from the genetic point of view, the shortest
may be understood as an Idea which overcomes the duality of concept and
intuition, interiorises the difference between straight and curved, and expresses this internal difference in the form of a reciprocal determination
and in the minimal conditions of an integral. The shortest is not a schema
but an Idea; or it is an ideal schema and no longer the schema of a concept.
In this sense, the mathematician Houel remarked that the shortest distance
was not a Euclidean notion at all, but an Archimedean one, more physical
than mathematical; that it was inseparable from a method of exhaustion,
and that it served less to determine the straight line than to determine the
length of a curve by means of the straight line - 'integral calculus performed unknowingly'.
Finally, the differential relation presents a third element, that of pure
potentiality. Power is the form of reciprocal determination according to
which variable magnitudes are taken to be functions of one another. In
consequence, calculus considers only those magnitudes where at least one
is of a power superior to another. No doubt the first act of the calculus
consists in a 'depotentialisation' of the equation (for example, instead of
2ax -x = y we have dy/dx = (a~xYy). However, the analogue may be found
in the two preceding figures where the disappearance of the quantum and

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

175

the quantitas was the condition for the appearance of the element of
quantitability, and disqualification the condition for the appearance of the
element of qualitability. This time, following Lagrange's presentation, the
depotentialisation conditions pure potentiality by allowing an evolution of
the function of a variable in a series constituted by the powers of i
(undetermined quantity) and the coefficients of these powers (new
functions of x), in such a way that the evolution function of that variable
be comparable to that of the others. The pure element of potentiality
appears in the first coefficient or the first derivative, the other derivatives
and consequently all the terms of the series resulting from the repetition of
the same operations. The whole problem, however, lies precisely in
determining this first coefficient which is itself independent of /'. It is on this
point that Wronski's objection intervenes, being directed as much against
Lagrange's presentation (Taylor's series) as against Carnot's (compensation
of errors). Against Carnot, he objects that the so-called auxiliary equations
are incorrect not because they imply dx and dy but because they neglect
certain complementary quantities which diminish at the same time as dx
and dy: far from explaining the nature of differential calculus, therefore,
Carnot's presentation presupposes it. The same applies to Lagrange's
series, where - from the point of view of the rigorous algorithm which,
according to Wronski, characterises 'transcendental philosophy' - the
discontinuous coefficients assume a signification only by virtue of the
differential functions which compose them. If it is true that the
understanding provides a 'discontinuous summation', this is only the
matter for the generation of quantities: only 'graduation' or continuity
constitutes their form, which belongs to Ideas of reason. That is why
differentials certainly do not correspond to any engendered quantity, but
rather constitute an unconditioned rule for the production of knowledge of
quantity, and for the construction of series or the generation of
discontinuities which constitute its material. As Wronski says, the
differential is 'an ideal difference' without which Lagrange's undetermined
quantity could not carry out the determination expected of it. In this sense,
the differential is indeed pure power, just as the differential relation is a
pure element of potentiality.
A principle of complete determination corresponds to this element of
potentiality. Complete determination must not be confused with reciprocal
determination. The latter concerned the differential relations and their
degrees or varieties in the Idea which correspond to diverse forms. The
former concerns the values of a relation - in other words, the composition
of a form or the distribution of singular points which characterise it: for
example, when the relation becomes null, infinite, or 0/0. It is indeed a
question of the complete determination of the parts of the object: it is now
in the object, and therefore on the curve, that the elements which present
the previously defined 'linear' relation must be found. Moreover, it is only

176

Difference and Repetition

here that the serial form within potentiality assumes its full meaning: it
even becomes necessary to present what is a relation in the form of a sum.
For a series of powers with numerical coefficients surround one singular
point, and only one at a time. The interest and the necessity of the serial
form appear in the plurality of series subsumed by it, in their dependence
upon singular points, and in the manner in which we can pass from one
part of the object where the function is represented by a series to another
where it is expressed in a different series, whether the two series converge
or extend one another or, on the contrary, diverge. Just as determinability
pointed towards reciprocal determination, so the latter points towards
complete determination. All three form the figure of sufficient reason in the
threefold element of quantitability, qualitability and potentiality. Ideas are
concrete universals in which extension and comprehension go together not only because they include variety or multiplicity in themselves, but
because they include singularity in all its varieties. They subsume the
distribution of distinctive or singular points; their distinctive character - in
other words, the distinctness of Ideas - consists precisely in the distribution
of the ordinary and the distinctive, the singular and the regular, and in the
extension of the singular across regular points into the vicinity of another
singularity. There is no abstract universal beyond the individual or beyond
the particular and the general: it is singularity itself which is
'pre-individual'.
The interpretation of the differential calculus has indeed taken the form of
asking whether infinitesimals are real or fictive. From the beginning, however, other issues were also involved: is the fate of calculus tied to infinitesimals, or must it not be given a rigorous status from the point of view of
finite representation? The real frontier defining modern mathematics lies
not in the calculus itself but in other discoveries such as set theory which,
even though it requires, for its own part, an axiom of infinity, gives a no
less strictly finite interpretation of the calculus. We know in effect that the
notion of limit has lost its phoronomic character and involves only static
considerations; that variability has ceased to represent a progression
through all the values of an interval and come to mean only the disjunctive
assumption of one value within that interval; that the derivative and the integral have become ordinal rather than quantitative concepts; and finally
that the differential designates only a magnitude left undetermined so that
it can be made smaller than a given number as required. The birth of structuralism at this point coincides with the death of any genetic or dynamic
ambitions of the calculus. It is precisely this alternative between infinite
and finite representation that is at issue when we speak of the
'metaphysics' of calculus. Moreover, this alternative, and therefore the
metaphysics, are strictly immanent to the techniques of the calculus itself.

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

177

That is why the metaphysical question was announced from the outset:
why is it that, from a technical point of view, the differentials are negligible
and must disappear in the result? It is obvious that to invoke here the infinitely small, and the infinitely small magnitude of the error (if there is
'error'), is completely lacking in sense and prejudges infinite representation.
The rigorous response was given by Carnot in his famous Reflections on
the Metaphysics of Infinitesimal Calculus,, but precisely from the point of
view of a finite interpretation: the differential equations are simple
'auxiliaries' expressing the conditions of the problem to which responds a
desired equation; but a strict compensation of errors is produced between
them such that no differentials persist in the result, since the latter can be
arrived at only between fixed or finite quantities.
By invoking the notions of 'problem' and 'problem conditions', however,
Carnot opened up for metaphysics a path which went beyond the frame of
his own theory. Already Leibniz had shown that calculus was the
instrument of a combinatory - in other words, that it expressed problems
which could not hitherto be solved or, indeed, even posed (transcendent
problems). One thinks in particular of the role of the regular and singular
points which enter into the complete determination of a species of curve.
No doubt the specification of the singular points (for example, dips, nodes,
focal points, centres) is undertaken by means of the form of integral curves,
which refers back to the solutions for the differential equation. There is
nevertheless a complete determination with regard to the existence and
distribution of these points which depends upon a completely different
instance - namely, the field of vectors defined by the equation itself. The
complementarity of these two aspects does not obscure their difference in
kind - on the contrary. Moreover, if the specification of the points already
shows the necessary immanence of the problem in the solution, its
involvement in the solution which covers it, along with the existence and
the distribution of points, testifies to the transcendence of the problem and
its directive role in relation to the organisation of the solutions themselves.
In short, the complete determination of a problem is inseparable from the
existence, the number and the distribution of the determinant points which
precisely provide its conditions (one singular point gives rise to two
condition equations). However, it then becomes more and more difficult
to speak of error or the compensation of errors. The condition equations
are not simply auxiliaries, nor are they imperfect equations, as Carnot
suggested. They are constitutive of the problem, and of its synthesis. It is
through lack of understanding of the ideal objective nature of the problematic that these are reduced to errors - albeit useful ones; or fictions albeit well-founded ones; in any case, to a subjective moment of imperfect,
approximative or erroneous knowledge. By 'problematic' we mean the
ensemble of the problem and its conditions. If the differentials disappear in
the result, this is to the extent that the problem-instance differs in kind

178

Difference and Repetition

from the solution-instance; it is in the movement by which the solutions
necessarily come to conceal the problem; it is in the sense that the
conditions of the problem are the object of a synthesis in the Idea which
cannot be expressed in the analysis of the propositional concepts
constituting cases of solution. As a result, the first alternative - real or
fictive? - collapses. Neither real nor fictive, differentials express the nature
of a problematic as such, its objective consistency along with its subjective
autonomy.
Perhaps the other alternative collapses as well, that between infinite and
finite representation. As we have seen, infinite and finite are indeed
characteristics of a representation in so far as the concept that it implicates
develops all its possible comprehension or, on the contrary, blocks it. In
any case, the representation of difference refers to the identity of the
concept as its principle. We can therefore treat representations like
propositions of consciousness, designating cases of solution in relation to
the concept in general. However, the problematic element, with its
extra-propositional character, does not fall within representation. Neither
particular nor general, neither finite nor infinite, it is the object of the Idea
as a universal. This differential element is the play of difference as such,
which can neither be mediated by representation nor subordinated to the
identity of the concept. The antinomy of the finite and the infinite emerges
precisely when Kant feels himself obliged, by virtue of the special nature of
cosmology, to pour into representation the content corresponding to the
Idea of the world. The antinomy is resolved, according to him, when on
the one hand he discovers within representation an element irreducible to
either infinity or finitude (regress); and when on the other he adds to this
element the pure thought of another element which differs in kind from
representation (noumena). However, to the extent that this pure thought
remains undetermined - or is not determined as differential representation, for its part, is not really overcome, any more than the
propositions of consciousness which constitute the substance and the
details of the antinomies. In a different manner, modern mathematics also
leaves us in a state of antinomy, since the strict finite interpretation that it
gives of the calculus nevertheless presupposes an axiom of infinity in the
set theoretical foundation, even though this axiom finds no illustration in
calculus. What is still missing is the extra-propositional or
sub-representative element expressed in the Idea by the differential,
precisely in the form of a problem.
We should speak of a dialectics of the calculus rather than a
metaphysics. By 'dialectic' we do not mean any kind of circulation of
opposing representations which would make them coincide in the identity
of a concept, but the problem element in so far as this may be distinguished
from the properly mathematical element of solutions. Following Lautman's
general theses, a problem has three aspects: its difference in kind from

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

179

solutions; its transcendence in relation to the solutions that it engenders on
the basis of its own determinant conditions; and its immanence in the
solutions which cover it, the problem being the better resolved the more it
is determined. Thus the ideal connections constitutive of the problematic
(dialectical) Idea are incarnated in the real relations which are constituted
by mathematical theories and carried over into problems in the form of
solutions. We have seen how all three of these aspects were present in the
differential calculus: the solutions are like the discontinuities compatible
with differential equations, engendered on the basis of an ideal continuity
in accordance with the conditions of the problem. However, an important
point must be specified. Differential calculus obviously belongs to
mathematics, it is an entirely mathematical instrument. It would therefore
seem difficult to see in it the Platonic evidence of a dialectic superior to
mathematics. At least, it would be difficult if the immanent aspect of
problems did not offer an adequate explanation. Problems are always
dialectical: the dialectic has no other sense, nor do problems have any
other sense. What is mathematical (or physical, biological, psychical or
sociological) are the solutions. It is true, however, that on the one hand the
nature of the solutions refers to different orders of problem within the
dialectic itself; and on the other hand that problems - by virtue of their
immanence, which is no less essential than their transcendence - express
themselves technically in the domain of solutions to which they give rise by
virtue of their dialectical order. Just as the right angle and the circle are
duplicated by ruler and compass, so each dialectical problem is duplicated
by a symbolic field in which it is expressed. That is why it must be said
that there are mathematical, physical, biological, psychical and sociological
problems, even though every problem is dialectical by nature and there are
no non-dialectical problems. Mathematics, therefore, does not include only
solutions to problems; it also includes the expression of problems relative
to the field of solvability which they define, and define by virtue of their
very dialectical order. That is why the differential calculus belongs entirely
to mathematics, even at the very moment when it finds its sense in the
revelation of a dialectic which points beyond mathematics.
We cannot even suppose that, from a technical point of view, differential
calculus is the only mathematical expression of problems as such. The
methods of exhaustion played this role in very diverse domains, as did
analytic geometry. More recently, other procedures have fulfilled this role
better. Recall the circle in which the theory of problems was caught: a
problem is solvable only to the extent that it is 'true', but we always tend
to define the truth of a problem in terms of its solvability. Instead of basing
the extrinsic criterion of solvability upon the internal character of the
problem (Idea), we make the internal character depend upon the simple
external criterion. Now, the mathematician Abel was perhaps the first to
break this circle: he elaborated a whole method according to which

180

Difference and Repetition

solvability must follow from the form of the problem. Instead of seeking to
find out by trial and error whether a given equation is solvable in general,
we must determine the conditions of the problem which progressively
specify the fields of solvability in such a way that 'the statement contains
the seeds of the solution'. This is a radical reversal in the problem-solution
relation, a more considerable revolution than the Copernican. It has been
said that Abel thereby inaugurated a new Critique of Pure Reason, in
particular going beyond Kantian 'extrinsicism'. This same judgement is
confirmed in relation to the work of Galois: starting from a basic 'field'
(R), successive adjunctions to this field (R', R", R'"...) allow a
progressively more precise distinction of the roots of an equation, by the
progressive limitation of possible substitutions. There is thus a succession
of 'partial resolvents' or an embedding of 'groups' which make the solution
follow from the very conditions of the problem: the fact that an equation
cannot be solved algebraically, for example, is no longer discovered as a
result of empirical research or by trial and error, but as a result of the
characteristics of the groups and partial resolvents which constitute the
synthesis of the problem and its conditions (an equation is solvable only by
algebraic means - in other words, by radicals, when the partial resolvents
are binomial equations and the indices of the groups are prime numbers).
The theory of problems is completely transformed and at last grounded,
since we are no longer in the classic master-pupil situation where the pupil
understands and follows a problem only to the extent that the master
already knows the solution and provides the necessary adjunctions. For, as
Georges Verriest remarks, the group of an equation does not characterise
at a given moment what we know about its roots, but the objectivity of
what we do not know about them. Conversely, this non-knowledge is no
longer a negative or an insufficiency but a rule or something to be learnt
which corresponds to a fundamental dimension of the object. The whole
pedagogical relation is transformed - a new Meno - but many other things
along with it, including knowledge and sufficient reason. Galois's
'progressive discernibility' unites in the same continuous movement the
processes of reciprocal determination and complete determination (pairs of
roots and the distinction between roots within a pair). It constitutes the
total figure of sufficient reason, into which it introduces time. With Abel
and Galois, the mathematical theory of problems is able to fulfil all its
properly dialectical requirements, and to break the circle in which it was
caught.
Modern mathematics is therefore regarded as based upon the theory of
groups or set theory rather than upon differential calculus. Nevertheless, it
is no accident that Abel's method concerned above all the integration of
differential formulae. What matters to us is less the determination of this or
that break [coupure] in the history of mathematics (analytic geometry,
differential calculus, group theory ...) than the manner in which, at each

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

181

moment of that history, dialectical problems, their mathematical
expression and the simultaneous origin of their fields of solvability are
interrelated. From this point of view, there is a continuity and a teleology
in the development of mathematics which makes the differences in kind
between differential calculus and other instruments merely secondary.
Calculus recognises differentials of different orders. However, the notions
of differential and order accord with the dialectic in a quite different
manner. The problematic or dialectical Idea is a system of connections
between differential elements, a system of differential relations between
genetic elements. There are different orders of Ideas presupposed by one
another according to the ideal nature of these relations and the elements
considered (Ideas of Ideas, etc.). There is as yet nothing mathematical in
these definitions. Mathematics appears with the fields of solution in which
dialectical Ideas of the last order are incarnated, and with the expression of
problems relative to these fields. Other orders of Ideas are incarnated in
other fields and in other modes of expression corresponding to different
sciences. In this manner, a genesis of diverse scientific domains takes place
on the basis of dialectical problems and their orders. Differential calculus
in the most precise sense is only a mathematical instrument which, even in
its own domain, does not necessarily represent the most complete form of
the expression of problems and the constitution of their solutions in
relation to the order of dialectical Ideas which it incarnates. It nevertheless
has a wider universal sense in which it designates the composite whole that
includes Problems or dialectical Ideas, the Scientific expression of
problems, and the Establishment of fields of solution. More generally, we
must conclude that there is no difficulty with any supposed application of
mathematics to other domains, in particular with regard to differential
calculus or group theory. It is rather that each engendered domain, in
which dialectical Ideas of this or that order are incarnated, possesses its
own calculus. Ideas always have an element of quantitability, qualitability
and potentiality; there are always processes of determinability, of
reciprocal determination and complete determination; always distributions
of distinctive and ordinary points; always adjunct fields which form the
synthetic progression of a sufficient reason. There is no metaphor here,
except the metaphor consubstantial with the notion of Ideas, that of the
dialectical transport or 'diaphora'. Herein lies the adventure of Ideas. It is
not mathematics which is applied to other domains but the dialectic which
establishes for its problems, by virtue of their order and their conditions,
the direct differential calculus corresponding or appropriate to the domain
under consideration. In this sense there is a mathesis universalis
corresponding to the universality of the dialectic. If Ideas are the
differentials of thought, there is a differential calculus corresponding to
each Idea, an alphabet of what it means to think. Differential calculus is
not the unimaginative calculus of the utilitarian, the crude arithmetic

182

Difference and Repetition

calculus which subordinates thought to other things or to other ends, but
the algebra of pure thought, the superior irony of problems themselves the only calculus 'beyond good and evil'. This entire adventurous character
of Ideas remains to be described.
Ideas are multiplicities: every idea is a multiplicity or a variety. In this Reimannian usage of the word 'multiplicity' (taken up by Husserl, and again
by Bergson) the utmost importance must be attached to the substantive
form: multiplicity must not designate a combination of the many and the
one, but rather an organisation belonging to the many as such, which has
no need whatsoever of unity in order to form a system. The one and the
many are concepts of the understanding which make up the overly loose
mesh of a distorted dialectic which proceeds by opposition. The biggest
fish pass through. Can we believe that the concrete is attained when the inadequacy of an abstraction is compensated for by the inadequacy of its opposite? We can say 'the one is multiple, the multiple one' for ever: we
speak like Plato's young men who did not even spare the farmyard. Contraries may be combined, contradictions established, but at no point has
the essential been raised: 'how many', 'how', 'in which cases'. The essence
is nothing, an empty generality, when separated from this measure, this
manner and this study of cases. Predicates may be combined, but the Idea
is missed: the outcome is an empty discourse which lacks a substantive.
'Multiplicity', which replaces the one no less than the multiple, is the true
substantive, substance itself. The variable multiplicity is the how many, the
how and each of the cases. Everything is a multiplicity in so far as it incarnates an Idea. Even the many is a multiplicity; even the one is a multiplicity. That the one is a multiplicity (as Bergson and Husserl showed) is
enough to reject back-to-back adjectival propositions of the one-many and
many-one type. Everywhere the differences between multiplicities and the
differences within multiplicities replace schematic and crude oppositions.
Instead of the enormous opposition between the one and the many, there is
only the variety of multiplicity - in other words, difference. It is, perhaps,
ironic to say that everything is multiplicity, even the one, even the many.
However, irony itself is a multiplicity - or rather, the art of multiplicities:
the art of grasping the Ideas and the problems they incarnate in things, and
of grasping things as incarnations, as cases of solution for the problems of
Ideas.
An Idea is an «-dimensional, continuous, defined multiplicity. Colour or rather, the Idea of colour - is a three-dimensional multiplicity. By
dimensions, we mean the variables or co-ordinates upon which a
phenomenon depends; by continuity, we mean the set of relations between
changes in these variables - for example, a quadratic form of the
differentials of the co-ordinates; by definition, we mean the elements

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

183

reciprocally determined by these relations, elements which cannot change
unless the multiplicity changes its order and its metric. When and under
what conditions should we speak of a multiplicity? There are three
conditions which together allow us to define the moment at which an Idea
emerges: (1) the elements of the multiplicity must have neither sensible
form nor conceptual signification, nor, therefore, any assignable function.
They are not even actually existent, but inseparable from a potential or a
virtuality. In this sense they imply no prior identity, no positing of a
something that could be called one or the same. On the contrary, their
indetermination renders possible the manifestation of difference freed from
all subordination. (2) These elements must in effect be determined, but
reciprocally, by reciprocal relations which allow no independence
whatsoever to subsist. Such relations are precisely non-localisable ideal
connections, whether they characterise the multiplicity globally or proceed
by the juxtaposition of neighbouring regions. In all cases the multiplicity is
intrinsically defined, without external reference or recourse to a uniform
space in which it would be submerged. Spatio-temporal relations no doubt
retain multiplicity, but lose inferiority; concepts of the understanding retain
inferiority, but lose multiplicity, which they replace by the identity of an 'I
think' or something thought. Internal multiplicity, by contrast, is
characteristic of the Idea alone. (3) A multiple ideal connection, a
differential relation, must be actualised in diverse spatio-temporal
relationships, at the same time as its elements are actually incarnated in a
variety of terms and forms. The Idea is thus defined as a structure. A
structure or an Idea is a 'complex theme', an internal multiplicity - in other
words, a system of multiple, non-localisable connections between
differential elements which is incarnated in real relations and actual terms.
In this sense, we see no difficulty in reconciling genesis and structure.
Following Lautman and Vuillemin's work on mathematics, 'structuralism'
seems to us the only means by which a genetic method can achieve its
ambitions. It is sufficient to understand that the genesis takes place in time
not between one actual term, however small, and another actual term, but
between the virtual and its actualisation - in other words, it goes from the
structure to its incarnation, from the conditions of a problem to the cases
of solution, from the differential elements and their ideal connections to
actual terms and diverse real relations which constitute at each moment the
actuality of time. This is a genesis without dynamism, evolving necessarily
in the element of a supra-historicity, a static genesis which may be
understood as the correlate of the notion of passive synthesis, and which in
turn illuminates that notion. Was not the mistake of the modern
interpretation of calculus to condemn its genetic ambitions under the
pretext of having discovered a 'structure' which dissociated calculus from
any phoronomic or dynamic considerations? There are Ideas which
correspond to mathematical relations and realities, others which

184

Difference and Repetition

correspond to physical laws and facts. There are others which, according
to their order, correspond to organisms, psychic structures, languages and
societies: these correspondences without resemblance are of a
structural-genetic nature. Just as structure is independent of any principle
of identity, so genesis is independent of a rule of resemblance. However, an
Idea with all its adventures emerges in so far as it already satisfies certain
structural and genetic conditions, and not others. The application of these
criteria must therefore be sought in very different domains, by means of
examples chosen almost at random.
First example: atomism as a physical Idea. Ancient atomism not only
multiplied Parmenidean being, it also conceived of Ideas as multiplicities of
atoms, atoms being the objective elements of thought. Thereafter it is indeed essential that atoms be related to other atoms at the heart of structures which are actualised in sensible composites. In this regard, the
clinamen is by no means a change of direction in the movement of an
atom, much less an indetermination testifying to the existence of a physical
freedom. It is the original determination of the direction of movement, the
synthesis of movement and its direction which relates one atom to another.
'Incerto tempore1 does not mean undetermined but non-assignable or nonlocalisable. If it is true that atoms, the elements of thought, move 'as
rapidly as thought itself, as Epicurus says in his letter to Herodotus, then
the clinamen is the reciprocal determination which is produced 'in a time
smaller than the minimum continuous time thinkable'. It is not surprising
that Epicurus makes use here of the vocabulary of exhaustion: there is
something analogous in the clinamen to a relation between the differentials
of atoms in movement. There is a declination here which also forms the
language of thought; there is something here in thought which testifies to a
limit of thought, but on the basis of which it thinks: faster than thought, 'in
a time smaller...'. Nevertheless, the Epicurean atom still retains too much
independence, a shape and an actuality. Reciprocal determination here still
has too much of the aspect of a spatio-temporal relation. The question
whether modern atomism, by contrast, fulfils all the conditions of a structure must be posed in relation to the differential equations which determine
the laws of nature, in relation to the types of 'multiple and non-localisable
connections' established between particles, and in relation to the character
of the 'potentiality' expressly attributed to these particles.
Second example: the organism as biological Idea. Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire
seems to be the first to have defended the consideration of elements that he
called abstract, taken independently of their forms and their functions.
This is why he criticised not only his predecessors but also his contemporaries (Cuvier) for not going beyond an empirical distribution of differences
and resemblances. These purely anatomical and atomic elements, such as

Ideas and the Synthesis of D ifference

185

small bones, are linked by ideal relations of reciprocal determination: they
thereby constitute an 'essence' which is the Animal in itself. It is these differential relations between pure anatomical elements which are incarnated
in diverse animal configurations, with their diverse organs and functions.
Such is the threefold character of anatomy: atomic, comparative and transcendent. In his Notions synthetiques et historiques de philosophic naturelle (1837), Geoffroy spells out his dream which, he says, was also that
of the young Napoleon: to be the Newton of the infinitely small, to discover 'the world of details' or 'very short distance' ideal connections beneath the cruder play of sensible and conceptual differences and
resemblances. An organism is a set of real terms and relations (dimension,
position, number) which actualises on its own account, to this or that degree, relations between differential elements: for example, the hyoid of a
cat has nine small bones, whereas in man it has only five; the other four are
found towards the skull, outside the organ reduced in this way by the upright position. The genesis of development in organisms must therefore be
understood as the actualisation of an essence, in accordance with reasons
and at speeds determined by the environment, with accelerations and interruptions, but independently of any transformist passage from one actual
term to another.
Such is the genius of Geoffroy. Here too, however, the question of a
structuralism in biology (in accordance with the word 'structure', which
Geoffroy often employed) depends upon the ultimate determination of the
differential elements and of the type of relations between them. Are
anatomical elements, principally bones, capable of fulfilling this role, as
though the necessity for muscles did not set limits to their relations; and as
though these elements did not themselves still enjoy an actual, or too
actual, existence? It may be, then, that structure reappears on a quite
different level, with a completely new determination of differential
elements and ideal connections. This occurs with genetics. There are
perhaps as many differences between genetics and Geoffroy as there are
between modern atomism and Epicurus. Nevertheless, chromosomes
appear as loci; in other words, not simply as places in space but as
complexes of relations of proximity; genes express differential elements
which also characterise an organism in a global manner, and play the role
of distinctive points in a double process of reciprocal and complete
determination; the double aspect of genes involves commanding several
characteristics at once, and acting only in relation to other genes; the whole
constitutes a virtuality, a potentiality; and this structure is incarnated in
actual organisms, as much from the point of view of the determination of
their species as from that of the differenciation of their parts, according to
rhythms that are precisely called 'differential', according to comparative
speeds or slownesses which measure the movement of actualisation.

186

Difference and Repetition

Third example: are there social Ideas, in a Marxist sense? In what Marx
calls 'abstract labour', abstraction is made from the particular qualities of
the products of labour and the qualities of the labourers, but not from the
conditions of productivity, the labour-power and the means of labour in a
society. The social Idea is the element of quantitability, qualitability and
potentiality of societies. It expresses a system of multiple ideal connections,
or differential relations between differential elements: these include relations of production and property relations which are established not between concrete individuals but between atomic bearers of labour-power or
representatives of property. The economic instance is constituted by such a
social multiplicity - in other words, by the varieties of these differential relations. Such a variety of relations, with its corresponding distinctive
points, is then incarnated in the concrete differenciated labours which characterise a determinate society, in the real relations of that society (juridical,
political, ideological) and in the actual terms of those relations (for example, capitalist-wage-labourer). Althusser and his collaborators are, therefore, profoundly correct in showing the presence of a genuine structure in
Capital, and in rejecting historicist interpretations of Marxism, since this
structure never acts transitively, following the order of succession in time;
rather, it acts by incarnating its varieties in diverse societies and by accounting for the simultaneity of all the relations and terms which, each
time and in each case, constitute the present: that is why 'the economic' is
never given properly speaking, but rather designates a differential virtuality
to be interpreted, always covered over by its forms of actualisation; a
theme or 'problematic' always covered over by its cases of solution. In
short, the economic is the social dialectic itself - in other words, the totality of the problems posed to a given society, or the synthetic and problematising field of that society. In all rigour, there are only economic
social problems, even though the solutions may be juridical, political or
ideological, and the problems may be expressed in these fields of
resolvability. The famous phrase of the Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 'mankind always sets itself only such tasks as it can solve',
does not mean that the problems are only apparent or that they are already
solved, but, on the contrary, that the economic conditions of a problem determine or give rise to the manner in which it finds a solution within the
framework of the real relations of the society. Not that the observer can
draw the least optimism from this, for these 'solutions' may involve stupidity or cruelty, the horror of war or 'the solution of the Jewish problem'.
More precisely, the solution is always that which a society deserves or gives
rise to as a consequence of the manner in which, given its real relations, it
is able to pose the problems set within it and to it by the differential relations it incarnates.
Ideas are complexes of coexistence. In a certain sense all Ideas coexist, but

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

187

they do so at points, on the edges, and under glimmerings which never
have the uniformity of a natural light. On each occasion, obscurities and
zones of shadow correspond to their distinction. Ideas are distinguished
from one another, but not at all in the same manner as forms and the terms
in which these are incarnated. They are objectively made and unmade according to the conditions which determine their fluent synthesis. This is because they combine the greatest power of being differentiated with an
inability to be differentiated. Ideas are varieties which include in themselves sub-varieties. We can distinguish three dimensions of variety. In the
first, vertical dimension we can distinguish ordinal varieties according to
the nature of the elements and the differential relations: for example, mathematical, mathematico-physical, chemical, biological, physical, sociological
and linguistic Ideas. ... Each level implies differentials of a different dialectical 'order', but the elements of one order can pass over into those of another under new relations, either by being dissolved in the larger superior
order or by being reflected in the inferior order. In the second, horizontal
dimension we can distinguish characteristic varieties corresponding to the
degrees of a differential relation within a given order, and to the distribution of singular points for each degree (such as the equation for conic sections which gives according to the case an ellipse, a hyperbola, a parabola
or a straight line; or the varieties of animal ordered from the point of view
of unity of composition; or the varieties of language ordered from the point
of view of their phonological system). Finally, in depth we can distinguish
axiomatic varieties which determine a common axiom for differential relations of a different order, on condition that this axiom itself coincides with
a third-order differential relation (for example, the addition of real numbers and the composition of displacements; or, in an altogether different
domain, the weaving-speech practised by the Griaule Dogons). Ideas and
the distinctions between Ideas are inseparable from their types of varieties,
and from the manner in which each type enters into the others. We propose the term 'perplication' to designate this distinctive and coexistent state
of Ideas. Not that the corresponding connotation of 'perplexity' signifies a
coefficient of doubt, hesitation or astonishment, or anything whatsoever incomplete about Ideas themselves. On the contrary, it is a question of the
identity of Ideas and problems, of the exhaustively problematic character
of Ideas - in other words, of the manner in which problems are objectively
determined by their conditions to participate in one another according to
the circumstantial requirements of the synthesis of Ideas.
Ideas are by no means essences. In so far as they are the objects of Ideas,
problems belong on the side of events, affections, or accidents rather than
on that of theorematic essences. Ideas are developed in the auxiliaries and
the adjunct fields by which their synthetic power is measured.
Consequently, the domain of Ideas is that of the inessential. They proclaim
their affinity with the inessential in a manner as deliberate and as fiercely

188

Difference and Repetition

obstinate as that in which rationalism proclaimed its possession and
comprehension of essences. Rationalism wanted to tie the fate of Ideas to
abstract and dead essences; and to the extent that the problematic form of
Ideas was recognised, it even wanted that form tied to the question of
essences - in other words, to the 'What is X?'. How many
misunderstandings are contained in this will! It is true that Plato employs
this question in order to refute those who content themselves with offering
empirical responses, and to oppose essence and appearance. His aim,
however, is to silence the empirical responses in order to open up the
indeterminate horizon of a transcendental problem which is the object of
an Idea. Once it is a question of determining the problem or the Idea as
such, once it is a question of setting the dialectic in motion, the question
'What is X?' gives way to other questions, otherwise powerful and
efficacious, otherwise imperative: 'How much, how and in what cases?'
The question 'What is X?' animates only the so-called aporetic dialogues in other words, those in which the very form of the question gives rise to
contradiction and leads to nihilism, no doubt because they have only
propaedeutic aims - the aim of opening up the region of the problem in
general, leaving to other procedures the task of determining it as a problem
or as an Idea. When Socratic irony was taken seriously and the dialectic as
a whole was confused with its propaedeutic, extremely troublesome
consequences followed: for the dialectic ceased to be the science of
problems and ultimately became confused with the simple movement of the
negative, and of contradiction. Philosophers began to talk like young men
from the farmyard. From this point of view, Hegel is the culmination of a
long tradition which took the question 'What is X?' seriously and used it to
determine Ideas as essences, but in so doing substituted the negative for the
nature of the problematic. This was the outcome of a distortion of the
dialectic. Moreover, how many theological prejudices were involved in that
tradition, since the answer to 'What is X?' is always God as the locus of
the combinatory of abstract predicates. It should be noticed how few
philosophers have placed their trust in the question 'What is X?' in order to
have Ideas. Certainly not Aristotle. ... Once the dialectic brews up its
matter instead of being applied in a vacuum for propaedeutic ends, the
questions 'How much?', 'How?', 'In what cases?' and 'Who?' abound questions the function and sense of which we shall see below. These
questions are those of the accident, the event, the multiplicity - of
difference - as opposed to that of the essence, or that of the One, or those
of the contrary and the contradictory. Hippias triumphs everywhere, even
already in Plato: Hippias who refused essences, but nevertheless did not
content himself with examples.
Problems are of the order of events - not only because cases of solution
emerge like real events, but because the conditions of a problem themselves
imply events such as sections, ablations, adjunctions. In this sense, it is

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

189

correct to represent a double series of events which develop on two planes,
echoing without resembling each other: real events on the level of the
engendered solutions, and ideal events embedded in the conditions of the
problem, like the acts - or, rather, the dreams - of the gods who double
our history. The ideal series enjoys the double property of transcendence
and immanence in relation to the real. In effect, we have seen how the
existence and distribution of singular points belongs entirely to the Idea,
even though their specification was immanent in the solution-curves of
their neighbouring regions - or, in other words, in the real relations in
which the Idea is incarnated. In his wonderful description of the event,
Peguy deployed two lines, one horizontal and another vertical, which
repeated in depth the distinctive points corresponding to the first, and even
anticipated and eternally engendered these distinctive points and their
incarnation in the first. At the intersection of these lines - where a powder
fuse forms the link between the Idea and the actual - the 'temporally
eternal' is formed, and our greatest mastery or greatest power is decided,
that which concerns problems themselves:
Suddenly, we felt that we were no longer the same convicts. Nothing
had happened. Yet a problem in which a whole world collided, a problem without issue, in which no end could be seen, suddenly ceased to
exist and we asked ourselves what we had been talking about. Instead of
an ordinary solution, a found solution, this problem, this difficulty, this
impossibility had just passed what seemed like a physical point of resolution. A crisis point. At the same time, the whole world had passed
what seemed like a physical crisis point. There are critical points of the
event just as there are critical points of temperature: points of fusion,
freezing and boiling points; points of coagulation and crystallization.
There are even in the case of events states of superfusion which are precipitated, crystallized or determined only by the introduction of a fragment of some future event.
For this reason, the procedure capable of following and describing multiplicities and themes, the procedure of vice-diction, is more important than
that of contradiction, which purports to determine essences and preserve
their simplicity. It will be said that the essence is by nature the most
'important' thing. This, however, is precisely what is at issue: whether the
notions of importance and non-importance are not precisely notions which
concern events or accidents, and are much more 'important' within accidents than the crude opposition between essence and accident itself. The
problem of thought is tied not to essences but to the evaluation of what is
important and what is not, to the distribution of singular and regular, distinctive and ordinary points, which takes place entirely within the inessential or within the description of a multiplicity, in relation to the ideal events
which constitute the conditions of a 'problem'. To have an Idea means no

190

Difference and Repetition

more than this, and erroneousness or stupidity is defined above all by its
perpetual confusion with regard to the important and the unimportant, the
ordinary and the singular. It is vice-diction which engenders cases, on the
basis of auxiliaries a'nd adjunctions. It presides over the distribution of distinctive points within the Idea; it decides the manner in which a series must
be continued, from one singular point among regular points up to which
other; it determines whether the series obtained within the Idea are convergent or divergent (there are therefore singularities which are themselves ordinary because of the convergence of the series, and singularities which are
distinctive because of their divergence). Vice-diction has two procedures
which intervene both in the determination of the conditions of the problem
and in the correlative genesis of cases of solution: these are, in the first
case, the specification of adjunct fields and, in the second, the condensation
of singularities. On the one hand, in the progressive determination of the
conditions, we must in effect discover the adjunctions which complete the
initial field of the problem as such - in other words, the varieties of the
multiplicity in all its dimensions, the fragments of ideal future or past
events which, by the same token, render the problem solvable; and we
must establish the modality in which these enclose or are connected with
the initial field. On the other hand, we must condense all the singularities,
precipitate all the circumstances, points of fusion, congelation or condensation in a sublime occasion, Kairos, which makes the solution explode like
something abrupt, brutal and revolutionary. Having an Idea is this as well.
It is as though every Idea has two faces, which are like love and anger: love
in the search for fragments, the progressive determination and linking of
the ideal adjoint fields; anger in the condensation of singularities which, by
dint of ideal events, defines the concentration of a 'revolutionary situation'
and causes the Idea to explode into the actual. It is in this sense that Lenin
had Ideas. (There is an objectivity on the part of adjunction and condensation, and an objectivity of conditions, which implies that Ideas no more
than Problems do not exist only in our heads but occur here and there in
the production of an actual historical world.) Furthermore we must not see
mathematical metaphors in all these expressions such as 'singular and distinctive points', 'adjunct fields', and 'condensation of singularities', nor
physical metaphors in 'points of fusion or congelation ...', nor lyrical or
mystical metaphors in 'love and anger'. These are categories of the dialectical Idea, the extensions of the differential calculus (mathesis universalis but
also universal physics, universal psychology and universal sociology) corresponding to the Idea in all its domains of multiplicity. They are what is amorous or revolutionary in every Idea, that by virtue of which Ideas are
always unequal glimmers of love and wrath which have nothing in common with any natural light.
(The most important aspect of Schelling's philosophy is his consideration
of powers. How unjust, in this respect, is Hegel's critical remark about the

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

191

black cows! Of these two philosophers, it is Schelling who brings difference
out of the night of the Identical, and with finer, more varied and more
terrifying flashes of lightning than those of contradiction: with
progressivity. Anger and love are powers of the Idea which develop on the
basis of a trie on - in other words, not from a negative or a non-being [ouk
on] but from a problematic being or non-existent, a being implicit in those
existences beyond the ground. The God of love and the God of anger are
required in order to have an Idea. A, A , A form the play of pure
depotentialisation and potentiality, testifying to the presence in Schelling's
philosophy of a differential calculus adequate to the dialectic. Schelling was
Leibnizian, but also Neo-Platonic. The great Neo-Platonic fantasy which
offered a response to the problem of the Phaedrus, stacking or embedding
types of Zeus by a method of exhaustion and evolution of powers: Zeus,
Zeus , Zeus . ... It is here that division finds its scope, which is not in
breadth in the differentiation of species within the same genus, but in
depth in derivation and potentialisation, already a kind of differentiation.
Thus, in a serial dialectic, the powers of a Difference which draws together
and assembles [ho synochikos] are awakened and become Titanic with
anger, demiurgic with love, and even Apolloniac, Arctic and Athenaic. )
There is no more opposition between event and structure or sense and
structure than there is between structure and genesis. Structures include as
many ideal events as they do varieties of relations and singular points,
which intersect with the real events they determine. Those systems of differential elements and relations which we call structures are also senses
from a genetic point of view, with regard to the actual terms and relations
in which they are incarnated. The true opposition lies elsewhere: between
Idea (structure-event-sense) and representation. With representation, concepts are like possibilities, but the subject of representation still determines
the object as really conforming to the concept, as an essence. That is why
representation as a whole is the element of knowledge which is realised by
the recollection of the thought object and its recognition by a thinking subject. The Idea makes a virtue of quite different characteristics. The virtuality of the Idea has nothing to do with possibility. Multiplicity tolerates no
dependence on the identical in the subject or in the object. The events and
singularities of the Idea do not allow any positing of an essence as 'what
the thing is'. No doubt, if one insists, the word 'essence' might be preserved, but only on condition of saying that the essence is precisely the accident, the event, the sense; not simply the contrary of what is ordinarily
called the essence but the contrary of the contrary: multiplicity is no more
appearance than essence, no more multiple than one. The procedures of
vice-diction cannot, therefore, be expressed in terms of representation, even
infinite: as we saw with Leibniz, they thereby lose their principal power,

192

Difference and Repetition

that of affirming divergence or decentring. In fact, the Idea is not the element of knowledge but that of an infinite 'learning', which is of a different
nature to knowledge. For learning evolves entirely in the comprehension of
problems as such, in the apprehension and condensation of singularities
and in the composition of ideal events and bodies. Learning to swim or
learning a foreign language means composing the singular points of one's
own body or one's own language with those of another shape or element,
which tears us apart but also propels us into a hitherto unknown and
unheard-of world of problems. To what are we dedicated if not to those
problems which demand the very transformation of our body and our language? In short, representation and knowledge are modelled entirely upon
propositions of consciousness which designate cases of solution, but those
propositions by themselves give a completely inaccurate notion of the instance which engenders them as cases, and which they resolve or conclude.
By contrast, the Idea and 'learning' express that extra-propositional or subrepresentative problematic instance: the presentation of the unconscious,
not the representation of consciousness. It is not surprising that, among
many of the authors who promote it, structuralism is so often accompanied
by calls for a new theatre or a new (non-Aristotelian) interpretation of the
theatre: a theatre of multiplicities opposed in every respect to the theatre of
representation, which leaves intact neither the identity of the thing represented, nor author, nor spectator, nor character, nor representation which,
through the vicissitudes of the play, can become the object of a production
of knowledge or final recognition. Instead, a theatre of problems and always open questions which draws spectator, setting and characters into the
real movement of an apprenticeship of the entire unconscious, the final elements of which remain the problems themselves.
How should the necessarily unconscious nature of Ideas be understood?
Must it be supposed that Ideas are the objects of a particular exclusive
faculty, and that to the extent that they cannot be grasped by its empirical
exercise they expose the transcendent or limit element of that faculty? This
hypothesis would already have the advantage of eliminating Reason or
even the understanding as the faculty of Ideas, and more generally of
eliminating every faculty constitutive of a common sense under which is
subsumed the empirical exercise of the other faculties with regard to a
supposed same object. It is incomprehensible only from the point of view
of a common sense or that of an exercise traced from the empirical that,
for example, thought should find within itself something which it cannot
think, something which is both unthinkable and that which must be
thought. According to an objection often made against Maimon, Ideas,
understood as the differentials of thought, themselves introduce a
minimum of 'given' which cannot be thought; they restore the duality of
infinite and finite understanding, which function respectively as the
conditions of existence and the conditions of knowledge, and which the

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

193

entire Kantian Critique nevertheless proposed to eliminate. This objection,
however, applies only to the extent that the faculty of Ideas according to
Mai'mon is the understanding, just as it was reason according to Kant; that
is, in either case, a faculty which constitutes a common sense and cannot
tolerate the presence within itself of a kernel on which the empirical
exercise of the conjoint faculties would break. It is only under these
conditions that the unthought in thought, the unconscious of a pure
thought, must be realised in an infinite understanding which serves as the
ideal of knowledge, and that the differentials are condemned to the status
of mere fictions unless they acquire the status of a fully actual reality in
that infinite understanding. Once again, however, the alternative is false.
We might as well say that the specificity of the problematic and the
presence of the unconscious in finite thought remain misunderstood. This is
no longer so when Ideas are related to the transcendent exercise of a
particular faculty liberated from any common sense.
However, we do not believe this first response to be sufficient, nor that
Ideas and structures refer to a particular faculty. Ideas occur throughout
the faculties and concern them all. According to the place and the existence
of a faculty determined as such, they render possible both the differential
object and the transcendent exercise of that faculty. Take, for example, the
linguistic multiplicity, regarded as a virtual system of reciprocal
connections between 'phonemes' which is incarnated in the actual terms
and relations of diverse languages: such a multiplicity renders possible
speech as a faculty as well as the transcendent object of that speech, that
'metalanguage' which cannot be spoken in the empirical usage of a given
language, but must be spoken and can be spoken only in the poetic usage
of speech coextensive with virtuality. Take the social multiplicity: it
determines sociability as a faculty, but also the transcendent object of
sociability which cannot be lived within actual societies in which the
multiplicity is incarnated, but must be and can be lived only in the element
of social upheaval (in other words, freedom, which is always hidden
among the remains of an old order and the first fruits of a new). The same
could be said for other Ideas or multiplicities: the psychic multiplicities of
imagination and phantasy, the biological multiplicities of vitality and
'monstrosity', the physical multiplicities of sensibility and sign. ... In this
manner, Ideas correspond in turn to each of the faculties and are not the
exclusive object of any one in particular, not even of thought. The essential
point is that in this way we do not reintroduce any form of common sense
- quite the contrary. We saw how the discord between the faculties, which
followed from the exclusive character of the transcendent object
apprehended by each, nevertheless implied a harmony such that each
transmits its violence to the other by powder fuse, but precisely a
'discordant harmony' which excludes the forms of identity, convergence
and collaboration which define a common sense. This harmonious Discord

194

Difference and Repetition

seemed to us to correspond to that Difference which by itself articulates or
draws together. There is thus a point at which thinking, speaking,
imagining, feeling, etc., are one and the same thing, but that thing affirms
only the divergence of the faculties in their transcendent exercise. It is a
question, therefore, not of a common sense but, on the contrary, of a
'para-sense' (in the sense that paradox is also the contrary of good sense).
The elements of this para-sense are Ideas, precisely because Ideas are pure
multiplicities which do not presuppose any form of identity in a common
sense but, on the contrary, animate and describe the disjoint exercise of the
faculties from a transcendental point of view. Ideas are thus multiplicities
with differential glimmers, like will-o'-the-wisps, 'virtual trails of fire',
from one faculty to another, without ever having the homogeneity of that
natural light which characterises common sense. That is why learning may
be defined in two complementary ways, both of which are opposed to
representation in knowledge: learning is either a matter of penetrating the
Idea, its varieties and distinctive points, or a matter of raising a faculty to
its disjoint transcendent exercise, raising it to that encounter and that
violence which are communicated to the others. That is also why the
unconscious has two complementary determinations which necessarily
exclude it from representation but render it worthy and capable of a pure
presentation: the unconscious may be defined either by the
extra-propositional and non-actual character of Ideas in the para-sense, or
by the non-empirical character of the paradoxical exercise of the faculties.
It is nevertheless true that Ideas have a very special relationship to pure
thought. Thought here must undoubtedly be regarded not as the form of
identity of all the faculties but as a particular faculty defined in the same
manner as the others by its differential object and its separate exercise. The
para-sense or violence which is communicated from one faculty to another
according to an order then assigns a particular place to thought: thought is
determined in such a manner that it grasps its own cogitandum only at the
extremity of the fuse of violence which, from one Idea to another, first sets
in motion sensibility and its sentiendum, and so on. This extremity might
just as well be regarded as the ultimate origin of Ideas. In what sense,
however, should we understand 'ultimate origin'? In this same sense, while
the opposition between thought and all forms of common sense remains
stronger than ever, Ideas must be called 'differentials' of thought, or the
'Unconscious' of pure thought. Ideas, therefore, are related not to a Cogito
which functions as ground or as a proposition of consciousness, but to the
fractured I of a dissolved Cogito; in other words, to the universal
ungrounding which characterises thought as a faculty in its transcendental
exercise. Ideas are not the object of a particular faculty, but nevertheless
particularly concern a special faculty to the point that one can say: they
come from it (in order to consititute the para-sense of all the faculties).
Once again, what does 'come from' or 'find its origin' mean here? Where

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

195

do Ideas come from, where do problems, their elements and ideal relations
come from?
The time has come to determine the difference between the two
instances of the problem and the question that we have until now left
vague. It must be remembered to what extent modern thought and the
renaissance of ontology is based upon the question-problem complex. This
complex has ceased to be considered the expression of a provisional and
subjective state in the representation of knowledge in order to become the
intentionality of Being par excellence, the only instance to which, properly
speaking, Being answers without the question thereby becoming lost or
overtaken. On the contrary, it alone has an opening coextensive with that
which must respond to it and can respond to it only by retaining, repeating
and continually going over it. This conception of the ontological scope of
the question animates works of art as much as philosophical thought.
Works are developed around or on the basis of a fracture that they never
succeed in filling. The fact that the novel, particularly since Joyce, has
found a new language in the mode of an 'Enquiry' or 'Questionnaire' and
presents essentially problematic events and characters obviously does not
mean that nothing is certain; it is obviously not the application of a
generalised method of doubt nor the sign of a modern scepticism but, on
the contrary, the discovery of the question and the problematic as a
transcendental horizon, as the transcendental element which belongs
'essentially' to beings, things and events. It is the novelistic or theatrical or
musical or philosophical, etc., discovery of the Idea, and at the same time
the discovery of a transcendent exercise of sensibility, of image-memory,
language and thought, by means of which each of these faculties
communicates in full discordance with the others and opens on to the
difference of Being by taking its own difference as object - in other words,
by posing the question of its own difference. Hence that form of writing
which is nothing but the question 'what is writing?', or that sensibility
which is nothing but the question 'what is it to sense?', or that thought
which asks 'what does it mean to think?'. These give rise to the greatest
monotonies and the greatest weaknesses of a new-found common sense in
the absence of the genius of the Idea, but also to the most powerful
'repetitions', the most prodigious inventions in the para-sense when the
Idea emerges in all its violence. Let us recall the mere principles of this
ontology of the question: (1) far from being an empirical state of
knowledge destined to disappear in the response once a response is given,
the question silences all empirical responses which purport to suppress it,
in order to force the one response which always continues and maintains it:
like Job, in his insistence upon a first-hand response which becomes
confused with the question itself (first power of the absurd); (2) whence the
power of the question to put in play the questioner as much as that which
is questioned, and to put itself in question: Oedipus and his manner of

196

Difference and Repetition

never being finished with the Sphinx (second power of the enigma); (3)
whence the revelation of Being as corresponding to the question, reducible
neither to the questioned nor to the questioner but that which unites both
in the articulation of its own Difference: a me on which is neither
non-being [non-etre] nor the being of the negative, but non-being
[non-etant] or the being of the question: Ulysses and the response 'No one'
(third power, which is that of the philosophical Odyssey).
This modern ontology nevertheless remains inadequate. It sometimes
plays upon the indeterminate as an objective power of the question, only to
introduce a subjective emptiness which is then attributed to Being, thereby
substituting for the force of repetition the impoverishment of the already
said or the stereotypes of a new common sense. Sometimes it even manages
to dissociate the complex, thereby entrusting questions to the religiosity of
a beautiful soul while relegating problems to the status of external
obstacles. However, what would a question be if it were not developed
under the auspices of those problematising fields alone capable of
determining it within a characteristic 'science'? The beautiful soul never
ceases to pose its own question, that of betrothal, but how many fiancees
were abandoned or disappeared once the question found its right problem
which then reacts upon it, corrects it and displaces it with all the difference
of a thought (thus Proust's hero asking 'Will I marry Albertine?', but
developing the question in the problem of the work of art to be
undertaken, where the very question undergoes a radical metamorphosis).
We must investigate the manner in which questions develop into problems
within Ideas, how problems are enveloped by questions within thought.
Here too, the classical image of thought must be confronted with another
image, this one suggested by the contemporary renaissance of ontology.
From Plato to the post-Kantians, philosophy has defined the movement
of thought as a certain type of passage from the hypothetical to the
apodictic. Even the Cartesian movement from doubt to certainty is a
variant of the passage. Another is the passage from hypothetical necessity
to metaphysical necessity in the On the Ultimate Origination of Things.
Already with Plato the dialectic was defined in this manner: depart from
hypotheses, use hypotheses as springboards or 'problems' in order to attain
the an-hypothetical principle which determines the solution to the
problems as well as the truth of the hypotheses. The whole structure of the
Parmenides follows from this, under conditions such that it is no longer
possible to see therein a propaedeutics, a gymnastics, a game or a formal
exercise, as has nevertheless been done ever so delicately. Kant himself is
more Platonic than he thinks when he passes from the Critique of Pure
Reason, entirely subordinated to the hypothetical form of possible
experience, to the Critique of Practical Reason in which, with the aid of
problems, he discovers the pure necessity of a categorical principle. Even
more so the post-Kantians when they wish to transform hypothetical

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

197

judgement into thetic judgement immediately, without changing
'critiques'. It is not illegitimate, therefore, to summarise in this way the
movement of philosophy from Plato to Fichte or Hegel by way of
Descartes, whatever the diversity of the initial hypotheses or the final
apodicticities. There is at least something in common: namely, the point of
departure found in a 'hypothesis' or proposition of consciousness affected
by a coefficient of uncertainty (as with Cartesian doubt) and the point of
arrival found in an eminently moral apodicticity or imperative (Plato's
One-Good, the non-deceiving God of the Cartesian Cogito, Leibniz's
principle of the best of all possible worlds, Kant's categorical imperative,
Fichte's Self, Hegel's 'Science'). However, while this procedure maximally
approximates the real movement of thought, it also maximally betrays and
distorts this movement: this conjoint hypotheticism and moralism, this
scientistic hypotheticism and this rationalist moralism, render
unrecognisable what they approximate.
Suppose we say instead that the movement goes not from the
hypothetical to the apodictic but from the problematical to the question: at
first the difference seems very slight - all the slighter to the extent that
while the apodictic is inseparable from a moral imperative, the question,
for its part, is also inseparable from an imperative, albeit of another kind.
A chasm nevertheless separates these two formulae. The assimilation of the
problem and the hypothesis is already a betrayal of the problem or Idea,
involving the illegitimate reduction of the latter to propositions of
consciousness and to representations of knowledge: the problematical is
different in kind from the hypothetical; the thematic is not to be confused
with the thetic. At issue in this difference is the whole distribution, the
whole determination, destination and exercise of the faculties within a
general doctrine. Moreover, to speak of the apodictic instance and the
question-instance is to speak of very different things, since these involve
two kinds of imperative, incomparable in every respect. Questions are
imperatives - or rather, questions express the relation between problems
and the imperatives from which they proceed. Is it necessary to take the
example of the police in order to demonstrate the imperative character of
questions? 'I'm asking the questions.' In fact, however, it is already the
dissolved self of the one being questioned which speaks through his
torturer. Problems or Ideas emanate from imperatives of adventure or from
events which appear in the form of questions. This is why problems are
inseparable from a power of decision, a fiat which, when we are infused by
it, makes us semi-divine beings. Did not mathematicians declare themselves
to be descended from the gods? This power of decision is exercised to the
highest degree in the two fundamental procedures of adjunction and
condensation. It is grounded in the nature of the problems to be resolved,
since it is always in relation to an ideal field added by the mathematician
that an equation turns out to be reducible or not. The infinite power to add

198

Difference and Repetition

an arbitrary quantity: it is no longer a question of a game after the manner
of Leibniz, where the moral imperative of predetermined rules combines
with the condition of a given space which must be filled ex hypothesi. It is
rather a question of a throw of the dice, of the whole sky as open space
and of throwing as the only rule. The singular points are on the die; the
questions are the dice themselves; the imperative is to throw. Ideas are the
problematic combinations which result from throws. The throw of the dice
is in no way suggested as an abolition of chance (the sky-chance). To
abolish chance is to fragment it according to the laws of probability over
several throws, in such a way that the problem is already dismembered into
hypotheses of win and loss, while the imperative is moralised into the
principle of choosing the best hypothesis which determines a win. By
contrast, the throw of the dice affirms chance every time; each throw of the
dice affirms the whole of chance each time. The repetition of throws is not
subject to the persistence of the same hypothesis, nor to the identity of a
constant rule. The most difficult thing is to make chance an object of
affirmation, but it is the sense of the imperative and the questions that it
launches. Ideas emanate from it just as singularities emanate from that
aleatory point which every time condenses the whole of chance into one
time. It will be said that by assigning the imperative Origin of Ideas to this
point we invoke only the arbitrary, the simple arbitrariness of a child's
game, the child-god. This, however, would be to misunderstand what it
means to 'affirm'. Chance is arbitrary only in so far as it is not affirmed or
not sufficiently affirmed, in so far as it is distributed within a space, a
number and under rules destined to avert it. When chance is sufficiently
affirmed the player can no longer lose, since every combination and every
throw which produces it is by nature adequate to the place and the mobile
command of the aleatory point. What does it mean, therefore, to affirm the
whole of chance, every time, in a single time? This affirmation takes place
to the degree that the disparates which emanate from a throw begin to
resonate, thereby forming a problem. The whole of chance is then indeed
in each throw, even though this be partial, and it is there in a single time
even though the combination produced is the object of a progressive
determination. The throw of the dice carries out the calculation of
problems, the determination of differential elements or the distribution of
singular points which constitute a structure. The circular relation between
imperatives and the problems which follow from them is formed in this
manner. Resonance constitutes the truth of a problem as such, in which the
imperative is tested, even though the problem itself is born of the
imperative. Once chance is affirmed, all arbitrariness is abolished every
time. Once chance is affirmed, divergence itself is the object of affirmation
within a problem. The ideal fields of adjunction which determine a
problem remain in the grip of the arbitrary so long as the basic field does
not resonate by incorporating all the values expressible by the adjunct. In

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

199

general a work is always in itself an ideal field, an ideal field of adjunction.
The work is a problem born of the imperative; it is all the more perfect and
total in a single throw as the problem is all the more progessively
determined as a problem. The author of the work is therefore justly called
the operator of the Idea. When Raymond Roussel poses his 'equations of
facts' as problems to be solved, as ideal facts or events which begin to
resonate as an effect of an imperative of language, or as facts which are
themselves fiats-,, when many modern novelists install themselves in this
aleatory point, this imperative and questioning 'blind spot' from which the
work develops like a problem by making divergent series resonate - they
are not doing applied mathematics, or employing a mathematical or
physical metaphor. Rather, by establishing that 'science' or universal
mathesis immediately in each domain, they make the work a process of
learning or experimentation, but also something total every time, where the
whole of chance is affirmed in each case, renewable every time, perhaps
without any subsistent arbitrariness.
This power of decision at the heart of problems, this creation or throw
which makes us descendant from the gods, is nevertheless not our own.
The gods themselves are subject to the Ananke or sky-chance. The
imperatives and questions with which we are infused do not emanate from
the I: it is not even there to hear them. The imperatives are those of being,
while every question is ontological and distributes 'that which is' among
problems. Ontology is the dice throw, the chaosmos from which the
cosmos emerges. If the imperatives of Being have a relation with the I, it is
with the fractured I in which, every time, they displace and reconstitute the
fracture according to the order of time. Imperatives do indeed form the
cogitanda of pure thought, the differentials of thought, at once that which
cannot be thought and that which must be thought and can be thought
only from the point of view of the transcendent exercise. Questions are
these pure thoughts of the cogitanda. Imperatives in the form of questions
thus signify our greatest powerlessness, but also that point of which
Maurice Blanchot speaks endlessly: that blind, acephalic, aphasic and
aleatory original point which designates 'the impossibility of thinking that
is thought', that point at which 'powerlesness' is transmuted into power,
that point which develops in the work in the form of a problem. Far from
referring back to the Cogito as a proposition of consciousness, imperatives
are addressed to the fractured I as though to the unconscious of thought.
For the I has the rights of an unconscious without which it would not
think, and in particular would not think the pure cogitanda. Contrary to
what is stated by the banal propositions of consciousness, thought thinks
only on the basis of an unconscious, and thinks that unconscious in the
transcendent exercise. Consequently, far from being the properties or
attributes of a thinking substance, the Ideas which derive from imperatives
enter and leave only by that fracture in the I, which means that another

200

Difference and Repetition

always thinks in me, another who must also be thought. Theft is primary in
thought. Of course powerlessness can remain powerlessness, but it alone
can also be raised to the highest power. This is precisely what Nietzsche
meant by will to power: that imperative transmutation which takes
powerlessness itself as an object (be cowardly, lazy or obedient if you wish!
on condition that ...) - that dice throw capable of affirming the whole of
chance, those questions with which we are infused during torrid or glacial
hours, those imperatives which dedicate us to the problems they launch.
For There is something irreducible in the depths of the spirit: a monolithic
bloc of Fatum, of decision already taken on all problems in their measure
and their relation to us; and also a right that we have to accede to certain
problems, like a hot-iron brand imprinted on our names.'
How disappointing this answer seems to be! We asked what was the
origin of Ideas and where problems come from: in reply we invoke throws
of the dice, imperatives and questions of chance instead of an apodictic
principle; an aleatory point at which everything becomes ungrounded
instead of a solid ground. We contrast this chance with arbitrariness to the
extent that it is affirmed, imperatively affirmed, affirmed in the particular
manner of the question; but we measure this affirmation itself by the
resonance established between the problematic elements which result from
a throw of the dice. In what circle do we turn such that we cannot speak of
the origin in any other way? We distinguished four instances: imperative or
ontological questions; dialectical problems or the themes which emerge
from them; symbolic fields of solvability in which these problems are
'scientifically' expressed in accordance with their conditions; the solutions
given in these fields when the problems are incarnated in the actuality of
cases. From the outset, however, what are these fiery imperatives, these
questions which are the beginning of the world? The fact is that every thing
has its beginning in a question, but one cannot say that the question itself
begins. Might the question, along with the imperative which it expresses,
have no other origin than repetition* Great authors of our time (Heidegger,
Blanchot) have exploited this most profound relation between the question
and repetition. Not that it is sufficient, however, to repeat a single question
which would remain intact at the end, even if this question is 'What is
being?' [Qu'en est-il de I'etre?}. It is the bad throws of the dice which are
inscribed in the same hypotheses (representing propositions of
consciousness or the opinions of a common sense) and approach what is
more or less the same apodictic principle (representing the determination of
the winning throw). It is the bad players who repeat only by fragmenting
chance and dividing it among several throws. By contrast, the good throw
of the dice affirms all of chance in one throw, and it is here that we find
the essence of what is called a question. There are nevertheless several
throws of the dice: the throw of the dice is repeated. Each, however, takes
the chance all at once, and instead of having the different, or different

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

201

combinations, result from the Same, has the same, or the repetition, result
from the Different. In this sense, the repetition which is consubstantial with
the question is at the source of the 'perplication' of Ideas. The differential
of the Idea is itself inseparable from the process of repetition which defined
the throw of the dice. There is an iteration in calculus just as there is a
repetition in problems which reproduces that of the questions or the
imperatives from which it proceeds. Here again, however, it is not an
ordinary repetition. Ordinary repetition is prolongation, continuation or
that length of time which is stretched into duration: bare repetition (it can
be discontinued, but remains fundamentally the repetition of the same).
However, who is prolonged in this manner? A singularity, as far as the
vicinity of another singularity? On the contrary, what defines the
extraordinary power of that clothed repetition more profound than bare
repetition is the reprise of singularities by one another, the condensation of
singularities one into another, as much in the same problem or Idea as
between one problem and another or from one Idea to another. Repetition
is this emission of singularities, always with an echo or resonance which
makes each the double of the other, or each constellation the redistribution
of another. Moreover, it amounts to the same thing to say that clothed
repetition is more profound at the level of problems, and that repetition
results from the different at the level of the questions from which these
proceed.
Heidegger shows clearly how the repetition of the question itself
develops in the relation between the problem and repetition:
By a repetition of a fundamental problem we understand the disclosure
of the primordial possibilities concealed in it. The development of these
possibilities has the effect of transforming the problem and thus preserving it in its import as a problem. To preserve a problem means to free
and to safeguard its intrinsic powers, which are the source of its essence
and which make it possible as a problem. The repetition of the possibilities of a problem, therefore, is not a simple taking up of that which is 'in
vogue' with regard to this problem. ... The possible, thus understood, in
fact hinders all genuine repetition and thereby all relation to history. ...
[A good interpretation must, on the contrary, decide] how far the understanding of the possible which governs all repetition extends and
whether it is equal to that which is repeatable.
What is this possible at the heart of a problem which stands opposed to the
possibilities or propositions of consciousness, to the currently accepted
opinions which make up hypotheses? Nothing but the potentiality of an
Idea, its determinable virtuality. On this point, Heidegger is Nietzschean.
Of what is repetition said in the eternal return if not the will to power, the
world of the will to power with its imperatives, its throws of the dice and
its problems resulting from such throws? Repetition in the eternal return

202

Difference and Repetition

never means continuation, perpetuation or prolongation, nor even the discontinuous return of something which would at least be able to be prolonged in a partial cycle (an identity, an I, a Self) but, on the contrary, the
reprise of pre-individual singularities which, in order that it can be grasped
as repetition, presupposes the dissolution of all prior identities. Every origin is a singularity and every singularity a commencement on the horizontal line, the line of ordinary points on which it is prolonged like so many
reproductions or copies which form the moments of a bare repetition. It is
also, however, a recommencement on the vertical line which condenses singularities and on which is woven the other repetition, the line of the affirmation of chance. If 'being' is above all difference and commencement,
Being is itself repetition, the recommencement of being. Repetition is the
'provided' of the condition which authenticates the imperatives of Being.
This is the constant ambiguity of the notion of origin and the reason for
our earlier deception: origins are assigned only in a world which challenges
the original as much as the copy, and an origin assigns a ground only in a
world already precipitated into universal ungrounding.
One final consequence remains, concerning the status of negation. There
is a non-being, yet there is neither negative nor negation. There is a
non-being which is by no means the being of the negative, but rather the
being of the problematic. The symbol for this (non)-being or ?-being is %.
The zero here refers only to difference and its repetition. This (non)-being
which corresponds to the form of a problematic field, even though the
modalities of proposition tend to assimilate it to negative non-being,
reappears with the so-called expletive 'Ne' which grammarians have so
much difficulty in interpreting: like the witness of an extra-propositional
grammatical instance, an expletive 'Ne' always appears in propositions
where there is a question developed into a problem. The negative is an
illusion, no more than a shadow of problems. We have seen how problems
were necessarily hidden by possible propositions corresponding to cases of
solution: instead of being grasped as problems, they can then appear as no
more than hypotheses or series of hypotheses. As a proposition of
consciousness, each of these hypotheses is flanked by a double negative:
whether the One is, whether the One is not... whether it is fine, whether it
is not fine. ... The negative is an illusion because the form of negation
appears with propositions which express the problem on which they
depend only by distorting it and obscuring its real structure. Once the
problem is translated into hypotheses, each hypothetical affirmation is
doubled by a negation, which amounts to the state of a problem betrayed
by its shadow. There is no Idea of the negative any more than there are
hypotheses in nature, even though nature does proceed by means of
problems. That is why it matters little whether the negative is understood
as logical limitation or real opposition. Consider the great negative notions
such as the many in relation to the One, disorder in relation to order,

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

203

nothingness in relation to being: it makes no difference whether they are
interpreted as the limit of a process of degeneration or as the antithesis of a
thesis. At best, the process will be grounded, either in the analytic
substance of God or in the synthetic form of the Self. God or the self, it is
the same thing. In both cases we remain in the hypothetical element of a
simple concept, under which are subsumed either all the infinite degrees of
an identical representation or the infinite opposition of two contrary
representations. Critiques of the negative are never decisive as long as they
invoke the rights of a first concept (the One, order, being); they are no
more so as long as they are content to translate opposition into limitation.
The critique of the negative is effective only when it denounces the
interchangeability of opposition and limitation, thereby denouncing the
hypothetical conceptual element which necessarily sustains one or the
other, or even one by means of the other. In short, the critique of the
negative must be conducted on the basis of the ideal, differential and
problematic element, on the basis of the Idea. It is the notion of
multiplicity which denounces simultaneously the One and the many, the
limitation of the One by the many and the opposition of the many to the
One. It is variety which denounces simultaneously order and disorder, and
(non)-being or ?-being which denounces simultaneously both being and
non-being. The complicity of the negative and the hypothetical must
everywhere be dissolved in favour of a more profound link between
difference and the problematic. In effect, the Idea is made up of reciprocal
relations between differential elements, completely determined by those
relations which never include any negative term or relation of negativity.
The oppositions, conflicts and contradictions in the concept appear such
crude and rough measures by contrast with the fine and differential
mechanisms which characterise the Idea - weight in contrast to lightness.
We should reserve the name 'positivity' for this state of the multiple Idea or
this consistency of the problematic. Moreover, we must guard every time
against the manner in which this perfectly positive (non)-being leans
towards a negative non-being and tends to collapse into its own shadow,
finding there its most profound distortion, to the further advantage of the
illusion of consciousness.
Take the example of the linguistic Idea, so frequently invoked today. As
defined by phonology, the linguistic Idea certainly has all the
characteristics of a structure: the presence of differential elements, called
phonemes, extracted from the continuous sonorous flux; the existence of
differential relations (distinctive features) which reciprocally and
completely determine these elements; the value of singular points assumed
by the phonemes in that determination (pertinent particularities); the
manner in which the system of language so constituted assumes the
character of a multiplicity, the problematic nature of which objectively
represents the set of problems which the language poses for itself, and

204

Difference and Repetition

solves in the constitution of significations; the unconscious, non-actual and
virtual character of the elements and relations, along with their double
status of transcendence and immanence with regard to the sounds actually
articulated; the double actualisation of the differential elements, the double
incarnation of the differential relations at once both in different languages
and in the different significant parts of the same language (differentiation),
each language incarnating certain varieties of relation and certain singular
points; the complementarity of sense and structure, genesis and structure,
where this takes the form of a passive genesis which is revealed in this
actualisation. Now, despite all these aspects which define a fully positive
multiplicity, linguists constantly speak in negative terms and assimilate the
differential relations between phonemes to relations of opposition. Perhaps
it might be said that this is only a matter of conventional terminology, and
that 'opposition' here means simply correlation. It is true that the notion of
opposition employed by linguists seems particularly pluralised and
relativised, since each phoneme enters into several distinct oppositions with
other phonemes from different points of view. For example, in
Trubetzkoy's classification, opposition is so dismembered and distributed
among the coexisting varieties of relation that it no longer exists as
opposition but rather as a complex or perplexed differential mechanism. A
Hegelian would not be at home there, in the absence of the uniformity of a
large contradiction. Nevertheless, we touch here upon an essential point:
here as elsewhere, in phonology as well as in other domains and with
regard to other Ideas, it is a question of knowing whether it is enough to
pluralise opposition or to overdetermine contradiction and to distribute
them among different figures which, despite everything, still preserve the
form of the negative. It seems to us that pluralism is a more enticing and
dangerous thought: fragmentation implies overturning. The discovery in
any domain of a plurality of coexisting oppositions is inseparable from a
more profound discovery, that of difference, which denounces the negative
and opposition itself as no more than appearances in relation to the
problematic field of a positive multiplicity. One cannot pluralise
opposition without leaving its domain and entering the caves of difference
which resonate with a pure positivity and reject opposition as no more
than a shadow cavern seen from without.
To return to the linguistic Idea: why does Saussure, at the very moment
when he discovers that 'in language there are only differences', add that
these differences are 'without positive terms' and 'eternally negative'? Why
does Trubetzkoy maintain as sacred the principle that 'the idea of
difference' which is constitutive of language 'presupposes the idea of
opposition'? Everything points to the contrary. Is this not a way of
introducing the point of view of consciousness and actual representations
into what should be the transcendent exploration of the Idea of the
linguistic unconscious - in other words, the highest exercise of speech in

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

205

relation to the point zero of language? When we interpret differences under
the category of opposition and as negatives, are we not already on the side
of the listener, even that of the bad listener who hesitates between several
possible versions of what was actually said and tries to find himself by
establishing oppositions? In other words, are we not on the lesser side of
language rather than the side of the one who speaks and assigns meaning?
Have we not already betrayed the nature of the play of language - in other
words, the sense of that combinatory, of those imperatives or linguistic
throws of the dice which, like Artaud's cries, can be understood only by
the one who speaks in the transcendent exercise of language? In short, the
translation of difference into opposition seems to us to concern not a
simple question of terminology or convention, but rather the essence of
language and the linguistic Idea. When difference is read as opposition, it is
deprived of the peculiar thickness in which its positivity is affirmed.
Modern phonology lacks a dimension which would prevent it from playing
with shadows on a single plane. In a sense, this is Gustave Guillaume's
message throughout his work, the importance of which is today beginning
to be understood. For opposition teaches us nothing about the nature of
that which is thought to be opposed. The selection of phonemes possessing
pertinent value in this or that language is inseparable from that of
morphemes as elements of grammatical constructions. Moreover, the
morphemes, which on their own account bring into play the virtual whole
of the language, are the object of a progressive determination which
proceeds by 'differential thresholds' and implies a purely logical time
capable of measuring the genesis or actualisation. The formal reciprocal
determination of the phonemes refers to that progressive determination
which expresses the action of the virtual system on the phonic matter; and
it is only when the phonemes are considered abstractly - in other words,
when the virtual is reduced to a simple possible - that their relations take
the negative form of an empty opposition, rather than that of filling
differential positions around a threshold. The fundamental lesson of
Guillaume's work is the substitution of a principle of differential position
for that of distinctive opposition. This substitution takes place to the
extent that morphology is no longer simply a continuation of phonology,
but rather introduces properly problematic values which determine the
significant selection of phonemes. For us, it is from this linguistic point of
view that non-being finds the confirmation of its necessary dissociation: on
the one hand, in a NE that we have called 'discordant', disparate or
differential rather than negative, a problematic NE which should be
written as (non)-being or ?-being; on the other hand, in a so-called
'foreclusive' PAS which should be written as wow-being, but which
indicates in the engendered proposition only the result of the preceding
process. In fact, it is not the expletive NE which presents a
little-understood special case of negation: rather, the expletive NE is the

206

Difference and Repetition

original sense from which emerges the negation PAS, both as a necessary
consequence and as an inevitable illusion. 'Ne ... pas' divides into a
problematic NE and a negative PAS which are like two instances differing
in kind, the second of which attracts the first only in order to betray it.
The genesis of the negative is as follows: the affirmations of being are
genetic elements in the form of imperative questions; these develop in the
positivity of problems; the propositions of consciousness are engendered
affirmations which designate cases of solution. Each proposition, however,
has a double negative which expresses the shadow of the problem in the
domain of solutions - in other words, it expresses the manner in which the
problem subsists in the distorted image of it given in representation. The
formula That is not the case' means that a hypothesis passes over into the
negative in so far as it does not represent the currently fulfilled conditions
of a problem, to which, on the contrary, another proposition corresponds.
The negative is indeed, therefore, the turning shadow of the problematic
upon the set of propositions that it subsumes as cases. As a general rule,
the critique of the negative remains ineffective so long as it assumes as
given the form of affirmation ready made in the proposition. The critique
of the negative is radical and well grounded only when it carries out a
genesis of affirmation and, simultaneously, the genesis of the appearance of
negation. For the question is to know how affirmation itself can be
multiple, or how difference as such can be the object of pure affirmation.
This is possible only to the extent that affirmation as a mode of the
proposition is produced from extra-propositional genetic elements (the
imperative questions or original ontological affirmations), then 'carried
through' or determined by way of problems (multiplicities or problematic
Ideas, ideal positivities). Under these conditions, it must be said in effect
that the negative in the proposition sits alongside affirmation, but only as
the shadow of the problem to which the proposition is thought to respond
- in other words, like the shadow of the genetic instance which produces
the affirmation itself.
Ideas contain all the varieties of differential relations and all the
distributions of singular points coexisting in diverse orders 'perplicated' in
one another. When the virtual content of an Idea is actualised, the varieties
of relation are incarnated in distinct species while the singular points which
correspond to the values of one variety are incarnated in the distinct parts
characteristic of this or that species. The Idea of colour, for example, is like
white light which perplicates in itself the genetic elements and relations of
all the colours, but is actualised in the diverse colours with their respective
spaces; or the Idea of sound, which is also like white noise. There is even a
white society and a white language, the latter being that which contains in
its virtuality all the phonemes and relations destined to be actualised in
diverse languages and in the distinctive parts of a given language. Thus,
with actualisation, a new type of specific and partitive distinction takes the

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

207

place of the fluent ideal distinctions. We call the determination of the
virtual content of an Idea differentiation; we call the actualisation of that
virtuality into species and distinguished parts differentiation. It is always in
relation to a differentiated problem or to the differentiated conditions of a
problem that a differentiation of species and parts is carried out, as though
it corresponded to the cases of solution of the problem. It is always a
problematic field which conditions a differentiation within the milieu in
which it is incarnated. Consequently - and this is all we wish to say - the
negative appears neither in the process of differentiation nor in the process
of differentiation. The Idea knows nothing of negation. The first process is
identical with the description of a pure positivity, in the form of a problem
to which are assigned relations and points, places and functions, positions
and differential thresholds which exclude all negative determination and
find their source in the genetic or productive elements of affirmation. The
other process is identical with the production of finite engendered
affirmations which bear upon the actual terms which occupy these places
and positions, and upon the real relations which incarnate these relations
and these functions. Forms of the negative do indeed appear in actual
terms and real relations, but only in so far as these are cut off from the
virtuality which they actualise, and from the movement of their
actualisation. Then, and only then, do the finite affirmations appear
limited in themselves, opposed to one another, and suffering from lack or
privation. In short, the negative is always derived and represented, never
original or present: the process of difference and of differenciation is
primary in relation to that of the negative and opposition. Those
commentators on Marx who insist upon the fundamental difference
between Marx and Hegel rightly point out that in Capital the category of
differenciation (the differenciation at the heart of a social multiplicity: the
division of labour) is substituted for the Hegelian concepts of opposition,
contradiction and alienation, the latter forming only an apparent
movement and standing only for abstract effects separated from the
principle and from the real movement of their production. Clearly, at
this point the philosophy of difference must be wary of turning into the
discourse of beautiful souls: differences, nothing but differences, in a
peaceful coexistence in the Idea of social places and functions ... but the
name of Marx is sufficient to save it from this danger.
The problems of a society, as they are determined in the infrastructure in
the form of so-called 'abstract' labour, receive their solution from the
process of actualisation or differenciation (the concrete division of labour).
However, as long as the problem throws its shadow over the ensemble of
differenciated cases forming the solution, these will present a falsified
image of the problem itself. It cannot even be said that the falsification
comes afterwards: it accompanies or doubles the actualisation. A problem
is always reflected in false problems while it is being solved, so that the

208

Difference and Repetition

solution is generally perverted by an inseparable falsity. For example,
according to Marx, fetishism is indeed an absurdity, an illusion of social
consciousness, so long as we understand by this not a subjective illusion
born of individual consciousness but an objective or transcendental illusion
born out of the conditions of social consciousness in the course of its
actualisation. There are those for whom the whole of differenciated social
existence is tied to the false problems which enable them to live, and others
for whom social existence is entirely contained in the false problems of
which they occupy the fraudulent positions, and from which they suffer.
All the figures of non-sense appear in the objective field of the false
problem: that is, all the counterfeit forms of affirmation, distortions of
elements and relations, and confusions of the distinctive with the ordinary.
This is why history is no less the locus of non-sense and stupidity than it is
the process of sense or meaning. While it is the nature of consciousness to
be false, problems by their nature escape consciousness. The natural object
of social consciousness or common sense with regard to the recognition of
value is the fetish. Social problems can be grasped only by means of a
'rectification' which occurs when the faculty of sociability is raised to its
transcendent exercise and breaks the unity of fetishistic common sense. The
transcendent object of the faculty of sociability is revolution. In this sense,
revolution is the social power of difference, the paradox of society, the
particular wrath of the social Idea. Revolution never proceeds by way of
the negative. We could not have established the first determination of the
negative, as shadow of the problem as such, without already being
embarked upon a second determination: the negative is the objective field
of the false problem, the fetish in person. The negative is both shadow of
the problem and false problem par excellence. Practical struggle never
proceeds by way of the negative but by way of difference and its power of
affirmation, and the war of the righteous is for the conquest of the highest
power, that of deciding problems by restoring them to their truth, by
evaluating that truth beyond the representations of consciousness and the
forms of the negative, and by acceding at last to the imperatives on which
they depend.
We have ceaselessly invoked the virtual. In so doing, have we not fallen
into the vagueness of a notion closer to the undetermined than to the determinations of difference? It is precisely this, however, that we wished to
avoid in speaking of the virtual. We opposed the virtual and the real: although it could not have been more precise before now, this terminology
must be corrected. The virtual is opposed not to the real but to the actual.
The virtual is fully real in so far as it is virtual. Exactly what Proust said of
states of resonance must be said of the virtual: 'Real without being actual,
ideal without being abstract'; and symbolic without being fictional. Indeed,

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

209

the virtual must be defined as strictly a part of the real object - as though
the object had one part of itself in the virtual into which it plunged as
though into an objective dimension. Accounts of the differential calculus
often liken the differential to a 'portion of the difference'. Or, following
Lagrange's method, the question is asked which part of the mathematical
object presents the relations in question and must be considered derived.
The reality of the virtual consists of the differential elements and relations
along with the singular points which correspond to them. The reality of the
virtual is structure. We must avoid giving the elements and relations which
form a structure an actuality which they do not have, and withdrawing
from them a reality which they have. We have seen that a double process
of reciprocal determination and complete determination defined that reality: far from being undetermined, the virtual is completely determined.
When it is claimed that works of art are immersed in a virtuality, what is
being invoked is not some confused determination but the completely determined structure formed by its genetic differential elements, its 'virtual'
or 'embryonic' elements. The elements, varieties of relations and singular
points coexist in the work or the object, in the virtual part of the work or
object, without it being possible to designate a point of view privileged
over others, a centre which would unify the other centres. How, then, can
we speak simultaneously of both complete determination and only a part
of the object? The determination must be a complete determination of the
object, yet form only a part of it. Following suggestions made by Descartes
in his Replies to Arnaud, we must carefully distinguish the object in so far
as it is complete and the object in so far as it is whole. What is complete is
only the ideal part of the object, which participates with other parts of objects in the Idea (other relations, other singular points), but never constitutes an integral whole as such. What the complete determination lacks is
the whole set of relations belonging to actual existence. An object may be
ens, or rather (non}-ens omni modo determinatum, without being entirely
determined or actually existing.
There is thus another part of the object which is determined by
actualisation. Mathematicians ask: What is this other part represented by
the so-called primitive function? In this sense, integration is by no means
the inverse of differentiation but, rather, forms an original process of
differentiation. Whereas differentiation determines the virtual content of
the Idea as problem, differenciation expresses the actualisation of this
virtual and the constitution of solutions (by local integrations).
Differenciation is like the second part of difference, and in order to
designate the integrity or the integrality of the object we require the
complex notion of different/dation. The t and the c here are the distinctive
feature or the phonological relation of difference in person. Every object is
double without it being the case that the two halves resemble one another,
one being a virtual image and the other an actual image. They are unequal

210

Difference and Repetition

odd halves. Differentiation itself already has two aspects of its own,
corresponding to the varieties of relations and to the singular points
dependent upon the values of each variety. However, differenciation in
turn has two aspects, one concerning the qualities or diverse species which
actualise the varieties, the other concerning number or the distinct parts
actualising the singular points. For example, genes as a system of
differential relations are incarnated at once both in a species and in the
organic parts of which it is composed. There is in general no quality which
does not refer to a space defined by the singularities corresponding to the
differential relations incarnated in that quality. The work of Lavelle and of
Nogue, for example, has shown the existence of spaces belonging to
qualities and the manner in which these spaces are constructed alongside
singularities, so that a difference in quality is always subtended by a spatial
difference (diaphora). Furthermore, the reflections of painters teach us
everything about the space of each colour and the alignment of such spaces
within a work. Species are differenciated only in so far as each has parts
which are themselves differenciated. Differenciation is always
simultaneously differenciation of species and parts, of qualities and
extensities: determination of qualities or determination of species, but also
partition or organisation. How, then, do these two aspects of
differenciation connect with the two preceding aspects of differentiation?
How do the two dissimilar halves of an object fit together? Qualities and
species incarnate the varieties of actual relation; organic parts incarnate the
corresponding singularities. However, the precision with which they fit
together is better seen from two complementary points of view.
On the one hand, complete determination carries out the differentiation
of singularities, but it bears only upon their existence and their
distribution. The nature of these singular points is specified only by the
form of the neighbouring integral curves - in other words, by virtue of the
actual or differenciated species and spaces. On the other hand, the essential
aspects of sufficient reason - determinability, reciprocal determination,
complete determination - find their systematic unity in progressive
determination. In effect, the reciprocity of determination does not signify a
regression, nor a marking time, but a veritable progression in which the
reciprocal terms must be secured step by step, and the relations themselves
established between them. The completeness of the determination also
implies the progressivity of adjunct fields. In going from A to B and then B
to A, we do not arrive back at the point of departure as in a bare
repetition; rather, the repetition between A and B and B and A is the
progressive tour or description of the whole of a problematic field. It is like
Vitrac's poem, where the different steps which each form a poem (Writing,
Dreaming, Forgetting, Looking for the opposite, Humourising and finally
Rediscovering by analysing) progressively determine the whole poem as a
problem or a multiplicity. In this sense, by virtue of this progressivity, every

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

211

structure has a purely logical, ideal or dialectical time. However, this
virtual time itself determines a time of differenciation, or rather rhythms or
different times of actualisation which correspond to the relations and
singularities of the structure and, for their part, measure the passage from
virtual to actual. In this regard, four terms are synonymous: actualise,
differenciate, integrate and solve. For the nature of the virtual is such that,
for it, to be actualised is to be differenciated. Each differenciation is a local
integration or a local solution which then connects with others in the
overall solution or the global integration. This is how, in the case of the
organic, the process of actualisation appears simultaneously as the local
differenciation of parts, the global formation of an internal milieu, and the
solution of a problem posed within the field of constitution of an
organism. An organism is nothing if not the solution to a problem, as are
each of its differenciated organs, such as the eye which solves a light
'problem'; but nothing within the organism, no organ, would be
differenciated without the internal milieu endowed with a general
effectivity or integrating power of regulation. (Here again, in the case of
living matter, the negative forms of opposition and contradiction, obstacle
and need, are secondary and derivative in relation to the imperatives of an
organism to be constructed or a problem to be solved.)
The only danger in all this is that the virtual could be confused with the
possible. The possible is opposed to the real; the process undergone by the
possible is therefore a 'realisation'. By contrast, the virtual is not opposed
to the real; it possesses a full reality by itself. The process it undergoes is
that of actualisation. It would be wrong to see only a verbal dispute here: it
is a question of existence itself. Every time we pose the question in terms of
possible and real, we are forced to conceive of existence as a brute
eruption, a pure act or leap which always occurs behind our backs and is
subject to a law of all or nothing. What difference can there be between the
existent and the non-existent if the non-existent is already possible, already
included in the concept and having all the characteristics that the concept
confers upon it as a possibility? Existence is the same as but outside the
concept. Existence is therefore supposed to occur in space and time, but
these are understood as indifferent milieux instead of the production of
existence occurring in a characteristic space and time. Difference can no
longer be anything but the negative determined by the concept: either the
limitation imposed by possibles upon each other in order to be realised, or
the opposition of the possible to the reality of the real. The virtual, by
contrast, is the characteristic state of Ideas: it is on the basis of its reality
that existence is produced, in accordance with a time and a space
immanent in the Idea.
Secondly, the possible and the virtual are further distinguished by the
fact that one refers to the form of identity in the concept, whereas the other
designates a pure multiplicity in the Idea which radically excludes the

212

Difference and Repetition

identical as a prior condition. Finally, to the extent that the possible is
open to 'realisation', it is understood as an image of the real, while the real
is supposed to resemble the possible. That is why it is difficult to
understand what existence adds to the concept when all it does is double
like with like. Such is the defect of the possible: a defect which serves to
condemn it as produced after the fact, as retroactively fabricated in the
image of what resembles it. The actualisation of the virtual, on the
contrary, always takes place by difference, divergence or differenciation.
Actualisation breaks with resemblance as a process no less than it does
with identity as a principle. Actual terms never resemble the singularities
they incarnate. In this sense, actualisation or differenciation is always a
genuine creation. It does not result from any limitation of a pre-existing
possibility. It is contradictory to speak of 'potential', as certain biologists
do, and to define differenciation by the simple limitation of a global power,
as though this potential were indistinguishable from a logical possibility.
For a potential or virtual object, to be actualised is to create divergent lines
which correspond to - without resembling •- a virtual multiplicity. The
virtual possesses the reality of a task to be performed or a problem to be
solved: it is the problem which orientates, conditions and engenders
solutions, but these do not resemble the conditions of the problem. Bergson
was right, therefore, to say that from the point of view of differenciation,
even the resemblances which appear along divergent lines of evolution (for
example, the eye as an 'analogous' organ) must be related first of all to the
heterogeneity in the production mechanism. Moreover, the subordination
of difference to identity and that of difference to similitude must be
overturned in the same movement. What is this correspondence, however,
without resemblance or creative differenciation? The Bergsonian schema
which unites Creative Evolution and Matter and Memory begins with the
account of a gigantic memory, a multiplicity formed by the virtual
coexistence of all the sections of the 'cone', each section being the
repetition of all the others and being distinguished from them only by the
order of the relations and the distribution of singular points. Then, the
actualisation of this mnemonic virtual appears to take the form of the
creation of divergent lines, each of which corresponds to a virtual section
and represents a manner of solving a problem, but also the incarnation of
the order of relations and distribution of singularities peculiar to the given
section in differenciated species and parts. Difference and repetition in
the virtual ground the movement of actualisation, of differenciation as
creation. They are thereby substituted for the identity and the resemblance
of the possible, which inspires only a pseudo-movement, the false
movement of realisation understood as abstract limitation.
Any hesitation between the virtual and the possible, the order of the Idea
and the order of the concept, is disastrous, since it abolishes the reality of
the virtual. There are traces of such an oscillation in the philosophy of

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

213

Leibniz. Every time Leibniz speaks of Ideas, he presents them as virtual
multiplicities made of differential relations and singular points, which
thought apprehends in a state close to sleep, stupor, swooning, death,
amnesia, murmuring or intoxication. ... However, that in which Ideas are
actualised is rather conceived as a possible, a realised possible. This
hesitation between the possible and the virtual explains why no one has
gone further than Leibniz in the exploration of sufficient reason, and why,
nevertheless, no one has better maintained the illusion of a subordination
of that sufficient reason to the identical. No one has come closer to a
movement of vice-diction in the Idea, but no one has better maintained the
supposed right of representation, albeit at the price of rendering it infinite.
No one has been better able to immerse thought in the element of
difference and provide it with a differential unconscious, surround it with
little glimmerings and singularities, all in order to save and reconstitute the
homogeneity of a natural light a la Descartes. It is in effect with Descartes
that the principle of representation as good sense or common sense appears
in its highest form. We can call this the principle of the 'clear and distinct',
or the principle of the proportionality of the clear and the distinct: an idea
is all the more distinct the clearer it is, and clarity-distinctness constitutes
the light which renders thought possible in the common exercise of all the
faculties. Given this principle, we cannot overemphasize the importance of
a remark that Leibniz constantly makes in his logic of ideas: a clear idea is
in itself confused; it is confused in so far as it is clear. Without doubt, this
remark may be accommodated within the Cartesian logic, and taken to
mean simply that a clear idea is confused because it is not yet clear enough
in all its parts. Moreover, is this not how Leibniz himself finally tends to
interpret it? However, is it not also susceptible to another more radical
interpretation, according to which there would be a difference between the
clear and the distinct, not just of degree but in kind, such that the clear
would be in itelf confused and the distinct in itself obscure? What is this
distinct-obscure which corresponds to the clear-confused? Consider
Leibniz's famous passages on the murmuring of the sea. Here too, two
interpretations are possible. Either we say that the apperception of the
whole noise is clear but confused (not distinct) because the component
little perceptions are themselves not clear but obscure; or we say that the
little perceptions are themselves distinct and obscure (not clear): distinct
because they grasp differential relations and singularities; obscure because
they are not yet 'distinguished', not yet differenciated. These singularities
then condense to determine a threshold of consciousness in relation to our
bodies, a threshold of differenciation on the basis of which the little
perceptions are actualised, but actualised in an apperception which in turn
is only clear and confused; clear because it is distinguished or
differenciated, and confused because it is clear. The problem is then no
longer posed in terms of whole-parts (from the point of view of logical

214

Difference and Repetition

possibility) but in terms of virtual-actual (actualisation of differential
relations, incarnation of singular points). At this point, the value of
representation in the common sense divides into two irreducible values in
the para-sense: a distinctness which can only be obscure, the more obscure
the more it is distinct; and a confusion-clarity which can only be confused.
The nature of the Idea is to be distinct and obscure. In other words, the
Idea is precisely real without being actual, differentiated without being
differentiated, and complete without being entire. Distinctness-obscurity is
intoxication, the properly philosophical stupor or the Dionysian Idea.
Leibniz very nearly encountered Dionysus at the sea shore or near the
water mill. Perhaps Apollo, the clear-confused thinker, is needed in order
to think the Ideas of Dionysus. However, the two never unite in order to
reconstitute a natural light. Rather, they compose two languages which are
encoded in the language of philosophy and directed at the divergent
exercise of the faculties: the disparity of style.
How does actualisation occur in things themselves? Why is differenciation
at once both composition and determination of qualities, organisation and
determination of species? Why is differenciation differenciated along these
two complementary paths? Beneath the actual qualities and extensities,
species and parts, there are spatio-temporal dynamisms. These are the
actualising, differenciating agencies. They must be surveyed in every domain, even though they are ordinarily hidden by the constituted qualities
and extensities. Embryology shows that the division of an egg into parts is
secondary in relation to more significant morphogenetic movements: the
augmentation of free surfaces, stretching of cellular layers, invagination by
folding, regional displacement of groups. A whole kinematics of the egg
appears, which implies a dynamic. Moreover, this dynamic expresses something ideal. Transport is Dionysian, divine and delirious, before it is local
transfer. Types of egg are therefore distinguished by the orientations, the
axes of development, the differential speeds and rhythms which are the primary factors in the actualisation of a structure and create a space and a
time peculiar to that which is actualised. Bae'r concluded, on the one hand,
that differenciation went from the more general to the less general because
the dynamic structural characteristics of the major types or branches appeared before the merely formal characteristics of the species, the genus or
even the class; and, on the other hand, that the irreducibility of these dynamisms, the fault lines between these types, imposed actual distinctions between Ideas and singular limitations upon the possibilities of evolution.
However, these two points raise many problems. In the first place, the
highest generalities put forward by Bae'r are generalities only for an adult
observer who contemplates them from without. In themselves, they are
lived by the individual-embryo in its field of individuation. Furthermore -

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

215

as Vialleton, a disciple of Baer, points out - they can only be lived, and
lived only by the individual-embryo: there are 'things' that only an embryo
can do, movements that it alone can undertake or even withstand (for example, the anterior member of the tortoise undergoes a relative displacement of 180 degrees, while the neck involves the forward slippage of a
variable number of proto-vertebrae). The destiny and achievement of the
embryo is to live the unlivable, to sustain forced movements of a scope
which would break any skeleton or tear ligaments. It is indeed true that
differenciation is progressive and serial: the characteristics of the major
types appear before those of genus and species in the order of the determination of species; and in the order of organisation, this shoot is the beginning of a paw before it becomes a right or left paw. Rather than a
difference in generality, however, this movement implies a difference in
kind: rather than discovering the more general beneath the less general, we
discover pure spatio-temporal dynamisms (the lived experience of the embryo) with regard to the constituted parts and qualities, beneath the morphological,
histological,
anatomical,
physiological
and
other
characteristics. Rather than going from more to less general, determination
progresses from virtual to actual in accordance with the primary factors of
actualisation. The notion of 'generality' here suffers the disadvantage of
suggesting a confusion between the virtual, in so far as it is actualised by a
process of creation, and the possible, in so far as it is realised by limitation.
Before the embryo as general support of qualities and parts there is the embryo as individual and patient subject of spatio-temporal dynamisms, the
larval subject.
As for the other aspect, that of the possibility of evolution, we must
approach it in terms of pre-evolutionist polemics. The great controversy
between Cuvier and Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire concerns the unity of
composition: is there an Animal in itself or an Idea of the universal animal
- or do the sub-kingdoms introduce impassable gulfs between the types of
animal? The discussion finds its poetic method and test in folding-, is it
possible to pass by folding from Vertebrate to Cephalopod? Can a
Vertebrate be folded in such a manner that the two ends of the spine
approach one another, the head moving towards the feet, the pelvis
towards the neck, and the viscera arranged in the manner of Cephalopods?
Cuvier denies that folding can produce such an arrangement. What animal
could pass the test, even reduced to its dry skeleton? Geoffroy, it is true,
does not claim that the passage is carried out by folding; his argument is
more profound: that there are developmental times which stop a given
animal at a particular degree of composition ('organ A would be in an
unusual relation to organ C if B were not produced, or if development had
stopped too soon and prevented its production'). The introduction of the
temporal factor is essential, even though Geoffroy conceives of it only in
the form of stoppages - in other words, progressive stages ordered

216

Difference and Repetition

according to the realisation of a possible common to all animals. It is
enough to endow time with its true meaning of creative actualisation for
evolution to find a principle which conditions it. For if, from the point of
view of actualisation, the dynamism of spatial directions determines a
differenciation of types, then the more or less rapid times immanent to
these dynamisms ground the passage from one to the other, from one
differenciated type to another, either by deceleration or by acceleration.
With contracted or extended times and according to the reasons for
acceleration or delay, other spaces are created. Even the stoppage assumes
the aspect of a creative actualisation in the case of neoteny. In principle,
the temporal factor allows the transformation of dynamisms, even though
these may be asymmetrical, spatially irreducible and completely
differenciated - or rather, differenciating. In this sense, Perrier saw
phenomena of 'accelerated repetition' (tachygenesis) at the origin of the
branchings of the animal kingdom, and found in the precocity of the
appearance of types a superior proof of evolution itself.
The entire world is an egg. The double differenciation of species and
parts always presupposes spatio-temporal dynamisms. Take a division into
24 cellular elements endowed with similar characteristics: nothing yet tells
us the dynamic process by which it was obtained - 2 X 12, (2 X 2) + (2 x
10), or (2 X 4) + (2 X 8) ...? Even Platonic division would lack a rule with
which to distinguish the two sides, if movements and orientations or spatial
lines did not provide one. Thus, in the case of fishing: entrap the prey or
strike it, strike it from top to bottom or from bottom to top. It is the
dynamic processes which determine the actualisation of Ideas. But what is
their relation to this actualisation? They are precisely dramas, they
dramatise the Idea. On the one hand, they create or trace a space
corresponding to the differential relations and to the singularities to be
actualised. When a cellular migration takes place, as Raymond Ruyer
shows, it is the requirements of a 'role' in so far as this follows from a
structural 'theme' to be actualised which determines the situation, not the
78
other way round. The world is an egg, but the egg itself is a theatre: a
staged theatre in which the roles dominate the actors, the spaces dominate
the roles and the Ideas dominate the spaces. Furthermore, by virtue of the
complexity of Ideas and their relations with other Ideas, the spatial
dramatisation is played out on several levels: in the constitution of an
internal space, but also in the manner in which that space extends into the
external extensity, occupying a region of it. For example, the internal space
of a colour is not to be confused with the manner in which it occupies an
extensity where it enters into relations with other colours, whatever the
affinity between these two processes. A living being is not only defined
genetically, by the dynamisms which determine its internal milieu, but also
ecologically, by the external movements which preside over its distribution
within an extensity. A kinetics of population adjoins, without resembling,

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

217

the kinetics of the egg; a geographic process of isolation may be no less
formative of species than internal genetic variations, and sometimes
precedes the latter. Everything is even more complicated when we
consider that the internal space is itself made up of multiple spaces which
must be locally integrated and connected, and that this connection, which
may be achieved in many ways, pushes the object or living being to its own
limits, all in contact with the exterior; and that this relation with the
exterior, and with other things and living beings, implies in turn
connections and global integrations which differ in kind from the
preceding. Everywhere a staging at several levels.
On the other hand, the dynamisms are no less temporal than spatial.
They constitute a time of actualisation or differenciation no less than they
outline spaces of actualisation. Not only do these spaces begin to incarnate
differential relations between elements of the reciprocally and completely
determined structure, but the times of differenciation incarnate the time of
the structure, the time of progressive determination. Such times may be
called differential rhythms in view of their role in the actualisation of the
Idea. Finally, beneath species and parts, we find only these times, these
rates of growth, these paces of development, these decelerations or
accelerations, these durations of gestation. It is not wrong to say that time
alone provides the response to a question, and space alone provides the
solution to a problem. Consider the following example, concerning sterility
and fecundity (in the case of the female sea-urchin and the male annelid):
problem - will certain paternal chromosomes be incorporated into new
nuclei, or will they be dispersed into the protoplasm? question - will they
arrive soon enough? However, the distinction is obviously relative, for it is
clear that the dynamism is simultaneously temporal and spatial - in other
words, spatio-temporal (in this case, the formation of cones of division, the
splitting of chromosomes and the movement which takes them to the poles
of the cones). The duality does not exist in the process of actualisation
itself, but only in its outcome, in the actual terms, species and parts. Nor is
it a question of a real distinction but rather a strict complementarity, since
the species designates the quality of the parts just as the parts designate the
number of the species. More precisely, the species gathers the time of the
dynamism into a quality (lion-ness, frog-ness) while the parts outline its
space. A quality always flashes within a space and endures the whole time
of that space. In short, dramatisation is the differenciation of
differenciation, at once both qualitative and quantitative. However, in
saying 'at once' we mean that differenciation differentiates itself into these
two correlative paths, species and parts, determination of species and
determination of parts. Just as there is a difference of difference which
gathers up the different, so there is a differenciation of differenciation
which integrates and welds together the differenciated. This is a necessary
outcome to the extent that dramatisation inseparably incarnates the two

218

Difference and Repetition

traits of the Idea, differential relations and corresponding singular points,
the latter being actualised in the parts while the former are actualised in the
species.
Are not these spatio-temporal determinations what Kant called
schemata? There is, nevertheless, an important difference. A schema is
indeed a rule of determination for time and of construction for space, but it
is conceived and put to work in relation to concepts understood in terms of
logical possibility: this is so much part of its nature that it does no more
than convert logical possibility into transcendental possibility. It brings
spatio-temporal relations into correspondence with the logical relations of
the concept. However, since it remains external to the concept, it is not
clear how it can ensure the harmony of the understanding and sensibility,
since it does not even have the means to ensure its own harmony with the
understanding without appeal to a miracle. Schematism possesses an
immense power: it can divide a concept and specify it according to a
typology. A concept alone is completely incapable of specifying or dividing
itself; the agents of differenciation are the spatio-temporal dynamisms
which act within or beneath it, like a hidden art. Without these, we would
still confront the questions which Aristotle raised with regard to Platonic
division: where do the halves come from? However, the schema does not
account for the power with which it acts. Everything changes when the
dynamisms are posited no longer as schemata of concepts but as dramas of
Ideas. For if the dynamism is external to concepts - and, as such, a schema
- it is internal to Ideas - and, as such, a drama or dream. Species are
divided into lineages, Linnaeons into Jordanons, concepts into types, but
these divisions do not have the same criteria as the divided, they are not
homogeneous with the divided, and they are established in a domain
external to that of concepts but internal to that of the Ideas which preside
over division itself. Dynamism thus comprises its own power of
determining space and time, since it immediately incarnates the differential
relations, the singularities and the progressivities immanent in the Idea.
The shortest is not simply the schema of the concept of straight, but the
dream, the drama or the dramatisation of the Idea of a line in so far as it
expresses the differenciation of the straight from the curved. We distinguish
Ideas, concepts and dramas: the role of dramas is to specify concepts by
incarnating the differential relations and singularities of an Idea.
Dramatisation takes place under the critical eye of the savant as much as
it does in the head of the dreamer. It acts below the sphere of concepts and
the representations subsumed by them. There is nothing which does not
lose its identity as this is constituted by concepts, and its similarity as this is
constituted in representation, when the dynamic space and time of its
actual constitution is discovered. The 'type hill' is no more than a stream
along parallel lines, the 'type slope' an outcrop of hard layers along which
the rocks are buried in a direction perpendicular to that of the hills; but on

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

219

the scale of millions of years which constitutes the time of their
actualisation, the hardest rocks in turn are fluid matters which flow under
the weak constraints exercised on their singularities. Every typology is
dramatic, every dynamism a catastrophe. There is necessarily something
cruel in this birth of a world which is a chaosmos, in these worlds of
movements without subjects, roles without actors. When Artaud spoke of
the theatre of cruelty, he defined it only in terms of an extreme
'determinism', that of spatio-temporal determination in so far as it
incarnates an Idea of mind or nature, like a 'restless space' or movement of
turning and wounding gravitation capable of directly affecting the
organism, a pure staging without author, without actors and without
subjects. Spaces are hollowed out, time is accelerated or decelerated, only
at the cost of strains and displacements which mobilise and compromise
the whole body. Shining points pierce us, singularities turn us back upon
ourselves: everywhere the tortoise's neck with its vertiginous sliding of
proto-vertebrae. Even the sky suffers from its cardinal points and its
constellations which, like 'actor-suns', inscribe Ideas in its flesh. There are
indeed actors and subjects, but these are larvae, since they alone are
capable of sustaining the lines, the slippages and the rotations. Afterwards
it is too late. It is true that every Idea turns us into larvae, having put aside
the identity of the I along with the resemblance of the self. This is badly
described as a matter of regression, fixation or arrestation of development,
for we are never fixed at a moment or in a given state but always fixed by
an Idea as though in the glimmer of a look, always fixed in a movement
that is under way. What would Ideas be if not the fixed and cruel Ideas of
which Villiers de ITsle-Adam speaks? We are always patients where Ideas
are concerned. This, however, is not an ordinary fixation or patience.
What is fixed is not ready-made or already complete. When we remain or
again become embryos, it is rather because of this pure movement of
repetition which is fundamentally distinguished from all regression. The
larvae bear Ideas in their flesh, while we do not go beyond the
representations of the concepts. They know nothing of the domain of the
possible, being close to the virtual, the first actualisations of which they
bear as though they had chosen them. Such is the intimacy of the Leech
and the Higher Man: they are at once dream and science, object of dreams
and object of science, bite and knowledge, mouth and brain (Perrier spoke
of the conflict between mouth and brain played out between the
Vertebrates and the annulate Worms).
Ideas are dramatised at several levels, but so too dramatisations of
different orders echo one another across these levels. Take the Idea of an
Island: geographical dramatisation differenciates it or divides the concept
into two types, the original oceanic type which signals an eruption or
raising above the sea, and the continental drift type which results from a
disarticulation or fracture. The Island dreamer, however, rediscovers this

220

Difference and Repetition

double dynamism because he dreams of becoming infinitely cut off, at the
end of a long drift, but also of an absolute beginning by means of a radical
foundation. It has often been remarked that the global sexual behaviour of
men and women tends to reproduce the movement of their organs, and
that the latter in turn tend to reproduce the dynamism of the cellular
elements: psychic, organic and chemical - three dramatisations of different
orders echo one another. While it is thought which must explore the virtual
down to the ground of its repetitions, it is imagination which must grasp
the process of actualisation from the point of view of these echoes or
reprises. It is imagination which crosses domains, orders and levels,
knocking down the partitions coextensive with the world, guiding our
bodies and inspiring our souls, grasping the unity of mind and nature; a
larval consciousness which moves endlessly from science to dream and
back again.
Actualisation takes place in three series: space, time and also
consciousness. Every spatio-temporal dynamism is accompanied by the
emergence of an elementary consciousness which itself traces directions,
doubles movements and migrations, and is born on the threshold of the
condensed singularities of the body or object whose consciousness it is. It is
not enough to say that consciousness is consciousness of something: it is
the double of this something, and everything is consciousness because it
possesses a double, even if it is far off and very foreign. Repetition is
everywhere, as much in what is actualised as in its actualisation. It is in the
Idea to begin with, and it runs through the varieties of relations and the
distribution of singular points. It also determines the reproductions of
space and time, as it does the reprises of consciousness. In every case,
repetition is the power of difference and differenciation: because it
condenses the singularities, or because it accelerates or decelerates time, or
because it alters spaces. Repetition is never explained by the form of
identity in the concept, nor by the similar in representation. No doubt
conceptual blockage gives rise to a bare repetition that we can effectively
represent as the repetition of the same. However, who blocks the concept,
if not the Idea? Moreover, as we have seen, the blockage takes place along
the three lines of space, time and consciousness. It is the excess in the Idea
which explains the lack in the concept. Similarly, it is the clothed, singular
or extraordinary repetition, dependent upon the Idea, which explains that
ordinary, bare repetition which is dependent upon the concept and plays
only the role of the outer garment. In the Idea and its actualisation, we find
at once both the natural reason for conceptual blockage and the
supernatural reason for a repetition superior to that subsumed within the
blocked concept. What remains outside the concept refers more profoundly
to what is inside the Idea. The entire Idea is caught up in the
mathematico-biological system of different/nation. However, mathematics
and biology appear here only in the guise of technical models which allow

Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference

221

the exposition of the virtual and the process of actualisation, along with
the exploration of the two halves of difference, the dialectical half and the
aesthetic half. The dialectical Idea is doubly determined by the variety of
differential relations and the distribution of correlative singularities
(differentiation). Aesthetic actualisation is doubly determined by the
determination of species and by composition (differentiation). The
determination of species incarnates the relations, just as composition does
the singularities. The actual qualities and parts, species and numbers,
correspond to the element of qualitability and the element of quantitability
in the Idea. However, what carries out the third aspect of sufficient reason
- namely, the element of potentiality in the Idea? No doubt the
pre-quantitative and pre-qualitative dramatisation. It is this, in effect,
which determines or unleashes, which differenciates the differentiation of
the actual in its correspondence with the differentiation of the Idea. Where,
however, does this power of dramatisation come from? Is it not, beneath
the species and parts, the qualities and numbers, the most intense or most
individual act? We have not yet shown what grounds dramatisation, both
for the actual and the Idea, as the development of the third element of
sufficient reason.

Chapter V
Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible
Difference is not diversity. Diversity is given, but difference is that by
which the given is given, that by which the given is given as diverse. Difference is not phenomenon but the noumenon closest to the phenomenon.
It is therefore true that God makes the world by calculating, but his calculations never work out exactly [juste], and this inexactitude or injustice in
the result, this irreducible inequality, forms the condition of the world. The
world 'happens' while God calculates; if the calculation were exact, there
would be no world. The world can be regarded as a 'remainder', and the
real in the world understood in terms of fractional or even incommensurable numbers. Every phenomenon refers to an inequality by which it is
conditioned. Every diversity and every change refers to a difference which
is its sufficient reason. Everything which happens and everything which appears is correlated with orders of differences: differences of level, temperature, pressure, tension, potential, difference of intensity. Carnot's principle
says this in one fashion, Curie's principle in another. There are locks
everywhere. Every phenomenon flashes in a signal-sign system. In so far as
a system is constituted or bounded by at least two heterogeneous series,
two disparate orders capable of entering into communication, we call it a
signal. The phenomenon that flashes across this system, bringing about the
communication between disparate series, is a sign. 'The emerald hides in its
facets a bright-eyed water-sprite ...': every phenomenon is of the 'brighteyed water-sprite' type, made possible by an emerald. Every phenomenon
is composite because not only are the two series which bound it heterogeneous but each is itself composed of heterogeneous terms, subtended by
heterogeneous series which form so many sub-phenomena. The expression
'difference of intensity' is a tautology. Intensity is the form of difference in
so far as this is the reason of the sensible. Every intensity is differential, by
itself a difference. Every intensity is E - E', where E itself refers to an e - e\
and e to 6 - e' etc. : each intensity is already a coupling (in which each element of the couple refers in turn to couples of elements of another order),
thereby revealing the properly qualitative content of quantity. We call this
state of infinitely doubled difference which resonates to infinity disparity.
Disparity - in other words, difference or intensity (difference of intensity) is the sufficient reason of all phenomena, the condition of that which appears. Novalis, with his tourmaline, is closer to the conditions of the sensible than Kant, with space and time. The reason of the sensible, the
condition of that which appears, is not space and time but the Unequal in
222

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

223

itself, disparateness as it is determined and comprised in difference of intensity, in intensity as difference.
Nevertheless, we encounter severe difficulties when we attempt to consider
Carnot's or Curie's principles as local manifestations of a transcendental
principle. We know only forms of energy which are already localised and
distributed in extensity, or extensities already qualified by forms of energy.
Energetics defined a particular energy by the combination of two factors,
one intensive and one extensive (for example, force and distance for linear
energy, surface tension and surface area for surface energy, pressure and
volume for volume energy, height and weight for gravitational energy, temperature and entropy for thermal energy ...). It turns out that, in experience, intensio (intension) is inseparable from an extensio (extension) which
relates it to the extensum (extensity). In these conditions, intensity itself is
subordinated to the qualities which fill extensity (primary physical qualities
or qualitas, and secondary perceptible qualities or quale). In short, we
know intensity only as already developed within an extensity, and as
covered over by qualities. Whence our tendency to consider intensive quantity as a badly grounded empirical concept, an impure mixture of a sensible
quality and extensity, or even of a physical quality and an extensive quantity.
It is true that this tendency would lead nowhere if intensity, for its own
part, did not present a corresponding tendency within the extensity in
which it develops and under the quality which covers it. Intensity is
difference, but this difference tends to deny or to cancel itself out in
extensity and underneath quality. It is true that qualities are signs which
flash across the interval of a difference. In so doing, however, they measure
the time of an equalisation - in other words, the time taken by the
difference to cancel itself out in the extensity in which it is distributed. This
is the most general content of the principles of Carnot, Curie, Le Chatelier,
et al. : difference is the sufficient reason of change only to the extent that
the change tends to negate difference. It is indeed in this manner that the
principle of causality finds in the signalling process its categorical physical
determination: intensity defines an objective sense for a series of
irreversible states which pass, like an 'arrow of time', from more to less
differenciated, from a productive to a reduced difference, and ultimately to
a cancelled difference. We know how these themes of a reduction of
difference, a uniformisation of diversity, and an equalisation of inequality
stitched together for the last time a strange alliance at the end of the
nineteenth century between science, good sense and philosophy.
Thermodynamics was the powerful furnace of that alloy. A system of basic
definitions was established which satisfied everybody, including a certain
Kantianism: the given as diverse; reason as a process of identification and

224

Difference and Repetition

equalisation tending towards identity; the absurd or irrational as the
resistance of the diverse to that identificatory reason. The words 'the real is
rational' found there a new sense, for diversity tended to be reduced in
Nature no less than in reason. As a result, difference was neither a law of
nature nor a category of the mind but only the origin = x of the diverse: a
given, but not a 'value' (except a regulative or compensatory value).4 In
truth, our epistemological tendency to be suspicious of the notion of
intensive quantity would prove nothing were it not linked to this other
tendency on the part of differences of intensity to cancel themselves out in
qualified extended systems. Intensity is suspect only because it seems to
rush headlong into suicide.
Science and philosophy here gave a final satisfaction to good sense. For
it is not science that is in question - it remains indifferent to the extension
of Carnot's principle - nor philosophy, which also, after a fashion, remains
indifferent to Carnot's principle. Every time science, philosophy and good
sense come together it is inevitable that good sense should take itself for a
science and a philosophy (that is why such encounters must be avoided at
all costs). It is therefore a question of the essence of good sense. This
essence is clearly and concisely outlined by Hegel in The Difference
between the Systems of Fichte and Schelling: good sense is partial truth in
so far as this is joined to the feeling of the absolute. The truth in the form
of reason is present in a partial state, and the absolute is there in the form
of a feeling. But how is the feeling of the absolute attached to the partial
truth? Good sense essentially distributes or repartitions: 'on the one hand'
and 'on the other hand' are the characteristic formulae of its false
profundity or platitude. It distributes things. It is obvious, however, that
not every distribution flows from good sense: there are distributions
inspired by madness, mad repartitions. Perhaps good sense even
presupposes madness in order to come after and correct what madness
there is in any prior distribution. A distribution is in conformity with good
sense when it tends to banish difference from the distributed. Only when
the inequality of the portions is supposed to disappear from the milieu over
time does the repartition effectively conform to good sense, or follow a
sense which is called good. Good sense is by nature eschatological, the
prophet of a final compensation and homogenization. If it comes second,
this is because it presupposes mad distribution - instantaneous, nomadic
distribution, crowned anarchy or difference. However, this sedentary,
patient figure which has time on its side corrects difference, introduces it
into a milieu which leads to the cancellation of differences or the
compensation of portions. It is itself this 'milieu'. Thinking itself to be in
between the extremes, it holds them off and fills in the interval. It does not
negate differences - on the contrary: it arranges things in the order of time
and under the conditions of extensity such that they negate themselves. It
multiplies the intermediates and, like Plato's demiurge, ceaselessly and

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

225

patiently transforms the unequal into the divisible. Good sense is the
ideology of the middle classes who recognise themselves in equality as an
abstract product. It dreams less of acting tl an of constituting a natural
milieu, the element of an action which passes from more to less
differenciated: for example, the good sense of eighteenth-century political
economy which saw in the commercial classes the natural compensation
for the extremes, and in the prosperity of commerce the mechanical process
of the equalisation of portions. It therefore dreams less of acting than of
foreseeing, and of allowing free rein to action which goes from the
unpredictable to the predictable (from the production of differences to
their reduction). Neither contemplative nor active, it is prescient. In short,
it goes from the side of things to the side of fire: from differences produced
to differences reduced. It is thermodynamic. In this sense it attaches the
feeling of the absolute to the partial truth. It is neither optimistic nor
pessimistic, but assumes a pessimistic or optimistic tint depending upon
whether the side of fire, which consumes everything and renders all
portions uniform, bears the sign of an inevitable death and nothingness (we
are all equal before death) or, on the contrary, bears the happy plenitude of
existence (we all have an equal chance in life). Good sense does not negate
difference: on the contrary, it recognises difference just enough to affirm
that it negates itself, given sufficient extensity and time. Between mad
difference and difference cancelled, between the unequal in the divisible
and the divisible equalised, between the distribution of the unequal and
equality distributed, good sense necessarily lives itself as a universal rule of
distribution, and therefore as universally distributed.
Good sense is based upon a synthesis of time, in particular the one
which we have determined as the first synthesis, that of habit. Good sense
is good only because it is wedded to the sense of time associated with that
synthesis. Testifying to a living present (and to the fatigue of that present),
it goes from past to future as though from particular to general. However,
it defines this past as the improbable or the less probable. In effect, since
every partial system has its origin in a difference which individualises its
domain, how would an observer situated within the system grasp this
difference except as past and highly 'improbable', given that it is behind
him? On the other hand, at the heart of the same system, the future, the
probable and the cancellation of difference are identified in the direction
indicated by the arrow of time - in other words, the right direction. This
condition grounds prediction itself (it has often been noticed that if initially
indistinguishable temperatures are allowed to differenciate, it cannot be
predicted which will increase or decrease; and if viscosity is accelerated, it
will tear moving bodies from their state of rest, but in an unpredictable
direction). Well-known pages by Boltzmann comment upon this scientific
and thermodynamic guarantee of good sense: they show how within a
partial system difference, the improbable and the past are identified on the

226

Difference and Repetition

one hand, while uniformity, the probable and the future are identified on
the other. In the dream of a truly universal good sense, one which attaches
the feeling of the absolute to partial truths, along with the moon to the
earth, this equalisation and homogenisation do not occur only in each
partial system, but continue from one system to another. However, as
Boltzmann shows, this attachment is not legitimate, any more than this
synthesis of time is sufficient.
We are at least in a position to clarify the relation between good sense
and common sense. Common sense was defined subjectively by the
supposed identity of a Self which provided the unity and ground of all the
faculties, and objectively by the identity of whatever object served as a
focus for all the faculties. This double identity, however, remains static. We
no more find ourselves before a universal indeterminate object than we are
a universal Self. Objects are divided up in and by fields of individuation, as
are Selves. Common sense must therefore point beyond itself towards
another, dynamic instance, capable of determining the indeterminate object
as this or that, and of individualising the self situated in this ensemble of
objects. This other instance is good sense, which takes its point of
departure from a difference at the origin of individuation. However,
precisely because it ensures the distribution of that difference in such a
manner that it tends to be cancelled in the object, and because it provides a
rule according to which the different objects tend to equalise themselves
and the different Selves tend to become uniform, good sense in turn points
towards the instance of a common sense which provides it with both the
form of a universal Self and that of an indeterminate object. Good sense,
therefore, has two definitions, one objective and one subjective, which
correspond to those of common sense: a rule of universal distribution and a
rule universally distributed. Good sense and common sense each refer to
the other, each reflect the other and constitute one half of the orthodoxy.
In view of this reciprocity and double reflection, we can define common
sense by the process of recognition and good sense by the process of
prediction. The one involves the qualitative synthesis of diversity, the static
synthesis of qualitative diversity related to an object supposed the same for
all the faculties of a single subject; the other involves the quantitative
synthesis of difference, the dynamic synthesis of difference in quantity
related to a system in which it is objectively and subjectively cancelled.
Nevertheless, difference remains not the given itself but that by which
the given is given. How could thought avoid going that far, how could it
avoid thinking that which is most opposed to thought? With the identical,
we think with all our force, but without producing the least thought: with
the different, by contrast, do we not have the highest thought, but also that
which cannot be thought? This protestation of the Different is full of sense.
Even if difference tends to be distributed thoughout diversity in such a
manner as to disappear, and to render uniform the diversity it creates, it

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

227

must first be sensed as that which gives diversity to be sensed. Moreover, it
must be thought as that which creates diversity. (Not because we would
then return to the common exercise of the faculties, but precisely because
the dissociated faculties enter into the violent relation in which each
transmits its constraint to the other.) Delirium lies at the base of good
sense, which is why good sense is always secondary. Thought must think
difference, that absolutely different from thought which nevertheless gives
it thought, gives to be thought. In some fine pages, Lalande says that
reality is difference, whereas the law of reality, or principle of thought, is
identification: 'Reality is therefore in opposition to the law of reality, the
present state with what it will become. How could such a state of affairs
come to be? How could it be that the physical world is constituted by a
fundamental property which its own laws endlessly attenuate?' In other
words, reality is not the result of the laws which govern it, and a saturnine
God devours at one end what he has made at the other, legislating against
his creation because he has created against his legislation. Thus we are
forced to sense and to think difference. We sense something which is
contrary to the laws of nature; we think something which is contrary to the
principles of thought. Moreover, even if the production of difference is by
definition 'inexplicable', how can we avoid implicating the inexplicable at
the heart of thought itself? How can the unthinkable not lie at the heart of
thought? Or delirium at the heart of good sense? How can we be content
to relegate the improbable to the beginning of a partial evolution, without
also grasping it as the highest power of the past, or as the immemorial in
memory? (In this sense the partial synthesis of the present already led us
into another synthesis of time, that of the immemorial memory, at the risk
of leading us further still...)
Philosophy is revealed not by good sense but by paradox. Paradox is the
pathos or the passion of philosophy. There are several kinds of paradox, all
of which are opposed to the complementary forms of orthodoxy - namely,
good sense and common sense. Subjectively, paradox breaks up the
common exercise of the faculties and places each before its own limit,
before its incomparable: thought before the unthinkable which it alone is
nevertheless capable of thinking; memory before the forgotten which is
also its immemorial; sensibility before the imperceptible which is
indistinguishable from its intensive. ... At the same time, however, paradox
communicates to the broken faculties that relation which is far from good
sense, aligning them along a volcanic line which allows one to ignite the
other, leaping from one limit to the next. Objectively, paradox displays the
element which cannot be totalised within a common element, along with
the difference which cannot be equalised or cancelled at the direction of a
good sense. It is correct to say that the only refutation of paradoxes lies in
good sense and common sense themselves, but on condition that they are

228

Difference and Repetition

already allowed everything: the role of judge as well as that of party to the
case, the absolute along with the partial truth.
It is not surprising that, strictly speaking, difference should be 'inexplicable'. Difference is explicated, but in systems in which it tends to be cancelled; this means only that difference is essentially implicated, that its
being is implication. For difference, to be explicated is to be cancelled or to
dispel the inequality which constitutes it. The formula according to which
'to explicate is to identify' is a tautology. We cannot conclude from this
that difference is cancelled out, or at least that it is cancelled in itself. It is
cancelled in so far as it is drawn outside itself, in extensity and in the
quality which fills that extensity. However, difference creates both this extensity and this quality. Intensity is developed and explicated by means of
an extension [extensio] which relates it to the extensity [extensum] in
which it appears outside itself and hidden beneath quality. Difference of intensity is cancelled or tends to be cancelled in this system, but it creates this
system by explicating itself. Whence the double aspect of the quality as a
sign: it refers to an implicated order of constitutive differences, and tends
to cancel out those differences in the extended order in which they are explicated. This is also why causality finds in signalling at once both an
origin and an orientation or destination, where the destination in a sense
denies the origin. The peculiarity of 'effects', in the causal sense, is to have
a perceptual 'effect' and to be able to be called by a proper name (Seebeck
effect, Kelvin effect...), because they emerge in a properly differential field
of individuation which the name symbolises. The vanishing of difference is
precisely inseparable from an 'effect' of which we are victims. Difference in
the form of intensity remains implicated in itself, while it is cancelled by
being explicated in extensity. It is therefore unnecessary, in order to save
the universe from heat death or to safeguard the chances of eternal return,
to imagine highly 'improbable' extensive mechanisms supposedly capable
of restoring difference. For difference has never ceased to be in itself, to be
implicated in itself even while it is explicated outside itself. Therefore, not
only are there sensory illusions but there is also a transcendental physical
illusion. In this regard, we believe that Leon Selme made a profound discovery. In opposing Carnot and Clausius, he wanted to show that the increase of entropy was illusory. Moreover, he pointed out certain empirical
or contingent factors of this illusion: the relative smallness of the differences in temperature produced in thermal machines, the enormity of the
dampening which seems to preclude the construction of a 'thermal ram'.
Above all, however, he discovered a transcendental form of illusion: of all
extensions, entropy is the only one which is not measurable either directly
or indirectly by any procedure independent of energetics. If it were the
same for volume or for quantity of electricity, we would necessarily have

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

229

the impression that these increase through irreversible transformations. The
paradox of entropy is the following: entropy is an extensive factor but, unlike all other extensive factors, it is an extension or 'explication' which is
implicated as such in intensity, which does not exist outside the implication
or except as implicated, and this is because it has the function of making
possible the general movement by which that which is implicated explicates
itself or is extended. There is thus a transcendental illusion essentially tied
to the qualitas. Heat, and to the extension, Entropy.
It is notable that extensity does not account for the individuations which
occur within it. No doubt the high and the low, the right and the left, the
figure and the ground are individuating factors which trace rises and falls,
currents and descents in extensity. However, since they take place within
an already developed extensity, their value is only relative. They therefore
flow from a 'deeper' instance - depth itself, which is not an extension but a
pure implex. No doubt every depth is also a possible length and size, but
this possibility is realised only in so far as an observer changes place and
gathers into an abstract concept that which is length for itself and that
which is length for others: in fact, it is always on the basis of a new depth
that the old one becomes length or is explicated in length. It obviously
amounts to the same thing whether we consider a simple plane, or an
extensity in three dimensions where the third is homogeneous with the
other two. Once depth is grasped as an extensive quantity, it belongs to
engendered extensity and ceases to include in itself its own heterogeneity in
relation to the other two. We see then that it is the ultimate dimension of
extensity, but we see this only as a fact without understanding the reason,
since we no longer know that it is original. We also then note the presence
in extensity of individuating factors, but without understanding where their
power comes from, since we no longer know that they express the original
depth. It is depth which explicates itself as right and left in the first
dimension, as high and low in the second, and as figure and ground in the
homogenised third. Extensity does not develop or appear without
presenting a left and a right, a high and a low, an above and a below,
which are like the dissymmetrical marks of its own origin. The relativity of
these determinations, moreover, is further testimony to the absolute from
which they come. Extensity as a whole comes from the depths. Depth as
the (ultimate and original) heterogeneous dimension is the matrix of all
extensity, including its third dimension considered to be homogeneous with
the other two.
The ground [fond] as it appears in a homogeneous extensity is notably a
projection of something 'deeper' [profond}: only the latter may be called
Ungrund or groundless. The law of figure and ground would never hold
for objects distinguished from a neutral background or a background of
other objects unless the object itself entertained a relation to its own depth.
The relation between figure and ground is only an extrinsic plane relation

230

Difference and Repetition

which presupposes an internal, voluminous relation between surfaces and
the depth which they envelop. This synthesis of depth which endows the
object with its shadow, but makes it emerge from that shadow, bears
witness to the furthest past and to the coexistence of the past with the
present. We should not be surprised that the pure spatial syntheses here
repeat the temporal syntheses previously specified: the explication of
extensity rests upon the first synthesis, that of habit or the present; but the
implication of depth rests upon the second synthesis, that of Memory and
the past. Furthermore, in depth the proximity and simmering of the third
synthesis make themselves felt, announcing the universal 'ungrounding'.
Depth is like the famous geological line from NE to SW, the line which
comes diagonally from the heart of things and distributes volcanoes: it
unites a bubbling sensibility and a thought which 'rumbles in its crater'.
Schelling said that depth is not added from without to length and breadth,
but remains buried, like the sublime principle of the differend which
creates them.
Extensity can emerge from the depths only if depth is definable
independently of extensity. The extensity whose genesis we are attempting
to establish is extensive magnitude, the extensum or term of reference of all
the extensio. The original depth, by contrast, is indeed space as a whole,
but space as an intensive quantity: the pure spatium. We know that
sensation or perception has an ontological aspect: precisely in the syntheses
which are peculiar to it, confronted by that which can only be sensed or
that which can only be perceived. Now, it appears that depth is essentially
implicated in the perception of extensity: neither depth nor distances are
judged by the apparent magnitude of objects, but, on the contrary, depth
envelops in itself distances which develop in extensity and explicate in turn
the apparent magnitudes. It also appears that depth and distances, in this
state of implication, are fundamentally linked to the intensity of the
sensation: it is the power of diminution of the intensity experienced that
provides a perception of depth (or rather, provides depth to perception).
The perceived quality presupposes intensity, because it expresses only a
resemblance to a 'band of isolatable intensities', within the limits of which
a permanent object is constituted - the qualified object which affirms its
identity across variable distances. Intensity, which envelops distances, is
explicated in extensity, while extensity develops, exteriorises and
homogenises these very distances. At the same time, a quality occupies this
extensity, either in the form of a qualitas which defines the milieu of a
direction, or in the form of a quale which characterises a given object in
relation to that direction. Intensity is simultaneously the imperceptible and
that which can only be sensed. How could it be sensed for itself,
independently of the qualities which cover it and the extensity in which it is
distributed? But how could it be other than 'sensed', since it is what gives
to be sensed, and defines the proper limits of sensibility? Depth is

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

231

simultaneously the imperceptible and that which can only be perceived (in
this sense, Paliard called it simultaneously both conditioning and
conditioned, and showed the existence of an inverse complementary
relation between distance as ideal existence and distance as visual
existence). The strangest alliance is formed between intensity and depth,
which carries each faculty to its own limit and allows it to communicate
only at the peak of its particular solitude: an alliance between Being and
itself in difference. Depth and intensity are the same at the level of being,
but the same in so far as this is said of difference. Depth is the intensity of
being, or vice versa. Out of this intensive depth emerge at once the extensio
and the extensum, the qualitas and the quale. The vectors or vectorial
magnitudes which occur throughout extensity, but also the scalar
magnitudes or particular cases of vector-potentials, are the eternal witness
to the intensive origin: for example, altitudes. The fact that they cannot be
added in any order whatsoever, or that they have an essential relation to an
order of succession, refers us back to the synthesis of time which acts in
depth.
Kant defined all intuitions as extensive quantities - in other words,
quantities such that the representation of the parts necessarily preceded
and made possible the representation of the whole. However, space and
time are not presented as they are represented. On the contrary, the
presentation of the whole grounds the possibility of the parts, the latter
being only virtual and actualised only by the determinate values of
empirical intuition. It is empirical intuition which is extensive. While he
refuses a logical extension to space and time, Kant's mistake is to maintain
a geometrical extension for it, and to reserve intensive quantity for the
matter which fills a given extensity to some degree or other. In the case of
enantiomorphic bodies, Kant recognised precisely an internal difference.
However, since it was not a conceptual difference, on his view it could
refer only to an external relation with extensity as a whole in the form of
extensive magnitude. In fact, the paradox of symmetrical objects, like
everything concerning right and left, high and low, figure and ground, has
an intensive source. Space as pure intuition or spatium is an intensive
quantity, and intensity as a transcendental principle is not merely the
anticipation of perception but the source of a quadruple genesis: that of the
extensio in the form of schema, that of extensity in the form of extensive
magnitude, that of qualitas in the form of matter occupying extensity, and
that of the quale in the form of designation of an object. Hermann Cohen
was right, therefore, to attach full value to the principle of intensive
quantities in his reinterpretation of Kantianism. While space may be
irreducible to concepts, its affinity with Ideas cannot nevertheless be denied
- in other words, its capacity (as intensive spatium) to determine in
extensity the actualisation of ideal connections (as differential relations
contained in the Idea). Finally, while the conditions of possible experience

232

Difference and Repetition

may be related to extension, there are also subjacent conditions of real
experience which are indistinguishable from intensity as such.
Intensity has three characteristics. According to the first, intensive quantity
includes the unequal in itself. It represents difference in quantity, that
which cannot be cancelled in difference in quantity or that which is unequalisable in quantity itself: it is therefore the quality which belongs to
quantity. It appears less as a species of the genus quantity than as the figure
of a fundamental or original moment present in every quantity. On the
other hand, this means that extensive quantity is the figure of another moment which indicates, rather, quantitative destination or finality (in a partial numerical system). In the history of number, we see that every
systematic type is constructed on the basis of an essential inequality, and
retains that inequality in relation to the next-lowest type: thus, fractions involve the impossibility of reducing the relation between two quantities to a
whole number; irrational numbers in turn express the impossibility of determining a common aliquot part for two quantities, and thus the impossibility of reducing their relation to even a fractional number, and so on.
It is true that a given type of number does not retain an inequality in its
essence without banishing or cancelling it within the new order that it
installs. Thus, fractional numbers compensate for their characteristic
inequality by the equality of an aliquot part; irrational numbers
subordinate their inequality to an equality of purely geometric relations or, better still, arithmetically speaking, to a limit-equality indicated by a
convergent series of rational numbers. Here, however, we rediscover only
the duality between explication and the implicit, between extensity and the
intensive: for if a type of number cancels its difference, it does so only by
explicating it within the extension that it installs. Nevertheless, it maintains
this difference in itself in the implicated order by which it is grounded.
Every number is originally intensive and vectorial in so far as it implies a
difference of quantity which cannot properly be cancelled, but extensive
and scalar in so far as it cancels this difference on another plane that it
creates and on which it is explicated. Even the simplest type of number
confirms this duality: natural numbers are first ordinal - in other words,
originally intensive. Cardinal numbers result from these and are presented
as the explication of the ordinal. It is often objected that ordination cannot
lie at the origin of number because it already implies cardinal operations of
colligation. This, however, is because the formula 'the cardinal results from
the ordinal' has been poorly understood. Ordination in no way
presupposes the repetition of the same unit which must be 'cardinalised'
every time the following ordinal number is reached. Ordinal construction
does not imply a supposed same unit but only, as we shall see, an
irreducible notion of distance - the distances implicated in the depth of an

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

233

intensive spatium (ordered differences). Identical unity is not presupposed
by ordination; on the contrary, this belongs to cardinal number and
presupposes an extensive equality among cardinal numbers, a relative
equivalence of exteriorised terms. We should not, therefore, believe that
cardinal number results analytically from ordinal, or from the final terms
of finite ordinal series (the preceding objection would then be justified). In
fact, ordinal number becomes cardinal only by extension, to the extent that
the distances enveloped in the spatium are explicated, or developed and
equalised in an extensity established by natural number. We should
therefore say that, from the outset, the concept of number is synthetic.
Intensity is the uncancellable in difference of quantity, but this difference
of quantity is cancelled by extension, extension being precisely the process
by which intensive difference is turned inside out and distributed in such a
way as to be dispelled, compensated, equalised and suppressed in the
extensity which it creates. Nevertheless, how many necessary operations
must intervene in this process! Admirable pages in the Timaeus bring
together the divisible and the indivisible. The important point is that the
divisible is defined as that which bears in itself the unequal, whereas the
indivisible (the Same or the One) seeks to impose an equality upon it, and
thereby render it docile. God begins by making a mixture of the two
elements. However, precisely because the divisible, B, escapes the mixture
and shows its inequality and oddness, God obtains only A + % = C. As a
result, he must make a second mixture: A + %. + C - in other words, A +
B
/l + (A + B/2). This mixture, however, also rebels, and he must avert the
rebellion: he distributes it into parts according to two arithmetic
progressions, one whose principle is 2, which refers to the element A (1, 2,
4, 8); and the other whose principle is 3, which refers to C and recognises
the oddness of B (1, 3, 9, 27). Now God is faced with intervals, with
distances to fill: he does this with two intermediates, one of which is
arithmetic (corresponding to A), while the other is harmonic
(corresponding to C). From this may be derived the relations, and the
relations between these relations, which pursue the task of tracking the
unequal in the divisible throughout the entire mixture. Furthermore, God
must cut the whole in two, cross over the two halves and then bend them
into two circles, such that the outer circle contains the equal in the form of
the movement of the Same, while the other, inner circle, orientated along a
diagonal, retains what subsists of inequality in the divisible by distributing
it among secondary circles. Finally, God has not defeated the unequal in
itself but only separated it from the divisible and enclosed it within an
outer circle, kuklos exothen. He has equalised the divisible in this
extension which is the extension of the Soul of the world, but underneath,
at the deepest layer of the divisible, the unequal still rumbles in intensity.
This is of little consequence to God, for he fills the entire expanse of the
soul with the extensity of bodies and their qualities. He covers everything.

234

Difference and Repetition

Nevertheless, he dances upon a volcano. Never have so many, so diverse
and such demented operations been multiplied in order to draw from the
depths of an intensive spatium a serene and docile extensity, and to dispel a
Difference which subsists in itself even when it is cancelled outside itself.
The labour of God is always threatened by the third hypothesis of the
Pannenides, that of the differential or intensive instant.
A second characteristic flows from the first: since it is already difference
in itself and comprises inequality as such, intensity affirms difference. It
makes difference an object of affirmation. Curie commented that it was
useful but misleading to speak of dissymmetry in negative terms, as though
it were the absence of symmetry, without inventing positive terms capable
of designating the infinite number of operations with unmatched outcomes.
The same goes for inequality: it is through inequalities that we discover the
affirmative formula for irrational numbers (for p and a whole, each
i— 9
number (p-qvi} will always exceed a certain value). It is also through
inequalities that we can positively establish the convergence of a series
(rounding up to the highest integer). The important enterprise of a
mathematics without negation is obviously not based upon identity, which,
on the contrary, determines the negative by the excluded middle and
non-contradiction. It rests axiomatically upon an affirmative definition of
inequality (*) for two natural numbers, and in other cases, upon a positive
definition of distance (^ *) which brings into play three terms in an infinite
series of affirmative relations. In order to appreciate the logical power of
an affirmation of distances in the pure element of positive difference, we
need only consider the formal difference between the following two
propositions: 'if a * b is impossible, then a = b'; 'if a is distant from every
number c which is distant from b, then a = b'. We shall see, however,
that the distance referred to here is by no means an extensive magnitude,
but must be related to its intensive origin. Since intensity is already
difference, it refers to a series of other differences that it affirms by
affirming itself. It is said that in general there are no reports of null
frequencies, no effectively null potentials, no absolutely null pressure, as
though on a line with logarithmic graduations where zero lies at the end of
an infinite series of smaller and smaller fractions. We must advance further,
at the risk of falling into an 'ethics' of intensive quantities. Constructed on
at least two series, one superior and one inferior, with each series referring
in turn to other implicated series, intensity affirms even the lowest-, it
makes the lowest an object of affirmation. The power of a Waterfall or a
very deep descent is required to go that far and make an affirmation even
of descent. Everything is like the flight of an eagle: overflight, suspension
and descent. Everything goes from high to low, and by that movement
affirms the lowest: asymmetrical synthesis. High and low, moreover, are
only a manner of speaking. It is a question of depth, and of the lower
depth which essentially belongs to it. There is no depth which is not a

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

235

'seeker' of a lower depth: it is there that distance develops, but distance
understood as the affirmation of that which it distances, or difference as
the sublimation of the lower.
When does the negative emerge? Negation is the inverted image of
difference - in other words, the image of intensity seen from below. In
effect, everything is overturned. What, from on high, is affirmation of
difference becomes from below the negation of that which differs. Here
again, therefore, the negative appears only with extensity and quality. We
have seen that the first dimension of extensity was a power of limitation,
while the second was a power of opposition. These two figures of the
negative are grounded upon the 'conservative' character of extensions (an
extension within a system cannot be increased without decreasing the
extension of the same kind in a related system). Quality in turn seems
inseparable from opposition: the opposition of contradiction, as Plato
showed, to the extent that each quality presupposes the identity of 'more'
and 'less' in the intensities it isolates; the opposition of contrariety in the
paired distribution of qualities themselves. Moreover, when contrariety
fails, as in the case of odours, this is in order to make room for a play of
limitations in a series of increasing or decreasing resemblances. There is no
doubt that resemblance is the law of quality, just as equality is that of
extensity (or invariance that of extension): as a result, extensity and quality
are the two forms of generality. However, precisely this is sufficient to
make them the elements of representation, without which representation
itself would not be able to fulfil its dearest task, which is to relate
difference to the identical. We can therefore add a third reason to the two
which we we have already given in order to explain the illusion of the
negative.
Difference is not negation. On the contrary, the negative is difference
inverted, seen from below. Always the candle in the bovine eye. Difference
is inverted, first, by the requirements of representation which subordinate it
to identity. Then, by the shadow of 'problems' which give rise to the
illusion of the negative. Finally, by extensity and quality which cover or
explicate intensity. It is underneath quality and within extensity that
Intensity appears upside down, and that its characteristic difference takes
the form of the negative (either of limitation or of opposition). The fate of
difference is tied to the negative only within extensity and quality, which
precisely tend to cancel difference. Every time we find ourselves confronted
with qualified oppositions and in an extensity in which these are
distributed, we must not count upon an extensive synthesis which would
overcome and resolve them. On the contrary, the constituent disparities or
enveloped distances inhabit intensive depth. These are the source of the
illusion of the negative, but also the principle of the denunciation of this
illusion. Only depth resolves, because only difference gives rise to
problems. It is not the synthesis of the different which leads to

236

Difference and Repetition

reconciliation in extensity (pseudo-affirmation) but, on the contrary, the
differentiation of their difference which affirms them in intensity.
Oppositions are always planar; they express on a given plane only the
distorted effect of an original depth. This has often been commented upon
for stereoscopic images. More generally, every field of forces refers back to
a potential energy, every opposition refers to a deeper 'disparateness', and
oppositions are resolved in time and extensity only to the extent that the
disparates have first invented their order of communication in depth and
rediscovered that dimension in which they envelop one another, tracing
hardly recognisable intensive paths through the ulterior world of qualified
extensity.12
What is the being of the sensible? Given the conditions of this question,
the answer must designate the paradoxical existence of a 'something'
which simultaneously cannot be sensed (from the point of view of the
empirical exercise) and can only be sensed (from the point of view of the
transcendent exercise). In a passage from Book VII of the Republic, Plato
showed how such a being transmits a shock to the other faculties, shaking
them from their torpor, stirring the memory and constraining thought.
However, Plato characterises this being as the contrary-sensible, that
which gives rise to contrary sensations at the same time. As the Philebus
expressly shows, Plato means that sensible qualities or relations are not in
themselves separable from a contrariety, or even a contradiction, in the
subject to which they are attributed. Since every quality is a becoming, one
does not become 'harder' (or taller) than one was without at the same time
becoming 'softer' (or smaller) than one is in the process of becoming. We
cannot avoid this by distinguishing times, since the distinction between
times is subsequent to the becoming which interposes the one in the other
and, at the same time, posits both the movement by which the new present
is constituted and the movement by which the former present is constituted
as past. It seems impossible to escape a mad-becoming or an unlimited
becoming which implies the identity of opposites in the form of the
coexistence of more and less with a given quality. However, this Platonic
response will not do: in fact, it rests upon intensive quantities, but
recognises these only in qualities in the course of development - and for
this reason, it assigns both the being of the sensible and contrariety to
qualities. However, while the contrary-sensible or contrariety in the
quality may constitute sensible being par excellence, they by no means
constitute the being of the sensible. It is difference in intensity, not
contrariety in quality, which constitutes the being 'of the sensible.
Qualitative contrariety is only the reflection of the intense, a reflection
which betrays it by explicating it in extensity. It is intensity or difference in
intensity which constitutes the peculiar limit of sensibility. As such, it has
the paradoxical character of that limit: it is the imperceptible, that which
cannot be sensed because it is always covered by a quality which alienates

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

237

or contradicts it, always distributed within an extensity which inverts and
cancels it. In another sense, it is that which can only be sensed or that
which defines the transcendent exercise of sensibility, because it gives to be
sensed, thereby awakening memory and forcing thought. The point of
sensory distortion is often to grasp intensity independently of extensity or
prior to the qualities in which it is developed. A pedagogy of the senses,
which forms an integral part of 'transcendentalism', is directed towards
this aim. Pharmacodynamic experiences or physical experiences such as
vertigo approach the same result: they reveal to us that difference in itself,
that depth in itself or that intensity in itself at the original moment at
which it is neither qualified nor extended. At this point, the harrowing
character of intensity, however weak, restores its true meaning: not the
anticipation of perception but the proper limit of sensibility from the point
of view of a transcendent exercise.
In terms of a third characteristic which includes the other two, intensity
is an implicated, enveloped or 'embryonised' quantity. Not implicated in
quality, for it is only secondarily so. Intensity is primarily implicated in
itself: implicating and implicated. We must conceive of implication as a
perfectly determined form of being. Within intensity, we call that which is
really implicated and enveloping difference; and we call that which is really
implicated or enveloped distance. For this reason, intensity is neither
divisible, like extensive quantity, nor indivisible, like quality. The
divisibility of extensive quantities is defined in the following manner: by
the relative determination of a unit (this unit itself never being indivisible
but only marking the level at which division ceases); by the equivalence of
the parts determined by the unit; by the consubstantiality of the parts with
the whole which is divided. Division can therefore take place and be
continued without any change in the nature of what is being divided. By
contrast, when it is pointed out that a temperature is not composed of
other temperatures, or a speed of other speeds, what is meant is that each
temperature is already a difference, and that differences are not composed
of differences of the same order but imply series of heterogeneous terms. As
Rosny showed, the fiction of a homogeneous quantity vanishes with
intensity. An intensive quantity may be divided, but not without changing
its nature. In a sense, it is therefore indivisible, but only because no part
exists prior to the division and no part retains the same nature after
division. We should nevertheless speak of 'smaller' and 'greater', according
to whether the nature of a given part presupposes a given change of nature
or is presupposed by it. Thus, the acceleration or deceleration of a
movement defines within it intensive parts that must be called greater or
smaller, even while these undergo a change of nature and following the
order of these changes (ordered differences). In this sense, difference in
depth is composed of distances, 'distance' being not an extensive quantity
but an indivisible asymmetrical relation, ordinal and intensive in character,

238

Difference and Repetition

which is established between series of heterogeneous terms and expresses at
each moment the nature of that which does not divide without changing its
nature. By contrast with extensive quantities, intensive quantities are
therefore defined by the enveloping difference, the enveloped distances, and
the unequal in itself which testifies to the existence of a natural 'remainder'
which provides the material for a change of nature. We must henceforth
distinguish between two types of multiplicities, such as those represented
by distances and lengths respectively: implicit as opposed to explicit
multiplicities; those whose metric varies with division and those which
carry the invariable principle of their metric. Difference, distance and
inequality are the positive characteristics of depth as intensive spatium.
Furthermore, the movement of explication is the movement by which
difference tends to be cancelled, but also by which distances tend to be
extended and developed into lengths, and the divisible tends to be
equalised. (Once again, Plato's greatness lies in having seen that the
divisible formed a nature in itself only by including the unequal.)
We could be criticized for having included all differences in kind within
intensity, thereby inflating it with everything that normally belongs to
quality. Equally, we could be criticized for having included within
distances what normally belongs to extensive quantities. To us, these
criticisms do not appear well founded. It is true that in being developed in
extension, difference becomes simple difference of degree and no longer
has its reason in itself. It is true that quality benefits from that alienated
reason and takes over differences in kind. However, the distinction
between the two, like that between mechanism and 'qualitativism', rests
upon a sleight of hand: the one profits from what has disappeared in the
other, but the true difference belongs to neither. Difference becomes
qualitative only in the process by which it is cancelled in extension. In its
own nature, difference is no more qualitative than extensive. We should
note, first, that qualities have much more stability, immobility and
generality than is often admitted. They are orders of resemblance.
Certainly they differ, and differ in kind, but always within a supposed
order of resemblance. Moreover, their variations in resemblance refer to
variations of a quite different sort. Certainly, a qualitative difference does
not reproduce or express a difference of intensity. However, in the passage
from one quality to another, even where there is a maximum of
resemblance or continuity, there are phenomena of delay and plateau,
shocks of difference, distances, a whole play of conjunctions and
disjunctions, a whole depth which forms a graduated scale rather than a
properly qualitative duration. Finally, if intensity were not there to attend
to, support and relay quality, what would the duration attributed to
quality be but a race to the grave, what time would it have other than the
time necessary for the annihilation of difference in the corresponding
extensity, or the time necessary for the uniformisation of qualities

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

239

themselves? In short, there would no more be qualitative differences or
differences in kind than there would be quantitative differences or
differences of degree, if intensity were not capable of constituting the
former in qualities and the latter in extensity, even at the risk of appearing
to extinguish itself in both.
This is why the Bergsonian critique of intensity seems unconvincing. It
assumes qualities ready-made and extensities already constituted. It
distributes difference into differences in kind in the case of qualities and
differences in degree in the case of extensity. From this point of view,
intensity necessarily appears as no more than an impure mixture, no longer
sensible or perceptible. However, Bergson has thereby already attributed to
quality everything that belongs to intensive quantities. He wanted to free
quality from the superficial movement which ties it to contrariety or
contradiction (that is why he opposed duration to becoming); but he could
do so only by attributing to quality a depth which is precisely that of
intensive quantity. One cannot be against both the negative and intensity at
once. It is striking that Bergson should define qualitative duration not as
indivisible but as that which changes its nature in dividing, that which does
not cease to divide and change its nature: virtual multiplicity, he says, in
opposition to the actual multiplicities of number and extensity which retain
only differences of degree. There comes a moment, however, in this
philosophy of Difference which the whole of Bergsonism represents, when
Bergson raises the question of the double genesis of quality and extensity.
This fundamental differenciation (quality-extensity) can find its reason
only in the great synthesis of Memory which allows all the degrees of
difference to coexist as degrees of relaxation and contraction, and
rediscovers at the heart of duration the implicated order of that intensity
which had been denounced only provisionally and from without. For the
differences of degree and the extensity which represents them mechanically
do not carry their reason within themselves; but neither do the differences
in kind and the duration which represents them qualitatively. The soul of
mechanism says that everything is difference of degree. The soul of quality
replies that there are differences in kind everywhere. However, these are
false souls, minor and auxiliary souls. Let us take seriously the famous
question: is there a difference in kind, or of degree, between differences of
degree and differences in kind? Neither. Difference is a matter of degree
only within the extensity in which it is explicated; it is a matter of kind
only with regard to the quality which covers it within that extensity.
Between the two are all the degrees of difference - beneath the two lies the
entire nature of difference - in other words, the intensive. Differences of
degree are only the lowest degree of difference, and differences in kind are
the highest form of difference. What differences in kind or of degree
separate or differenciate, the degrees or nature of difference make the
Same, but the same which is said of the different. Bergson, as we have seen,

240

Difference and Repetition

went as far as this extreme conclusion: perhaps this 'same', the identity of
nature and degrees of difference, is Repetition (ontological repetition)...
There is an illusion tied to intensive quantities. This illusion, however, is
not intensity itself, but rather the movement by which difference in
intensity is cancelled. Nor is it only apparently cancelled. It is really
cancelled, but outside itself, in extensity and underneath quality. We must
therefore distinguish two orders of implication or degradation: a secondary
implication which designates the state in which intensities are enveloped by
the qualities and extensity which explicate them; and a primary implication
designating the state in which intensity is implicated in itself, at once both
enveloping and enveloped. In other words, a secondary degradation in
which difference in intensity is cancelled, the highest rejoining the lowest;
and a primary power of degradation in which the highest affirms the
lowest. The illusion is precisely the confusion of these two instances or
extrinsic and intrinsic states. How could it be avoided from the point of
view of the empirical exercise of sensibility, since the latter can grasp
intensity only in the order of quality and extensity? Only transcendental
enquiry can discover that intensity remains implicated in itself and
continues to envelop difference at the very moment when it is reflected in
the extensity and the quality that it creates, which implicate it only
secondarily, just enough to 'explicate it'. Extensity, quality, limitation,
opposition indeed designate realities, but the form which difference
assumes here is illusory. Difference pursues its subterranean life while its
image reflected by the surface is scattered. Moreover, it is in the nature of
that image, but only that image, to be scattered, just as it is in the nature of
the surface to cancel difference, but only on the surface.
We asked how a transcendental principle might be extracted from the
empirical principles of Carnot or Curie. When we seek to define energy in
general, either we take account of the extensive and qualified factors of
extensity - in which case we are reduced to saying 'there is something
which remains constant', thereby formulating the great but flat tautology
of the Identical - or, on the contrary, we consider pure intensity in so far as
it is implicated in that deep region where no quality is developed, or any
extensity deployed. In this case, we define energy in terms of the difference
buried in this pure intensity and it is the formula 'difference of intensity'
which bears the tautology, but this time the beautiful and profound
tautology of the Different. Energy in general will not then be confused with
a uniform energy at rest, which would render any transformation
impossible. Only a particular form of empirical energy, qualified in
extensity, can be at rest; one in which the difference in intensity is already
cancelled because it is drawn outside itself and distributed among the
elements of the system. However, energy in general or intensive quantity is
the spatium, the theatre of all metamorphosis or difference in itself which
envelops all its degrees in the production of each. In this sense, energy or

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

241

intensive quantity is a transcendental principle, not a scientific concept. In
terms of the distinction between empirical and transcendental principles,
an empirical principle is the instance which governs a particular domain.
Every domain is a qualified and extended partial system, governed in such
a manner that the difference of intensity which creates it tends to be
cancelled within it (law of nature). But the domains are distributive and
cannot be added: there is no more an extensity in general than there is an
energy in general within extensity. On the other hand, there is an intensive
space with no other qualification, and within this space a pure energy. The
transcendental principle does not govern any domain but gives the domain
to be governed to a given empirical principle; it accounts for the subjection
of a domain to a principle. The domain is created by difference of intensity,
and given by this difference to an empirical principle according to which
and in which the difference itself is cancelled. It is the transcendental
principle which maintains itself in itself, beyond the reach of the empirical
principle. Moreover, while the laws of nature govern the surface of the
world, the eternal return ceaselessly rumbles in this other dimension of the
transcendental or the volcanic spatium.
When we say that the eternal return is not the return of the Same, or of
the Similar or the Equal, we mean that it does not presuppose any identity.
On the contrary, it is said of a world without identity, without resemblance
or equality. It is said of a world the very ground of which is difference, in
which everything rests upon disparities, upon differences of differences
which reverberate to infinity (the world of intensity). The eternal return is
itself the Identical, the similar and the equal, but it presupposes nothing of
itself in that of which it is said. It is said of that which has no identity, no
resemblance and no equality. It is the identical which is said of the
different, the resemblance which is said of the pure disparate, the equal
which is said only of the unequal and the proximity which is said of all
distances. Things must be dispersed within difference, and their identity
must be dissolved before they become subject to eternal return and to
identity in the eternal return. We can therefore measure the chasm which
separates eternal return as a 'modern' belief, or even a belief of the future,
from eternal return as an ancient or supposedly ancient belief. In fact, it is
a meagre achievement on the part of our philosophy of history to oppose
what is taken to be our historical time with the cyclical time supposed to
be that of the Ancients. It is supposed that for the Ancients things revolve,
whereas for we Moderns they progress in a straight line. However, this
opposition between cyclical and linear time is a weak idea. Every time such
a schema is tested it fails for several reasons. In the first place, the eternal
return that is attributed to the Ancients presupposes the identity in general
of that which it is supposed to make return. This return of the identical,
however, is subject to certain conditions which contradict it in fact. For it
is grounded either upon the cyclical transformation of qualitative elements

242

Difference and Repetition

into one another (physical eternal return) or upon the circular movement
of incorruptible celestial bodies (astronomical eternal return). In both
cases, return is presented as a 'law of nature'. In the one case, it is
interpreted in terms of quality, in the other case, in terms of extensity.
However, whether astronomical or physical, extensive or qualitative, this
interpretation of eternal return has already reduced the identity that it
presupposes to a simple and very general resemblance: for the 'same'
qualitative process, or the 'same' respective position of the stars determine
only very crude resemblances among the phenomena they govern.
Moreover, eternal return is here so badly understood that it is opposed to
what is intimately connected with it: on the one hand, with the ideal of an
exit from the 'wheel of births', it finds a first qualitative limit in the form of
metamorphoses and transmigrations; on the other hand, with the
irreducible inequality of the celestial periods, it finds a second quantitative
limit in the form of irrational numbers. Thus the two themes most
profoundly linked to eternal return, that of qualitative metamorphosis and
that of quantitative inequality, are turned back against it, having lost all
intelligible relation to it. We are not saying that eternal return 'as it was
believed by the Ancients' is erroneous or unfounded. We are saying that
the Ancients only approximately and partially believed in it. It was not so
much an eternal return as a system of partial cycles and cycles of
resemblance. It was a generality - in short, a law of nature. (Even the great
year of Heraclitus was only the time necessary for that part of fire which
constituted a living being to transform itself into earth and back into
fire.) Alternatively, if there is, in Greece or elsewhere, a genuine
knowledge of eternal return, it is a cruel and esoteric knowledge which
must be sought in another dimension, more mysterious and more
uncommon than that of astronomical or qualitative cycles and their
generalities.
Why did Nietzsche, who knew the Greeks, know that the eternal return
was his own invention, an untimely belief or belief of the future? Because
'his' eternal return is in no way the return of a same, a similar or an equal.
Nietzsche says clearly that if there were identity, if there were an
undifferentiated qualitative state of the world or a position of equilibrium
for the stars, then this would be a reason never to leave it, not a reason for
entering into a cycle. Nietzsche thereby links eternal return to what
appeared to oppose it or limit it from without - namely, complete
metamorphosis, the irreducibly unequal. Depth, distance, caves, the lower
depths, the tortuous, and the unequal in itself form the only landscape of
the eternal return. Zarathustra reminds the buffoon as well as the eagle
and the serpent that it is not an astronomical 'refrain', nor a physical circle.
... It is not a law of nature. The eternal return is elaborated within a
ground, or within a groundlessness in which original Nature resides in its
chaos, beyond the jurisdictions and laws which constitute only second

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

243

nature. Nietzsche opposes 'his' hypothesis to the cyclical hypothesis, 'his'
depth to the absence of depth in the sphere of the immutable. The eternal
return is neither qualitative nor extensive but intensive, purely intensive. In
other words, it is said of difference. This is the fundamental connection
between the eternal return and the will to power. The one does not hold
without the other. The will to power is the flashing world of
metamorphoses, of communicating intensities, differences of differences, of
breaths, insinuations and exhalations: a world of intensive intentionalities,
\f\
a world of simulacra or 'mysteries'. Eternal return is the being of this
world, the only Same which is said of this world and excludes any prior
identity therein. It is true that Nietzsche was interested in the energetics of
his time, but this was not the scientific nostalgia of a philosopher. We must
discover what it was that he sought to find in the science of intensive
quantities - namely, the means to realise what he called Pascal's prophecy:
to make chaos an object of affirmation. Difference in the will to power is
the highest object of sensibility, the hohe Stimmung, sensed against the
laws of nature (remember that the will to power was first presented as a
feeling, a feeling of distance). A thought contrary to the laws of nature,
repetition in the eternal return is the highest thought, the gross Gedanke.
Difference is the first affirmation; eternal return is the second, the 'eternal
affirmation of being' or the 'nth' power which is said of the first. It is
always on the basis of a signal - or, in other words, a primary intensity that thought occurs. Along the broken chain or the tortuous ring we are
violently led from the limit of sense to the limit of thought, from what can
only be sensed to what can only be thought.
It is because nothing is equal, because everything bathes in its difference,
its dissimilarity and its inequality, even with itself, that everything returns or rather, everything does not return. What does not return is that which
denies eternal return, that which does not pass the test. It is quality and
extensity which do not return, in so far as within them difference, the
condition of eternal return, is cancelled. So too the negative, in so far as
difference is thereby inverted and cancelled. So too the identical, the similar
and the equal, in so far as these constitute the forms of indifference. So too
God, along with the self as the form and guarantee of identity: everything
which appears only under the law of 'once and for all', including repetition
when it is subject to the condition of the identity of a same quality, a same
extended body, a same self (as in the 'resurrection'). ... Does this truly
mean that neither quality nor extensity returns? Or were we not, rather,
led to distinguish two states of quality along with two states of extension?
One in which quality flashes like a sign in the distance or interval created
by a difference of intensity; the other in which, as an effect, it reacts upon
its cause and tends to cancel difference. One in which extension remains
implicated in the enveloping order of differences; the other in which
extensity explicates difference and cancels it within a qualified system. This

244

Difference and Repetition

distinction, which cannot be drawn within experience, becomes possible
from the point of view of the thought of eternal return. The hard law of
explication is that what is explicated is explicated once and for all. The
ethics of intensive quantities has only two principles: affirm even the
lowest, do not explicate oneself (too much). We must be like the father
who criticised the child for having uttered all the dirty words he knew not only because it was wrong but because he had said everything at once,
because he kept nothing in reserve, no remainder for the subtle, implicated
matter of the eternal return. Moreover, if the eternal return reduces
qualities to the status of pure signs, and retains of extensities only what
combines with the original depth, even at the cost of our coherence and in
favour of a superior coherence, then the most beautiful qualities will
appear, the most brilliant colours, the most precious stones and the most
vibrant extensions. For once reduced to their seminal reasons, and having
broken all relation with the negative, these will remain for ever affixed in
the intensive space of positive differences. Then, in turn, the final
prediction of the Phaedo will be realised, in which Plato promised to the
sensibility disconnected from its empirical exercise temples, stars and gods
such as had never before been seen, unheard-of affirmations. The
prediction is realised, it is true, only by the very overturning of Platonism.
The affinity between intensive quantities and differentials has often been
denied. Such criticism, however, bears only upon a misconception of this
affinity. This should be grounded not upon the consideration of a series,
the terms of a series and the differences between consecutive terms, but
upon the confrontation between two types of relation: differential relations
in the reciprocal synthesis of the Idea and relations of intensity in the asymmetrical synthesis of the sensible. The reciprocal synthesis ^y/dx is continued
in the asymmetrical synthesis which connects y to #. The intensive factor is
a partial derivative or the differential of a composite function. A whole
flow of exchange occurs between intensity and Ideas, as though between
two corresponding figures of difference. Ideas are problematic or
'perplexed' virtual multiplicities, made up of relations between differential
elements. Intensities are implicated multiplicities, 'implexes', made up of
relations between asymmetrical elements which direct the course of the
actualisation of Ideas and determine the cases of solution for problems.
The aesthetic of intensities thus develops each of its moments in correspondence with the dialectic of Ideas: the power of intensity (depth) is grounded
in the potentiality of the Idea. Already the illusion we encountered on the
level of the aesthetic repeats that of the dialectic, and the form of the negative is the shadow projected by problems and their elements before it is the
inverted image of intensive differences. Just as intensive quantities seem to
be cancelled, so problematic Ideas seem to disappear. The unconscious of

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

245

little perceptions or intensive quantities refers to the unconscious of Ideas,
and the art of the aesthetic echoes that of the dialectic. The latter is irony,
understood as the art of problems and questions which is expressed in the
handling of differential relations and in the distribution of the ordinary and
the singular. By contrast, the art of the aesthetic is humour, a physical art
of signals and signs determining the partial solutions or cases of solution in short, an implicated art of intensive quantities.
These very general correspondences do not, nevertheless, indicate
precisely how the affinity works, nor how the connection between intensive
quantities and differentials operates. Let us reconsider the movement of
Ideas, which is inseparable from a process of actualisation. For example,
an Idea or multiplicity such as that of colour is constituted by the virtual
coexistence of relations between genetic or differential elements of a
particular order. These relations are actualised in qualitatively distinct
colours, while their distinctive points are incarnated in distinct extensities
which correspond to these qualities. The qualities are therefore
differenciated, along with the extensities, in so far as these represent
divergent lines along which the differential relations which coexist only in
the Idea are actualised. We have seen that every process of actualisation
was in this sense a double differenciation, qualitative and extensive. The
categories of differenciation no doubt change according to the order of the
differentials constitutive of the Idea: qualification and partition are the two
aspects of physical actualisation, just as organisation and the determination
of species are of biological actualisation. However, the qualities
differenciated by virtue of the relations they actualise impose their own
requirements, as do the extensities differenciated by virtue of the distinctive
points they incarnate. That is why we proposed the concept of
differenZ/ciation to indicate at once both the state of differential relations in
the Idea or virtual multiplicity, and the state of the qualitative and
extensive series in which these are actualised by being differenciated.
Thereby, however, the condition of such actualisation remains completely
indeterminate. How is the Idea determined to incarnate itself in
differenciated qualities and differenciated extensities? What determines the
relations coexisting within the Idea to differenciate themselves in qualities
and extensities? The answer lies precisely in the intensive quantities.
Intensity is the determinant in the process of actualisation. It is intensity
which dramatises. It is intensity which is immediately expressed in the
basic spatio-temporal dynamisms and determines an 'indistinct' differential
relation in the Idea to incarnate itself in a distinct quality and a
distinguished extensity. In this way, after a fashion (but, as we shall see,
only after a fashion), the movement and the categories of differenciation
reproduce those of explication. We speak of differenciation in relation to
the Idea which is actualised. We speak of explication in relation to the
intensity which 'develops' and which, precisely, determines the movement

246

Difference and Repetition

of actualisation. However, it remains literally true that intensity creates the
qualities and extensities in which it explicates itself, because these qualities
and extensities do not in any way resemble the ideal relations which are
actualised within them: differenciation implies the creation of the lines
along which it operates.
How does intensity fulfil this determinant role? In itself, it must be no
less independent of the differenciation than of the explication which
proceeds from it. It is independent of the explication by virtue of the order
of implication which defines it. It is independent of the differenciation by
virtue of its own essential process. The essential process of intensive
quantities is individuation. Intensity is individuating, and intensive
quantities are individuating factors. Individuals are signal-sign systems. All
individuality is intensive, and therefore serial, stepped and communicating,
comprising and affirming in itself the difference in intensities by which it is
constituted. Gilbert Simondon has shown recently that individuation
presupposes a prior metastable state - in other words, the existence of a
'disparateness' such as at least two orders of magnitude or two scales of
heterogeneous reality between which potentials are distributed. Such a
pre-individual state nevertheless does not lack singularities: the distinctive
or singular points are defined by the existence and distribution of
potentials. An 'objective' problematic field thus appears, determined by the
distance between two heterogeneous orders. Individuation emerges like the
act of solving such a problem, or - what amounts to the same thing - like
the actualisation of a potential and the establishing of communication
between disparates. The act of individuation consists not in suppressing the
problem, but in integrating the elements of the disparateness into a state of
coupling which ensures its internal resonance. The individual thus finds
itself attached to a pre-individual half which is not the impersonal within it
so much as the reservoir of its singularities. In all these respects, we
believe that individuation is essentially intensive, and that the
pre-individual field is a virtual-ideal field, made up of differential relations.
Individuation is what responds to the question 'Who?', just as the Idea
responds to the questions 'How much?' and 'How?'. 'Who?' is always an
intensity. ... Individuation is the act by which intensity determines
differential relations to become actualised, along the lines of differenciation
and within the qualities and extensities it creates. The total notion is
therefore that of: indi-differenf/ciation (indi-drama-differenf/ciation). Irony,
as the art of differential Ideas, is by no means unaware of singularity: on
the contrary, it plays upon the entire distribution of ordinary and
distinctive points. However, it is always a question of pre-individual
singularities distributed within the Idea. It is unaware of the individual.
Humour, the art of intensive quantities, plays upon the individual and
individuating factors. Humour bears witness to the play of individuals as
cases of solution, in relation to the differenciations it determines, whereas

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

247

irony, for its part, proceeds to the differentiations necessary within the
calculation of problems or the determination of their conditions.
The individual is neither a quality nor an extension. The individual is
neither a qualification nor a partition, neither an organisation nor a
determination of species. The individual is no more an infima species than
it is composed of parts. Qualitative or extensive interpretations of
individuation remain incapable of providing reasons why a quality ceases
to be general, or why a synthesis of extensity begins here and finishes there.
The determination of qualities and species presupposes individuals to be
qualified, while extensive parts are relative to an individual rather than the
reverse. It is not sufficient, however, to mark a difference in kind between
individuation and differenciation in general. This difference in kind
remains unintelligible so long as we do not accept the necessary
consequence: that individuation precedes differenciation in principle, that
every differenciation presupposes a prior intense field of individuation. It is
because of the action of the field of individuation that such and such
differential relations and such and such distinctive points (pre-individual
fields) are actualised - in other words, organised within intuition along
lines differenciated in relation to other lines. As a result, they then form the
quality, number, species and parts of an individual in short, its generality.
Because there are individuals of different species and individuals of the
same species, there is a tendency to believe that individuation is a
continuation of the determination of species, albeit of a different kind and
proceeding by different means. In fact any confusion between the two
processes, any reduction of individuation to a limit or complication of
differenciation, compromises the whole of the philosophy of difference.
This would be to commit an error, this time in the actual, analogous to
that made in confusing the virtual with the possible. Individuation does not
presuppose any differenciation; it gives rise to it. Qualities and extensities,
forms and matters, species and parts are not primary; they are imprisoned
in individuals as though in a crystal. Moreover, the entire world may be
read, as though in a crystal ball, in the moving depth of individuating
differences or differences in intensity.
All differences are borne by individuals, but they are not all individual
differences. Under what conditions does a difference become regarded as
individual? The problem of classification was clearly always a problem of
ordering differences. However, plant and animal classifications show that
we can order differences only so long as we are provided with a multiple
network of continuity of resemblance. The idea of a continuity among
living beings was never distinct from that of classification, much less
opposed to it. It was not even an idea supposed to limit or nuance the
demands of classification. On the contrary, it is the prerequisite of any
possible classification. For example, one asks which among several
differences is the one which truly forms a 'characteristic' - in other words,

248

Difference and Repetition

the one which allows to be grouped under a reflected identity those beings
which resemble one another on a maximum number of points. It is in this
sense that a genus may be simultaneously both a concept of reflection and
also a natural concept (to the extent that the identity it 'carves out' is
related to that of neighbouring species). If we consider three plants, A, B
and C, of which A and B are ligneous while C is non-ligneous, B and C are
blue while A is red, then 'ligneous' will be the characteristic, since it
ensures the greatest subordination of differences to the order of increasing
and decreasing resemblances. No doubt the order of resemblances may be
denounced as belonging to crude perception. This, however is so only on
condition that one substitutes for units of reflection the great constitutive
units (either Cuvier's great functional units or Geoffroy's great units of
composition), in relation to which difference is still understood in terms of
judgements of analogy or in terms of variation within a universal concept.
In any case, so long as it is subordinated to the criteria of resemblance
within perception, identity within reflection, analogy within judgement and
opposition within the concept, difference is not regarded as individual
difference. It remains only general difference, even though it is borne by the
individual.
Darwin's great novelty, perhaps, was that of inaugurating the thought of
individual difference. The leitmotiv of The Origin of Species is: we do not
know what individual difference is capable of! We do not know how far it
can go, assuming that we add to it natural selection. Darwin's problem is
posed in terms rather similar to those employed by Freud on another
occasion: it is a question of knowing under what conditions small,
unconnected or free-floating differences become appreciable, connected
and fixed differences. Natural selection indeed plays the role of a principle
of reality, even of success, and shows how differences become connected to
one another and accumulate in a given direction, but also how they tend to
diverge further and further in different or even opposed directions. Natural
selection plays an essential role: the differenciation of difference (survival
of the most divergent). Where selection does not occur or no longer occurs,
differences remain or once more become free-floating; where it occurs, it
does so to fix the differences and make them diverge. The great taxonomic
units - genera, families, orders and classes - no longer provide a means of
understanding difference by relating it to such apparent conditions as
resemblances, identities, analogies and determined oppositions. On the
contrary, these taxonomic units are understood on the basis of such
fundamental mechanisms of natural selection as difference and the
differenciation of difference. For Darwin, no doubt, individual difference
does not yet have a clear status, to the extent that it is considered for itself
and as primary matter of selection or differenciation: understood as
free-floating or unconnected difference, it is not distinguished from an
indeterminate variability. That is why Weissmann makes an essential

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

249

contribution to Darwinism when he shows how individual difference finds
a natural cause in sexed reproduction: sexed reproduction as the principle
of the 'incessant production of varied individual differences'. To the extent
that sexual differenciation itself results from sexed reproduction, we see
that the three great biological differenciations - that of species, that of
organic parts and that of the sexes - turn around individual difference, not
vice versa. These are the three figures of the Copernican Revolution of
Darwinism. The first concerns the differenciation of individual differences
in the form of the divergence of characteristics and the determination of
groups. The second concerns the connection of differences in the form of
the co-ordination of characteristics within the same group. The third
concerns the production of differences as the continuous matter of
differenciation and connection.
In appearance - well-founded appearance, certainly - sexed
reproduction is subordinated to the criteria of the species and the demands
of the organic parts. It is true that the egg must reproduce all the parts of
the organism to which it belongs. It is also more or less true that sexed
reproduction operates within the limits of the species. However, it has
often been noticed that all modes of reproduction imply phenomena of
organic 'de-differenciation'. The egg reconstitutes the parts only on
condition that it develops within a field which does not depend upon them.
It develops within the limits of the species only on condition that it also
presents phenomena of specific de-differenciation. Only beings of the same
species can effectively overcome the limits of the species and produce
beings which function as sketches, provisionally reduced to supra-specific
characteristics. This is what von Baer discovered when he showed that an
embryo does not reproduce ancestral adult forms belonging to other
species, but rather experiences or undergoes states and undertakes
movements which are not viable for the species but go beyond the limits of
the species, genus, order or class, and can be sustained only by the embryo
itself, under the conditions of embryonic life. Baer concludes that
epigenesis proceeds from more to less general - in other words, from the
most general types to generic and specific determinations. However, this
high level of generality has nothing to do with an abstract taxonomic
concept since it is, as such, lived by the embryo. It refers, on the one hand,
to the differential relations which constitute the virtuality which exists
prior to the actualisation of the species; on the other hand, it refers to the
first movements of that actualisation, and particularly to its condition namely, individuation as it finds its field of constitution in the egg. The
highest generalities of life, therefore, point beyond species and genus, but
point beyond them in the direction of the individual and pre-individual
singularities rather than towards an impersonal abstraction. If we notice,
with Baer, that not only the type but also the specific form of the embryo
appears very early, we should not necessarily take this to indicate the

250

Difference and Repetition

irreducibility of types and branchings, but rather the speed and relative
acceleration of the influence exercised by individuation upon actualisation
or the determination of species. It is not the individual which is an
illusion in relation to the genius of the species, but the species which is an
illusion - inevitable and well founded, it is true - in relation to the play of
the individual and individuation. The question is not whether in fact the
individual can be separated from its species and its parts. It cannot.
However, does not this very 'inseparability', along with the speed of
appearance of the species and its parts, testify to the primacy in principle of
individuation over differentiation? It is the individual which is above the
species, and precedes the species in principle. Moreover, the embryo is the
individual as such directly caught up in the field of its individuation. Sexed
reproduction defines this very field: if it is accompanied in the product by
an all the more precocious apparition of the specific form, this is because
the very notion of the species depends first upon sexed reproduction, which
accelerates the movement of the unfolding of actualisation by individuation
(the egg itself is already the site of the first developments). The embryo is a
sort of phantasm of its parents; every embryo is a chimera, capable of
functioning as a sketch and of living that which is unlivable for the adult of
every species. It undertakes forced movements, constitutes internal
resonances and dramatises the primordial relations of life. The problem of
comparison between animal and human sexuality consists of finding out
how sexuality ceases to be a function and breaks its attachments to
reproduction, for human sexuality interiorises the conditions of the
production of phantasms. Dreams are our eggs, our larvae and our
properly psychic individuals. The vital egg is nevertheless already a field of
individuation, and the embryo is a pure individual, and the one in the other
testifies to the primacy of individuation over actualisation - in other words,
over both organisation and the determination of species.
Individuating difference must be understood first within its field of
individuation - not as belated, but as in some sense in the egg. Since the
work of Child and Weiss, we recognise the axes or planes of symmetry
within an egg. Here too, however, the positive element lies less in the
elements of the given symmetry than in those which are missing. An
intensity forming a wave of variation throughout the protoplasm
distributes its difference along the axes and from one pole to another. The
region of maximal activity is the first to come into play, exercising a
dominant influence on the development of the corresponding parts at a
lower rate: the individual in the egg is a genuine descent, going from the
highest to the lowest and affirming the differences which comprise it and in
which it falls. In a young amphibian gastrula the intensity seems to be
maximal in a mid 'sub-blastoporaF region and to decrease in all directions,
but less rapidly towards the animal pole. In the middle layer of a young
vertebrate neurula the intensity decreases, for each transverse section, from

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

251

the mid-dorsal to the mid-ventral line. In order to plumb the intensive
depths or the spatium of an egg, the directions and distances, the
dynamisms and dramas, the potentials and potentialities must be
multiplied. The world is an egg. Moreover, the egg, in effect, provides us
with a model for the order of reasons: (organic and species related)
differentiation-individuation-dramatisation-differenciation. We think that
difference of intensity, as this is implicated in the egg, expresses first the
differential relations or virtual matter to be organised. This intensive field
of individuation determines the relations that it expresses to be incarnated
in spatio-temporal dynamisms (dramatisation), in species which
correspond to these relations (specific differenciation), and in organic parts
which correspond to the distinctive points in these relations (organic
differenciation). Individuation always governs actualisation: the organic
parts are induced only on the basis of the gradients of their intensive
environment; the types determined in their species only by virtue of the
individuating intensity. Throughout, intensity is primary in relation to
organic extensions and to species qualities. Notions such as
'morphogenetic potential', 'field-gradient-threshold' put forward by
Dalcq, which essentially concern the relations of intensity as such, account
for this complex ensemble. This is why the question of the comparative
role of the nucleus and the cytoplasm, in the egg as in the world, is not
easily solved. The nucleus and the genes designate only the differentiated
matter - in other words, the differential relations which constitute the
pre-individual field to be actualised; but their actualisation is determined
only by the cytoplasm, with its gradients and its fields of individuation.
Species do not resemble the differential relations which are actualised in
them; organic parts do not resemble the distinctive points which
correspond to these relations. Species and parts do not resemble the
intensities which determine them. As Dalcq says, when a caudal appendix
is induced by its intensive environment, that appendix corresponds to a
certain level of morphogenetic potential and depends upon a system in
which 'nothing is a priori caudal'. The egg destroys the model of
similitude. To the extent that the requirements of resemblance disappear,
two quarrels seem to lose much of their meaning. On the one hand,
pre-formism and epigenesis cease to be opposed once we admit that the
enveloped pre-formations are intensive while the developed formations are
qualitative and extensive, and that they do not resemble one another. On
the other hand, fixism and evolutionism tend to be reconciled to the extent
that movement does not go from one actual term to another, nor from
general to particular, but - by the intermediary of a determinant
individuation - from the virtual to its actualisation.
Nevertheless, we have not advanced with regard to the principal
difficulty. We invoke a field of individuation or individuating difference as
the condition of the organisation and determination of species. However,

252

Difference and Repetition

this field of individuation is posited only formally and in general: it seems
to be 'the same' for a given species, and to vary in intensity from one
species to another. It seems, therefore, to depend upon the species and the
determination of species, and to refer us once more to differences borne by
the individual, not to individual differences. In order for this difficulty to
disappear, the individuating difference must not only be conceived within a
field of individuation in general, but must itself be conceived as an
individual difference. The form of the field must be necessarily and in itself
filled with individual differences. This plenitude must be immediate,
thoroughly precocious and not delayed in the egg, to such a degree that the
principle of indiscernibles would indeed have the formula given it by
Lucretius: no two eggs or grains of wheat are identical. These conditions,
we believe, are fully satisfied in the order of implication of intensities.
Intensities presuppose and express only differential relations; individuals
presuppose only Ideas. Furthermore, the differential relations within Ideas
are not more species (or genera, or families, etc.) than their distinctive
points form parts. They by no means constitute either qualities or
extensions. On the contrary, all the Ideas, all the relations with their
variations and points, coexist, even though there are changes of order
according to the elements considered: they are fully determined and
differentiated even though they are completely undifferenciated. Such a
mode of 'distinction' seemed to us to correspond to the perplication of
Ideas - in other words, to their problematic character and to the reality of
the virtual which they represent. This is why Ideas have the logical
character of being simultaneously both distinct and obscure. They are
obscure (undifferenciated and coexisting with other Ideas, 'perplicated'
with them) in so far as they are distinct [omni modo determinata]. The
question then is what happens when Ideas are expressed by intensities or
individuals in this new dimension of implication.
Intensity or difference in itself thus expresses differential relations and
their corresponding distinctive points. It introduces a new type of
distinction into these relations and between Ideas a new type of distinction.
Henceforward, the Ideas, relations, variations in those relations and
distinctive points are in a sense separated: instead of coexisting, they enter
states of simultaneity or succession. Nevertheless, all the intensities are
implicated in one another, each in turn both enveloped and enveloping,
such that each continues to express the changing totality of Ideas, the
variable ensemble of differential relations. However, each intensity clearly
expresses only certain relations or certain degrees of variation. Those that
it expresses clearly are precisely those on which it is focused when it has
the enveloping role. In its role as the enveloped, it still expresses all
relations and all degrees, but confusedly. As the two roles are reciprocal,
and as intensity is in the first instance enveloped by itself, it must be said
that the clear and the confused, as logical characteristics in the intensity

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

253

which expresses the Idea - in other words, in the individual which thinks it
- are no more separable than the distinct and the obscure are separable in
the Idea itself. The clear-confused as individuating intensive unit
corresponds to the distinct—obscure as ideal unit. Clear-confused does not
qualify the Idea, but the thinker who thinks or expresses it. The thinker is
the individual. The distinct was precisely the obscure: it was the obscure in
so far as it was distinct. In the present case, however, the clear is precisely
the confused; it is confused in so far as it is clear. We saw that the
weakness of the theory of representation, from the point of view of the
logic of knowledge, was to have established a direct proportion between
the clear and the distinct, at the expense of the inverse proportion which
relates these two logical values: the entire image of thought was
compromised as a result. Only Leibniz approached the conditions of a
logic of thought, inspired by his theory of individuation and expression.
For despite the complexity and ambiguity of the texts, it does indeed seem
at times that the expressed (the continuum of differential relations or the
unconscious virtual Idea) should be in itself distinct and obscure: for
example, all the drops of water in the sea like so many genetic elements
with the differential relations, the variations in these relations and the
distinctive points they comprise. In addition, it seems that the expressor
(the perceiving, imagining or thinking individual) should be by nature clear
and confused: for example, our perception of the noise of the sea, which
confusedly includes the whole and clearly expresses only certain relations
or certain points by virtue of our bodies and a threshold of consciousness
which they determine.
The order of implication includes the enveloping no less than the
enveloped, depth as well as distance. When an enveloping intensity clearly
expresses certain differential relations and certain distinctive points, it still
expresses confusedly all the other relations, all their variations and points.
It expresses these in the intensities it envelops. These latter enveloped
intensities are then within the former. The enveloping intensities (depth)
constitute the field of individuation, the individuating differences. The
enveloped intensities (distances) constitute the individual differences. The
latter necessarily fill the former. Why is the enveloping intensity already a
field of individuation? Because the differential relation on which it is
focused is not yet a species, nor are its distinctive points yet parts. They
will become so, but only in being actualised by the action of this field
which it constitutes. Must we say at least that all the individuals of a given
species have the same field of individuation, since they point originally to
the same relation? Certainly not, for while two individuating intensities
may be abstractly the same by virtue of their clear expression, they are
never the same by virtue of the order of intensities which they envelop or
the relations which they confusedly express. There is a variable order
according to which the ensemble of relations is diversely implicated in

254

Difference and Repetition

these secondary intensities. We should nevertheless avoid saying that an
individual has individual difference only by virtue of its confused sphere.
This would be again to neglect the indissolubility of the clear and the
confused. It would be to forget that the clear is confused by itself, in so far
as it is clear. In effect, the secondary intensities represent the fundamental
property of the primary intensities - namely, the power to divide in
changing their nature. Two intensities are never identical except abstractly.
Rather, they differ in Kind, if only by the manner in which they divide
within the intensities they include. Finally, we should not say that the
individuals of a given species are distinguished by their participation in
other species: as if, for example, there was ass or lion, wolf or sheep, in
every human being. There is indeed all that, and metempsychosis retains all
its symbolic truth. However, the ass and the wolf can be considered species
only in relation to the fields of individuation which clearly express them. In
the confused and in the enveloped, they play only the role of variables, of
individual differences or composing souls. That is why Leibniz was right to
substitute the notion of 'metaschematism' for that of metempsychosis,
meaning by this that a soul never changed bodies, but its body could be
re-enveloped or reimplicated in order to enter, if need be, other fields of
individuation, thereby returning to a 'more subtle theatre'. Every body,
every thing, thinks and is a thought to the extent that, reduced to its
intensive reasons, it expresses an Idea the actualisation of which it
determines. However, the thinker himself makes his individual differences
from all manner of things: it is in this sense that he is laden with stones and
diamonds, plants 'and even animals'. The thinker, undoubtedly the thinker
of eternal return, is the individual, the universal individual. It is he who
makes use of all the power of the clear and the confused, of the
clear-confused, in order to think Ideas in all their power as the
distinct-obscure. The multiple, mobile and communicating character of
individuality, its implicated character, must therefore be constantly
recalled. The indivisibility of the individual pertains solely to the property
of intensive quantities not to divide without changing nature. We are made
of all these depths and distances, of these intensive souls which develop
and are re-enveloped. We call individuating factors the ensemble of these
enveloping and enveloped intensities, of these individuating and individual
differences which ceaselessly interpenetrate one another throughout the
fields of individuation. Individuality is not a characteristic of the Self but,
on the contrary, forms and sustains the system of the dissolved Self.
We must give a more precise account of the relations between explication
and differenciation. Intensity creates the extensities and the qualities in
which it is explicated; these extensities and qualities are differenciated. Extensities are formally distinct from one another, and comprise within them-

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

255

selves the distinctions between parts corresponding to the distinctive
points. Qualities are materially distinct, and comprise the distinctions corresponding to the variations of relations. Creation is always the production
of lines and figures of differenciation. It is nevertheless true that intensity is
explicated only in being cancelled in this differenciated system that it creates. Equally, we notice that the differenciation of a system occurs by linkage with a more general system which is 'de-differenciated'. In this sense,
even living beings do not contradict the empirical principle of degradation,
and the local differenciations are compensated by an overall tendency towards uniformity, in exactly the same way as a final cancellation compensates the originary creations. We nevertheless see that very important
variations occur from one domain to the next. Physical and biological systems are distinguished first by the order of the Ideas they incarnate or
actualise: differentials of this or that order. Secondly, they are distinguished
by the process of individualisation which determines that actualisation: in a
physical system, this happens all at once, and affects only the boundaries,
whereas a biological system receives successive waves of singularities and
involves its whole internal milieu in the operations which take place at the
outer limits. Finally, they are distinguished by the figures of differenciation
which represent actualisation itself: organisation and the determination of
biological species as opposed to simple physical qualification and distribution. Nevertheless, whatever the domain under consideration, the law of
explication remains the cancellation of productive difference and the erasure of the differenciation produced which is manifest in physical equilibrium as well as in biological death. Once again, the principle of
degradation is never negated or contradicted. Yet if it 'explicates' everything, it accounts for nothing. As has been said: if everything goes into this
principle, nothing comes out. If nothing contradicts it, if there is no
counter-order or exception, then there are, on the contrary, many things of
another order. While local increases in entropy may be compensated by a
more general degradation, they are in no way comprised in or produced by
the latter. Empirical principles tend to leave out the elements of their own
foundation. The principle of degradation obviously does not account either
for the creation of the most simple system or for the evolution of systems
(the threefold difference between biological systems and physical ones).
The living therefore testifies to the existence of another order, a heterogeneous order of another dimension - as though the individuating factors or
the atoms taken individually with their power of mutual communication
and fluent instability there enjoyed a higher degree of expression.
What is the formula for this 'evolution'? The more complex a system,
the more the values peculiar to implication appear within it. The presence
of these values is what allows a judgement of the complexity or the
complication of a system, and determines the preceding characteristics of
biological systems. The values of implication are centres of envelopment.

256

Difference and Repetition

These centres are not the intensive individuating factors themselves, but
they are their representatives within a complex whole in the process of
explication. It is these which constitute the little islands and the local
increases of entropy at the heart of systems which nevertheless conform
overall to the principle of degradation: atoms taken individually, for
example, even though they none the less confirm the law of increasing
entropy when considered en masse in the order of explication of the system
in which they are implicated. In so far as it testifies to individual actions
between directed molecules, an organism such as a mammal may be
assimilated to a microscopic being. The function of these centres may be
defined in several ways. First, to the extent that the individuating factors
form a kind of noumenon of the phenomenon, we claim that the
noumenon tends to appear as such in complex systems, that it finds its own
phenomenon in the centres of envelopment. Second, to the extent that
sense is tied to the Ideas which are incarnated and to the individuations
which determine that incarnation, we claim that these centres are
expressive, or that they reveal sense. Finally, to the extent that every
phenomenon finds its reason in a difference of intensity which frames it, as
though this constituted the boundaries between which it flashes, we claim
that complex systems increasingly tend to interiorise their constitutive
differences: the centres of envelopment carry out this interiorisation of the
individuating factors. The more the difference on which the system
depends is interiorised in the phenomenon, the more repetition finds itself
interior, the less it depends upon external conditions which are supposed to
ensure the reproduction of the 'same' differences.
As the movement of life shows, difference and repetition tend to become
interiorised in signal-sign systems both at once. Biologists are right when,
in posing the problem of heredity, they avoid allocating distinct functions,
such as variation and reproduction, to thes" systems, but rather seek to
show the underlying unity or reciprocal conditioning of these functions. At
this point, the theories of heredity necessarily open on to a philosophy of
nature. It is as if repetition were never the repetition of the 'same' but
always of the Different as such, and the object of difference in itself were
repetition. At the moment when they are explicated in a system (once and
for all) the differential, intensive or individuating factors testify to their
persistence in implication, and to eternal return as the truth of that
implication. Mute witnesses to degradation and death, the centres of
envelopment are also the dark precursors of the eternal return. Here again,
it is the mute witnesses or dark precusors which do everything - or, at
least, it is in these that everything happens.
Speaking of evolution necessarily leads us to psychic systems. For each
type of system, we must ask what pertains to Ideas and what pertains to
implication-individuation and explication-differenciation respectively.
With psychic systems the problem assumes a particular urgency, since it is

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

257

by no means certain that either the I or the Self falls within the domain of
individuation. They are, rather, figures of differenciation. The I forms the
properly psychic determination of species, while the Self forms the psychic
organisation. The I is the quality of human being as a species. The
determination of psychic species is not of the same type as the
determination of biological species, since here the determination must
equal, or be of the same power as, the determinable. That is why Descartes
refused any definition of human being which would proceed by genus and
difference as in the case of animal species: for example, 'rational animal'.
On the contrary, he presents the I think as another procedure of definition,
one capable of demonstrating the specificity of humanity or the quality of
its substance. In correlation with the I, the Self must understand itself in
extension: the Self designates the properly psychic organism, with its
distinctive points represented by the diverse faculties which enter into the
comprehension of the I. As a result, the fundamental psychic correlation is
expressed in the formula '/ think Myself ', just as the biological correlation
is expressed in the complementarity of species and their parts, of quality
and extension. That is why both the I and the Self each begin with
differences, but these differences are distributed in such a way as to be
cancelled, in accordance with the requirements of good sense and common
sense. The I therefore appears at the end as the universal form of psychic
life, just as the Self is the universal matter of that form. The I and the Self
explicate one another, and do so endlessly throughout the entire history of
the Cogito.
The individuating factors or the implicated factors of individuation
therefore have neither the form of the I nor the matter of the Self. This is
because the I is inseparable from a form of identity, while the Self is
indistinguishable from a matter constituted by a continuity of
resemblances. The differences included within the I and the Self are,
without doubt, borne by individuals: nevertheless, they are not individual
or individuating to the extent that they are understood in relation to this
identity in the I and this resemblance in the Self. By contrast, every
individuating factor is already difference and difference of difference. It is
constructed upon a fundamental disparity, and functions on the edges of
that disparity as such. That is why these factors endlessly communicate
with one another across fields of individuation, becoming enveloped in one
another in a demesne which disrupts the matter of the Self as well as the
form of the I. Individuation is mobile, strangely supple, fortuitous and
endowed with fringes and margins; all because the intensities which
contribute to it communicate with each other, envelop other intensities and
are in turn enveloped. The individual is far from indivisible, never ceasing
to divide and change its nature. It is not a Self with regard to what it
expresses, for it expresses Ideas in the form of internal multiplicities, made
up of differential relations and distinctive points or pre-individual

258

Difference and Repetition

singularities. Nor is it an I with regard to its expressive character, for here
again it forms a multiplicity of actualisation, as though it were a
condensation of distinctive points or an open collection of intensities. The
fringe of indetermination which surrounds individuals and the relative,
floating and fluid character of individuality itself has often been
commented upon (for example, the case of two physical particles whose
individuality can no longer be observed when their fields of individuation
or domains of presence encroach upon one another; or the case of the
biological distinction between an organ and an organism which depends on
the situation of the corresponding intensities according to whether or not
these are enveloped within a larger field of individuation). The error,
however, is to believe that this indetermination or this relativity indicates
something incomplete in individuality or something interrupted in
individuation. On the contrary, they express the full, positive power of the
individual as such, and the manner in which it is distinguished in nature
from both an I and a self. The individual is distinguished from the I and the
self just as the intense order of implications is distinguished from the
extensive and qualitative order of explication. Indeterminate, floating,
fluid, communicative and enveloping-enveloped are so many positive
characteristics affirmed by the individual. It is therefore insufficient to
multiply selves or to 'attenuate' the I in order to discover the true status of
individuation. We have seen to what extent selves must be presupposed as
a condition of passive organic syntheses, already playing the role of mute
witnesses. However, the synthesis of time which is carried out in them
refers precisely to other syntheses as though to other witnesses, thereby
leading us into the domain of another nature in which there is no longer
either self or I, and in which, by contrast, we encounter the chaotic realm
of individuation. For each self still retains some resemblance in its matter,
while each I retains an identity, however attenuated. However, that which
has its ground in dissemblance, or its lack of ground in a difference of
difference, does not fit the categories of the I and the Self.
The great discovery of Nietzsche's philosophy, which marks his break
with Schopenhauer and goes under the name of the will to power or the
Dionysian world, is the following: no doubt the I and the Self must be
replaced by an undifferenciated abyss, but this abyss is neither an
impersonal nor an abstract Universal beyond individuation. On the
contrary, it is the I and the self which are the abstract universals. They
must be replaced, but in and by individuation, in the direction of the
individuating factors which consume them and which constitute the fluid
world of Dionysus. What cannot be replaced is individuation itself. Beyond
the self and the I we find not the impersonal but the individual and its
factors, individuation and its fields, individuality and its pre-individual
singularities. For the pre-individual is still singular, just as the ante-self and
the ante-I are still individual - or, rather than simply 'still', we should say

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

259

'finally'. That is why the individual in intensity finds its psychic image
neither in the organisation of the self nor in the determination of species of
the I, but rather in the fractured I and the dissolved self, and in the
correlation of the fractured I with the dissolved self. This correlation seems
clear, like that of the thinker and the thought, or that of the clear-confused
thinker with distinct-obscure Ideas (the Dionysian thinker). It is Ideas
which lead us from the fractured I to the dissolved Self. As we have seen,
what swarms around the edges of the fracture are Ideas in the form of
problems - in other words, in the form of multiplicities made up of
differential relations and variations of relations, distinctive points and
transformations of points. These Ideas, however, are expressed in
individuating factors, in the implicated world of intensive quantities which
constitute the universal concrete individuality of the thinker or the system
of the dissolved Self.
Death is inscribed in the I and the self, like the cancellation of difference
in a system of explication, or the degradation which compensates for the
processes of differenciation. From this point of view, death may well be
inevitable, but every death is none the less accidental and violent, and
always comes from without. Simultaneously, however, death has quite
another face hidden among the individuating factors which dissolve the
self: here it is like a 'death instinct', an internal power which frees the
individuating elements from the form of the I or the matter of the self in
which they are imprisoned. It would be wrong to confuse the two faces of
death, as though the death instinct were reduced to a tendency towards
increasing entropy or a return to inanimate matter. Every death is double,
and represents the cancellation of large differences in extension as well as
the liberation and swarming of little differences in intensity. Freud
suggested the following hypothesis: the organism wants to die, but to die in
its own way, so that real death always presents itself as a foreshortening, as
possessing an accidental, violent and external character which is anathema
to the internal will-to-die. There is a necessary non-correspondence
between death as an empirical event and death as an 'instinct' or
transcendental instance. Freud and Spinoza are both right: one with regard
to the instinct, the other with regard to the event. Desired from within,
death always comes from without in a passive and accidental form. Suicide
is an attempt to make the two incommensurable faces coincide or
correspond. However, the two sides do not meet, and every death remains
double. On the one hand, it is a 'de-differenciation' which compensates for
the differenciations of the I and the Self in an overall system which renders
these uniform; on the other hand, it is a matter of individuation, a protest
by the individual which has never recognised itself within the limits of the
Self and the I, even where these are universal.
There must none the less be values of implication in psychic systems in
the process of being explicated; in other words, there must be centres of

260

Difference and Repetition

envelopment which testify to the presence of individuating factors. These
centres are clearly constituted neither by the I nor by the Self, but by a
completely different structure belonging to the I-Self system. This structure
should be designated by the name 'other'. It refers only to the self for the
other I and the other I for the self. Theories tend to oscillate mistakenly
and ceaselessly from a pole at which the other is reduced to the status of
object to a pole at which it assumes the status of subject. Even Sartre was
content to inscribe this oscillation in the other as such, in showing that the
other became object when I became subject, and did not become subject
unless I in turn became object. As a result, the structure of the other, as
well as its role in psychic systems, remained misunderstood. The other who
is nobody, but who is self for the other and the other for the self in two
systems, the a priori Other is defined in each system by its expressive value
- in other words, its implicit and enveloping value. Consider a terrified face
(under conditions such that I do not see and do not experience the causes
of this terror). This face expresses a possible world: the terrifying world. By
'expression' we mean, as always, that relation which involves a torsion
between an expressor and an expressed such that the expressed does not
exist apart from the expressor, even though the expressor relates to it as
though to something completely different. By 'possible', therefore, we do
not mean any resemblance but that state of the implicated or enveloped in
its very heterogeneity with what envelops it: the terrified face does not
resemble what terrifies it, it envelops a state of the terrifying world. In
every psychic system there is a swarm of possibilities around reality, but
our possibles are always Others. The Other cannot be separated from the
expressivity which constitutes it. Even when we consider the body of
another as an object, its ears and eyes as anatomical pieces, we do not
remove all expressivity from them even though we simplify in the extreme
the world they express: the eye is an implicated light or the expression of a
possible light, while the ear is that of a possible sound. Concretely,
however, it is the so-called tertiary qualities whose mode of existence is in
the first instance enveloped by the other. The I and the Self, by contrast,
are immediately characterised by functions of development or explication:
not only do they experience qualities in general as already developed in the
extensity of their system, but they tend to explicate or develop the world
expressed by the other, either in order to participate in it or to deny it (I
unravel the frightened face of the other, I either develop it into a
frightening world the reality of which seizes me, or I denounce its
unreality). However, these relations of development, which form our
commonalities as well as our disagreements with the other, also dissolve its
structure and reduce it either to the status of an object or to the status of a
subject. That is why, in order to grasp the other as such, we were right to
insist upon special conditions of experience, however artificial - namely,

Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible

261

the moment at which the expressed has (for us) no existence apart from
that which expresses it: the Other as the expression of a possible world.
In the psychic system of the I-Self, the Other thus functions as a centre
of enwinding, envelopment or implication. It is the representative of the
individuating factors. Moreover, if an organism may be regarded as a
microscopic being, how much more is this true of the Other in psychic
systems. It gives rise there to local increases in entropy, whereas the
explication of the other by the self represents a degradation in accordance
with law. The rule invoked earlier - not to be explicated too much meant, above all, not to explicate oneself too much with the other, not to
explicate the other too much, but to maintain one's implicit values and
multiply one's own world by populating it with all those expresseds that do
not exist apart from their expressions. For it is not the other which is
another I, but the I which is an other, a fractured I. There is no love which
does not begin with the revelation of a possible world as such, enwound in
the other which expresses it. Albertine's face expressed the blending of
beach and waves: 'From what unknown world does she distinguish me?'
The entire history of that exemplary love is the long explication of the
possible worlds expressed by Albertine, which transform her now into a
fascinating subject, now into a deceptive object. It is true that the other
disposes of a means to endow the possibles that it expresses with reality,
independently of the development we cause them to undergo. This means is
language. Words offered by the other confer reality on the possible as such;
whence the foundation of the lie inscribed within language itself. It is this
role of language as a result of the values of implication or the centres of
envelopment which endows it with its powers within internal resonance
systems. The structure of the other and the corresponding function of
language effectively represent the manifestation of the noumenon, the
appearance of expressive values - in short, the tendency towards the
interiorisation of difference.

Conclusion
Difference is not and cannot be thought in itself, so long as it is subject to
the requirements of representation. The question whether it was 'always'
subject to these requirements, and for what reasons, must be closely examined. But it appears that pure disparates formed either the celestial beyond
of a divine understanding inaccessible to our representative thought, or the
infernal and unfathomable for us below of an Ocean of dissemblance. In
any case, difference in itself appears to exclude any relation between different and different which would allow it to be thought. It seems that it can
become thinkable only when tamed - in other words, when subject to the
four iron collars of representation: identity in the concept, opposition in
the predicate, analogy in judgement and resemblance in perception. As
Foucault has shown, the classical world of representation is defined by
these four dimensions which co-ordinate and measure it. These are the four
roots of the principle of reason: the identity of the concept which is reflected in a ratio cognoscendi; the opposition of the predicate which is developed in a ratio fiendi-, the analogy of judgement which is distributed in a
ratio essendi', and the resemblance of perception which determines a ratio
agendi. Every other difference, every difference which is not rooted in this
way, is an unbounded, uncoordinated and inorganic difference: too large
or too small, not only to be thought but to exist. Ceasing to be thought,
difference is dissipated in non-being. From this, it is concluded that difference in itself remains condemned and must atone or be redeemed under
the auspices of a reason which renders it livable and thinkable, and makes
it the object of an organic representation.
The greatest effort of philosophy was perhaps directed at rendering
representation infinite (orgiastic). It is a question of extending
representation as far as the too large and the too small of difference; of
adding a hitherto unsuspected perspective to representation - in other
words, inventing theological, scientific and aesthetic techniques which
allow it to integrate the depth of difference in itself; of allowing
representation to conquer the obscure; of allowing it to include the
vanishing of difference which is too small and the dismemberment of
difference which is too large; of allowing it to capture the power of
giddiness, intoxication and cruelty, and even of death. In short, it is a
question of causing a little of Dionysus's blood to flow in the organic veins
of Apollo. This effort has always permeated the world of representation.
The ultimate wish of the organic is to become orgiastic and to conquer the
in-itself, but this effort found two culminating moments in Leibniz and
Hegel. With the former, representation conquers the infinite because a
262

Conclusion

263

technique for dealing with the infinitely small captures the smallest
difference and its disappearance. With the latter, representation conquers
the infinite because a technique for dealing with the infinitely large
captures the largest difference and its dismembering. The two are in
agreement, since the Hegelian problem is also that of disappearance, while
the Leibnizian problem is also that of dismembering. Hegel's technique lies
in the movement of contradiction (difference must attain that point, it must
be extended that far). It consists of inscribing the inessential in the essence,
and in conquering the infinite with the weapons of a synthetic finite
identity. Leibniz's technique lies in the movement we call vice-diction: it
consists in constructing the essence from the inessential, and conquering
the finite by means of an infinite analytic identity (difference must be
developed to that point). But what is the point of making representation
infinite? It retains all its requirements. All that is discovered is a ground
which relates the excess and default of difference to the identical, the
similar, the analogous and the opposed: reason, - that is, sufficient reason
- has become the ground which no longer allows anything to escape.
Nothing, however, has changed: difference remains subject to malediction,
and all that has happened is the discovery of more subtle and more sublime
means to make it atone, or to redeem it and subject it to the categories of
representation.
Thus, Hegelian contradiction appears to push difference to the limit, but
this path is a dead end which brings it back to identity, making identity the
sufficient condition for difference to exist and be thought. It is only in
relation to the identical, as a function of the identical, that contradiction is
the greatest difference. The intoxications and giddinesses are feigned, the
obscure is already clarified from the outset. Nothing shows this more
clearly than the insipid monocentricity of the circles in the Hegelian
dialectic. Moreover, in another manner perhaps the same should be said of
the condition of convergence in the Leibnizian world. Take a notion such
as that of Leibnizian incompossibility. Everyone recognises that
incompossibility is not reducible to contradiction, and compossibility is not
reducible to the identical. It is indeed in this sense that the compossible and
the incompossible testify to a specific sufficient reason and to a presence of
the infinite - not only in the totality of possible worlds, but in each chosen
world. It is more difficult to say in what these new notions consist. It seems
to us that compossibility consists uniquely in the following: the condition
of a maximum of continuity for a maximum of difference - in other words,
a condition of convergence of established series around the singularities of
the continuum. Conversely, the incompossibility of worlds is decided in the
vicinity of those singularities which give rise to divergent series between
themselves. In short, representation may well become infinite; it
nevertheless does not acquire the power to affirm either divergence or
decentring. It requires a convergent and monocentric world: a world in

264

Difference and Repetition

which one is only apparently intoxicated, in which reason acts the
drunkard and sings a Dionysian tune while none the less remaining 'pure'
reason. The ground or sufficient reason is nothing but a means of allowing
the identical to rule over infinity itself, and allowing the continuity of
resemblance, the relation of analogy and the opposition of predicates to
invade infinity. This is the originality of sufficient reason: better to ensure
the subjection of difference to the quadripartite yoke. The damage is done
not only by the requirement of finite representation, which consists of
fixing a propitious moment for difference, neither too large nor too small,
in between excess and default; but also by the apparently contrary
requirement of infinite representation, which purports to integrate the
infinitely large and the infinitely small of difference, excess and default
themselves. The entire alternative between finite and infinite applies very
badly to difference, because it constitutes only an antinomy of

representation. We saw this, moreover, in the case of calculus: modern
finitist interpretations betray the nature of the differential no less than the
former infinitist interpretations, because both fail to capture the
extra-propositional or sub-representative source - in other words, the
'problem' from which the calculus draws its power. In addition, the
alternative of the Small and the Large, whether in finite representation
which excludes both, or in infinite representation which wants to include
both, and each within the other, does not, in general, fit difference. The
reason is that this alternative expresses only the oscillations of
representation with regard to an always dominant identity, or rather the
oscillations of the Identical with regard to an always rebellious matter, the
excess and default of which it sometimes rejects and sometimes tries to
integrate. Finally, returning to Leibniz and Hegel and their common
attempt to extend representation to infinity: we are not sure that Leibniz
does not go 'farthest' (nor that, of the two, he is not the least theological).
His conception of the Idea as an ensemble of differential relations and
singular points, the manner in which he begins with the inessential and
constructs essences in the form of centres of envelopment around
singularities, his presentiment of divergences, his procedure of vice-diction,
his approximation to an inverse ratio between the distinct and the clear, all
show why the ground rumbles with greater power in the case of Leibniz,
why the intoxication and giddiness are less feigned in his case, why
obscurity is better understood and the Dionysian shores are closer.
What motivated the subordination of difference to the requirements of
finite or infinite representation? It is correct to define metaphysics by
reference to Platonism, but insufficient to define Platonism by reference to
the distinction between essence and appearance. The primary distinction
which Plato rigorously establishes is the one between the model and the
copy. The copy, however, is far from a simple appearance, since it stands
in an internal, spiritual, noological and ontological relation with the Idea

Conclusion

265

or model. The second and more profound distinction is the one between
the copy itself and the phantasm. It is clear that Plato distinguishes, and
even opposes, models and copies only in order to obtain a selective
criterion with which to separate copies and simulacra, the former founded
upon their relation to the model while the latter are disqualified because
they fail both the test of the copy and the requirements of the model. While
there is indeed appearance, it is rather a matter of distinguishing the
splendid and well-grounded Apollonian appearances from the other,
insinuative, malign and maleficent appearances which respect the ground
no more than the grounded. This Platonic wish to exorcize simulacra is
what entails the subjection of difference. For the model can be defined only
by a positing of identity as the essence of the Same [auto kath' hauto], and
the copy by an affection of internal resemblance, the quality of the Similar.
Moreover, because the resemblance is internal, the copy must itself have an
internal relation to being and the true which is analogous to that of the
model. Finally, the copy must be constructed by means of a method which,
given two opposed predicates, attributes to it the one which agrees with the
model. In all these ways, copies are distinguished from simulacra only by
subordinating difference to instances of the Same, the Similar, the
Analogous and the Opposed. No doubt with Plato these instances are not
yet distributed as they will be in the deployed world of representation
(from Aristotle onwards). Plato inaugurates and initiates because he
evolves within a theory of Ideas which will allow the deployment of
representation. In his case, however, a moral motivation in all its purity is
avowed: the will to eliminate simulacra or phantasms has no motivation
apart from the moral. What is condemned in the figure of simulacra is the
state of free, oceanic differences, of nomadic distributions and crowned
anarchy, along with all that malice which challenges both the notion of the
model and that of the copy. Later, the world of representation will more or
less forget its moral origin and presuppositions. These will nevertheless
continue to act in the distinction between the originary and the derived, the
original and the sequel, the ground and the grounded, which animates the
hierarchies of a representative theology by extending the complementarity
between model and copy.
Representation is a site of transcendental illusion. This illusion comes in
several forms, four interrelated forms which correspond particularly to
thought, sensibility, the Idea and being. In effect, thought is covered over
by an 'image' made up of postulates which distort both its operation and
its genesis. These postulates culminate in the position of an identical
thinking subject, which functions as a principle of identity for concepts in
general. A slippage occurs in the transition from the Platonic world to the
world of representation (which again is why we can present Plato as the
origin or at the crossroads of a decision). The 'sameness' of the Platonic
Idea which serves as model and is guaranteed by the Good gives way to the

266

Difference and Repetition

identity of an originary concept grounded in a thinking subject. The
thinking subject brings to the concept its subjective concomitants: memory,
recognition and self-consciousness. Nevertheless, it is the moral vision of
the world which is thereby extended and represented in this subjective
identity affirmed as a common sense [Cogitatio natura universalis]. When
difference is subordinated by the thinking subject to the identity of the
concept (even where this identity is synthetic), difference in thought
disappears. In other words, what disappears is that difference that thinking
makes in thought, that genitality of thinking, that profound fracture of the
I which leads it to think only in thinking its own passion, and even its own
death, in the pure and empty form of time. To restore difference in thought
is to untie this first knot which consists of representing difference through
the identity of the concept and the thinking subject.
The second illusion concerns the subordination of difference to
resemblance. Given the manner in which it is distributed in representation,
resemblance need no longer be just that between copy and model. It can be
determined as the resemblance of the (diverse) sensible to itself, in such a
way that the identity of the concept should be applicable to it, and receive
from it in turn the possibility of specification. The illusion takes the
following form: difference necessarily tends to be cancelled in the quality
which covers it, while at the same time inequality tends to be equalised
within the extension in which it is distributed. The theme of quantitative
equality or equalisation doubles that of qualitative resemblance and
assimilation. As we saw, this was the illusion of 'good sense',
complementary to the preceding illusion and its 'common sense'. It is a
transcendental illusion because it is entirely true that difference is cancelled
qualitatively and in extension. It is nevertheless an illusion, since the nature
of difference lies neither in the quality by which it is covered nor in the
extensity by which it is explicated. Difference is intensive, indistinguishable
from depth in the form of an non-extensive and non-qualified spatium, the
matrix of the unequal and the different. Intensity is not the sensible but the
being of the sensible, where different relates to different. To restore
difference within intensity as the being of the sensible is to untie the second
knot, one which subordinates difference to the similar within perception,
allowing it to be experienced only on condition that there is an assimilation
of diversity taken as raw material for the identical concept.
The third illusion concerns the negative and the manner in which it
subordinates difference to itself, in the form of both limitation and
opposition. The second illusion already prepared us for this discovery of a
mystification on the part of the negative: it is in quality and extensity that
intensity is inverted and appears upside down, and its power of affirming
difference is betrayed by the figures of quantitative and qualitative
limitation, qualitative and quantitative opposition. Limitation and
opposition are first- and second-dimension surface effects, whereas the

Conclusion

267

living depths, the diagonal, is populated by differences without negation.
Beneath the platitude of the negative lies the world of 'disparateness'. The
origin of the illusion which subjects difference to the false power of the
negative must therefore be sought, not in the sensible world itself, but in
that which acts in depth and is incarnated in the sensible world. We have
seen that Ideas are genuine objectivities, made up- of differential elements
and relations and provided with a specific mode - namely, the
'problematic'. Problems thus defined do not designate any ignorance on the
part of a thinking subject, any more than they express a conflict, but rather
objectively characterise the nature of Ideas as such. There is indeed,
therefore, a me on, which must not be confused with the ouk on, and
which means the being of the problematic and not the being of the
negative: an expletive NE rather than a negative 'not'. This me on is so
called because it precedes all affirmation, but is none the less completely
positive. Problems-Ideas are positive multiplicities, full and differentiated
positivities described by the process of complete and reciprocal
determination which relates problems to their conditions. The positivity of
problems is constituted by the fact of being 'posited' (thereby being related
to their conditions and fully determined). It is true that, from this point of
view, problems give rise to propositions which give effect to them in the
form of answers or cases of solution. These propositions in turn represent
affirmations, the objects of which are those differences which correspond
to the relations and the singularities of the differential field. In this sense,
we can establish a distinction between the positive and the affirmative - in
other words, between the positivity of Ideas understood as differential
positings and the affirmations to which they give rise, which incarnate and
solve them. With regard to the latter, we should say not only that they are
different affirmations but that they are affirmations of differences, as a
consequence of the multiplicity which belongs to each Idea. Affirmation,
understood as the affirmation of difference, is produced by the positivity of
problems understood as differential positings; multiple affirmation is
produced by problematic multiplicity. It is of the essence of affirmation to
be in itself multiple and to affirm difference. As for the negative, this is
only the shadow cast upon the affirmations produced by a problem:
negation appears alongside affirmation like a powerless double, albeit one
which testifies to the existence of another power, that of the effective and
persistent problem.
Everything, however, is reversed if we begin with the propositions which
represent these affirmations in consciousness. For Problems-Ideas are by
nature unconscious: they are extra-propositional and sub-representative,
and do not resemble the propositions which represent the affirmations to
which they give rise. If we attempt to reconstitute problems in the image of
or as resembling conscious propositions, then the illusion takes shape, the
shadow awakens and appears to acquire a life of its own: it is as though

268

Difference and Repetition

each affirmation referred to its negative, or has 'sense' only by virtue of its
negation, while at the same time a generalised negation, an ouk on, takes
the place of the problem and its me on. Thus begins the long history of the
distortion of the dialectic, which culminates with Hegel and consists in
substituting the labour of the negative for the play of difference and the
differential. Instead of being defined by a (non)-being which is the being of
problems and questions, the dialectical instance is now defined by a
wow-being which is the being of the negative. The false genesis of
affirmation, which takes the form of the negation of the negation and is
produced by the negative, is substituted for the complementarity of the
positive and the affirmative, of differential positing and the affirmation of
difference. Furthermore, if the truth be told, none of this would amount to
much were it not for the moral presuppositions and practical implications
of such a distortion. We have seen all that this valorisation of the negative
signified, including the conservative spirit of such an enterprise, the
platitude of the affirmations supposed to be engendered thereby, and the
manner in which we are led away from the most important task, that of
determining problems and realising in them our power of creation and
decision. That is why conflicts, oppositions and contradictions seemed to
us to be surface effects and conscious epiphenomena, while the
unconscious lived on problems and differences. History progresses not by
negation and the negation of negation, but by deciding problems and
affirming differences. It is no less bloody and cruel as a result. Only the
shadows of history live by negation: the good enter into it with all the
power of a posited differential or a difference affirmed; they repel shadows
into the shadows and deny only as the consequence of a primary positivity
and affirmation. For them, as Nietzsche says, affirmation is primary; it
affirms difference, while the negative is only a consequence or a reflection
in which affirmation is doubled. That is why real revolutions have the
atmosphere of fetes. Contradiction is not the weapon of the proletariat but,
rather, the manner in which the bourgeoisie defends and preserves itself,
the shadow behind which it maintains its claim to decide what the
problems are. Contradictions are not 'resolved', they are dissipated by
capturing the problem of which they reflect only the shadow. The negative
is always a conscious reaction, a distortion of the true agent or actor. As a
result, as long as it remains within the limits of representation, philosophy
is prey to the theoretical antinomies of consciousness. The choice whether
difference must be understood as quantitative limitation or qualitative
opposition is no less devoid of sense than that between the Small and the
Large. For whether it is limitation or opposition, difference is unjustly
assimilated to a negative non-being. Whence another illusory choice: either
being is full positivity, pure affirmation, but undifferenciated being,
without difference; or being includes differences, it is Difference and there
is non-being, a being of the negative. All these antinomies are connected,

Conclusion

269

and depend upon the same illusion. We must say both that being is full
positivity and pure affirmation, and that there is (non)-being which is the
being of the problematic, the being of problems and questions, not the
being of the negative. In truth, the origin of the antinomies is as follows:
once the nature of the problematic and the multiplicity which defines the
Idea is misrecognised, once the Idea is reduced to the Same or even to the
identity of a concept, the negative takes wing. Instead of the positive
process of determination in the Idea, what emerges is a process of
opposition of contrary predicates or limitation of primary predicates. To
restore the differential in the Idea, and difference to the affirmation which
flows from it, is to break this unholy bond which subordinates difference
to the negative.
Finally, the fourth illusion concerns the subordination of difference to
the analogy of judgement. In effect, the identity of the concept does not yet
give us a concrete rule of determination, since it appears only as the
identity of an indeterminate concept; Being or I am (that 'I am' which Kant
said was the perception or the feeling of an existence independently of any
determination). The ultimate concepts or primary and originary predicates
must therefore be posited as determinable. They are recognised by the fact
that each maintains an internal relation to being. In this sense, these
concepts are analogues, or Being is analogous in relation to them and
acquires simultaneously the identity of a distributive common sense and
that of an ordinal good sense (we have seen how analogy took two forms,
which rested not upon equality but upon the inferiority of the relation of
judgement). It is not sufficient, therefore, that representation be grounded
upon the identity of an indeterminate concept. Identity must itself be
represented every time in a certain number of determinable concepts. These
originary concepts, in relation to which Being is distributive and ordinal,
are called categories or genera of being. On the basis of such categories,
specific derived concepts can in turn be determined by a method of division
- in other words, by the play of contrary predicates within each genus. In
this manner, difference is assigned two limits, in the form of two
irreducible but complementary figures which indicate precisely its
belonging to representation (the Large and the Small): the categories as a
priori concepts and the empirical concepts; the originary determinable
concepts and the derived determined concepts; the analogous and the
opposed; the large genera and the species. This distribution of difference in
a manner entirely dependent upon the requirements of representation
essentially belongs within the analogical vision of the world. However, this
form of distribution commanded by the categories seemed to us to betray
the nature of Being (as a cardinal and collective concept) and the nature of
the distributions themselves (as nomadic rather than sedentary and fixed
distributions), as well as the nature of difference (as individuating
difference). In terms of this distribution, the individual is only, and only

270

Difference and Repetition

understood as, that which bears differences in general, while Being
distributes itself among the fixed forms of these differences and is said
analogically of that which is.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that the four illusions of representation
distort repetition no less than they distort difference, and for reasons which
are in certain respects comparable. In the first place, representation
provides no direct and positive criteria for distinguishing between
repetition and the order of generality, resemblance or equivalence. That is
why repetition is represented as a perfect resemblance or an extreme
equality. Second, representation in effect invokes the identity of the
concept in order to explain repetition no less than to understand difference.
Difference is represented in the identical concept, and thereby reduced to a
merely conceptual difference. Repetition, by contrast, is represented
outside the concept, as though it were a difference without concept, but
always with the presupposition of an identical concept. Thus, repetition
occurs when things are distinguished in numero, in space and time, while
their concept remains the same. In the same movement, therefore, the
identity of the concept in representation includes difference and is extended
to repetition. A third aspect follows from this: it is apparent that repetition
can no longer receive anything but a negative explanation. In effect, it is a
matter of explaining the possibility of differences without concept. Or one
invokes a logical limitation of the concept at each of its moments - in other
words, a relative 'blockage' such that, however far the comprehension of
the concept is pushed, there is always an infinite number of things which
can correspond to it, since in fact one can never encompass the infinity of
that comprehension which would make every difference a conceptual
difference. Repetition is then explained only in terms of a relative
limitation in our representation of the concept and, from precisely this
point of view, we deprive ourselves of any means of distinguishing
repetition from simple resemblance. Alternatively, a real opposition is
invoked, one that is capable of imposing an absolute natural blockage on
the concept: by assigning to it a comprehension that is in principle
necessarily finite, by defining an order external to the comprehension of
even an indefinite concept, or by bringing in forces opposed to the
subjective concomitants of the infinite concept (memory, recognition,
self-consciousness). We have seen how these three cases seemed to be
illustrated respectively by nominal concepts, concepts of nature and
concepts of freedom: words, Nature and the unconscious. In all these cases,
thanks to the distinction between absolute natural blockage and artificial
or logical blockage, there is no doubt that we have the means to distinguish
between repetition and simple resemblance, since things are said to repeat
when they differ even though their concept is absolutely the same.
However, not only this distinction but repetition itself is explained here in
an entirely negative fashion. It (language) repeats because it (the words) is

Conclusion

271

not real, because there is no definition other than nominal. It (nature)
repeats because it (matter) has no inferiority, because it is panes extra
panes. It (the unconscious) repeats because it (the Ego) represses, because
it (the Id) has no memory, no recognition and no consciousness of itself ultimately because it has no instinct, instinct being the subjective
concomitant of the species as concept. In short, things repeat always by
virtue of what they are not and do not have. We repeat because we do not
hear. As Kierkegaard said, it is the repetition of the deaf, or rather for the
deaf: deafness of words, deafness of nature, deafness of the unconscious.
Within representation, the forces which ensure repetition - in other words,
a multiplicity of things for a concept absolutely the same - can only be
negatively determined.
Fourth, repetition is not only defined in relation to the absolute identity
of the concept; it must, in a certain manner, itself represent this identical
concept. A phenomenon corresponding to the analogy of judgement
emerges here. Repetition is not content with multiplying instances of the
same concept; it puts the concept outside itself and causes it to exist in so
many instances hie et nunc. It fragments identity itself, just as Democritus
fragmented the One-Being of Parmenides and multiplied it into atoms. Or
rather, the multiplication of things under an absolutely identical concept
has as its consequence the division of the concept into absolutely identical
things. Matter realises this state of the concept outside itself or the
infinitely repeated element. That is why the model of repetition is
indistinguishable from pure matter understood as the fragmentation of the
identical or the repetition of a minimum. Repetition, therefore, has a
primary sense from the point of view of representation - namely, that of a
material and bare repetition, a repetition of the same (and not only under
the same concept). All the other senses will be derived from this extrinsic
model. In other words, every time we encounter a variant, a difference, a
disguise or a displacement, we will say that it is a matter of repetition, but
only in a derivative and 'analogical' manner. (Even in the case of Freud, the
prodigious conception of repetition in psychic life is dominated not only by
a schema of opposition in the case of the theory of repression, but by a
material model in that of the death instinct.) This extrinsic material model,
however, takes repetition as already accomplished and presents it to a
spectator who contemplates it from without. It suppresses the thickness in
which repetition occurs and unfolds, even in the case of matter and death.
Whence the attempt, by contrast, to represent disguise and displacement as
the constituent elements of repetition, but on condition that repetition is
confounded with analogy itself. Identity is no longer that of an element
but, in accordance with the traditional signification, that of a relation
between distinct elements or a relation between relations. Earlier, physical
matter provided repetition with its primary sense, and the other senses
(biological, psychic, metaphysical...) were said by analogy. Now, analogy

272

Difference and Repetition

by itself is the logical matter of repetition, providing it with a distributive
sense. However, it is still a sense understood in relation to a thought
identity or to a represented equality, with the result that repetition remains
a concept of reflection which ensures the distribution and the displacement
of terms, the transportation of the element, but only within representation
and for a spectator who remains extrinsic.
To ground is to determine. But what is determination, and upon what is it
exercised? Grounding is the operation of the logos, or of sufficient reason.
As such, it has three senses. In its first sense, the ground is the Same or the
Identical. It enjoys supreme identity, that which is supposed to belong to
Ideas or to the auto kath' hauto. What it is, and what it possesses, it is and
it possesses primarily, in the utmost. What, apart from Courage, would be
courageous, or virtuous apart from Virtue? What the ground has to
ground, therefore, is only the claim of those who come after, all those who
at best possess secondarily. It is always a claim or an 'image' that requires a
ground or appeals to a ground: for example, the claim of men to be courageous, to be virtuous - in short, to have part or to participate in (metexein means to have after). As such, we may distinguish between the ground
or ideal Essence, the grounded in the form of Claimant or claim, and that
upon which the claim bears - in other words, the Quality that the ground
possesses primarily and the claimant will possess secondarily, assuming
that its claim is well grounded. This quality, the object of the claim, is difference - the fiancee, Ariadne. The essence or ground is the identical in so
far as it originarily includes the difference of its object. The operation of
grounding renders the claimant similar to the ground, endowing it with resemblance from within and thereby allowing it to participate in the quality
or the object which it claims. As similar to the same, the claimant is said to
resemble - this, however, is not an external resemblance to the object but
an internal resemblance to the ground itself. In order to have the daughter,
one must resemble the father. Difference is thought here in terms of the
principle of Sameness and the condition of resemblance. Moreover, there
will be claimants in third place, fourth place and fifth place, as many as
there are images grounded in the hierarchy of this internal resemblance.
That is why the ground selects and establishes the difference between the
claimants themselves. Each well-grounded image or claim is called a representation [icone], since the first in the order of claims is still second in
itself in relation to the foundation. It is in this sense that Ideas inaugurate
or ground the world of representation. As for the rebellious images which
lack resemblance [simulacra], these are eliminated, rejected and denounced
as ungrounded, false claimants.
In a second sense, once the world of representation is established, the
ground is no longer defined by the identical. The identical has become the

Conclusion

273

internal character of representation itself, while resemblance has become its
external relation with the thing. The identical now expresses a claim which
must in turn be grounded. For the object of the claim is no longer
difference understood as the quality, but that which is too large or too
small in the difference, the excess and the default - in other words, the
infinite. What must be grounded is the claim of representation to conquer
the infinite, in order that it be indebted to no one for the daughter and
capture the heart of difference. It is no longer the image which seeks to
conquer difference as this seemed to be originarily included in the identical,
but, on the contrary, identity which seeks to conquer that which it does not
include of difference. To ground no longer means to inaugurate and render
possible representation, but to render representation infinite. The ground
must now operate in the heart of representation, in order to extend its
limits to both the infinitely small and the infinitely large. This operation is
carried out by a method which ensures a monocentricity of all the possible
centres of finite representation, a convergence of all the finite points of
view of representation. This operation expresses sufficient reason. The
latter is not identity but, rather, the means of subordinating to the identical
and the other requirements of representation that part of difference which
escaped them in the first sense.
The two senses of the ground are nevertheless united in a third. In effect,
to ground is always to bend, to curve and recurve - to organise the order
of the seasons, the days and years. The object of the claim (the quality,
difference) finds itself placed in a circle; the arcs of the circle are
distinguished to the extent that the ground establishes moments of stasis
within qualitative becoming, stoppages in between the two extremes of
more and less. The claimants are distributed around the mobile circle, each
receiving the lot which corresponds to the worth of its life: a life is here
assimilated to a strict present which stakes its claim upon a portion of the
circle, which 'contracts' that portion and draws from it a loss or a gain in
the order of more and less according to its own progression or regression in
the hierarchy of images (another present or another life contracts another
portion). In Platonism we see clearly how the rotation of the circle and the
distribution of lots, cycle and metempsychosis, form a grounding test or
lottery. With Hegel again, however, all the possible beginnings and all the
presents are distributed within the unique incessant principle of a
grounding circle, which includes these in its centre while it distributes them
along its circumference. With Leibniz, too, compossibility itself is a circle
of convergence on which are distributed all the points of view, all the
presents of which the world is composed. To ground, in this third sense, is
to represent the present - in other words, to make the present arrive and
pass within representation (finite or infinite). The ground then appears as
an immemorial Memory or pure past, a past which itself was never present

274

Difference and Repetition

but which causes the present to pass, and in relation to which all the
presents coexist in a circle.
To ground is always to ground representation. How, then, are we to
explain the ambiguity that is essential to the ground? It is as though it were
attracted by the representation that it grounds (in these three senses), while
at the same time it is drawn towards a beyond; as though it vacillated
between a fall into the grounded and an engulfment in a groundlessness
[sans fond]. We saw this in the case of the Memory-ground: it tended to
represent itself as a former present and to enter into the circle which it
organised in principle. Is this not the most general characteristic of the
ground - namely, that the circle which it organises is also the vicious circle
of philosophical 'proof, in which representation must prove what proves
it, just as for Kant the possibility of experience serves as the proof of its
own proof? On the other hand, when transcendental memory overcomes
its vertigo and maintains the irreducibility of the pure past to any present
which passes in representation, it is only to see this pure past dissolve in
another manner, and to see unravelled the circle on which it too simply
distributes difference and repetition. In this manner, the second synthesis of
time which united Eros and Mnemosyne (Eros as the seeker after
memories, Mnemosyne as the treasure of the pure past) is overcome or
overturned in a third synthesis, one which brings together a desexualised
death instinct and an essentially amnesiac narcissistic ego within the form
of empty time. Moreover, how can the ground in its other senses be
protected from challenge at the hands of the simulacra and all the forces of
divergence and decentring which overturn the false distributions and the
false repartitions as they do the false circle and the false lottery? The world
of the ground is undermined by what it tries to exclude, by the simulacrum
which draws it in only to fragment it. When the ground in the first sense
appeals to the Idea, it is on condition that the latter be attributed an
identity that it does not have by itself, but which it derives solely from the
requirements of that which it claims to prove. The Idea no more implies an
identity than its process of actualisation is explicated by resemblance. An
entire multiplicity rumbles underneath the 'sameness' of the Idea. There is
no doubt that describing Ideas as substantive multiplicities, irreducible to
any same or One, showed us how sufficient reason was capable of
engendering itself independently of the requirements of representation,
along the pathways of the multiple as such, by determining the elements,
relations and singularities corresponding to a given Idea in terms of the
threefold principle of determinability, reciprocal determination and
complete determination. Upon precisely what ground, however, is this
multiple reason engendered and played out; in what unreason is it
submerged, and from what new type of game or lottery does it draw its
singularities and its distributions which remain irreducible to all that we
have just seen? In short, sufficient reason or the ground is strangely bent:

Conclusion

275

on the one hand, it leans towards what it grounds, towards the forms of
representation; on the other hand, it turns and plunges into a
groundlessness beyond the ground which resists all forms and cannot be
represented. If difference is the fiancee, Ariadne, then it passes from
Theseus to Dionysus, from the grounding principle to the universal
'ungrounding'..
The fact is that to ground is to determine the indeterminate, but this is
not a simple operation. When determination as such occurs, it does not
simply provide a form or impart form to a given matter on the basis of the
categories. Something of the ground rises to the surface, without assuming
any form but, rather, insinuating itself between the forms; a formless base,
an autonomous and faceless existence. This ground which is now on the
surface is called depth or groundlessness. Conversely, when they are
reflected in it, forms decompose, every model breaks down and all faces
perish, leaving only the abstract line as the determination absolutely
adequate to the indeterminate, just as the flash of lightning is equal to the
night, acid equal to the base, and distinction adequate to obscurity as a
whole: monstrosity. (A determination which is not opposed to the
indeterminate and does not limit it.) That is why the matter-form couple is
not sufficient to describe the mechanism of determination: matter is
already informed, form is not separable from the model of the species or
that of the morphe, and the whole is under the protection of the categories.
In fact, this couple is completely internal to representation, serving to
define its first state as this was established by Aristotle. It is already
progress to invoke the complementarity of force and the ground as the
sufficient reason of form, matter and their union. More profound and
threatening still is the couple formed by the abstract line and the
groundlessness which dissolves matters and breaks down models. Thought
understood as pure determination or abstract line must confront this
indeterminate, this groundlessness. This indeterminate or groundlessness is
also the animality peculiar to thought, the genitality of thought: not this or
that animal form, but stupidity [betise]. For if thought thinks only when
constrained or forced to do so, if it remains stupid so long as nothing
forces it to think, is it not also the existence of stupidity which forces it to
think, precisely the fact that it does not think so long as nothing forces it to
do so? Recall Heidegger's statement: 'What gives us most cause for thought
is the fact that we do not yet think.' Thought is the highest determination,
confronting stupidity as though face to face with the indeterminate which
is adequate to it. Stupidity (not error) constitutes the greatest weakness of
thought, but also the source of its highest power in that which forces it to
think. Such is the prodigious adventure of Bouvard and Pecuchet or the
play of sense and non-sense. As a result, determination and the
indeterminate remain equal and do not progress, the one always adequate
to the other - a strange repetition which ties them to the wheel, or rather

276

Difference and Repetition

to the same double pulpit. Shestov saw in Dostoyevsky the outcome of the
Critique of Pure Reason in the sense of both culmination and exit. Let us
for a moment be allowed to see Bouvard and Pecuchet as the outcome of
the Discourse on Method. Is the Cogito a stupidity? It is necessarily a
non-sense to the extent that this proposition purports to state both itself
and its sense. However, it is also a confusion (as Kant showed) to the
extent that the determination 'I think' purports to bear immediately on the
indeterminate existence 'I am', without specifying the form under which
the indeterminate is determinable. The subject of the Cartesian Cogito does
not think: it only has the possibility of thinking, and remains stupid at the
heart of that possibility. It lacks the form of the determinable: not a
specificity, not a specific form informing a matter, not a memory informing
a present, but the pure and empty form of time. It is the empty form of
time which introduces and constitutes Difference in thought, on the basis
of which it thinks, in the form of the difference between the indeterminate
and the determination. It is this form of time which distributes throughout
itself an I fractured by the abstract line, a passive self produced by a
groundlessness that it contemplates. It is this which engenders thought
within thought, for thought thinks only by means of difference, around this
point of ungrounding. It is difference or the form of the determinable
which causes thought to function - in other words, the entire machine of
determination and the indeterminate. The theory of thought is like
painting: it needs that revolution which took art from representation to
abstraction. This is the aim of a theory of thought without image.
Representation, especially when it becomes infinite, is imbued with a
presentiment of groundlessness. Because it has become infinite in order to
include difference within itself, however, it represents groundlessness as a
completely undifferenciated abyss, a universal lack of difference, an
indifferent black nothingness. For representation began by connecting
individuation to the form of the I and the matter of the self. In effect, for
representation the I is not only the superior form of individuation but the
principle of recognition and identification for all judgements of
individuality bearing upon things: 'It is the same wax ...'. For
representation, every individuality must be personal (I) and every
singularity individual (Self). Where one no longer says I, individuation also
ceases, and where individuation ceases, so too does all possible singularity.
Since groundlessness lacks both individuality and singularity, it is therefore
necessarily represented as devoid of any difference. We see this with
Schelling, with Schopenhauer, and even with the first Dionysus, that of the
Birth of Tragedy: their groundlessness cannot sustain difference. However,
the self in the form of passive self is only an event which takes place in
pre-existing fields of individuation: it contemplates and contracts the
individuating factors of such fields, and constitutes itself at the points of
resonance of their series. Similarly, the I in the form of a fractured I allows

Conclusion

277

to pass all the Ideas defined by their singularities, themselves prior to fields
of individuation.
Just as singularity as differential determination is pre-individual, so is
individuation as individuating difference an ante-I or ante-self. The world
of 'one' or 'they' is a world of impersonal individuations and pre-individual
singularities; a world which cannot be assimilated to everyday banality but
one in which, on the contrary, we encounter the final face of Dionysus, and
in which resonates the true nature of that profound and that
groundlessness which surrounds representation, and from which simulacra
emerge. (Hegel criticized Schelling for having surrounded himself with an
indifferent night in which all cows are black. What a presentiment of the
differences swarming behind us, however, when in the weariness and
despair of our thought without image we murmur 'the cows', 'they
exaggerate', etc.; how differenciated and differenciating is this blackness,
even though these differences remain unidentified and barely or
non-individuated; how many differences and singularities are distributed
like so many aggressions, how many simulacra emerge in this night which
has become white in order to compose the world of 'one' and 'they'.) The
ultimate, external illusion of representation is this illusion that results from
all its internal illusions - namely, that groundlessness should lack
differences, when in fact it swarms with them. What, after all, are Ideas,
with their constitutive multiplicity, if not these ants which enter and leave
through the fracture in the I?
Systems in which different relates to different through difference itself are
systems of simulacra. Such systems are intensive; they rest ultimately upon
the nature of intensive quantities, which precisely communicate through
their differences. The fact that conditions are necessary for such communication to take place (small difference, proximity, etc.) should lead us to believe not in a condition of prior resemblance, but only in the particular
properties of intensive quantities which may divide, but do so only in
changing their nature according to their own particular order. As for resemblance, it seems to us to result from the functioning of the system, like
an 'effect' which it would be wrong to take for a cause or condition. In
short, systems of simulacra must be described with the help of notions
which, from the outset, appear very different from the categories of representation:
(1) the depth or spatium in which intensities are organised;
(2) the disparate series these form, and the fields of individuation that they
outline (individuating factors);
(3) the 'dark precursor' which causes them to communicate;
(4) the linkages, internal resonances and forced movements which result;

278

Difference and Repetition

(5) the constitution of passive selves and larval subjects in the system, and
the formation of pure spatio-temporal dynamisms;
(6) the qualities and extensions, species and parts which form the double
differenciation of the system and cover over the preceding factors;
(7) the centres of envelopment which nevertheless testify to the persistence
of these factors in the developed world of qualities and extensities. Systems
of simulacra affirm divergence and decentring: the only unity, the only convergence of all the series, is an informal chaos in which they are all included. No series enjoys a privilege over others, none possesses the identity
of a model, none the resemblance of a copy. None is either opposed or
analogous to another. Each is constituted by differences, and communicates with the others through differences of differences. Crowned anarchies
are substituted for the hierarchies of representation; nomadic distributions
for the sedentary distributions of representation.
We saw how these systems were sites for the actualisation of Ideas. An
Idea, in this sense, is neither one nor multiple, but a multiplicity constituted
of differential elements, differential relations between those elements, and
singularities corresponding to those relations. These three dimensions,
elements, relations and singularities, constitute the three aspects of multiple
reason: determinability or the principle of quantitability, reciprocal
determination or the principle of qualitability, and complete determination
or the principle of potentiality. All three are projected in an ideal temporal
dimension which is that of progressive determination. There is therefore an
empiricism of the Idea. In the most diverse cases, we must ask whether we
are indeed confronted by ideal elements - in other words, elements without
figure or function, but reciprocally determined within a network of
differential relations (ideal non-localisable connections). For example, we
must ask whether any physical particles are elements of this kind and, if so,
which ones? Are biological genes such elements? Are phonemes? We must
also ask what distribution of singularities, what repartitioning of singular
and regular, distinctive and ordinary points, corresponds to the values of
the given relations. A singularity is the point of departure for a series which
extends over all the ordinary points of the system, as far as the region of
another singularity which itself gives rise to another series which may
either converge with or diverge from the first. Ideas have the power to
affirm divergence; they establish a kind of resonance between divergent
series. It is probable that the notions of singular and regular, distinctive
and ordinary, have for philosophy an ontological and epistemological
importance much greater than those of truth and falsity in relation to
representation: for what is called sense depends upon the distinction and
distribution of these shining points in the structure of a given Idea. It is
therefore the play of reciprocal determination from the point of view of its
relations, and of complete determination from the point of view of its
singularities, which makes an Idea in itself progressively determinable. This

Conclusion

279

play in the Idea is that of the differential: it runs throughout the Idea
understood as multiplicity and constitutes the method of vice-diction
(which Leibniz employed with such genius, even though he subordinated it
to illegitimate conditions of convergence, thereby indicating the presence of
a continuing pressure on the part of the requirements of representation).
Ideas thus defined possess no actuality. They are pure virtuality. All the
differential relations brought about by reciprocal determination, and all the
repartitions of singularities brought about by complete determination,
coexist according to their own particular order in the virtual multiplicities
which form Ideas. In the first place, Ideas are incarnated in fields of
individuation: the intensive series of individuating factors envelop ideal
singularities which are in themselves pre-individual; the resonances
between series put the ideal relations in play. Here too, Leibniz showed
profoundly that the individual essences were constituted on the ground of
these relations and these singularities. Second, Ideas are actualised in
species and parts, qualities and extensities which cover and develop these
fields of individuation. A species is made up of differential relations
between genes, just as the organic parts and the extensity of a body are
made up of actualised pre-individual singularities. However, the absolute
condition of non-resemblance must be emphasized: neither species nor
qualities resemble the differential relations that they actualise, any more
than the organic parts resemble the singularities. The possible and the real
resemble one another, but not the virtual and the actual. The incarnation
and the actualisation of Ideas no more rely upon similarity or proceed by
resemblance than Ideas themselves possess a given identity or may be
assimilated to the Identical.
If it is true that the two aspects of differentiation are constituted by
species and parts, qualities and extensities - or rather, division and the
determination of species, qualification and extension - then we should say
that Ideas are actualised by differentiation. For Ideas, to be actualised is to
be differentiated. In themselves and in their virtuality they are thus
completely undifferenciated. However, they are by no means
indeterminate: on the contrary, they are completely differentiated. (In this
sense the virtual is by no means a vague notion, but one which possesses
full objective reality; it cannot be confused with the possible which lacks
reality. As a result, whereas the possible is the mode of identity of concepts
within representation, the virtual is the modality of the differential at the
heart of Ideas.) The greatest importance must be attached to the 'distinctive
feature' tic as the symbol of Difference: differentiate and differentiate. The
totality of the system which brings into play the Idea, its incarnation and
its actualisation must be expressed in the complex notion of
'(indi)-differertf/dation'. It is as though everything has two odd,
dissymmetrical and dissimilar 'halves', the two halves of the Symbol, each
dividing itself in two: an ideal half submerged in the virtual and constituted

280

Difference and Repetition

on the one hand by differential relations and on the other by corresponding
singularities; an actual half constituted on the one hand by the qualities
actualising those relations and on the other by the parts actualising those
singularities. Individuation ensures the embedding of the two dissimilar
halves. The question of the ens omni modo determinatum must be posed as
follows: something which exists only in the Idea may be completely
determined (differentiated) and yet lack those determinations which
constitute actual existence (it is undifferenciated, not yet even
individuated). If we call the state of a completely differentiated Idea
'distinct', and the forms of quantitative and qualitative differenciation
'clear', then we must reject the rule of proportionality between the clear
and the distinct: Ideas as they exist in themselves are distinct-obscure.
Opposed to the clear-and-distinct of Apollonian representation, Ideas are
Dionysian, existing in an obscure zone which they themselves preserve and
maintain, in an indifferenciation which is nevertheless perfectly
differentiated, in a pre-individuality which is nevertheless singular: the
obscure zone of an intoxication which will never be calmed; the
distinct-obscure as the double colour with which philosophy paints the
world, with all the forces of a differential unconscious.
It is an error to see problems as indicative of a provisional and subjective
state, through which our knowledge must pass by virtue of its empirical
limitations. This error liberates negation and leads to the distortion of the
dialectic by substituting the non-being of the negative for the (non)-being
of problems. The 'problematic' is a state of the world, a dimension of the
system, and even its horizon or its home: it designates precisely the
objectivity of Ideas, the reality of the virtual. The problem as problem is
completely determined: to the extent that it is related to its perfectly
positive conditions, it is necessarily differentiated, even though it may not
yet be 'solved', and thereby remains undifferenciated. Or rather, it is solved
once it is posited and determined, but still objectively persists in the
solutions to which it gives rise and from which it differs in kind. That is
why the metaphysics of differential calculus finds its true signification
when it escapes the antinomy of the finite and the infinite in representation
in order to appear in the Idea as the first principle of the theory of
problems. 'Perplication' is what we called this state of Problems-Ideas,
with their multiplicities and coexistent varieties, their determination of
elements, their distribution of mobile singularities and their formation of
ideal series around these singularities. The word 'perplication' here
designates something other than a conscious state. 'Complication' is what
we called the state of chaos which retains and comprises all the actual
intensive series which correspond to these ideal series, incarnating them
and affirming their divergence. This chaos thus gathers in itself the being of
the problems and distributes it to all the systems and fields which form
within it the persistent value of the problematic. 'Implication' is what we

Conclusion

281

called the state of intensive series in so far as these communicate through
their differences and resonate in forming fields of individuation. Each is
'implicated' by the others, which it implicates in turn; they constitute the
'enveloping' and the 'enveloped', the 'solving' and the 'solved' of the
system. Finally, 'explication' is what we called the state of qualities and
extensities which cover and develop the system, between the basic series: it
is here that the differenciations and integrations which define the totality of
the final solution are traced out. The centres of envelopment still testify to
the persistence of the problems or the persistence of the values of
implication in the movement which explicates and solves them
[replication].
We saw this in the case of the Other in psychic systems. The Other is not
reducible to the individuating factors implicated in the system, but it
'represents' or stands for them in a certain sense. In effect, among the
developed qualities and extensities of the perceptual world, it envelops and
expresses possible worlds which do not exist outside their expression. In
this manner, it testifies to the persistent values of implication which confer
upon it an essential function in the represented world of perception. For if
the Other presupposes the organisation of fields of individuation, it is, on
the other hand, the condition under which we perceive distinct objects and
subjects in these fields, and perceive them as forming diverse kinds of
identifiable and recognisable individuals. That the Other should not,
properly speaking, be anyone, neither you nor I, signifies that it is a
structure which is implemented only by variable terms in different
perceptual worlds - me for you in yours, you for me in mine. It is not even
enough to see in the Other a specific or particular structure of the
perceptual world in general: in fact, it is a structure which grounds and
ensures the overall functioning of this world as a whole.
Notions necessary for the description of this world - such as those of
form-ground, profile-unity of the object, depth-length, horizon-focus would remain empty and inapplicable if the Other were not there to give
expression to those possible worlds in which that which is (for us) in the
background is pre-perceived or sub-perceived as a possible form; that
which is in depth as a possible length, etc. The delineation of objects, the
transitions as well as the ruptures, the passage from one object to another,
and even the fact that one world disappears in favour of another, the fact
that there is always something else implicated which remains to be
explicated or developed - all this is made possible only by the
Other-structure and its expressive power in perception. In short, it is the
Other-structure that ensures individuation within the perceptual world. It
is not the I, nor the self: on the contrary, these need this structure in order
to be perceived as individualities. Everything happens as though the Other
integrated the individuating factors and pre-individual singularities within
the limits of objects and subjects, which are then offered to representation

282

Difference and Repetition

as perceivers or perceived. As a result, in order to rediscover the
individuating factors as they are in the intensive series along with the
pre-individual singularities as they are in the Idea, this path must be
followed in reverse so that, departing from the subjects which give effect to
the Other-structure, we return as far as this structure in itself, thus
apprehending the Other as No-one, then continue further, following the
bend in sufficient reason until we reach those regions where the
Other-structure no longer functions, far from the objects and subjects that
it conditions, where singularities are free to be deployed or distributed
within pure Ideas, and individuating factors to be distributed in pure
intensity. In this sense, it is indeed true that the thinker is necessarily
solitary and solipsistic.
For where do Ideas come from, with their variations of relations and
their distributions of singularities? Here, too, we follow the path to the
bend at which 'reason' plunges into the beyond. The ultimate origin was
always assimilated to a solitary and divine game. There are several ways to
play, however, and collective and human games do not resemble this
solitary divine game. Several characteristics allow us to oppose the human
and the ideal as two species of game. First, human games presuppose
pre-existing categorical rules. Second, these rules serve to determine the
probabilities - in other words, the winning and losing 'hypotheses'. Third,
these games never affirm the whole of chance: on the contrary, they
fragment it and, for each case, subtract or remove the consequences of the
throw from chance, since they assign this or that loss or gain as though it
were necessarily tied to a given hypothesis. Finally, this is why human
games proceed by sedentary distributions: in effect, the prior categorical
rule here plays the invariant role of the Same and enjoys a metaphysical or
moral necessity; as such, it subsumes opposing hypotheses by establishing a
corresponding series of numerically distinct turns or throws which are
supposed to effect a distribution among them; the outcomes or results of
these throws are distributed according to their consequences following a
hypothetical necessity - in other words, according to the hypothesis carried
out. This is sedentary distribution, in which the fixed sharing out of a
distributed occurs in accordance with a proportion fixed by rules. This
false and human manner of playing does not hide its presuppositions,
which are moral presuppositions, the hypothesis here being that of Good
and Evil, and the game an apprenticeship in morality. Pascal's wager is the
model for this bad game, with its manner of fragmenting chance and
distributing the morsels in order to separate out the modes of human
existence, under the constant rule of the existence of a God who is never
put in question. This conception of a game completely inscribed in the grid
of necessity, of the hypothetical and hypothetical necessity (categorical or
apodictic principle, hypothesis, consequence), reappears from the Platonic
lottery to the Leibnizian game of chess in On the Ultimate Origination of

Conclusion

283

Things. This game is indistinguishable from the practice of representation,
of which it presents all the elements: the superior identity of the principle,
the opposition of hypotheses, the resemblance of numerically distinct
throws, and proportion in the relation between the hypothesis and the
consequence.
The divine game is quite different - that of which Heraclitus, perhaps,
speaks; that which Mallarme evokes with such religious fear and
repentance, and Nietzsche with such decisiveness - for us it is the most
difficult game to understand, impossible to deal with in the world of
representation. First, there is no pre-existent rule, since the game includes
its own rules. As a result, every time, the whole of chance is affirmed in a
necessarily winning throw. Nothing is exempt from the game:
consequences are not subtracted from chance by connecting them with a
hypothetical necessity which would tie them to a determinate fragment; on
the contrary, they are adequate to the whole of chance, which retains and
subdivides all possible consequences. The different throws can then no
longer be said to be numerically distinct: each necessarily winning throw
entails the reproduction of the act of throwing under another rule which
still draws all its consequences from among the consequences of the
preceding throw. Every time, the different throws are distinguished not
numerically but formally, the different rules being the forms of a single
ontologically unique throw, the same across all occasions. The different
outcomes are no longer separated according to the distribution of the
hypotheses which they carry out, but distribute themselves in the open
space of the unique and non-shared throw: nomadic rather than sedentary
distribution. A pure Idea of play - in other words, of a game which would
be nothing else but play instead of being fragmented, limited and intercut
with the work of men. (What is the human game closest to this solitary
divine game? As Rimbaud said: look for H, the work of art.) The
variations of relations and the distributions of singularities as these occur
in the Idea have no origin except these rules which are formally distinct for
this ontologically unique throw. This is the point at which the ultimate
origin is overturned into an absence of origin (in the always displaced circle
of the eternal return). An aleatory point is displaced through all the points
on the dice, as though one time for all times. These different throws which
invent their own rules and compose the unique throw with multiple forms
and within the eternal return are so many imperative questions subtended
by a single response which leaves them open and never closes them. They
animate ideal problems, determining their relations and singularities.
Moreover, by the intermediary of these problems they inspire the outcomes
- in other words, the differenciated solutions which incarnate these
relations and singularities. The world of the 'will', in which the entire
positivity of Ideas is developed between the affirmations of chance
(imperative and decisive questions) and the resultant affirmations to which

284

Difference and Repetition

these give rise (decisive resolutions or cases of solution). The game of the
problematic and the imperative has replaced that of the hypothetical and
the categorical; the game of difference and repetition has replaced that of
the Same and representation. The dice are thrown against the sky, with all
the force of displacement of the aleatory point, with their imperative points
like lightning, forming ideal problem-constellations in the sky. They fall
back to Earth with all the force of the victorious solutions which bring
back the throw. It is a game on two tables. How could there not be a
fracture at the limit or along the hinge between the two tables? And how
can we recognise on the first a substantial I identical to itself, on the second
a continuous self similar to itself? The identity of the player has
disappeared, as has the resemblance of the one who pays the price or
profits from the consequences. The fracture or hinge is the form of empty
time, the Aion through which pass the throws of the dice. On one side,
nothing but an I fractured by that empty form. On the other, nothing but a
passive self always dissolved in that empty form. A broken Earth
corresponds to a fractured sky. 'O sky above me, you pure, lofty sky! This
is now your purity to me ... that you are to me a dance floor for divine
chances, that you are to me a gods' table for divine dice and dicers!' To
which the reply on the other table: 'If ever I have played dice with gods at
their table, the earth, so that the earth trembled and broke open and
streams of fire snorted forth: for the earth is a table of the gods, and
trembling with creative new words and the dice throws of the gods ...'.
Both together, however, the fractured sky and the broken earth, do not
support the negative but vomit it out through that which fractures or
breaks them; they expel all the forms of negation, including precisely those
which represent the false game: 'A throw you made had failed. But what of
that, you dice-throwers! You have not learned to play and mock as a man
ought to play and mock!'.
We have continually proposed descriptive notions. These describe actual
series, or virtual Ideas, or indeed the groundlessness from which everything
comes: intensity-linkage-resonance-forced movement; differential and
singularity; complication-implication-explication; differentiation-individuationdifferenciation; question-problem-solution, etc. None of this, however,
amounts to a list of categories. It is pointless to claim that a list of
categories can be open in principle: it can be in fact, but not in principle.
For categories belong to the world of representation, where they constitute
forms of distribution according to which Being is repartitioned among
beings following the rules of sedentary proportionality. That is why
philosophy has often been tempted to oppose notions of a quite different
kind to categories, notions which are really open and which betray an
empirical and pluralist sense of Ideas: 'existential' as against essential,
percepts as against concepts, or indeed the list of empirico-ideal notions
that we find in Whitehead, which makes Process and Reality one of the

Conclusion

285

greatest books of modern philosophy. Such notions, which must be called
'phantastical' in so far as they apply to phantasms and simulacra, are
distinguished from the categories of representation in several respects. First,
they are conditions of real experience, and not only of possible experience.
In this sense, because they are no larger than the conditioned, they reunite
the two parts of Aesthetics so unfortunately dissociated: the theory of the
forms of experience and that of the work of art as experimentation. This
aspect, however, does not yet allow us to determine the difference in kind
between these two types of notions. Second, these types preside over
completely distinct, irreducible and incompatible distributions: the
nomadic distributions carried out by the phantastical notions as opposed to
the sedentary distributions of the categories. The former, in effect, are not
universals like the categories, nor are they the hie et nunc or now here, the
diversity to which categories apply in representation. They are complexes
of space and time, no doubt transportable but on condition that they
impose their own scenery, that they set up camp there where they rest
momentarily: they are therefore the objects of an essential encounter rather
than of recognition. The best word to designate these is undoubtedly that
forged by Samuel Butler: erewhon. They are erewhons. Kant had the
liveliest presentiment of such notions participating in a phantasmagoria of
the imagination, irreducible both to the universality of the concept and to
the particularity of the now here. For while synthesis is exercised upon the
diverse here and now, and the synthetic units or categories are continuous
universals which condition all possible experience, the schemata are a
priori determinations of space and time which transport real complexes of
place and time to all places and times, but in a discontinuous manner. The
Kantian schemata would take flight and point beyond themselves in the
direction of a conception of differential Ideas, if they were not unduly
subordinated to the categories which reduce them to the status of simple
mediations in the world of representation. Further still, beyond the world
of representation, we suppose that a whole problem of Being is brought
into play by these differences between the categories and the nomadic or
phantastical notions, the problem of the manner in which being is
distributed among beings: is it, in the last instance, by analogy or
univocality?
When we consider repetition as an object of representation, we
understand it in terms of identity, but we also then explain it in a negative
manner. In effect, the identity of a concept does not qualify a repetition
unless, at the same time, a negative force (whether of limitation or of
opposition) prevents the concept from being further specified or
differenciated in relation to the multiplicity that it subsumes. As we saw,
matter unites the following two characteristics: it allows a concept which is
absolutely identical in as many exemplars as there are 'times' or 'cases';
and it prevents this concept from being further specified by virtue of its

286

Difference and Repetition

natural poverty, or its natural state of unconsciousness or alienation.
Matter, therefore, is the identity of spirit - in other words, of the concept,
but in the form of an alienated concept, without self-consciousness and
outside itself. An essential feature of representation is that it takes a bare
and material repetition as its model, a repetition understood in terms of the
Same and explained in terms of the negative. Is this not, however, another
antinomy of representation: namely, that it can represent repetition only in
this manner, and that it nevertheless cannot represent it in this manner
without contradiction? For this bare and material model is, properly
speaking, unthinkable. (How can consciousness, which has only a single
presence, represent to itself the unconscious?) Identical elements repeat
only on condition that there is an independence of 'cases' or a discontinuity
of 'times' such that one appears only when the other has disappeared:
within representation, repetition is indeed forced to undo itself even as it
occurs. Or rather, it does not occur at all. Repetition in itself cannot occur
under these conditions. That is why, in order to represent repetition,
contemplative souls must be installed here and there; passive selves,
sub-representative syntheses and habituses capable of contracting the cases
or the elements into one another, in order that they can subsequently be
reconstituted within a space or time of conservation which belongs to
representation itself. The consequences of this are very important: since
this contraction is a difference or a modification of the contemplative soul
- indeed, the modification of this soul, the only modification which truly
belongs to it and after which it dies - it appears that the most material
repetition occurs only by means of and within a difference which is drawn
off by contraction, by means of and within a soul which draws a difference
from repetition. Repetition is therefore represented, but on the condition of
a soul of a quite different nature: contemplative and contracting, but
non-representing and non-represented. Matter is, in effect, populated or
covered by such souls, which provide it with a depth without which it
would present no bare repetition on the surface. Nor should we believe
that the contraction is external to what it contracts, or that this difference
is external to the repetition: it is an integral part of it, the constituent part,
the depth without which nothing would repeat on the surface.
Everything then changes. If a difference is necessarily (in depth) part of
the superficial repetition from which it is drawn, the question is: Of what
does this difference consist? This difference is a contraction, but in what
does this contraction consist? Is it not itself the most contracted degree or
the most concentrated level of a past which coexists with itself at all levels
of relaxation and in all degrees? This was Bergson's splendid hypothesis:
the entire past at every moment but at diverse degrees and levels, of which
the present is only the most contracted, the most concentrated. The present
difference is then no longer, as it was above, a difference drawn from a
superficial repetition of moments in such a way as to sketch a depth

Conclusion

287

without which the latter would not exist. Now, it is this depth itself which
develops itself for itself. Repetition is no longer a repetition of successive
elements or external parts, but of totalities which coexist on different levels
or degrees. Difference is no longer drawn from an elementary repetition
but is between the levels or degrees of a repetition which is total and
totalising every time; it is displaced and disguised from one level to
another, each level including its own singularities or privileged points.
What, then, is to be said of the elementary repetition which proceeds by
moments, except that it is itself the most relaxed level of this total
repetition? And what is to be said of the difference drawn from the
elementary repetition, except that it is, on the contrary, the most
contracted degree of this total repetition? Difference itself is therefore
between two repetitions: between the superficial repetition of the identical
and instantaneous external elements that it contracts, and the profound
repetition of the internal totalities of an always variable past, of which it is
the most contracted level. This is how difference has two faces, or the
synthesis of time has two aspects: one, Habitus, turned towards the first
repetition which it renders possible; the other, Mnemosyne, offered up to
the second repetition from which it results.
It therefore amounts to the same thing to say that material repetition has
a secret and passive subject, which does nothing but in which everything
takes place, and that there are two repetitions, of which the material is the
most superficial. Perhaps it is incorrect to attribute all the characteristics of
the other to Memory, even if by memory is meant the transcendental
faculty of a pure past which invents no less than it remembers. Memory is,
nevertheless, the first form in which the opposing characteristics of the two
repetitions appear. One of these repetitions is of the same, having no
difference but that which is subtracted or drawn off; the other is of the
Different, and includes difference. One has fixed terms and places; the
other essentially includes displacement and disguise. One is negative and by
default; the other is positive and by excess. One is of elements, extrinsic
parts, cases and times; the other is of variable internal totalities, degrees
and levels. One involves succession in fact, the other coexistence in
principle. One is static; the other dynamic. One is extensive, the other
intensive. One is ordinary; the other distinctive and involving singularities.
One is horizontal; the other vertical. One is developed and must be
explicated; the other is enveloped and must be interpreted. One is a
repetition of equality and symmetry in the effect; the other is a repetition of
inequality as though it were a repetition of asymmetry in the cause. One is
repetition of mechanism and precision; the other repetition of selection and
freedom. One is bare repetition which can be masked only afterwards and
in addition; the other is a clothed repetition of which the masks, the
displacements and the disguises are the first, last and only elements.
We must draw two consequences from these opposing characteristics.

288

Difference and Repetition

First, it is at the same time and from the same point of view that we claim
to understand repetition in terms of the Same and explain it in negative
fashion. Here, there is a confusion in the philosophy of repetition which
corresponds exactly to that which compromised the philosophy of
difference. In effect, the concept of difference was defined by the moment
or the manner in which it was inscribed within the concept in general. The
concept of difference was thereby confused with a simply conceptual
difference, and difference was thereby understood within identity, since the
concept in general was only the manner in which the principle of identity
was deployed within representation. Repetition, for its part, could no
longer be defined as other than a difference without concept. This
definition obviously continued to presuppose the identity of the concept for
that which was repeated, but instead of inscribing the difference within the
concept, it placed it outside the concept in the form of a numerical
difference, and placed the concept itself outside itself, as existing in as
many exemplars as there were numerically distinct cases or times. It
thereby invoked an external force, a form of exteriority capable of putting
difference outside the identical concept, and the identical concept outside
itself, by blocking its specification, in the same way as an internal force or
form of inferiority capable of putting difference into the concept and the
concept into itself by means of a continued specification was invoked
earlier. It was therefore at the same time and from the same point of view
that the supposed identity of the concept integrated and internalised
difference in the form of conceptual difference, while, on the contrary,
projecting repetition as a correlative difference, but without concept and
explained negatively or by default. However, if everything is related in this
chain of confusions, so must everything be related in the rectification of
difference and repetition. Ideas are not concepts; they are a form of
eternally positive differential multiplicity, distinguished from the identity of
concepts. Instead of representing difference by subordinating it to the
identity of concepts, and thereby to the resemblance of perception, the
opposition of predicates and the analogy of judgement, they liberate it and
cause it to evolve in positive systems in which different is related to
different, making divergence, disparity and decentring so many objects of
affirmation which rupture the framework of conceptual representation.
The powers of repetition include displacement and disguise, just as
difference includes power of divergence and decentring. The one no less
than the other belongs to Ideas, for Ideas no more have an inside than they
do an outside (they are erewhons). The Idea makes one and the same
problem of difference and repetition. There is an excess and an
exaggeration peculiar to Ideas which makes difference and repetition the
combined object, the 'simultaneous' of the Idea. It is from this excess
peculiar to Ideas that concepts unjustly profit, but in so doing betray and
distort the nature of Ideas: in effect, concepts repartition this ideal excess

Conclusion

289

into two parts, that of conceptual difference and that of difference without
concept; that of the becoming-equal or the becoming-similar to its own
proper identity on the part of the concept, and that of the condition by
default which continues to presuppose this same identity, but as though
blocked. Nevertheless, if we ask what blocks the concept, we see clearly
that it is never some lack, default or opposing thing. It is not a nominal
limitation of the concept, nor a natural indifference of space and time, nor
a spiritual opposition on the part of the unconscious. It is always the excess
of the Idea which constitutes the superior positivity that arrests the concept
or overturns the requirements of representation. Moreover, it is at the same
time and from the same point of view that difference ceases to be reduced
to a simply conceptual difference, and repetition establishes its most
profound link with difference and finds a positive principle both for itself
and for this link. (Beyond memory, the evident paradox of the death
instinct lay in the fact that, despite its name, it seemed to us from the outset
to be endowed with a double role: to include all the force of the different in
repetition, and at the same time to provide the most positive and most
excessive account of repetition.)
The second consequence is that it is not enough to oppose two
repetitions, one bare and material in accordance with the identity and
default of the concept, the other clothed, psychical and metaphysical in
accordance with the difference and excess of the always positive Idea. This
second repetition should be seen as the 'reason' of the first. The clothed
and living, vertical repetition which includes difference should be regarded
as the cause, of which the bare, material and horizontal repetition (from
which a difference is merely drawn off) is only an effect. We saw this
repeatedly in the three cases of concepts of freedom, concepts of nature
and nominal concepts: every time, the material repetition results from the
more profound repetition which unfolds in depth and produces it as an
effect, like an external envelope or a detachable shell which loses all
meaning and all capacity to reproduce itself once it is no longer animated
by the other repetition which is its cause. In this manner, the clothed lies
underneath the bare, and produces or excretes it as though it were the
effect of its own secretion. The secret repetition surrounds itself with a
mechanical and bare repetition as though this were the final barrier which
indicates here and there the outer limits of the differences that it
communicates within a mobile system. It is always in one and the same
movement that repetition includes difference (not as an accidental and
extrinsic variant but at its heart, as the essential variant of which it is
composed, the displacement and disguise which constitute it as a difference
that is itself divergent and displaced) and that it must receive a positive
principle which gives rise to material and indifferent repetition (the
abandoned snake skin, the envelope emptied of what it implicates, the
epidermis which lives and dies only from its own soul or latent content).

290

Difference and Repetition

This is the case with concepts of nature. Nature would never repeat, its
repetitions would always be hypothetical, dependent upon the good will of
the experimenter and the savant, if it were reducible to the superficiality of
matter, if that matter itself did not involve a depth or side of Nature in
which living and mortal repetition unfolds and becomes positive and
imperative, on condition that it displaces and disguises an ever-present
difference which makes repetition an evolution as such. One savant does
not make a spring, nor a series of savants the return of the seasons. The
Same would never leave itself to be distributed across several 'equivalents'
in cyclical alternation if difference were not displacing itself in these cycles
and disguising itself in this same, rendering repetition imperative but
offering only the bare to the eyes of the external observer who believes that
the variants are not the essential and have little effect upon that which they
nevertheless constitute from within.
This is even more true of concepts of freedom and nominal concepts.
The words and actions of men give rise to bare, material repetitions, but as
effects of more profound repetitions of a different kind ('effects' in a
causal, optical and vestiary sense). Repetition is pathos and the philosophy
of repetition is pathology. However, there are so many pathologies, so
many repetitions entwined in one another. When an obsessive repeats a
ceremony once, twice; or when he repeats an enumeration, 1, 2, 3, ... he
carries out a repetition of elements in extension which both translate and
ward off another, vertical and intensive repetition, that of a past which is
displaced each time or with each number, and is disguised in the overall set
of numbers and times. It is the equivalent of a cosmological proof in
pathology: the horizontal linkage of causes and effects in the world
requires a totalising, extra-worldly first Cause as the vertical cause of the
causes and effects. We repeat twice simultaneously, but not the same
repetition: once mechanically and materially in breadth, and once
symbolically and by means of simulacra in depth; first we repeat the parts,
then we repeat the whole on which the parts depend. These two repetitions
do not take place in the same dimension, they coexist: one is a repetition of
instants, the other of the past; one is a repetition of elements, the other is
totalising; and the most profound and 'productive' is obviously not the
most visible or the one which produces the most 'effect'. In general, the
two repetitions enter into so many different relations that it would require
an extremely systematic clinical study, of a kind yet to be undertaken, in
order to distinguish the cases which correspond to their possible
combinations. Consider the gestural or linguistic repetitions and iterations
or stereotypical behaviours associated with dementia and schizophrenia.
These no longer seem to manifest a will capable of investing an object
within the context of a ceremony; rather, they function like reflexes which
indicate a general breakdown of investment (whence the impossibility for
patients to repeat at will in the tests to which they are subjected). It is

Conclusion

291

nevertheless the case that 'involuntary' repetition depends not upon
aphasic or amnesiac difficulties, as a negative explanation would suggest,
but on subcortical lesions and 'thymic' disorders. Is this another way of
explaining repetition negatively, as though the patient reverted through
degeneration to primitive, non-integrated circuits? In fact, in cases of
iterations and even of stereotypes, we should note the constant presence of
contractions, which show up at least in parasitic vowels or consonants.
Contraction continues to have two aspects: one by which it bears upon a
physical element of repetition which it modifies, the other by which it
concerns a psychic totality which is repeatable in different degrees. In this
sense, we can recognise a persistent intentionality in every stereotype, even
in a schizophrenic grinding of the jaws. This intentionality amounts to
investing the entire psychic life in a fragment, gesture or word, in the
absence of any other object of investment, these in turn becoming the
elements of the other repetition: for example, the patient who turns ever
more rapidly on one foot, the other leg extended in such a way as to repel
any person approaching from behind, thereby miming his horror of women
and his fear of being surprised by them. The properly pathological aspect
lies in the fact that, on the one hand, the contraction no longer ensures a
resonance between two or more levels, simultaneously 'playable' in
differenciated manners, but rather crushes them all and compresses them
into the stereotypical fragment. On the other hand, contraction no longer
draws from the element a difference or modification which would permit
repetition within a space and time organised by the will. On the contrary,
it makes the modification itself the element to be repeated, taking itself as
object in an acceleration which precisely renders impossible any bare
repetition of elements. Thus, in these cases of iteration and stereotype we
see not an independence of purely mechanical repetition, but rather a
specific difficulty in the relation between the two repetitions, and in the
process by which one is and remains the cause of the other.
Repetition is the power of language, and far from being explicable in
negative fashion by some default on the part of nominal concepts, it
implies an always excessive Idea of poetry. The coexistent levels of a
psychic totality may be considered to be actualised in differenciated series,
according to the singularities which characterise them. These series are
liable to resonate under the influence of a fragment or 'dark precursor'
which stands for this totality in which all the levels coexist: each series is
therefore repeated in the other, at the same time as the precursor is
displaced from one level to another and disguised in all the series. It
therefore does not belong to any level or degree. In the case of verbal
series, we call a word which designates the sense of a preceding word a
'word of higher degree'. However, the linguistic precursor, the esoteric or
poetic word par excellence (object = x) transcends all degrees to the extent
that it purports to say both itself and its sense, while appearing as always

292

Difference and Repetition

displaced and disguised nonsense (the secret word which has no sense:
Snark or Blituri...). All the verbal series themselves therefore form so many
'synonyms' in relation to this word, while it plays the role of a 'homonym'
for all the series. It is therefore by virtue of its entirely positive and ideal
power that language organises its entire system in the form of a clothed
repetition. Of course, it goes without saying that real poems are not
supposed to be adequate to this Idea of poetry. In order for a real poem to
emerge, we must 'identify' the dark precursor and confer upon it at least a
nominal identity - in short, we must provide the resonance with a body;
then, as in a song, the differenciated series are organised into couplets or
verses, while the precursor is incarnated in an antiphon or chorus. The
couplets turn around the chorus. What combines nominal concepts and
concepts of freedom better than a song? A bare repetition is produced
under these conditions: at once in the return of the chorus which represents
the object = x, and in certain aspects of the differenciated couplets which
represent in turn the interpenetration of the series (measure, rhyme, or even
verses rhyming with the chorus). In some cases almost bare repetitions take
the place of synonymy and homonymy, as they do with Peguy and
Raymond Roussel. Here, the genius of poetry identifies itself with these
brute repetitions. Nevertheless, this genius belongs in the first place to the
Idea, and to the manner in which it produces brute repetitions on the basis
of a more secret repetition.
The distinction between the two repetitions, however, is still not enough.
The second repetition still participates in all the ambiguities of memory
and ground. It includes difference, but includes it only between the degrees
or levels. As we saw, it appears first in the form of the circles of the past
coexistent in themselves; then in the form of a circle of coexistence of the
past and the present; and finally in the form of a circle of all the presents
which pass and which coexist in relation to the object = x. In short,
metaphysics makes a circle of the physical or physis. How, then, are we to
avoid this profound repetition being hidden by the bare repetitions that it
inspires, and succumbing to the illusion of a primacy of brute repetition? In
the same movement, the ground falls back into the representation of what
it grounds, while the circles begin to turn in the manner of the Same. For
this reason, it always seemed to us that the circles were unravelled in a
third synthesis, where the ground was abolished in a groundlessness, the
Ideas were separated from the forms of memory, and the displacement and
disguise of repetition engaged divergence and decentring, the powers of
difference. Beyond the cycles, the at first straight line of the empty form of
time; beyond memory, the death instinct; beyond resonance, forced
movement. Beyond bare repetition and clothed repetition, beyond that
from which difference is drawn and that which includes it, a repetition
which 'makes' the difference. Beyond the grounded and grounding
repetitions, a repetition of ungrounding on which depend both that which

Conclusion

293

enchains and that which liberates, that which dies and that which lives
within repetition. Beyond physical repetition and psychic or metaphysical
repetition, an ontological repetition? The role of the latter would not be to
suppress the other two but, on the one hand, to distribute difference to
them (in the form of difference drawn off or included); and, on the other
hand, to produce the illusion by which they are affected while nevertheless
preventing them from developing the related error into which they fall. In a
certain sense, the ultimate repetition, the ultimate theatre, therefore
encompasses everything; while in another sense it destroys everything; and
in yet another sense selects among everything.
Perhaps the highest object of art is to bring into play simultaneously all
these repetitions, with their differences in kind and rhythm, their respective
displacements and disguises, their divergences and decentrings; to embed
them in one another and to envelop one or the other in illusions the 'effect'
of which varies in each case. Art does not imitate, above all because it
repeats; it repeats all the repetitions, by virtue of an internal power (an
imitation is a copy, but art is simulation, it reverses copies into simulacra).
Even the most mechanical, the most banal, the most habitual and the most
stereotyped repetition finds a place in works of art, it is always displaced in
relation to other repetitions, and it is subject to the condition that a
difference may be extracted from it for these other repetitions. For there is
no other aesthetic problem than that of the insertion of art into everyday
life. The more our daily life appears standardised, stereotyped and subject
to an accelerated reproduction of objects of consumption, the more art
must be injected into it in order to extract from it that little difference
which plays simultaneously between other levels of repetition, and even in
order to make the two extremes resonate - namely, the habitual series of
consumption and the instinctual series of destruction and death. Art
thereby connects the tableau of cruelty with that of stupidity, and discovers
underneath consumption a schizophrenic clattering of the jaws, and
underneath the most ignoble destructions of war, still more processes of
consumption. It aesthetically reproduces the illusions and mystifications
which make up the real essence of this civilisation, in order that Difference
may at last be expressed with a force of anger which is itself repetitive and
capable of introducing the strangest selection, even if this is only a
contraction here and there - in other words, a freedom for the end of a
world. Each art has its interrelated techniques or repetitions, the critical
and revolutionary power of which may attain the highest degree and lead
us from the sad repetitions of habit to the profound repetitions of memory,
and then to the ultimate repetitions of death in which our freedom is
played out. We simply wish to offer three examples, however diverse and
disparate these may be: first, the manner in which all the repetitions coexist
in modern music (such as the development of the leitmotiv in Berg's
Wozzeck); second, the manner in which, within painting, Pop Art pushed

294

Difference and Repetition

the copy, copy of the copy, etc., to that extreme point at which it reverses
and becomes a simulacrum (such as Warhol's remarkable 'serial' series, in
which all the repetitions of habit, memory and death are conjugated); and
finally the novelistic manner in which little modifications are torn from the
brute and mechanical repetitions of habit, which in turn nourish repetitions
of memory and ultimately lead to repetitions in which life and death are in
play, and risk reacting upon the whole and introducing into it a new
selection, all these repetitions coexisting and yet being displaced in relation
to one another (Butor's La modification-, or indeed Last Year at
Marienbad, which shows the particular techniques of repetition which
cinema can deploy or invent).
Are not all the repetitions ordered in the pure form of time? In effect, this
pure form or straight line is defined by an order which distributes a before,
a during and an after, by a totality which incorporates all three in the simultaneity of its a priori synthesis; and by a series which makes a type of
repetition correspond to each. From this point of view, we must essentially
distinguish between the pure form and the empirical contents. The empirical contents are mobile and succeed one another, while the a priori determinations of time, on the contrary, are fixed or held, as though in a photo
or a freeze-frame, coexisting within the static synthesis which distinguishes
a redoubtable action in relation to the image. This action may be anything
from an empirical point of view, or at least its occasion may be found in
any empirical circumstances (action = x); all that is required is that the circumstances allow its 'isolation' and that it is sufficiently embedded in the
moment such that its image extends over time as a whole and becomes, as
it were, the a priori symbol of the form. On the other hand, with regard to
the empirical contents of time, we distinguish the first, second, third ... in
their indefinite succession: it may be that this succession can be defined as
a cycle, and that repetition is therefore impossible, either in an intracyclic
form in which 2, repeats 1, 3 repeats 2 and so on; or in an intercyclic form
in which 1' repeats 1, 2' repeats 2, 3' repeats 3. (Even if an indefinite succession of cycles is supposed, the first time will be defined as the Same or
the undifferenciated, either at the origin of all cycles or in between two cycles.) In any case, the repetition remains external to something which is repeated and must be supposed primary; a frontier is established between a
first time and repetition itself. The question whether the first time escapes
repetition (in which case it is referred to as 'once and for all'), or, on the
contrary, is repeated within a cycle or from one cycle to another, depends
entirely upon the reflection of an observer. The first time being regarded as
the Same, the question is asked whether the second displays sufficient resemblance with the first to be identified as the Same again: a question
which can be answered only by the establishment of relations of analogy

Conclusion

295

within judgement, taking into account the variations in empirical circumstances (is Luther the analogue of Paul, the French Revolution the analogue
of the Roman republic?). Things are very different, however, from the
point of view of the pure form or straight line of time. Now, each determination (the first, second and third; the before, during and after) is already
repetition in itself, in the pure form of time and in relation to the image of
the action. The before or the first time is no less repetition than the second
or the third time. Each time being in itself repetition, the problem is no
longer susceptible to the analogies of reflection on the part of a supposed
observer; rather, it must be lived as a problem of the internal conditions of
the action in relation to the redoubtable image. Repetition no longer bears
(hypothetically) upon a first time which escapes it, and in any case remains
external to it: repetition bears upon repetitions, upon modes and types of
repetition, in an imperative manner. The frontier or 'difference' is therefore
singularly displaced: it is no longer between the first time and the others,
between the repeated and the repetition, but between these types of repetition. It is repetition itself that is repeated. Furthermore, 'once and for all'
no longer qualifies a first time which would escape repetition, but on the
contrary a type of repetition which opposes another type operating an infinity of times (in this manner Christian repetition is opposed to atheist
repetition, and Kierkegaardian to Nietzschean, for in the case of Kierkegaard it is repetition itself which takes place once and for all, whereas according to Nietzsche it operates for all times. Nor is this simply a
numerical difference; it is, rather, a fundamental difference between these
two kinds of repetition).
How are we to explain the fact that once repetition bears upon
repetitions, once it assembles them all and introduces difference between
them, it thereby acquires a formidable power of selection? Everything
depends on the distribution of repetitions in the form, the order, the
totality and the series of time. This distribution is extremely complex. At a
first level, the repetition of the Before is defined by default or in a negative
manner: one repeats because one does not know, because one does not
remember, etc: or because one is not capable of performing the action
(whether this action remains to be performed or is already performed).
'One' therefore signifies here the unconscious of the Id as the first power of
repetition. The repetition of the During is defined by a becoming-similar or
a becoming-equal: one becomes capable of performing the action, one
becomes equal to the image of the action, the 'one' now signifying the
unconscious of the Ego, its metamorphosis, its projection in an I or ego
ideal in the form of the second power of repetition. However, since to
become similar or equal is always to become similar or equal to sojrnething
that is supposed to be identical in itself, or supposed to enjoy the privilege
of an originary identity, it appears that the image of the action to which
one becomes similar or equal stands here only for the identity of the

296

Difference and Repetition

concept in general, or that of the I. At this level, the first two repetitions
gather together and distribute amongst themselves the characteristics of the
negative and the identical, which, as we have seen, constitute the limits of
representation. At another level, the hero repeats the first, that of the
Before, as though in a dream and in a bare, mechanical and stereotypical
manner which constitutes the comic; yet this repetition would be nothing if
it did not refer to something hidden or disguised in its own series, capable
of introducing contractions therein as though it were a hesitant Habitus in
which the other repetition ripened. This second repetition of the During is
one in which the hero himself embraces disguise and assumes the
metamorphosis which re-places him on a tragic plane, with his own
identity, the inner depths of his memory and that of the whole world, in
order that, having become capable of action, he purports to be equal to the
whole of time. At this second level, the two repetitions rework and
redistribute in their own way the two syntheses of time, and the two forms,
bare and clothed, which characterize them.
Certainly, we could imagine that the two repetitions enter into a cycle of
which they form two analogous parts; and also that they begin again at the
end of a cycle, embarking upon a new path itself analogous to the first; and
finally, that these two intracyclic and extracyclic hypotheses are not
mutually exclusive but reinforce one another and repeat the repetitions on
different levels. In all this, however, everything depends upon the nature of
the third time: analogy requires that a third time be given, just as the circle
of the Phaedo requires that its two arcs be completed by a third on which
everything is decided with regard to their own return. For example, we
distinguished between the Old Testament with its repetition by default and
the New Testament with its repetition by metamorphosis (Joachim of
Flora); or indeed, in another manner, we distinguished between the age of
the gods, by default in the human unconscious, and the age of heroes by
metamorphosis in the human Self (Vico). The answer to the double
question - (1) Do the two times repeat one another in an analogical
manner within the same cycle? (2) Are these two times themselves repeated
in a new analogous cycle? - depends solely and above all upon the nature
of the third time (Flora's 'Testament' to come, Vico's 'The Age of Men',
Ballanche's 'Man without Name'). For if this third time, the future, is the
proper place of decision, it is entirely likely that, by virtue of its nature, it
eliminates the two intracyclic and extracyclic hypotheses; that it undoes
them both and puts time into a straight line, straightening it out and
extracting the pure form; in other words, it takes time out of 'joint' and,
being itself the third repetition, renders the repetition of the other two
impossible. Far from ensuring the occurrence of the cycle and analogy, the
third time excludes them. In accordance with the new frontier, the
difference between the two repetitions becomes the following: the Before
and the During are and remain repetitions, but operate only once and for

Conclusion

297

all. The third repetition distributes them in accordance with the straight
line of time, but also eliminates them, determining them to operate only
once and for all, keeping the 'all times' for the third time alone. In this
sense, Joachim of Flora saw the essential: there are two significations for a
single signifier. The essential is the third Testament. There are two
repetitions for a single repeated, but only the signified or the repeated
repeats itself, abolishing its significations along with its conditions. The
frontier is no longer between a first time and a repetition that it renders
hypothetically possible, but between the conditional repetitions and the
third repetition or repetition within the eternal return which renders
impossible the return of the other two. Only the third Testament turns on
itself. There is eternal return only in the third time: it is here that the
freeze-frame begins to move once more, or that the straight line of time, as
though drawn by its own length, re-forms a strange loop which in no way
resembles the earlier cycle, but leads into the formless, and operates only
for the third time and for that which belongs to it. As we have seen, the
condition of the action by default does not return; the condition of the
agent by metamorphosis does not return; all that returns, the eternal
return, is the unconditioned in the product. The expulsive and selective
force of the eternal return, its centrifugal force, consists of distributing
repetition among the three times of the pseudo-cycle, but also of ensuring
that the first two repetitions do not return, that they occur only once and
for all, and that only the third repetition which turns upon itself returns for
all times, for eternity. The negative, the similar and the analogous are
repetitions, but they do not return, forever driven away by the wheel of
eternal return.
We know that Nietzsche gave no exposition of the eternal return, for
reasons which pertain both to the simplest 'objective criticism' of the texts
and to their most modest dramatic or poetic comprehension. In Thus
Spoke Zarathustra, the question of the eternal return arises twice, but each
time it appears as a truth not yet reached and not expressed: once when the
dwarf speaks (III, 'Of the Vision and the Riddle'); and a second time when
the animals speak (III, 'The Convalescent'). The first time is enough to
make Zarathustra ill, producing his terrible nightmare and leading him to
undertake a sea voyage. The second time, after a further crisis, the
convalescent Zarathustra smiles indulgently at his animals, knowing that
his destiny will be decided only in an unsaid third time (that announced at
the end: 'The sign has come'). We cannot make use of the posthumous
notes, except in directions confirmed by Nietzsche's published works, since
these notes are reserved material, as it were, put aside for future
elaboration. We know only that Thus Spoke Zarathustra is unfinished, and
that it was supposed to have a further section concerning the death of
Zarathustra: as though a third time and a third occasion. Nevertheless, the

298

Difference and Repetition

existing dramatic progression of Thus Spoke Zarathustra allows a series of
questions and answers.
1. Why, on the first occasion, does Zarathustra become angry and suffer
such a terrible nightmare when the dwarf says: 'All truth is crooked,
time itself is a circle'? As he explains later in interpreting his nightmare:
he fears that eternal return means the return of Everything, of the Same
and the Similar, including the dwarf and including the smallest of men
(see III, The Convalescent'). He particularly fears that repetition will
only be negative and will occur only by default: that one repeats only
because one is deaf, lame and a dwarf, perched on the shoulders of others; or because one is incapable of an act (the death of God), even
though the act has already occurred. He knows that a circular repetition
would necessarily be of this type. That is why Zarathustra denies that
time is a circle, and replies to the dwarf: 'Spirit of Gravity, do not simplify matters too much!'. By contrast, he holds that time is a straight line
in two opposing directions. If a strangely decentred circle should form,
this will be only 'at the end' of the straight line ...
2. Why does Zarathustra undergo a further crisis and become convalescent? Zarathustra is like Hamlet; the sea voyage has made him capable,
he has reached the becoming-similar or the becoming-equal of the heroic
metamorphosis; yet he feels that the hour has not yet come (see III, 'Of
Involuntary Bliss'). He has already banished the shadow of the negative:
he knows that repetition is not that of the dwarf. Nevertheless, the becoming-equal or becoming-capable of the metamorphosis has only
brought him to a supposed originary identity: he has not yet banished
the apparent positivity of the identical. That requires the new crisis and
convalescence. The animals can then say that it is the Same and the Similar that return; they can expound the eternal return in the form of a
positive natural certitude: Zarathustra, feigning sleep, no longer listens
to them, for he knows that the eternal return is something different
again, and that it does not cause the same and the similar to return.
3. Why does Zarathustra still say nothing; why is he not yet 'ripe', and
why will he become so only in a third unsaid time? The revelation that
not everything returns, nor does the Same, implies as much distress as
the belief in the return of the Same and of everything, even though it is a
different distress. The highest test is to understand the eternal return as a
selective thought, and repetition in the eternal return as selective being.
Time must be understood and lived as out of joint, and seen as a straight
line which mercilessly eliminates those who embark upon it, who come
upon the scene but repeat only once and for all. The selection occurs between two repetitions: those who repeat negatively and those who repeat identically will be eliminated. They repeat only once. The eternal
return is only for the third time: the time of the drama, after the comic and

Conclusion

299

after the tragic (the drama is defined when the tragic becomes joyful and
the comic becomes the comedy of the Overman). The eternal return is
only for the third repetition, only in the third repetition. The circle is at
the end of the line. Neither the dwarf nor the hero, neither Zarathustra
ill nor Zarathustra convalescent, will return. Not only does the eternal
return not make everything return, it causes those who fail the test to
perish. (Nietzsche carefully indicates the two distinct types who do not
survive the test: the passive small man or last man, and the great heroic
active man, the one who has become a man 'who wants to perish').
The Negative does not return. The Identical does not return. The Same
and the Similar, the Analogous and the Opposed, do not return. Only
affirmation returns - in other words, the Different, the Dissimilar. Nothing which denies the eternal return returns, neither the default nor the
equal, only the excessive returns: how much distress before one extracts
joy from such a selective affirmation? Only the third repetition returns.
At the cost of the resemblance and identity of Zarathustra himself:
Zarathustra must lose these, the resemblance of the Self and the identity
of the I must perish, and Zarathustra must die. Zarathustra-hero became equal, but what he became equal to was the unequal, at the cost of
losing the sham identity of the hero. For 'one' repeats eternally, but
'one' now refers to the world of impersonal individualities and pre-individual singularities. The eternal return is not the effect of the Identical
upon a world become similar, it is not an external order imposed upon
the chaos of the world; on the contrary, the eternal return is the internal
identity of the world and of chaos, the Chaosmos. How could the reader
believe that Nietzsche, who was the greatest critic of these categories,
implicated Everything, the Same, the Identical, the Similar, the Equal,
the I and the Self in the eternal return? How could it be believed that he
understood the eternal return as a cycle, when he opposed 'his' hypothesis to every cyclical hypothesis? How could it be believed that he
lapsed into the false and insipid idea of an opposition between a circular
time and a linear time, an ancient and a modern time?
What, however, is the content of this third time, this formlessness at the
end of the form of time, this decentred circle which displaces itself at the
end of the straight line? What is this content which is affected or 'modified'
by the eternal return? We have tried to show that it is a question of
simulacra, and simulacra alone. The power of simulacra is such that they
essentially implicate at once the object = x in the unconscious, the word = x
in language, and the action = x in history. Simulacra are those systems in
which different relates to different by means of difference itself. What is essential is that we find in these systems no prior identity, no internal resemblance. It is all a matter of difference in the series, and of differences of
difference in the communication between series. What is displaced and dis-

300

Difference and Repetition

guised in the series cannot and must not be identified, but exists and acts as
the differenciator of difference. Moreover, repetition necessarily flows from
this play of difference in two ways. On the one hand, because each series is
explicated and unfolded only in implicating the others, it therefore repeats
the others and is repeated in the others, which in turn implicate it. However, it is implicated by the others only in so far as it simultaneously implicates those others, with the result that it returns to itself as many times as it
returns to another. Returning to itself is the ground of the bare repetitions,
just as returning to another is the ground of the clothed repetitions. On the
other hand, the play which presides over the distribution of simulacra ensures the repetition of each numerically distinct combination, since the different 'throws' are not, for their own part, numerically but only 'formally'
distinct. As a result, all the outcomes are included in the number of each
according to the relations between implicated and implicator just referred
to, each returning in the others in accordance with the formal distinction of
throws, but also always returning to itself in accordance with the unity of
the play of difference. Repetition in the eternal return appears under all
these aspects as the peculiar power of difference, and the displacement and
disguise of that which repeats only reproduce the divergence and the
decentring of the different in a single movement of diaphora or transport.
The eternal return affirms difference, it affirms dissemblance and disparateness, chance, multiplicity and becoming. Zarathustra is the dark precursor
of eternal return. The eternal return eliminates precisely all those instances
which strangle difference and prevent its transport by subjecting it to the
quadruple yoke of representation. Difference is recovered, liberated, only
at the limit of its power - in other words, by repetition in the eternal return. The eternal return eliminates that which renders it impossible by rendering impossible the transport of difference. It eliminates the
presuppositions of representation, namely the Same and the Similar, the
Analogue and the Negative. For representation and its presuppositions return, but only once; they return no more than one time, once and for all,
thereafter eliminated for all times.
Nevertheless, we speak of the unity of the play of difference; we speak of
the 'the same series' when it returns to itself, and of 'similar series' when
one returns to another. However, very small linguistic shifts express
upheavals and reversals in the concept. We saw that the two formulae
'similars differ' and 'differents resemble one another', belong to entirely
foreign worlds. It is the same here: the eternal return is indeed the Similar,
repetition in the eternal return is indeed the Identical - but precisely the
resemblance and the identity do not pre-exist the return of that which
returns. They do not in the first instance qualify what returns, they are
indistinguishable from its return. It is not the same which returns, it is not
the similar which returns-, rather, the Same is the returning of that which
returns, - in other words, of the Different; the similar is the returning of

Conclusion

301

that which returns, - in other words, of the Dissimilar. The repetition in
the eternal return is the same, but the same in so far as it is said uniquely of
difference and the different. This is a complete reversal of the world of
representation, and of the sense that 'identical' and 'similar' had in that
world. This reversal is not merely speculative but eminently practical, since
it defines the conditions of legitimate use of the words 'identical' and
'similar' by linking them exclusively to simulacra, while denouncing the
ordinary usage made from the point of view of representation. For this
reason, the philosophy of Difference seems to us badly established as long
as it is content with the terminological opposition between the platitude of
the Identical as equal to itself and the profundity of the Same which is
supposed to incorporate the different. For while the Same which includes
difference and the identical which excludes it may be opposed in many
ways, they remain no less principles of representation. At most, they inspire
the dispute between infinite representation and finite representation. The
true distinction is not between the identical and the same, but between the
identical, the same or the similar - it matters little which, once these are
posited as primary on various grounds - and the identical, the same or the
similar understood as secondary powers, but all the more powerful as such,
turning around difference, being said of difference itself. At this point,
everything effectively changes. The Same, for ever decentred, effectively
turns around difference only once difference, having assumed the whole of
Being, applies only to simulacra which have assumed the whole of 'being'.
The history of the long error is the history of representation, the history
of the icons. For the Same, or the Identical, has an ontological sense: the
repetition in the eternal return of that which differs (the repetition of each
implicating series). The Similar has an ontological sense: the eternal return
of that which makes dissimilar (the repetition of implicated series).
However, the eternal return itself, in turning, gives rise to a certain illusion
in which it delights and admires itself, and which it employs in order to
double its affirmation of that which differs: it produces an image of
identity as though this were the end of the different. It produces an image
of resemblance as the external effect of 'the disparate'. It produces an
image of the negative as the consequence of what it affirms, the
consequence of its own affirmation. It surrounds the simulacra and
surrounds itself with this identity, this resemblance and this negative.
However, these are precisely a simulated identity, resemblance and
negative. It plays upon these as though upon a never attained end, an
always distorted effect and an always perverted consequence: they are the
products of the functioning of simulacra. It employs them each time in
order to decentre the identical, distort the similar and pervert the
consequence. For it is true that there are only perverted consequences, only
distorted similarities, only decentred identities and only unattained ends.
Revelling in what it produces, the eternal return denounces every other use

302

Difference and Repetition

of ends, identities, resemblances and negations: even - and especially negation, which it employs in the service of simulacra in the most radical
manner - namely, to deny everything which denies multiple and different
affirmation, in order to double what it affirms. It is essential to the
function of simulacra to simulate the identical, the similar and the negative.
There is a necessary linkage between the ontological sense and the
simulated sense. The second derives [derive] from the first - in other words,
it remains adrift [a la derive] without autonomy or spontaneity, a simple
effect of the ontological cause which plays upon it like a tempest. How
could representation not profit from this? How could representation not be
born once, in the trough of a wave, to the advantage of the illusion? How
could it not make of the illusion an 'error'? By this means, the identity of
the simulacra, simulated identity, finds itself projected or retrojected on to
the internal difference. The simulated external resemblance finds itself
interiorised in the system. The negative becomes principal and agent. Each
product of the functioning assumes an autonomy. It is then supposed that
difference is valid, exists and is thinkable only within a pre-existing Same
which understands it as conceptual difference and determines it by means
of opposition between predicates. It is supposed that repetition is valid,
exists and is thinkable only under an Identical which in turn posits it as a
difference without concept and explains it negatively. Instead of
understanding bare repetition as the product of clothed repetition, and the
latter as the power of difference, difference itself is made into a by-product
of the same in the concept, clothed repetition into a derivative of bare
repetition, and bare repetition a by-product of the identical outside the
concept. It is in the same milieu, that of representation, that difference is
posited on the one hand as conceptual difference, and repetition on the
other hand as difference without a concept. Moreover, since there is no
longer any conceptual difference between the ultimate determinable
concepts among which the same is distributed, the world of representation
finds itself in the grip of a network of analogies which makes difference
and repetition simple concepts of reflection. The Same and the Identical
may be interpreted in many ways: in the sense of a perseveration (A is A),
in the sense of an equality (A = A) or a resemblance (A # B), in the sense of
an opposition (A = non-A), or in the sense of an analogy (as is suggested by
the excluded third term, which determines the conditions under which the
third term is determinable only in a relation identical to the relation
between two others: A = non-A(B) = C/non-C(D). But all these ways belong
to representation, to which analogy brings a final touch, a specific closure
or the last element. They are the development of the erroneous sense which
betrays both the nature of difference and that of repetition. The long error
begins here - all the longer since it occurs only once.
We have seen how analogy essentially belonged to the world of
representation. Once the limits of the inscription of difference in the

Conclusion

303

concept in general are fixed, the upper limit is represented by the ultimate
determinable concepts (the genera of being or categories), while the lower
limit is represented by the smallest determined concepts (species). In the
case of finite representation, generic and specific difference have different
procedures and differ in kind, but they are strictly complementary: the
equivocity of the one has its correlate in the univocity of the other. In
effect, the genus in relation to its species is univocal, while Being in relation
to the genera or categories themselves is equivocal. The analogy of being
implies both these two aspects at once: one by which being is distributed in
determinable forms which necessarily distinguish and vary the sense; the
other by which being so distributed is necessarily repartitioned among
well-determined beings, each endowed with a unique sense. What is missed
at the two extremities is the collective sense of being [etre] and the play of
individuating difference in being [etant]. Everything takes place between
generic difference and specific difference. The genuine universal is missed
no less than the true singular: the only common sense of being is
distributive, and the only individual difference is general. The list of
categories may well be 'opened up' or representation may be made infinite;
nevertheless, being continues to be said in several senses according to the
categories, and that of which it is said is determined only by differences 'in
general'. The world of representation presupposes a certain type of
sedentary distribution, which divides or shares out that which is distributed
in order to give 'each' their fixed share (as in the bad game or the bad way
to play, the pre-existing rules define distributive hypotheses according to
which the results of the throws are repartitioned). Representation
essentially implies an analogy of being. However, the only realised
Ontology - in other words, the univocity of being - is repetition. From
Duns Scotus to Spinoza, the univocal position has always rested upon two
fundamental theses. According to one, there are indeed forms of being, but
contrary to what is suggested by the categories, these forms involve no
division within being or plurality of ontological senses. According to the
other, that of which being is said is repartitioned according to essentially
mobile individuating differences which necessarily endow 'each one' with a
plurality of modal significations. This programme is expounded and
demonstrated with genius from the beginning of the Ethics: we are told
that the attributes are irreducible to genera or categories because while
they are formally distinct they all remain equal and ontologically one, and
introduce no division into the substance which is said or expressed through
them in a single and same sense (in other words, the real distinction
between attributes is a formal, not a numerical distinction). We are told,
on the other hand, that the modes are irreducible to species because they
are repartitioned within attributes according to individuating differences
which are degrees of power operating in intensity, and immediately relate
them to univocal being (in other words, the numerical distinction between

304

Difference and Repetition

'beings' is a modal, not a real distinction). Is it not the same with the true
throw of the dice? The throws are formally distinct, but with regard to an
ontologically unique throw, while the outcomes implicate, displace and
recover their combinations in one another throughout the unique and open
space of the univocal? All that Spinozism needed to do for the univocal to
become an object of pure affirmation was to make substance turn around
the modes - in other words, to realise univocity in the form of repetition in
the eternal return. For while it is true that analogy has two aspects - one
according to which being is said in several senses, and the other according
to which it is said of something fixed and well determined - univocity, for
its part, has two completely opposing aspects according to which being is
said 'in all manners' in a single same sense, but is said thereby of that
which differs, is said of a difference which is itself always mobile and
displaced within being. The univocity of being and individuating difference
are connected outside representation as profoundly as generic difference
and specific difference are connected within representation from the point
of view of analogy. Univocity signifies that being itself is univocal, while
that of which it is said is equivocal: precisely the opposite of analogy. Being
is said according to forms which do not break the unity of its sense; it is
said in a single same sense throughout all its forms - that is why we
opposed to categories notions of a different kind. That of which it is said,
however, differs; it is said of difference itself. It is not analogous being
which is distributed among the categories and allocates a fixed part to
beings, but the beings which are distributed across the space of univocal
being, opened by all the forms. Opening is an essential feature of univocity.
The nomadic distributions or crowned anarchies in the univocal stand
opposed to the sedentary distributions of analogy. Only there does the cry
resound: 'Everything is equal!' and 'Everything returns!'. However, this
'Everything is equal' and this 'Everything returns' can be said only at the
point at which the extremity of difference is reached. A single and same
voice for the whole thousand-voiced multiple, a single and same Ocean for
all the drops, a single clamour of Being for all beings: on condition that
each being, each drop and each voice has reached the state of excess - in
other words, the difference which displaces and disguises them and, in
turning upon its mobile cusp, causes them to return.

Notes

Translator's Preface
1 Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, transl. Brian Massumi,
London: Athlone, 1988, p. 22.
Preface
1 * Nietzsche, 'On the uses and disadvantages of history for life', in Untimely Meditations, transl. RJ. Hollingdale, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1983, p. 60.
2 * Jorge Luis Borges, Ficciones, New York: Grove Press, 1962, p. 52.
Introduction
1 Charles Peguy, Clio, Paris: NRF, 1917, 33rd edn, pp. 45, 114.
2 Pius Servien, Principes d'Esthetique, Paris: Boivin, 1935, pp. 3-5; Science et Poesie, Paris: Flammarion, 1947, pp. 44-7.
3 *Georg Biichner, Danton's Death, transl. Howard Brenton, London:
Methuen, 1982, p. 25. Translation modified in the light of the French
version.
4 In the preceding comparison, we are referring to some of the bestknown texts of Nietzsche and Kierkegaard. In the case of Kierkegaard,
these include Fear and Trembling and Repetition, ed. and transl. H.V.
and E.H. Hong, published as two volumes in one by Princeton University Press, 1983; the very important note in The Concept of Anxiety,
transl. R. Thomte, ed. H.V. and E.H. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1980; passages from the Journals and Papers, ed. H.V.
and E.H. Hong, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1967-78. On
the critique of memory, see Philosophical Fragments-, or A Fragment of
Philosophy, revised transl. H.V. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962; and Stages on Life's Way: Studies by Various Persons, ed. and transl. H.V. and E.H. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1988.
In the case of Nietzsche, see Thus Spoke Zarathustra (especially Part
II, 'Of Redemption'; and the two main passages in Part III, 'Of the Vision and the Riddle' and 'The Convalescent', one concerning
Zarathustra ill, talking to his demon; the other Zarathustra convalescent, conversing with his animals), transl. RJ. Hollingdale,
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1961; but also the Notes of 1881-2 (in
which Nietzsche explicitly opposes 'his' hypothesis to the cyclical hypothesis and criticises all notions of resemblance, equilibrium and iden305

306

5

6
7

8

9

Difference and Repetition
tity. cf. La Volonte de Puissance, transl. Bianquis, Paris: NRF, pp. 295301). Finally, for Peguy, see essentially Clio and Le mystere de la
charite de Jeanne d'Arc, Paris: Gallimard, 1955 (transl. Julien Green as
The Mystery of the Charity of Joan of Arc, London: Hollis & Carter,
1950).
Compare Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling (Crainte et Tremblement,
transl. Tisseau, Paris: Aubier, pp. 52-67) on 'the nature of the real
movement which is not mediation but 'repetition' and which stands opposed to the abstract, logical, false movement described by Hegel. See
also the remarks from the Journal published as an appendix to La
Repetition, transl. and ed. Tisseau. One also finds in Peguy a profound
critique of 'logical movement': Peguy denounces this as a conservative,
accumulative and capitalistic pseudo-movement: Clio, pp. 45 ff. This is
close to the Kierkegaardian critique.
Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Part HI, 'Of Old and New LawTables', section 4: 'But only a buffoon thinks: "Man can also be
jumped over".'
The formula and the phenomenon of discrete extension are clearly
identified by Michel Tournier in Les Meteores, Paris: Gallimard, 1975.
English version entitled Gemini, transl. Anne Carter, New York: Doubleday, 1981.
With Kant, there is indeed an infinite specification of concepts; but because this infinite is only virtual (indefinite), no argument favourable to
posing a principle of indiscernibles can be drawn from it. On the contrary, according to Leibniz it is very important that the comprehension
of the concept of a (possible or real) existent be actually infinite:
Leibniz clearly affirms this in On Freedom ('Only God being able to
see, not the end of the analysis indeed, since there is no end ...'). When
Leibniz employs the word 'virtually' to characterize the inherence of
predicates in the case of truths of fact (for example, in the Discourse on
Metaphysics, section 8), 'virtual' should be understood not as the contrary of actual but as signifying 'enveloped', 'implicated' or 'impressed',
which is by no means exclusive of actuality. In the strict sense, the notion of virtuality is indeed invoked by Leibniz, but only apropos of a
species of necessary truths (non-reciprocal propositions); see Leibniz,
On Freedom, in Philosophical Papers and Letters, transl. and ed. Leroy
E. Loemker, 2nd edn, Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 1969, pp. 262-6.
Freud, 'Remembering, Repeating and Working-Through (Further Recommendations on the Technique of Psycho-Analysis, II)', 1914, in
James Strachey (transl. and ed.), The Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, 24 vols, London: Hogarth,
1953-73 (1958) vol. 12, pp. 147-56. This negative interpretation of
psychical repetition (one repeats because one is mistaken, because one
has not worked through the memory, because one lacks consciousness,

Notes

10

11
12
13
14

15

307

because one has no instincts) has nowhere been developed further or
with greater rigour than in Ferdinand Alquie, Le desir d'eternite, Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 1943, chs 2-4.
Freud invokes transference in particular to call into question his global
law of the inverse relation. See Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 1920,
Standard Edition, vol. 18, p. 19: memory and reproduction, remembrance and repetition, are opposed in principle, but in practice one
must accept that the patient will relive certain repressed elements during the cure: 'the ratio between what is remembered and what is reproduced varies from case to case'. Those who insisted most profoundly
upon the therapeutic and liberatory aspect of repetition as it appears in
transference were Ferenczi and Rank in Entwicklungziele der Psychoanalyse, Vienna: Neue Arbeiten zur drtzlichen Psychoanalyse,
1924.
*Henry Miller, The Time of the Assassins, London: Neville Spearman
Ltd, 1956, p. 3.
Claude Levi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques, transl. John and Doreen
Weightman, London: Jonathan Cape, 1973, p. 191.
Matila Ghyka, Le Nombre d'Or: Rites et Rhythmes Pythagoriciens
Dans le Developpement de la Civilisation Occidental, Paris:
Gallimard, 1931, vol. I, p. 65.
On the relation between repetition and language, but also between repetition and masks and death in the work of Raymond Roussel, see
Michel Foucault's fine book Death and the Labyrinth: The World of
Raymond Roussel, transl. Charles Ruas, London: Athlone, 1987: 'Both
the repetition and the difference are so intricately linked, and adjusted
with such exactitude, that it is not possible to distinguish which came
first ...' (p. 24); 'Far from being a language that seeks to begin, it is the
second form of words already spoken: it is everyday language ravaged
by destruction and death .... By nature it is repetitive .... there is a profound repetition. It is not the lateral one of things said again, but the
radical one which has gone beyond nonbeing and, because it has come
through this void, is poetry ...' (pp. 45-6). See also Michel Butor's article on Roussel which analyses the double aspect of the repetition that
enchains and saves, in Repertoire, I, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1960.
In his Lois de limitation, Paris: Alcan, 1890 (transl. Elsie Clews Parsons, as The Laws of Imitation, New York: Henry Holt, 1903; republished Gloucester, MA.: Peter Smith Publishing, 1962) Gabriel Tarde
shows how resemblance between, for example, different species refers
back to the identity of the physical milieu; that is, to a repetitive process affecting elements inferior to the forms in question. All of Tarde's
philosophy, as we shall see more clearly later, is founded upon the two
categories of difference and repetition: difference is simultaneously
both the origin and the destination of repetition, in a more and more

308

Difference and Repetition

'forceful and ingenious' movement which takes 'greater and greater account of degrees of freedom'. Tarde proposes to substitute this differential and differenciating repetition for opposition in every domain.
Roussel or Peguy could adopt his formula: 'Repetition is a more powerful and less tiring stylistic procedure than antithesis, and moreover better suited to renew a subject' (L'opposition universelle, Paris: Alcan,
1897, p. 119). Tarde regarded repetition as a thoroughly French idea;
Kierkegaard, it is true, saw it as a thoroughly Danish concept. They
meant that it gives rise to a dialectic quite different to that of Hegel.
16 On internal difference which is nevertheless neither intrinsic nor conceptual, see Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, transl.
Norman Kemp Smith, London: Macmillan, 1933, section 13 (note the
opposition between innere Verschiedenheit and innerlich Verschiedenheit).
Chapter I Difference in Itself
1 Odilon Redon, A soi-meme: Journal, 1867-1915, Paris: Fleury, 1922,
p. 63: 'No plastic form will be found in my works, I mean any form
perceived objectively, for itself, according to the laws of light and
shadow, through the conventional means of relief. ... All of my art is
confined solely to the resources of chiaroscuro, and also owes much to
the effects of the abstract line, that agent from a profound source, acting directly on the spirit.'
2 Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book X, 4, 8, 9; transl. W.D. Ross, Oxford:
The Clarendon Press, 1924; reprinted in The Complete Works of Aristotle, ed. Jonathan Barnes, vol. 2, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1984. On the three kinds of difference, common, proper and
strict, see Porphyry the Phoenician, Isagoge, transl. Edward W. Warren, Toronto: The Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975, paras
8-9. See also The Thomist manuals: for example the chapter 'De
differentia' in the Elementa philosophia aristotelico-thomisticae by Joseph Gredt, Fribourg: Herder, 1909-12, vol. I, pp. 122-5.
3 Porphyry, Isagoge, para. 9, pp. 42-3: 'The difference 'rational' added
to animal makes another essence [allo], but the difference 'moving'
only makes something qualitatively different from resting, so that the
one makes a difference-in-essence, the other only a difference-in-quality.'
4 Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book III, 3, 998b, 20-27; Topics, VI, 6, 144a,
35-40.
5 We know that Aristotle himself did not speak of analogy with regard
to being. He determined the categories as pros hen and no doubt also
as ephexes (these are are the two cases, apart from pure equivocity,
where there is 'difference' without a common genus). The pros hen are
said in relation to a unique term. This is like a common sense, but this
common sense is not a genus, for it forms only a distributive unity (im-

Notes

309

plicit and confused), not a collective, explicit and distinct unity such as
we find with genera. The scholastics are therefore right to translate the
pros hen as 'analogy of proportionality'. In effect, this analogy must
not be understood in the strict mathematical sense and does not presuppose any equality of relation. It is defined by something completely different - by an inferiority of relation: the relation of each category with
being is interior to each category, it is on its own account that each has
unity and being, by virtue of its own nature. This distributive character
is clearly noted by Aristotle when he identifies categories with
diaireseis. Moreover, despite certain recent interpretations there is indeed a division of being corresponding to the ways in which it is distributed to 'beings'. However, in the pros hen the unique term is not
only being as common sense but already substance as first sense whence the slide towards the idea that ephexes imply a hierarchy. The
scholastics speak here of 'analogy of proportion': there is no longer a
distributive concept which is formally related to different terms but a
serial concept which is formally-eminently related to a principal term
and to others in a lesser degree. Being is first, in act, analogy of proportionality; but does it not also 'virtually' present an analogy of proportion?
6 See E. Laroche, Histoire de la racine nem - en grec ancien, Paris:
Klincksieck, 1949. Laroche shows that the idea of distribution in
nomos-nemo does not stand in a simple relation to that of allocation
[temno, diao, diaireo]. The pastoral sense of nemo (to pasture) only belatedly implied an allocation of the land. Homeric society had neither
enclosures nor property in pastures: it was not a question of distributing the land among the beasts but, on the contrary, of distributing the
beasts themselves and dividing them up here and there across an unlimited space, forest or mountainside. The nomos designated first of all an
occupied space, but one without precise limits (for example, the expanse around a town) - whence, too, the theme of the 'nomad'.
7 Etienne Gilson raises all these questions in his book Jean Duns Scot: Introduction a ses positions fondamentales, Paris: Vrin, 1952, pp. 87-88,
114, 236-7, 629. He insists on the relation between analogy and judgement, especially the judgement of existence (p. 101).
8 Nietzsche: 'That dangerous word hubris is indeed the touchstone for
every Heraclitan': Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks, transl.
by M. Cowan, Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1962, S. 7, p. 61. And on the
problem of order and rank, 'of which we may say it is our problem, we
free spirits', see Human, All Too Human, transl. RJ. Hollingdale,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986, Preface, S. 6-7, pp. 910. For the Overman as 'the superior form of everything that is', see
Ecce Homo, 'Thus Spake Zarathustra', S. 6. (*In Kaufmann's translation this phrase is rendered as 'the supreme type of all beings'.)

310

Difference and Repetition

9 On this indifference towards the small or the large, see Leibniz, 'Tentamen Anagogicum', in Philosophical Papers and Letters, transl. and ed.
Leroy E. Loemker, 2nd edn, Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 1969.
Note that for Leibniz no less than for Hegel, infinite representation
cannot be reduced to a mathematical structure: there is a non-mathematical or supra-mathematical architectonic element in continuity and
in the differential calculus. Conversely, Hegel seems to recognise the
presence of a genuine infinite in the differential calculus, the infinity of
'relation'. He criticizes calculus only for expressing this genuine infinite
in the mathematical form of the 'series', which is a bad infinity: Hegel's
Science of Logic, transl. A.V. Miller, London: George Allen & Unwin,
1969, pp. 240ff. We know that modern interpretations give an account
of the differential calculus entirely in terms of finite representation: this
point of view will be analysed in Chapter IV.
10 Hegel's Science of Logic, pp. 431, 442. See also Hegel's Logic, Part
One of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830), transl.
William Wallace, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975, S. 116-22. On the
passage from difference to opposition and to contradiction, see the
comments by Jean Hyppolite, Logique et Existence: Essai sur la
Logique de Hegel, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1953, pp.
146-57.
11 Hegel's Science of Logic, p. 432.
12 On the infinite, genus and species, see Hegel's Phenomenology of
Spirit, transl. A.V. Miller, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977, pp. 98-101,
107-9,175-8.
13 See Leibniz, 'Nova calculi differentialis applicatio ...' (1694). On the
principle of reciprocal determination which Salomon Ma'imon draws
from Leibniz, see M. Gueroult, La philosophic transcendentale de
Salomon Ma'imon, Paris: Alcan, 1929, p. 75 ff. (Neither Ma'imon nor
Leibniz distinguishes between the reciprocal determination of relations
and the complete determination of the object.)
14 Leibniz, Correspondence with Arnauld, 9 October 1687: 'I have said
that the soul, which naturally expresses the entire universe in a certain
sense and according to the relationship which other bodies have to its
own, and which as a consequence expresses more immediately the
properties of the parts of its body, must therefore, by virtue of the laws
of relationship which are essential to it, particularly express certain unusual motions of the parts of its body': Philosophical Papers and Letters, p. 339. see also the 'degrees of accidental unity' among things as a
result of the degrees of relation between their component elements, in
the Letter of 30 April 1687 (in Leibniz, Discourse on Metaphysics.
Correspondence with Arnauld. Monadology, transl. George Montgomery, La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing Company, 1979, pp. 180-99).
15 Louis Althusser denounces the all-powerful character of identity in

Notes

311

Hegel's philosophy, in the form of the simplicity of its internal principle: The simplicity of the Hegelian contradiction is made possible only
by the simplicity of the internal principle that constitutes the essence of
any historical period. It is because it is possible in principle to reduce
the totality, the infinite diversity of a given historical society ... to a
simple internal principle, that this very simplicity thereby accrues by
right to contradiction and may be reflected in it.' This is why he criticizes the Hegelian circle for having only a single centre in which all the
figures are reflected and retained. In opposition to Hegel, Althusser
proposes a principle of multiple or overdetermined contradiction which
he finds in the young Marx: 'This means that if the "differences" that
constitute each of the instances in play ... "merge" into a real unity,
they are not "dissipated" as pure phenomena in the internal unity of a
simple contradiction.' (It is still the case that for Althusser it is contradiction which is overdetermined and differential, and the totality of
these differences remains legitimately grounded in a principal contradiction). See Louis Althusser, For Marx, transl. Ben Brewster, London:
New Left Review Editions, 1977, pp. 100,103 (*translation modified).
16 Nietzsche never ceases to denounce the assimilation of 'affirm' with
'bear'. See Beyond Good and Evil, S. 213, where he says of most thinkers and scholars: ' "Thinking" and "taking something seriously", taking on its weight - to them these things go together, they have no other
experience of it.' * Beyond Good and Evil, transl. R.J. Hollingdale,
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973, p. 126, has ' "taking something seriously",
giving it "weighty consideration".' The point is that to bear implies a
false activity, a false affirmation which concerns itself only with the
products of nihilism. Thus Nietzsche defines Kant and Hegel as 'philosophical labourers' who amass and conserve an enormous pile of established value judgements, even if for them it is a matter of overcoming
the past. In this sense, they are still enslaved to the negative (S. 211).
17 Beyond Good and Evil, S. 211. On the 'no' of the master which is a
consequence, by contrast with the 'no' of the slave which is a principle,
see On the Genealogy of Morals, I, S. 10.
18 Cited by Jean Wahl, Les philosophies pluralistes d'Angleterre et
d'Amerique, Paris: Alcan, 1920, p. 37. All Jean Wahl's work is a profound meditation on difference: on the possibilities within empiricism
for expressing its poetic, free and wild nature; on the irreducibility of
difference to the simple negative; on the non-Hegelian relations between affirmation and negation.
* Citation modified. These lines are quoted from The Anaesthetic Revelation (1874), by the American poet and philosopher Benjamin Paul
Blood (1822-1919). Wahl cites them from the essay on Blood's pamphlet by William James, entitled 'A Pluralistic Mystic' and first published in the Hibbert Journal, July 1910. This essay is republished in

312

19

20

21

22

Difference and Repetition

James's Memories and Studies, London: Longmans Green, 1911, (see
pp. 394, 409); and in vol. 15 of The Works of William James, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987.
In two articles which renew the interpretation of Nietzsche, Pierre
Klossowski uncovers this element: 'God is dead does not mean that the
divinity ceases to provide a clarification of existence, but rather that the
absolute guarantee of the identity of the responsible self disappears
from the horizon of Nietzsche's consciousness, which in turn becomes
indistinguishable from that disappearance. ... All that is left (to consciousness) is to declare that its very identity is a chance case arbitrarily
maintained as necessary, even if this means taking itself for that universal wheel of chance, even if this means embracing if possible the totality
of cases, chance itself in its necessary totality. What subsists is thus
being, and the verb "to be", which is never applied to being itself but
to the fortuitous': 'Nietzsche, le polytheisme et la parodie', in Un si
funeste desir, Paris: NRF, 1963, pp. 220-21. 'Does this mean that the
thinking subject loses its identity on the basis of a coherent thought
which excludes it? ... What is my role in this circular movement in relation to which I am incoherent, in relation to that thought so perfectly
coherent that it excludes me at the very moment I think it? ... How
does it threaten the reality of the self, of this self which it nevertheless
exalts? By liberating the fluctuations which signify it as a self in such a
fashion that it is only ever the completed which resound in its present.
... Circulus vitiosus deus is only a denomination of this sign which here
takes on a divine physiognomy after the manner of Dionysus': 'Oubli et
anamnese dans 1'experience vecue de 1'eternel retour du Meme', in
Nietzsche: Cahiers de Royaumont, Philosophic No. vi, Paris: Editions
de Minuit, 1967, pp. 233-5.
On Aristotle's critique of Platonic division, cf. Prior Analytics, I, 31;
Posterior Analytics, II, 5 and 13 (In the latter text Aristotle maintains a
certain role for division in the determination of species, even though
the insufficiencies that he finds in Plato's conception are corrected by a
principle of continuity). But we can see clearly how far the determination of species is merely an ironic appearance and not the aim of Platonic division, for example, in The Statesman, 266 b-d.
It is with regard to this aspect that the myth must be completed by another kind of model, the paradigm, which enables Plato to distinguish
parents, servants, auxiliaries and counterfeits by means of analogy. In
the same manner, assaying gold involves several selections: the removal
of impurities, the elimination of other metals 'from the same family' (cf.
The Statesman, 303 d-e).
See Note 19 above. On this notion of simulacra as it appears in
Klossowski in connection with eternal return, see Michel Foucault, 'La

Notes

313

Prose d'Acteon', Nouvelle Revue Fran$aise, March 1964; Maurice
Blanchot, 'Le rire des dieux', Nouvelle Revue Fran$aise, July 1965.
23 See Umberto Eco, The Open Work, transl. Anna Cancogni, with an Introduction by David Robey, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1989. Eco shows clearly that the 'classical' work of art may be
seen from several perspectives and is susceptible to several interpretations, but that there is no autonomous work corresponding to each
point of view or interpretation, all included in the the chaos of the
work as a whole. The characteristic of the 'modern' work of art appears to be precisely the absence of any such centre or convergence (see
Chapters 1 and 6).
Chapter II Repetition for Itself
1 The Bergson text is in Time and Free-Will: An Essay on the Immediate
Data of Consciousness, transl. F.L. Pogson, New York: Harper &
Row, 1960, ch. 2. There Bergson clearly distinguishes the two aspects:
fusion or contraction in the mind, and deployment in space. Contraction as the essence of duration, and as operating on elementary material agitations in order to constitute the perceived quality, is even more
precisely dealt with in Matter and Memory, transl. Nancy Margaret
Paul and W. Scott Palmer, New York: Zone Books, 1988.
The Hume texts are in A Treatise of Human Nature, especially Part
III section 16 of Book I. Hume forcefully distinguishes the union or fusion of cases in the imagination - a union which takes place independently of memory or understanding - and the separation of these same
cases in the memory and the understanding.
2 Samuel Butler, Life and Habit, London: Jonathan Cape, 1910, p. 82.
3 The philosophy of Gabriel Tarde is one of the last great philosophies of
nature, in the tradition of Leibniz. It unfolds on two levels. On the first
level it deploys three fundamental categories which govern all phenomena: repetition, opposition and adaptation (see Les his sociales, Paris:
Alcan, 1898; transl. Howard C. Warren, as Social Laws: An Outline of
Sociology, New York: Arno Press, 1899). Opposition, however, is only
the figure by means of which a difference is distributed throughout repetition in order to limit it and to open up a new order or a new infinity:
for example, when the parts of life are opposed in pairs, it renounces
any indefinite growth or multiplication in order to form limited wholes.
Nevertheless, life thereby attains an infinity of another kind, a different
sort of repetition: that of generation (L'opposition universelle, Paris:
Alcan, 1897). Adaptation itself is the figure by means of which the repetitive currents meet and become integrated into superior repetitions.
As a result, difference appears between two kinds of repetition, and
each repetition presupposes a difference of the same degree as itself
(imitation as the repetition of an invention, reproduction as the repeti-

314

Difference and Repetition

tion of a variation, diffusion as the repetition of a perturbation, summation as the repetition of a differential ... See Tarde, Les lois
d'imitation, Paris: Alcan, 1890 (transl. Elsie Clews Parsons as The
Laws of Imitation, New York: Henry Holt, 1903; republished Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith Publishing, 1962).
On a deeper level, however, it is rather repetition which serves difference. For neither opposition nor even adaptation presents the free figure of difference: that difference 'which opposes nothing and which
serves no purpose', which is 'the final end of all things' (L'opposition
universelle, p. 445). From this point of view, repetition is between two
differences-, it is what enables us to pass from one order of difference to
another: from external to internal difference, from elementary difference to transcendent difference, from infinitesimal difference to personal and monadological difference. Repetition, therefore, is not the
process by which difference is augmented or diminished, but the process by which it 'goes on differing' and 'takes itself as its end' (see
Tarde, 'Monadologie et sociologie' et 'La variation universelle', in Essais et melanges sociologiques, Paris: Editions Maloine, 1895).
It is completely wrong to reduce Tarde's sociology to a psychologism
or even an interpsychology. Tarde criticizes Durkheim for assuming
what must be explained - namely, 'the similarity of thousands of men'.
For the alternative - impersonal givens or the Ideas of great men - he
substitutes the little ideas of little men, the little inventions and interferences between imitative currents. What Tarde inaugurates is a
microsociology, which is not necessarily concerned with what happens
between individuals but with what happens within a single individual:
for example, hesitation understood as 'infinitesimal social opposition',
or invention as 'infinitesimal social adaptation': Social Laws: An Outline of Sociology. It is by following this method, through a series of
monographs, that it will be possible to show how repetition adds and
integrates the small variations, always with a view to discovering the
'differently different' (La logique sociale, Paris: Alcan, 1893). All of
Tarde's philosophy may be presented in this light: as a dialectic of difference and repetition which founds the possibility of a microsociology
upon a whole cosmology.
4 Michel Souriau, Le Temps, Paris: Alcan, 1937, p. 55.
5 These three paradoxes are discussed in Chapter III of Matter and Memory. Under these three aspects, Bergson opposes the pure past or pure
memory, which is without psychological existence, to representation that is, to the psychological reality of the image-memory.
6 Bergson, Matter and Memory, p. 105: The same psychical life, therefore, must be supposed to be repeated an endless number of times on
the different stories of memory, and the same act of the mind may be
performed at varying heights'; p. 162: 'there is room, as we indicated in

Notes

7
8
9
10

11
12

13

315

the previous chapter, for a thousand repetitions of our psychical life,
figured by as many sections A'B', A" B", etc., of the same cone.' Notice
that repetition here concerns psychological life but is not itself psychological: in effect, psychology begins only with the memory-image,
whereas the sections or levels of the cones are drawn in the pure past. It
is therefore a question of a metapsychological repetition of psychological life. Moreover, when Bergson speaks of 'successive stages', successive must be understood figuratively as a function of the eye which
scans his proposed drawing; for, in their own terms, all the levels are
supposed to coexist with one another.
Leibniz, New Essays on Human Understanding, transl. and ed. Peter
Remnant and Jonathan Bennett, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981, Book I, ch. I, p. 71.
Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, transl. Norman Kemp Smith,
London: Macmillan, 1933: 'General Note on the Transition from Rational Psychology to Cosmology', p. 382.
Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 'Analytic of Concepts', note to section
25, p. 169.
On the pure form of time and the fracture or 'caesura' that it introduces into the I, see Holderlin, Remarques sur Oedipe, Remarques sur
Antigone, and Jean Beaufret's commentary 'Holderlin et Sophocle', in
ibid., Paris: Union Generate d'Editions (10/18), 1965. Beaufret's commentary strongly underlines Kant's influence upon Holderlin: see especially pp. 16-26. (On the theme of a 'fracture' within the I which is
essentially related to the form of time understood as a death instinct,
recall three great but very different literary works: Zola, La bete humaine; F. Scott Fitzgerald, The Crack-Up; and Malcolm Lowry, Under the
Volcano.)
On the explicit opposition between reminiscence and innateness, see
Phaedo 76 a-d.
On the manner in which Kierkegaardian repetition is opposed to the
customary cycle and also to the cycle of reminiscences, see Mircea
Eliade's comments regarding Abraham's sacrifice, in The Myth of the
Eternal Return, transl. William R. Trask, New York: Pantheon, 1984,
pp.108 ff. The author concludes from this that the categories of history
and faith are new.
The very important text by Kierkegaard on the true repetition from
which no difference may be 'drawn' can be found in The Concept of
Anxiety, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980, pp. 17-19.
The Kierkegaardian theory of the condition, the unconditioned and the
absolutely different is put forward in Philosophical Fragments.
Daniel Lagache has examined the possibility of applying the psychological concept of habit to the unconscious and to repetition in the unconscious (but it seems that that repetition is here considered only from the

316

14
15

16

17

Difference and Repetition
perspective of a mastery of tensions): 'Le probleme du transfert', Revue
fran^aise de psychanalyse, January 1952, pp. 84-97.
Henri Maldiney, Le Moi, course summary, Bulletin Faculte de Lyon,
1967.
Jacques Lacan, 'Seminar on The Purloined Letter', transl. Jeffrey
Mehlmann, Yale French Studies, no. 48, 1972, p. 55. This text is undoubtedly the one in which Lacan most profoundly develops his conception of repetition.
Certain disciples of Lacan have strongly insisted upon this theme of
the 'non-identical' and on the relation between difference and repetition which follows from it: J.-A. Miller, 'La Suture' (transl. 'Suture (elements of the logic of the signifier)', Screen, vol. xviii, no. 4, 1977/8, pp.
24-34); J.-C. Milner, 'Le point du signifiant'; S. Leclaire, 'Les elements
en jeu dans une psychanalyse', Cahiers pour I'analyse, nos 1, 3 and 5
respectively, 1966.
Lacan discloses the existence of series in two very important texts: 'The
Seminar on The Purloined Letter', cited above (first series: 'kingqueen-minister', second series: 'police-minister-Dupin'); and in a commentary on 'the rat man', 'Le mythe individuel du nevrose', C.D.U.
('The Neurotic's Individual Myth', transl. Martha Noel Evans, The
Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 48, 1979, pp. 405-25) (here the two series,
one paternal and one filial, put into play in different situations the
debt, the friend, the poor woman and the rich woman). The elements
and relations in each series are determined by their position in relation
to the always displaced virtual object - the letter in the first example;
the debt in the second: 'it is not only the subject, but the subjects,
grasped in their intersubjectivity, who line up ... the displacement of the
signifier determines the subjects in their acts, in their destiny, in their
refusals, in their blindnesses, in their end and in their fate, their innate
gifts and social acquisitions notwithstanding, without regard for character or sex ...' Yale French Studies, no. 48, 1972, p. 60. In this manner, an intersubjective unconscious is defined which reduces neither to
an individual unconscious nor to a collective unconscious, and in relation to which one can no longer describe one series as original and the
other as derived (even though Lacan continues to use these terms - for
ease of expression, it seems).
Serge Leclaire has outlined a theory of neuroses and psychoses in terms
of the notion of the question as the fundamental category of the unconscious. In this connection he distinguishes between the hysteric's mode
of questioning ('Am I a man or a woman?') and that of the obsessive
('Am I dead or alive?'); he also distinguishes the respective positions of
the neurotic and the psychotic in relation to this instance of the question: 'La mort dans la vie de 1'obsede', La psychanalyse, no. 2, 1956
('Jerome, or Death in the Life of the Obsessional', Returning to Freud:

Notes

317

Clinical Psychoanalysis in the School of Lacan, ed. and transi. Stuart
Schneiderman, New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1980,
pp. 94-113); 'A la recherche des principes d'une psychotherapie des
psychoses', Evolution psychiatrique, II, 1958. This research on the
form and content of the questions lived by patients seems to us of enormous importance, implying a revision of the role of the negative and of
conflict in the unconscious in general. Here again, they have their origin in some remarks by Lacan: on the kinds of question in hysteria and
obsession, see Ecrits, A Selection, transi. Alan Sheridan, London:
Tavistock/Routledge, 1989: The function and field of speech and language in psychoanalysis', pp. 89-90; on desire, its difference from need
and its relation with 'enquiry' and with the 'question', see ibid: The direction of the treatment and the principles of its power', pp. 263-5;
The signification of the phallus', pp. 285-8.
Was not one of the most important points of Jung's theory already to
be found here: the force of 'questioning' in the unconscious, the conception of the unconscious as an unconscious of 'problems' and 'tasks'?
Drawing out the consequences of this led Jung to the discovery of a
process of differenciation more profound than the resulting oppositions
(see The Ego and the Unconscious). Freud, it is true, violently criticised
this point of view, notably in The Wolf Man', s. 5, where he maintains
that the child does not question but desires, and that rather than being
confronted with tasks it is confronted with emotions governed by opposition; and also in 'Dora', s. 2, where he shows that the kernel of the
dream can only be a desire engaged in a corresponding conflict. Nevertheless, the discussion between Jung and Freud is perhaps not well situated, since it is a question of knowing whether or not the unconscious
can do anything other than desire. In truth, should it not be asked
whether desire is only an oppositional force rather than a force completely founded in the power [puissance] of the question? Even Dora's
dream, which Freud invokes, can be interpreted only from the perspective of a problem (with the two series father-mother, Herr K.-Frau K.)
which develops an hysterical question (with the jewel box playing the
role of the object = x).
18 Even though Eros implies the union of two cellular bodies, thereby introducing new 'vital differences', 'we still feel our line of thought appreciably hampered by the fact that we cannot ascribe to the sexual
instinct the characteristic of a compulsion to repeat which first put us
on the track of the death instincts'. Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 1920, Standard Edition, vol. 18, p. 56.
19 See Paul Ricoeur, De ^interpretation, Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1965,
pp. 413-14, transi. Denis Savage as Freud and Philosophy: An Essay
on Interpretation, New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press,
1970..

318

Difference and Repetition

20 Freud, The Ego and the Id, 1923, Standard Edition, vol. 19, pp. 43-7.
21 Freud, Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, 1926 [1925], Standard Edition, vol. 20, pp. 138 ff. It is all the more strange that Freud reproaches
Rank for having a too objective conception of birth.
22 Maurice Blanchot, The Space of Literature, transl. Ann Smock, Lincoln
and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1982, pp. 106,154-5.
23 Jorge Luis Borges, Ficciones, New York: Grove Press, 1962, 'The Babylon Lottery', pp. 69-70; The Garden of Forking Paths' p. 98.
24 See Claude Levi-Strauss, Totemism, transl. Rodney Needham, Boston,
MA: Beacon Press, 1963, p. 77: 'If we may be allowed the expression,
it is not the resemblances, but the differences, which resemble each
other.' Levi-Strauss shows how this principle develops in the constitution of at least two series, the terms of each series being different
amongst themselves (for example, in the case of totemism, the series of
distinct species of animals and that of the differential social positions):
the resemblance is 'between these two series of differences'.
25 Leon Selme showed that the illusion of an annulment of difference
must be all the greater the smaller the differences realised within a system (and therefore in thermal machines), in his Principe de carnot contre formule empirique de Clausius, Paris: H. Dunod & E. Pinat, 1917.
On the importance of disparate series and their internal resonance in
the constitution of systems, see Gilbert Simondon, L'individu et sa
genese physico-biologique, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1964, p. 20. (However, Simondon maintains as a condition the requirement of resemblance between series, or the smallness of the differences
in play: pp. 254-7.)
26 Witold Gombrowicz, Cosmos, transl. into French by Georges Sedir,
Paris: Denoel, 1966. The preface to this edition of Cosmos outlines a
theory of disparate series, their resonance and of chaos. The English
edition of Cosmos, transl. by Eric Mosbacher, New York: Grove Press,
1967, has no preface.
See also the theme of repetition in Ferdydurke, transl. Eric
Mosbacher, London: Marion Boyars, 1979, pp. 70-87.
27 On this problem, see J. Laplanche and J.-B. Pontalis, 'Fantasme originaire, fantasmes des origines, origine du fantasme', Les Temps modernes, no. 215, April 1964. Transl. as 'Fantasy and the Origins of
Sexuality', International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 49, 1968; reprinted, with an afterword, in V. Burgin, J. Donald, C. Kaplan eds.,
Formations of Fantasy, London: Methuen, 1968.
28 In lines which apply particularly to Freudian phantasy, Jacques Derrida
writes: 'It is thus the delay which is in the beginning. Without which,
differance would be the lapse which a consciousness, a self-presence of
the present, accords itself. ... To say that differance is originary is simultaneously to erase the myth of a present origin. Which is why

Notes

319

'originary' must be understood as having been crossed out, without
which differance would be derived from an original plenitude. It is a
non-origin which is originary': Writing and Difference, transl. Alan
Bass, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978, p. 203; see also Maurice Blanchot, 'Le rire des dieux', Nouvelle Revue Franqaise, July 1965:
'The image must cease to be second in relation to a supposedly prior
object and must demand a certain primacy, just as the original and then
the origin will lose their initial privileges. ... There is no longer any
original but an eternal twinkling in which the absence of any origin is
dispersed in the flash of detour and return.'
29 Plato's arguments are marked by stylistic reprises and repetitions which
testify to a meticulous attention to detail, as though there were an effort to 'correct' a theme in order to defend it against a neighbouring
but dissimilar theme that is likely to 'insinuate itself. The repetition of
the Platonic theme serves to neutralise and ward off the return of preSocratic themes: parricide is therefore consummated several times, and
never more than when Plato imitates those he denounces. See P.-M.
Schuhl, 'Remarques sur la technique de la repetition dans le Phedon', in
Etudes platoniciennes, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1960, pp.
118-25 (what P.-M. Schuhl calls the 'litanies of the idea').
30 On this 'other' model, which amounts to a kind of equivalent in
Platonism of the evil demon or the God who misleads us, see Theaetetus, 176e, and especially Timaeus, 28b ff. On phantasms and the
distinction between icones and phantasms, the principal texts are in the
Sophist, 235e-236d (also the Republic, X, 601 ff.).
*The Greek term phantasma, for which Deleuze often uses the French
equivalent phantasme, is frequently rendered in English translations of
Plato as 'appearance'. I have preferred to use 'phantasm' in order to retain the connection with 'phantasy' in the preceding section of the text,
where Deleuze uses the same French word as equivalent to the Freudian
term Phantasie.
Chapter III The Image of Thought
1 See Descartes, 'The Search for Truth by Means of the Natural Light', in
The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, transl. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff and Dugald Murdoch, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, vol. II.
2 Feuerbach is among those who have pursued farthest the problem of
where to begin. He denounces the implicit presuppositions of philosophy in general, and those of Hegel in particular. He shows that philosophy must not begin with its accord with a pre-philosophical image, but
with its 'difference' from non-philosophy. (However, he supposes that
this exigency of the true beginning is sufficiently met by beginning with
empirical, perceptible and concrete being.) See Contribution a la Cri-

320

3
4
5
6

7

8
9

10

Difference and Repetition

tique de la Philosophic de Hegel, transl. Louis Althusser, in Manifestes
philosophiques, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1960, especially
p. 33.
The sentence 'Good sense is of all things in the world the most equally
distributed', opens Part 1 of the Discourse on the Method, which appears in The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. I.
* Descartes, 'Second Meditation', in The Philosophical Writings of
Descartes, vol. II, p. 21.
Nietzsche, 'Schopenhauer as Educator', in Untimely Meditations,
transl. by RJ. Hollingdale, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1983, p. 137.
On this common sense and the persistence of the model of recognition,
see Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, transl.
Colin Smith, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962, pp. 239 ff, 313
ff. On the Kantian theory of common senses, see especially the Critique
of Judgment, transl. Werner S. Pluhar, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1987,
sections 18-22 and 40, and the declarations of principle in the Critique
of Pure Reason: 'The ideas of pure reason can never be dialectical in
themselves; any deceptive illusion to which they give occasion must be
due solely to their misemployment. For they arise from the very nature
of our reason; and it is impossible that this highest tribunal of all the
rights and claims of speculation should itself be the source of deceptions and illusions' (Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, transl. Norman
Kemp Smith, London: Macmillan, 1973, Appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic, p. 533); 'in regard to the essential ends of human nature
the highest philosophy cannot advance further than is possible under
the guidance which nature has bestowed even upon the most ordinary
understanding.' (from 'The Transcendental Doctrine of Method', ch. 2,
Critique of Pure Reason, p. 652).
On the double subordination of difference to conceived identity and
perceived resemblance in the 'classical' world of representation, see
Michel Foucault, The Order of Things, transl. Alan Sheridan, London:
Tavistock, 1977, pp. 54 ff, 67 ff.
Plato, The Republic, Book VH, 523b, transl. Paul Shorey, in Plato: The
Collected Dialogues, ed. E. Hamilton and H. Cairns, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1963.
Ibid., 524a, b. Note that Gaston Bachelard opposes the problem or the
object-bearer of problem to Cartesian doubt, and denounces the recognition model in philosophy: Le rationalisme applique, Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1949, pp. 51-6.
The case of the imagination: this is the only case in which Kant considers a faculty liberated from the form of a common sense, and discovers
for it a truly legitimate 'transcendent' exercise. In effect, the schematic
imagination in the Critique of Pure Reason is still under the logical

Notes

11

12

13
14

15

321

common sense; the reflective imagination of judgements of beauty is
still under the aesthetic common sense. Yet with the sublime, according
to Kant, the imagination is forced or constrained to confront its own
limit, its phantasteon, its maximum which is equally the unimaginable,
the unformed or the deformed in nature (Critique of Judgment, s. 26).
Moreover, it transmits this constraint to thought itself, which in turn is
forced the think the supra-sensible as foundation of both nature and
the faculty of thought: thought and imagination here enter into an essential discordance, a reciprocal violence which conditions a new type
of accord (s. 27). As a result, in the case of the sublime, the recognition
model and the form of common sense are found wanting in favour of a
quite different conception of thought (s. 29).
Martin Heidegger, What is Called Thinking? transl. J. Glenn Gray,
New York: Harper &c Row, 1968, p. 3. It is true that Heidegger retains
the theme of a desire or a philia, of an analogy - or rather, a homology
- between thought and that which is to be thought. The point is that he
retains the primacy of the Same, even if this is supposed to include and
comprehend difference as such - whence the metaphors of gift which
are substituted for those of violence. In all these senses, Heidegger does
not abandon what we called above the subjective presuppositions. As
can be seen in Being and Time (transl. John Macquarie and Edward
Robinson, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987), there is in effect a pre-ontological and implicit understanding of being, even though, Heidegger
specifies, the explicit conception must not follow from it.
The notion of a 'discordant - harmony' is well specified by Kostas Axelos, who applies it to the world and employs a particular sign
('and/or') to designate ontological difference in this sense: see Vers la
pensee planetaire, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1964.
Artaud, 'Correspondence with Jacques Riviere', Collected Works, vol.
1, transl. Victor Corti, London: John Calder, 1968, p.19 (*translation
modified).
See Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, transl. A.V. Miller, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977, p. 23: 'Dogmatism as a way of thinking,
whether in ordinary knowing or in the study of philosophy, is nothing
else but the opinion that the true consists in a proposition which is a
fixed result, or which is immediately known. To such questions as,
when was Caesar born? or how many feet were there in a stadium?,
etc., a clear-cut answer ought to be given ... but the nature of a socalled truth of that kind is different from the nature of philosophical
truth.'
Flaubert, Bouvard et Pecuchet. Schelling wrote some splendid pages on
evil (stupidity and malevolence), its source which is like the Ground become autonomous (essentially related to individuation), and on the entire history which follows from this, in 'Recherches philosophiques sur

322

16
17
18

19
20

Difference and Repetition

la nature de la liberte humaine', in Essais, transl. S. Jankelevitch, Paris:
Aubier, 1949, pp. 265-7: 'God allowed this ground to act quite independently ...'
*Bertrand Russell, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth,
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1962, p. 201.
Whence Russell's attitude, which privileges singular propositions: see
his polemic with Carnap in An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, pp.
244 ff.
See Hubert Elie's excellent book Le complexe significabile, Paris: Vrin,
1936, which shows the importance and the paradoxes of this theory of
sense as it was developed in the course of the fourteenth century among
Ockham's school (Gregory of Rimini, Nicholas d'Autrecourt), and also
as it was rediscovered by Meinong. The sterility and ineffectiveness of
sense conceived in this manner appears again in Husserl when he
writes: 'The stratum of expression - and this constitutes its peculiarity apart from the fact that it lends expression to all other intentionalities,
is not productive. Or if one prefers: its productivity, its noematic service, exhausts itself in expressing and in the form of the conceptual introduced by that function': Ideas: General Introduction to Pure
Phenomenology, transl. W.R. Boyce Gibson, London: George Allen &c
Unwin, 1931, Section 124.
* These paradoxes of sense are discussed further, with reference to
Lewis Carroll, in The Logic of Sense, transl. Mark Lester, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1990, pp. 28-35.
Aristotle, Topics, I, 4, lOlb, 30-35, in The Complete Works of Aristotle, ed. Jonathan Barnes, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1984, vol. I, p. 169. The same illusion continues within modern logic:
the calculus of problems as it is defined - notably by Kolgomoroff still remains traced from a calculus of propositions, in 'isomorphism'
with it. See Paulette Destouches-Fevrier, 'Rapports entre le calcul des
problemes et le calcul des propositions', Comptes rendus des seances de
I'Academie des Sciences, April 1945. As we shall see, an attempt at
'mathematics without negation' such as that of G.F.C. Griss is limited
only by this false conception of the category of problems.
Leibniz, on the other hand, was aware of the variable but always profound gap between problems or themes and propositions: 'There are indeed "themes" which can be said to be midway between an idea and a
proposition, namely questions. Some of these ask only for a Yes or a
No, and these are the closest to propositions; but there are others
which ask how, and ask for details, and so on, and more must be
added to these if they are to become propositions: New Essays on
Human Understanding, transl. and ed. Peter Remnant and Jonathan
Bennett, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981, Book 4, ch. 1,
p. 356.

Notes

323

21 In his Rules for the Direction of the Mind, Descartes distinguishes the
precepts relating to 'simple propositions' from the precepts relating to
'questions' (Rule XII). The latter begin only with Rule XIII, and are the
first to be concluded. Descartes himself underlines the point of resemblance between his method and the Aristotelian dialectic: This is the
sole respect in which we imitate the dialecticians: when they exposed
the forms of the syllogisms, they presupposed that the terms or the subject-matter of the syllogisms are known; similarly, we are making it a
prerequisite here that the problem under investigation is perfectly
understood': The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. I, p. 51.
Similarly, 'questions' have a subordinate role in Malebranche - see The
Search After Truth, transl. T.M. Lennon and PJ. Olscamp, Columbus:
Ohio State University Press, 1980, VI, 2, ch. 7 - and in Spinoza, where
the use of the geometric method involves no 'problems' at all.
In the Geometry, however, Descartes underlines the importance of
the analytic procedure from the point of view of the constitution of
problems, and not only with regard to their solution (Auguste Comte,
in some fine pages, insists on this point, and shows how the distribution of 'singularities' determines the 'conditions of the problem': Traite
elementaire de geometric analytique, 1843). In this sense we can say
that Descartes the geometer goes further than Descartes the philosopher.
22 One of the most original characteristics of modern epistemology is the
recognition of this double irreducibility of 'problems' (in this sense the
use of the word 'problematic' as a substantive seems to us an indispensable neologism). See Georges Bouligand and his distinction between the
'problem-element' and the 'global synthesis-element' (notably in Le
declin des absolus mathematico-logiques, Editions d'Enseignement
superieur, 1949); Georges Canguilhem and his problem-theory distinction (notably in On the Normal and the Pathological, transl. Carolyn
R. Fawcett, Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 1978.
23 Proclus, A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid's Elements, transl.
Glenn R. Morrow, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1970, pp.
63-7. .
24 Albert Lautman, Essai sur les notions de structure et d'existence en
mathematiques, Paris: Hermann, 1938, vol. I, p. 13; vol. II, p.149 ('the
only a priori element we allow is that given in the experience of this urgency of problems prior to the discovery of their solutions ...'). On the
double aspect of problems-Ideas, transcendence and immanence, see
Nouvelles recherches sur la structure dialectique des mathematiques,
Paris: Hermann, 1939, pp. 14-15.
Chapter IV Ideas and the Synthesis of Difference
1 Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, transl. Norman Kemp

324

Difference and Repetition

Smith, London: Macmillan, 1973, 'Introduction', p. 57; see Preface to
the Second Edition, p. 25: 'For pure speculative reason has this peculiarity, that it can measure its powers according to the different ways in
which it chooses the objects of its thinking, and can also give an exhaustive enumeration of the various ways in which it propounds its
problems ...'.
2 Ibid., p. 318 (The Transcendental Ideas).
3 Ibid., p. 319.
4 Both images may be found in the 'Appendix to the Transcendental
Dialectic': ibid., p. 533, and p. 542.
5 Jean Bordas-Demoulin, Le cartesianisme ou la veritable renovation des
sciences, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1843, vol. II, pp. 133 ff., 453 ff.
Charles Renouvier provides a comprehensive and profound analysis,
despite his hostility towards Bordas's theses: La Critique
philosophique, 6e annee, 1877.
6 Salomon Ma'imon, Versuch uber die Transzendentalphilosophie, Berlin:
Vos, 1790, p. 33. See also Martial Gueroult's very important book La
philosophie transcendentale de Salomon Maimon, Paris: Alcan, 1929
(especially pp. 53ff., 76ff. on 'determinability' and 'reciprocal
determination').
7 Jules Houel, Essai critique sur les principes fondamentaux de la
geometric elementaire, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1867, pp. 3, 75.
8 Hoene Wronski, Philosophie de I'infini, Paris: Didot, 1814;
Philosophie de la technie algorithmique, Paris: Didot, 1817. It is in the
latter book that Wronski expounds his theory and his formulae for series. Wronski's mathematical works were republished by Hermann in
1925. On his philosophy, see Francis Warrain, L'ceuvre philosophique
de Hoene Wronski, Paris: Vega, 1933. Warrain undertakes the necessary comparisons with the philosophy of Schelling.
9 Albert Lautman has clearly indicated this difference in kind between
the existence and distribution of singular points which refer to the
problem-element, and the specification of these same points which refers to the solution-element: Le probleme du temps, Paris: Hermann,
1946, p. 42. He emphasizes thereafter the role of singular points in
their problematizing function which generates solutions: '1. allowing
the determination of a fundamental system of solutions which can be
analytically extended over every path which does not encounter any
singularities; 2. ... their role is to divide up a domain so that the function which ensures the representation can be defined in this domain; 3.
they allow the passage from the local integration of the differential
equations to the global characterisation of the analytic functions which
are the solutions of those equations': Essai sur les notions de structure
et d'existence en mathematiques, Paris: Hermann, 1938, vol. II, p. 138.
10 C. Georges Verriest, 'Evariste Galois et la theorie des equations

Notes

11
12

13
14

15

325

algebriques', Oeuvres mathematiques de Galois, Paris: GauthierVillars, 1961, p. 41. The great manifesto with regard to the problem solution may be found in N.H. Abel, CEuvres completes, ed. B.
Holmboe, Christiana, Norway: Grondhal, 1839, vol. II: Sur la
resolution algebrique des equations. On Abel and Galois, see the two
essential chapters of Jules Vuillemin, La philosophic de I'algebre, Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 1962, vol. I. Vuillemin analyses the
role of a theory of problems and of a new conception of the critique of
Reason in Abel, and the role of a new principle of determination in Galois, especially pp. 213-21, pp. 229-33.
See Louis Althusser and Etienne Balibar, Reading Capital, London:
New Left Books, 1970, pp. 174 ff., 212 ff.
Jacques Brunschvig, for example, has clearly shown that the Aristotelian questions ti to on and tis he ousia do not at all mean 'What is
being?' and 'What is the essence?', but 'Which one is being (which is
being)?' and 'Which one is substance (or better, as Aristotle says, which
things are substances)?': 'Dialectique et ontologie chez Aristote', Revue
philosophique, 1964.
Charles Peguy, Clio, Paris: NRF, p. 269.
See one of the most important books of Neo-Platonism which puts in
play a serial and potential dialectic of difference, Damascius's
Dubitationes et solutiones de primis principiis, in Platonis Parmenidem,
Paris: C.A. Ruelle, 1889; reprinted Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1966.
The term ho synonichos in Deleuze's text is a misspelling of ho synochikos, 'the one that pertains to an integrated whole, holistic', which
occurs in Damascius, Dubitationes, p. 234. This clarification is due to
Professor A.P.D. Mourelatos.
On Schelling's theory of difference and powers, see particularly his
'Conferences de Stuttgart', transl. into French by S. Jankelevitch, in Essais, Paris: Aubier, 1949; and The Ages of the World, transl. Frederick
de Wolfe Bolman, New York: Columbia University Press, 1942.
On Plato, see The Republic, VI, 511 b: 'by the other section of the intelligible I mean that which the reason itself lays hold of by the power of
dialectic, treating its assumptions not as absolute beginnings but literally as hypotheses, underpinnings, footings and springboards so to
speak, to enable it to rise to that which requires no assumption and is
the starting point of all, and after attaining to that again taking hold of
the first dependencies from it, so to proceed downward to the conclusion ...'. This text is profoundly commented upon by Proclus, who
treats it as the expression of the method of the Parmenides, and uses it
to denounce the formal or sceptical interpretations already current in
his time: it is clear that the One in so far as it is distributed among the
hypotheses of the Parmenides is not the same as the One which requires
no assumption (an-hypothetical One), which is progressively attained

326

Difference and Repetition

by the dialectician and measures the truth of each hypothesis along the
way: Proclus, Commentaire du Parmenide, transl. into French by A.E.
Chaignet, Paris: Leroux, 1903.
On the transformation of hypothetical judgement into categorical
judgement in the philosophies of Mai'mon and Fichte, see Martial
Gueroult, L 'evolution et la structure de la Doctrine de la Science chez
Fichte, Paris: Les Belles-Lettres, 1930, vol. I, pp. 127 ff.
On Hegel and the analogous transformation, see the relation between
the in-itself and the for-itself in The Phenomenology of Mind; the relation between the Phenomenology itself and the Logic; the Hegelian
idea of 'science', and the passage from the empirical proposition to the
speculative proposition.
16 We refer, for example, to Philippe Sollers's novel Drame, Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1965. This novel takes as its motto a formula of Leibniz:
'Suppose, for example, that someone draws a number of points on the
paper at random. ... I say that it is possible to find a geometric line the
notion of which is constant and uniform according to a certain rule
such that this line passes through all the points ...'. The entire beginning of the book is constructed on the two formulae: 'Problem ...' and
'Missed ...'. Series are traced out in relation to the singular points of the
body of the narrator, an ideal body which is 'thought rather than
perceived'.*
On the blind spot as the original point of the work, see the interventions by Philippe Sellers and Jean-Pierre Faye in 'Debat sur le roman',
TelQuel.no. 17,1964.
17. Nietzsche, Musarion-Ausgabe, XVI, p. 35. * See Beyond Good and
Evil, transl. RJ. Hollingdale, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973, p. 231.
18 M. Heidegger, Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics, transl. J.S. Churchill, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1962, pp. 211-12.
19 No one has gone further than Gabriel Tarde in a classification of multiple oppositions, valid in every domain: formally, static oppositions
(symmetries) as opposed to dynamic; successive dynamic oppositions
(rhythms) as opposed to simultaneous; linear simultaneous oppositions
(polarities) as opposed to radiating. Materially, qualitative serial oppositions as opposed to quantitative; quantitative oppositions of degree as
opposed to force: L'oppositionuniverselle, Paris: Alcan, 1897.
Tarde seems to us to be the only one to discover the consequences of
such a classification: far from being autonomous, far from being a
maximum of difference, opposition is a minimal repetition in relation
to difference itself. Hence the positing of difference as the reality of a
multiple virtual field, and the determination of micro-processes in every
domain, such that oppositions are only summary results or simplified
and enlarged processes. For the application of this point of view to language and the principle of a micro-linguistics, cf. Les lois sociales,

Notes

20

21

22

23

327

Paris: Alcan, 1898, pp. 150 ff. transl. Howard C. Warren, (as Social
Laws: An Outline of Sociology, New York: Arno Press, 1899). It seems
that Georges Gurvitch rediscovers an inspiration in many respects close
to that of Tarde in Dialectique et Sociologie, Paris: Flammarion, 1962.
Gustave Guillaume, especially his Conferences de I'lnstitut de
Linguistique de I'lnstitut de Paris, 1939. For an account and an interpretation of Guillaume's work, see Edmond Ortigues's fine book, Le
discours et le symbole, Paris: Aubier, 1962. Similarly, on the expletive
NE and on negation, see Ortigues, pp. 102-9; and, cited by Ortigues,
Essai de grammaire de la langue fran$aise, by Jacques Damourette and
Edouard Pichon, Paris: Editions d'Astrey, 1911-52, vol. VI, chs 4, 5.
The distinction between the 'discordant' and the 'foreclusive' is due to
Damourette and Pichon.
Louis Althusser, Jacques Ranciere, Pierre Macherey, Etienne Balibar,
Roger Establet, Lire le Capital, Paris: Maspero, 1966. (On the nature
and the role of the concepts of opposition, contradiction and alienation, see Ranciere, vol. I, pp. 141 f., Macherey, vol. I, pp. 233 f.,
Balibar, vol. II, pp. 298 f.).
*The English translation of Reading Capital (London: New Left Books,
1970) contains only the essays by Althusser and Balibar. For the reference to Balibar's essay, see pp. 289 ff.
On the 'problem-differenciation' schema as a historical category, see
Arnold Toynbee, who, it is true, is little suspected of Marxism: 'We
could say that a society confronts in the course of its existence a succession of problems that each member must solve for himself as best he
can. The statement of each of these problems takes the form of a challenge which must be undertaken as a test. By means of this series of
tests, the members of the society are progessively differenciated from
one another': L'Histoire, un essai d'interpretation, transl. E. Julia,
Paris: NRF, p. 10.
On the correlation between internal milieu and differenciation, see
Frangois Meyer, Problematique de Devolution, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1954, pp. 112 ff. H.F. Osborne is among those
who have most profoundly insisted that life is the posing and solving of
'problems'; mechanical, dynamic or properly biological problems: The
Origin and Evolution of Life: On the Theory of Action, Reaction and
Interaction of Energy, London and New York: G. Bell, 1918. For example, the different types of eye can be studied only in relation to a
general physico-biological problem and the variations of its conditions
in different types of animals. The rule governing solutions is that each
entails at least one advantage and one drawback.
Bergson is the author who pushes furthest the critique of the possible,
and also most frequently invokes the notion of the virtual. From Time
and Free-Will, duration is defined as a non-actual multiplicity (Time

328

24
25
26
27
28

29
30

Difference and Repetition
and Free-Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness,
transl. F.L. Pogson, New York: Harper 8c Row, 1960, p. 84). In Matter and Memory (transl. Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer,
New York: Zone Books, 1988), the cone of pure memories with its sections and its 'shining points' on each section (p. 171) is completely real
but only virtual. In Creative Evolution, (transl. A. Mitchell, New York:
Holt, 1911; reprinted by University Press of America, 1983), differenciation and the creation of divergent lines is understood as an
actualisation in which each line of actualisation corresponds to a section of the cone (p. 167).
Leibniz, New Essays on Human Understanding, transl. and ed. Peter
Remnant and Jonathan Bennett, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981, Book II, ch.l.
Louis Vialleton, Membres et ceintures des vertebres tetrapods, Paris:
Doin, 1924, pp. 600 ff.
Etienne Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire, Principes de philosophic zoologique,
Paris: Pichon & Didiet, 1830, p. 70. The texts of the controversy with
Cuvier may be found in this book.
Edmond Perrier, Les colonies animales et la formation des organismes,
Paris: Masson, 1881, pp. 701 ff.
Raymond Ruyer, La genese des formes vivantes, Paris: Flammarion,
1958, pp. 91 ff.: 'The mystery of differenciation cannot be elucidated
by making it the effect of differences in situation produced by equal divisions ...'. Ruyer, no less than Bergson, profoundly analysed the notions of the virtual and actualisation. His entire biological philosophy
rests upon them along with the idea of the 'thematic'. See Elements de
psycho-biologic, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1946, ch. 4.
Lucien Cuenot, L'espece, Paris: Doin, 1936, p. 241.
The Kantian theory of schematism points beyond itself in two directions: towards the dialectical Idea, which is its own schema and which
ensures the specification of the concept (Critique of Pure Reason, 'The
Final Purpose of the Natural Dialectic of Human Reason'), and towards the aesthetic Idea, which makes schemata serve the more complex and comprehensive process of symbolism (Critique of Judgment,
Sections 49, 59).

Chapter V Asymmetrical Synthesis of the Sensible
1 On dissymmetry as 'sufficient reason', see Louis Rougier, En marge de
Curie, de Carnot et d'Einstein, Paris: Editions Chiron, 1922.
2 J.-H. Rosny, the elder (Boex-Borel), Les sciences et le pluralisme, Paris:
Alcan, 1922, p. 18: 'Energetics shows that all work derives from differences of temperature, potential, or level, just as all acceleration presupposes differences of speed: it is likely that all calculable energy implies
the presence of factors of the form E-E', where E and E' themselves

Notes

3

4

5

6
7
8

329

hide factors of the form e-e'. ... Since intensity already expresses a difference, it will be necessary to define more clearly what this means, and
in particular to make it clear that intensity cannot be composed of two
homogeneous terms but must contain at least two series of heterogeneous terms.' Rosny develops two theses in this fine book concerning
intensive quantities: (1) resemblance presupposes difference; it is differences that resemble one another; (2) 'difference alone allows us to conceive of being'. Rosny was a friend of Curie. In his novels, he invents a
kind of naturalism in intensity which, at the two extremes of the intensive scale, then leads into the prehistoric caverns and future spaces of
science fiction.
*Deleuze follows Bergson in employing distinct terms for the act or
process of extension (Latin extensio, for which Deleuze gives both
extensile and extension intra: pp. 223, 228), and the result (Latin extensum, for which he invariably uses etendue). I have followed established usage in using 'extension' for the former and 'extensity' for the
latter. See the note on these terms by Martin Joughin in Deleuze, Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza, New York: Zone Books, 1990, pp.
416-18.
See 'Valeur de la difference', Revue philosophique de la Prance et de
L'Etranger, vol. CXLV, April 1955, pp. 121-39, where Andre Lalande
sums up his principal theses. Emile Meyerson's position is closely analogous, even though Meyerson gives a quite different evaluation of the
role and sense of Carnot's principle. However, he accepts the same system of definitions. So does Albert Camus who, in The Myth of
Sisyphus, invokes Nietzsche, Kierkegaard and Shestov, but is much
closer to the tradition of Meyerson and Lalande.
Ludwig Boltzmann, Lemons sur la theorie des gaz, transl. into French
by Gallotti and Benard, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, vol. II, pp. 251 ff.(*see
Lectures on Gas Theory, transl. Stephen G. Brush, Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1964).
Andre Lalande, Les illusions evolutionnistes, Paris: Alcan, 1930, pp.
347-8, and 378: 'The production of difference, which is contrary to the
general laws of thought, is, strictly speaking, mexplicable.'
Leon Selme, Principe de Carnot contre formule empirique de Clausius,
Paris: H. Dunod & E. Pinat, 1917.
(A) On the envelopment or 'implication' of depth in the perception of
extensity, see the very important and little-known work of Jacques Paliard, notably Pensee implicite et perception visuelle, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1949. Paliard analyses the forms of implication
and shows the difference in nature between what he calls implicit
thought and explicit thought: p. 6: 'Not only is there an enveloped implicit, but there is also an enveloping implicit'; and p. 46: This implicit
knowledge ... seemed to us to be at once something enveloping, like

330

Difference and Repetition

depth or the synthetic affirmation of a visible universe, and something
enveloped, such as the multiple suggestions which cause details to conspire, or the multiple distancial relations within depth itself...'.
(B) On the intensive nature of depth perception and the status of the
quality which follows from this, see Maurice Pradines, Traite de Psychologie generate, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1943, vol. I,
pp. 405-31, 554-69.
(C) Finally, on intensive space and spatial operations of an intensive
nature, from the point of view of activity, see Jean Piaget, Introduction
a I'epistemologie genetique, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1949, vol. I, pp.75 ff. 210 ff.
9 Hermann Cohen, Kants Theorie der Erfahrung, Berlin: Diimmler, 2nd
edn, 1885, section 428 ff. On the role of intensive quantities in Cohen's
interpretation of Kantianism, see the comments by Jules Vuillemin,
L'heritage kantien et la revolution copernicienne, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1954, pp. 183-202.
10 Plato, Timaeus, 35-7.
11 G.F.C. Griss founded and developed the idea of a mathematics without
negation, within the framework of Brouwerian intuitionism: 'Logique
des mathematiques intuitionnistes sans negation', Paris: Comptes rendus des seances de L'Academic des Sciences, 8 November 1948; 'Sur la
negation', Synthese, Amsterdam: Bussum, 1948-9. On the notions of
gap, distance or positive difference according to Griss, see A. Heyting,
Les fondements mathematiques, Intuitionnisme, Theorie de la
demonstration, transl. Paulette Fevrier, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1955;
Paulette Fevrier, 'Manifestations et sens de la notion de
complementarite', Dialectica, 1948; and especially Nicole Dequoy, Axiomatique intuitionniste sans negation de la geometrie protective, Paris:
Gauthier-Villars, 1955, where the author gives numerous examples of
proofs by Griss in contrast to proofs involving negations. The limitations of this mathematics as shown by Madame Fevrier do not seem to
us to derive from the notion of distance or difference itself, but rather
from the theory of problems added to it by Griss: cf. Chapter III above.
12 On depth, stereoscopic images and the 'solution of the antinomies', see
Raymond Ruyer, 'Le relief axiologique et le sentiment de la
profondeur', Revue de metaphysique et de morale, July 1956. On the
primacy of 'disparateness' in relation to opposition, see Gilbert
Simondon's critique of Lewin's 'hodological space' in Uindividu et sa
genese physico-biologique, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1964, pp. 232-4.
13 Alois Meinong ('Uber die Bedeutung des Weberschen Gesetzes',
Zeitschrift fur Psychologic und Physiologic der Sinnesorgane, vol. XI,
1896) and Bertrand Russell (The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1903, ch. 31) clearly indicated the

Notes

14

15
16

17
18

331

distinction between lengths or extensions and differences or distances.
The former are extensive quantities divisible into equal parts; the latter
are relatively indivisible quantities of intensive origin - in other words,
quantities which do not change without changing their nature. It was
Leibniz who first founded the theory of distances, linking these to the
spatium and opposing them to the magnitudes of extensio - see Martial
Gueroult, 'Espace, point et vide chez Leibniz', Revue philosophique de
la France et de I'etranger, vol. 136, 1946 (*partially translated by
Roger Ariew as 'Space, Point and Void in Leibniz's Philosophy', in M.
Hooker, ed., Leibniz: Critical and Interpretative Essays, Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 1982).
Bergson, from the outset, defined duration as a 'multiplicity' or a divisibility which does not divide without changing its nature: Time and
Free-Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness, transl.
F.L. Pogson, New York: Harper 6c Row, 1960, pp. 84 ff.; and especially Matter and Memory transl. Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott
Palmer, New York: Zone Books, 1988, pp. 206-7. There is therefore
not only a difference in kind between duration and extensity, but duration is distinguished from extensity in the same manner as differences in
kind are distinguished from differences of degree (two types of
'multiplicity'). Nevertheless, in another manner duration is indistinguishable from the nature of difference and, as such, includes all the degrees of difference-, hence the reintroduction of intensities within
duration, and the idea of a coexistence in duration of all the degrees of
relaxation and contraction (the essential thesis of Matter and Memory
and La Pensee et le mouvant).
On the reticence of the Greeks, for example, with regard to the eternal
return, see Charles Mugler, Deux themes de la cosmologie grecque,
devenir cyclique et pluralite des mondes, Paris: Klincksieck, 1953.
Pierre Klossowski has demonstrated the link between eternal return
and pure intensities functioning as 'signs': 'Oubli et anamnese dans
1'experience vecue de Peternel retour du Meme', in Nietzsche: Cahiers
de Royaumont, Philosophic No. VI, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1967. In
his story Le Baphomet (Paris: Mercure, 1965) Klossowski offers a detailed description of this world of intensive 'breaths' which constitute
the specific matter of the eternal return.
See Simondon, L'individu et sa genese physico-biologique.
On the speed with which the type and specific form appear, see Edmond Perrier, Les colonies animales et la formation des organismes,
Paris: Masson, 1881, pp. 701 ff. Perrier emphasizes the dependence of
the notion of species with regard to sexed reproduction: To each new
generation, the common characteristics assume a greater immutability.
... All recent research tends to show that species do not exist in those
groups of the animal kingdom where reproduction is carried out with-

332

19
20
21

22

Difference and Repetition

out prior fertilization. Thus, the appearance of species is intimately tied
to that of sexual generation' (p. 707).
Albert Dalcq, L'oeuf et son dynamisme organisateur, Paris: Albin
Michel, 1941, pp. 194 ff.
Leibniz, The Principles of Nature and of Grace, Based on Reason,
1714, section 6, In Philosophical Papers and Letters, transl. and ed.
Leroy E. Loemker, 2nd edn, Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 1969.
Francois Meyer, Problematique de revolution, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1954, p. 193: The functioning of biological systems is therefore not contrary to thermodynamics but only outside its
sphere of application ...'. In this sense, Meyer recalls Jordan's question:
'Is a Mammal a microscopic being?' (p. 228).
On the other as expression, implication and envelopment of a possible
'world'; see Michel Tournier, Vendredi ou les limbes du Pacifique,
Paris: Gallimard, 1967; transl. Norman Denny as Friday, New York:
Pantheon, 1985.

Conclusion
1 See Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, Part I, section 10.
2 The most developed attempt of this kind is that of J.-P. Faye in a book
entitled, precisely, Analogues, Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1964. See pp.
14-15 on displacement and disguise in unspecified series, yet at the
same time the consideration of repetition as an analogy for an eye
which remains after all external. Also, throughout the book, the role of
a death instinct interpreted in an analogical manner.
3 There is no need to enquire whether Bouvard and Pecuchet themselves
are stupid or not. This is not at all the issue. Flaubert's project is encyclopaedic and 'critical' rather than psychological. The problem of stupidity is posed in a philosophical manner as a transcendental problem
of the relations between thought and stupidity. In the same divided - or
rather, repeated - thinking being, it is a matter of both stupidity as a
faculty and of the faculty of being unable to stand stupidity. Here,
Flaubert recognises Schopenhauer as his master.
4 Arthur Adamov wrote a very fine piece on this theme, La grande et la
petite manoeuvre, Paris: NRF, Theatre 1,1950.
5 See Eugen Fink, Le jeu comme symbole du monde, transl. Hildenbrand
and Lindenberg, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1960; and Kostas Axelos,
Vers la pensee planetaire, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1964, which attempt to distinguish the divine game and the human game, from a very
different perspective from that adopted here, in order to arrive at a formula which they call, following Heidegger, 'ontological difference'.
6 Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, transl. R.J. Hollingdale,
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1961, Book III, 'Before Sunrise'; The Seven
Seals'; Book IV, 'Of the Higher Men', s. 14.

Notes

333

7 Butler's Erewbon seems to us not only a disguised no-where but a rearranged now-here.
8 All sorts of examples of this kind may be found in Xavier Abely, Les
stereotypies, Toulouse: Dirion, 1916. One of the best clinical studies of
stereotypes and iteration remains Paul Guiraud's, Psychiatric clinique,
Paris: Le Francois, 1956, pp. 106 ff.; and 'Analyse du symptome
stereotypie', L'Encephale, November 1936. Guiraud distinguishes
clearly between perseveration and repetition (step-by-step iterations or
intermittent stereotypes). For if the phenomena of perseveration may be
explained negatively by a defect or mental lack, those of repetition have
the double property of presenting condensations and contractions and
requiring a primary and positive principle of explanation. Note, in this
regard, that Jacksonism, while it places repetition among the category
of 'positive' symptoms, still maintains the principle of an entirely negative explanation; for the positivity it invokes is that of a bare and mechanical repetition, expressing a supposedly inferior or archaic level of
equilibrium. In fact, the mechanical repetition which constitutes the
manifest aspect of a stereotype or an iteration does not express a level
of the totality but concerns essentially fragments or 'bricks', as
Monakow and Mourgue call them - hence the importance of fragmentary contractions and condensations. In this sense, however, the true
positivity is that which invests the totality of the psychic life in the fragment - in other words, invests in the mechanical repetition a repetition
of a quite different kind which belongs to the sphere of the 'instincts',
always displaceable and disguised [thymie]. It has been said that in the
case of stereotypes, only the signifier, not the signified, is archaic: 'Underneath the fragmentation of the symptom, there is always a continuous signified, more or less richly endowed with sense': A. Beley and
J.-J. Lefransois, 'Aper^u semeiologique dramatique de quelques
stereotypies motrices chez Penfant', Annales med. ps., April 1962.
9 Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Prologue 4 and 5; and Part n, 'Of
the Sublime Men' for the critique of heroes.
10 Nietzsche, Werke, Leipzig: Kroner, vol. XII, 1, section 106.
11 See Heidegger, '... Poetically Man Dwells ...' in Poetry Language,
Thought, transl. Albert Hofstadter, New York: Harper &c Row, 1971,
p. 18.

Bibliography
Index of Names and Topics
The comment following the book-title specifies the sense in which the work
is cited in relation to the concerns of the this book.
Works of a particularly scientific or literary character are marked with
an asterisk .
This bibliography is obviously not exhaustive, and could not be. (For
example, a theme such as that of the 'compulsion to repeat' in the
unconscious involves almost the entire psychoanalytic bibliography.) Only
those authors and works which have been referred to in the course of this
book have been included, even where this involved no more than a detail
or a simple reference.
Sometimes we refer in an allusive, vague and general manner to authors
or works which are nevertheless essential: for example, Damascius,
Schelling or Heidegger with regard to the philosophy of difference; Vico
and Peguy with regard to repetition. This is because, in the case of these
authors, we have not had occasion to give an account of their conceptions
of difference or repetition for their own sake. In other cases, by contrast,
we have been led to undertake such an account: in those of Plato, Aristotle,
Leibniz, Hegel or Nietzsche, for example. Even in these cases, however, the
accounts given remain completely inadequate from the point of view of the
history of philosophy, since they are intended only to serve the needs of
our researches.
One should therefore take into account not only the fact that there is no
analysis of the theory of difference as it appears in the work of many very
important authors, but also the fact that even where such an analysis is
sketched, it remains partial and fragmentary.
For a certain number of authors (Plato, Aristotle, Leibniz, Hegel, Freud
and Heidegger) we have put only passim in the column for works. This is
because the themes of difference or repetition are really present throughout
all their work. Undoubtedly there are some works which treat these themes
more directly than others: these are the ones cited in the course of this
book. In other cases, by contrast, particularly those where the work is of
more literary character, we have cited only certain works considered
'exemplary', even though the whole of the author's work revolves around
the themes of difference and repetition.
Abel, N.H. (Euvres completes, ed. B. Holmboe, Christiana, Norway: C.
Grondhal, 1839. Theory of problems, differential and determination.
334

Bibliography

335

Abely, X. Les stereotypies, Toulouse: Dirion, 1916. Stereotypes in psychiatry.
Adamov, A. La grande et la petite manoeuvre. Paris: NRF, Theatre I,
1950. Impersonal differences.
Alleman, B. Holderlin et Heidegger, French translation, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1954. Ontological difference according to Heidegger.
Alquie, F. Le desir d'eternite, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1943.
Repetition in the unconscious.
Althusser, L. For Marx, transl. Ben Brewster, London: New Left Review
Editions, 1977; with Jacques Ranciere, Pierre Macherey, Etienne Balibar
and Roger Establet, Lire le Capital Paris: Maspero, 1966. (See Althusser
and Balibar, Reading Capital, London: New Left Books, 1970.) Difference and contradiction: structural logic of difference.
Aristotle Passim. Logic and ontology of difference (generic and specific differences).
Artaud, A. Collected Works, transl. Victor Corti, London: John Calder,
1968. Determination, theatre and thought.
Axelos, K. Vers la pensee planetaire, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1964. Ontological difference and play.
Bachelard, G. Le rationalisme applique, Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1949. Epistemology of problems and difference.
Beaufret, J. Introduction to Poeme de Parmenide, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1955; 'Holderlin et Sophocle' in Holderlin, Remarques sur Oedipe. Remarques sur Antigone, Paris: Union Generale
d'Editions 10/18, 1965. Difference, the form of time and the caesura according to Holderlin.
Bergson, H. (Euvres, Paris, Presses Universitaires de France (Edition du
Centenaire), 1959. Physical repetition, contraction, change; Repetition
and memory, biological differenciation; intensity, quality and extension.
Blanchot, M. 'Le rire des dieux', Nouvelle Revue Franfaise, July 1965; The
Space of Literature, transl. Ann Smock, Lincoln and London: University
of Nebraska Press, 1982. Difference, thought and death; simulacra.
Boltzmann, L. Lectures on Gas Theory, transl. Stephen G. Brush, Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1964. Difference and
probability.
Bordas-Demoulin, J. Le cartesianisme ou la veritable renovation des sciences, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1843. The differential Idea and the interpretation of calculus.
Borges, J.L. Ficciones, New York: Grove Press, 1962. Chaos, play, difference and repetition.
Bouligand, G. (with Desgranges, J.) Le declin des absolus mathematico-

336

Difference and Repetition

logiques, Paris: Editions d'Enseignement superieur, 1949. Epistemology
of problems and difference in mathematics.
Brunschvig, J. 'Dialectique et ontologie chez Aristote', Revue
philosophique, 1964. Aristotelian difference and dialectic.
Butler, S. Life and Habit, London: Jonathan Cape, 1910. Erewhon: Or
Over the Range, London: Triibner, 1872. Repetition and habit.
Butor, M. Repertoire, I, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1960. Repetition and
freedom according to Raymond Roussel.
*La Modification, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1957. Repetition and modification.
Camus, A. Le Mythe de Sisyphe, Paris: NRF, 1942. Difference and identity.
Canguilhem, G. On the Normal and the Pathological, transl. Carolyn R.
Fawcett, Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 1978. Epistemology of problems and of biological difference.
Carnot, L. Reflexions sur la metaphysique du calcul infinitesimal, Paris,
1797 (2nd ed. transl. W.R. Browell as Reflexions on the Metaphysical
Principles of the Infinitesimal Analysis, Oxford, 1832). Differential calculus and problems.
Carroll, L. The Complete Works of Lewis Carroll, New York: Random
House/Nonesuch Press, 1939. Problem, sense and difference (the object
= *)•
Cohen, H. Kants Theorie der Erfahrung, Berlin: Diimmler, 2nd ed., 1885.
The role of intensive quantities in the Critique of Pure Reason.
Cuenot, L. L'espece, Paris: Doin, 1936. Difference in biology.
Dalcq, A. L'ozuf et son dynamisme organisateur, Paris: Albin Michel,
1941. Intensity, individuation and biological differenciation.
Damascius Dubitationes et solutiones de primis principiis, in Platonis
Parmenidem, Paris: C.A. Ruelle, 1889; reprinted Amsterdam, Hakkert,
1966. Neo-Platonic dialectic of difference.
Damourette, J. (with Pichon, E.) Essai de grammaire de la langue francaise,
Paris: Editions D'Astrey, 1911-52. The differential 'Ne' in language.
Darwin, C. On the Origin of the Species by means of Natural Selection,
London: J. Murray, 1859. The logic of difference in biology.
Dequoy, N. Axiomatique intuitionniste sans negation de la geometric projective, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1955. Distance or positive difference in
logic and mathematics according to Griss.
Derrida, J. Writing and Difference, transl. Alan Bass, London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1978. Difference and repetition in the unconscious, language and the work of art.
Duns Scotus, J. Opus Oxoniense. (Opera Omnia, ed. L. Wadding, 1639;
reprinted Paris: Vives, 1891-95.) Univocity, formal distinction and individuating difference.

Bibliography

337

Eco, U. The Open Work, transl. Anna Cancogni, with an Introduction by
David Robey, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989.
Simulacra, difference and works of art.
Eliade, M. The Myth of the Eternal Return, transl. William R. Trask, New
York: Pantheon, 1984. Repetition, myth and faith.
Elie, H. Le complexe significabile, Paris: Vrin, 1936. Sense and difference
in certain medieval logics.
Faye, J.-P. in 'Debat sur le roman', Tel Quel, no. 17, 1964; Analogues,
Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1964. Difference and repetition in the work of
art.
Ferenczi, S. (with Rank, O.) Entwicklungziele der Psychoanalyse, Neue
Arbeiten zur drtzlichen Psychoanalyse, Vienna: 1924. (The Development
of Psychoanalysis, transl. Caroline Newton, New York: Nervous and
Mental Disease Publishing, 1925.) Transference and repetition in the unconscious.
Feuerbach, L. Contribution a la Critique de la Philosophic de Hegel, transl.
Louis Althusser, in Manifestes philosophiques, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1960. Difference and beginning in philosophy.
Fevrier, P. 'Rapports entre le calcul des problemes et le calcul des
propositions', Comptes rendus des seances de I'Academic des Sciences,
April 1945; 'Manifestations et sens de la notion de complementarite',
Dialectica, 1948. Difference and negation in logic, mathematics and
physics.
Fink, E. Le jeu comme symbole du monde, transl. Hildenbrand and
Lindenberg, Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1960. Ontological difference and
play.
Foucault, M. 'La Prose d'Acteon', Nouvelle Revue Fran$aise, March 1964;
The Order of Things, transl. Alan Sheridan, London: Tavistock, 1977;
Death and the Labyrinth: The World of Raymond Roussel, transl.
Charles Ruas, London: Athlone, 1987. Difference, resemblance, identity.
Difference and repetition in simulacra.
Freud, S. Passim. Repetition in the unconscious; after 1918, Repetition,
Eros and the death instinct.
Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire, E. Principes de philosophic zoologique, Paris:
Pichon 8c Didiet, 1830. The logic of difference in biology.
Ghyka, M. Le Nombre d'Or, Paris: Gallimard, 1931. Static and dynamic
repetition, symmetry and dissymmetry.
Gilson, E. Jean Duns Scot: Introduction a ses positions fondamentales,
Paris: Vrin, 1952. Difference, analogy, univocity.
Gombrowicz, W. Cosmos, transl. into French by Georges Sedir, Paris:
Denoel, 1966^ (English ed. transl. Eric Mosbacher, New York: Grove
Press, 1967); Ferdydurke, transl. Eric Mosbacher, London: Marion Boyars, 1979. Chaos, difference and repetition.

338

Difference and Repetition

Gredt, J. Elementa philosophiae aristotelico-thomisticae, I, Freibourg: 7th
1937. Analogy and the logic of difference according to Aristotle.
Griss, G.F.C. 'Logique des mathematiques intuitionnistes sans negation',
Paris: Comptes rendus des seances de L'Academie des Sciences, 8 November 1948; 'Sur la negation', Synthese, Amsterdam: Bussum, 19489. Distance or positive difference in logic and mathematics.
Gueroult, M. La philosophic transcendentale de Salomon Ma'imon, Paris:
Alcan, 1929; L'evolution et la structure de la Doctrine de la Science chez
Fichte, Paris: Les Belles-Lettres, 1930; The philosophy of difference in
Post-Kantianism.
'Espace, point et vide chez Leibniz', Revue philosophique de la France et
de I'etranger, vol. 136, 1946. (Partially transl. Roger Ariew as 'Space,
Point and Void in Leibniz's Philosophy', in M. Hooker, ed., Leibniz:
Critical and Interpretative Essays, Manchester: Manchester University
Press, 1982.) Distance and difference according to Leibniz.
Guillaume, G. Passim. The logic of difference in language.
Guiraud, P. Psychiatric clinique, Paris: Le Frangois, 1956, republished from
'Psychiatric du medecin clinicien', 1922; 'Analyse du symptome
stereotypie', L'Encephale, November 1936. Iterations and stereotypes in
psychiatry.
Gurvitch, G. Dialectique et sociologie, Paris: Flammarion, 1962. Difference
and opposition in the dialectic.
Hegel, G.W.F. Passim. The logic and ontology of difference (difference, negation, opposition, contradiction).
Heidegger, M. Passim. Ontological difference (Being, difference and the
question).
Heyting, A. Les fondements mathematiques. Intuitionnisme. Theorie de la
demonstration, transl. P. Fevrier, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1955. Distance
or positive difference in logic and mathematics according to Griss.
Holderlin, F. Remarques sur Oedipe, Remarques sur Antigone, 1804,
French transl., Paris: Union Generale d'Editions (10/18), 1965. Difference, the form of time and the caesura.
Hume, D. A Treatise of Human Nature, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1978. Physical repetition, contraction, change: the problem of habit.
Hyppolite, J. Logique et Existence: Essai sur la Logique de Hegel, Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 1953. The logic and ontology of difference according to Hegel.
Joachim of Flora L'Evangile eternel, transl. into French by E. Aegerter,
Paris: Rieder, 1928. Repetition, universal history and faith.
Joyce, J. Finnegans Wake, London: Faber & Faber, 1939. Chaos, difference and repetition.
Jung, C. G. Dialectique du moi et de I'inconscient, Paris: Gallimard, 1964
('The Relation between the Ego and the Unconscious, in Two Essays on

Bibliography

339

Analytical Psychology (Collected Works Volume 7), transl. R.F.C. Hull,
London/Henley: Routledge 8c Kegan Paul, 1966). The unconscious,
problems and differenciation.
Kant, I. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, revision of the Carus
transl. with an introduction by L.W. Beck, New York and London:
Macmillan, 1950; Critique of Pure Reason, transl. Norman Kemp
Smith, London: Macmillan, 1933. Internal and intrinsic difference. The
undetermined, the determinable and determination in the 'I think' and in
the Idea. The difference between the faculties.
Kierkegaard, S. Fear and Trembling and Repetition, transl. and ed. H.V.
and E.H. Hong, published as two volumes in one; Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1983; The Concept of Anxiety, transl. R.
Thomte, ed. H.V. and E.H. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1980; Philosophical Fragments-, or A Fragment of Philosophy, rev.
transl. H.V. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962. Repetition, difference, freedom and faith.
Klossowski, P. Un si funeste desir, Paris: NRF, 1963; 'Oubli et anamnese
dans I'experience vecue de Peternel retour du Meme', in Nietzsche: Cahiers de Royaumont, Philosophic No. VI, Paris: Editions de Minuit,
1967; Le Baphomet, Paris: Mercure, 1965. Simulacra and repetition;
intensity, eternal return and loss of identity.
Lacan, J. Le mythe individual du nevrose, CDU ('The Neurotic's Individual
Myth', transl. Martha Noel Evans, The Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 48,
1979, pp. 405-25); Ecrits, Paris: Seuil, 1966 (Ecrits. A Selection, transl.
Alan Sheridan, London: Tavistock/Routledge, 1989). Difference and
repetition in the unconscious: the death instinct.
Lagache, D. 'Le probleme du transfert', Revue fran$aise de psychanalyse,
January 1952. Transference, habit and repetition in the unconscious.
Lalande, A. Les illusions evolutionnistes, Paris: Alcan, 1930; 'Valeur de la
difference', Revue philosophique de la France et de L'Etranger, vol.
CXLV, April 1955. Difference and identity.
Laplanche, J. and Pontalis, J.-B. 'Fantasme originaire, fantasmes des origines, origine du fantasme', Les Temps modernes, no. 215, April 1964.
Transl. as 'Fantasy and the Origins of Sexuality', International Journal
of Psycho-Analysis, 49, 1968; reprinted, with an afterword, in V.
Burgin, J. Donald, C. Kaplan eds., Formations of Fantasy, London:
Methuen, 1968. Difference and repetition in the phantasm.
Laroche, E. Histoire de la racine nem - en grec ancien, Paris: Klincksieck,
1949. 'Distribution' according to Ancient Greek.
Lautman, A. Essai sur les notions de structure et d'existence en
mathematiques, Paris: Hermann, 1938; Nouvelles recherches sur la
structure dialectique des mathematiques, Paris: Hermann, 1939; Le

340

Difference and Repetition

probleme du temps, Paris: Hermann, 1946. The dialectical Idea, the differential and the theory of problems.
Leclaire, S. 'La mort dans la vie de 1'obsede', La psychanalyse, no. 2, 1956
('Jerome, or Death in the Life of the Obsessional', Returning to Freud:
Clinical Psychoanalysis in the School of Lacan, ed. and transl. Stuart
Schneiderman, New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1980,
pp. 94-113); 'A la recherche des principes d'une psychotherapie des
psychoses', Evolution psychiatrique, II, 1958; 'Les elements en jeu dans
une psychanalyse', Cahiers pour I'analyse, 5, 1966. Difference and repetition in the unconscious, and the role of questions (according to J.
Lacan).
Leibniz, G. Passim. The logic and ontology of difference (continuity and
indiscernibles, the differential unconscious).
Levi-Strauss, C. Tristes Tropiques, transl. John and Doreen Weightman,
London: Jonathan Cape, 1973. Static and dynamic repetition.
Totemism, transl. Rodney Needham, Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1963.
Difference and resemblance.
Maimon, S. Versuch uber die Transzendentalphilosophie, Berlin: Vos,
1790. The differential Idea and transcendental philosophy of difference.
Marx, K. The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, in Surveys from
Exile, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973. Repetition and History.
Meinong, A. 'Uber die Bedeutung des Weberschen Gesetzes', Zeitschrift fiir
Psychologic und Physiologie der Sinnesorgane, vol. XI, 1896. Difference
and intensity.
Meyer, F. Problematique de revolution, Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1954. The logic of difference in biology.
Meyerson, E. Passim. Difference and identity.
Miller, J. A. 'La Suture', Cahiers pour I'analyse, 1, 1966 (transl. 'Suture
(elements of the logic of the signifier)', Screen, vol. xviii, no. 4, 1977/8,
pp.24-34). Difference and repetition in the unconscious according to J.
Lacan.
Milner, J. C. 'Le Point du Signifiant', Cahiers pour I'Analyse, 1, 1966. Difference and repetition in the unconscious according to J. Lacan.
Mugler, C. Deux themes de la cosmologie grecque, devenir cyclique et
pluralite des mondes, Paris: Klincksieck, 1953. The role of eternal return
in Greek thought.
Nietzsche, F. Werke, Leipzig: Kroner, 1930 (see Werke: Kritische
Gesamtausgabe, eds G. Colli and M. Montinari, Berlin: De Gruyter,
1967-78). The ontology of difference and repetition: will to power and
eternal return.
Ortigues, E. Le discours et le symbole, Paris: Aubier, 1962. The logic of
difference in language according to G. Guillaume.

Bibliography

341

Osborne, H.F. The Origin and Evolution of Life: On the Theory of Action,
Reaction and Interaction of Energy, London and New York: G. Bell,
1918. Life, difference and problems.
Paliard, J. Pensee implicite et perception visuelle, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1949. Distance and depth.
Peguy, C. Passim. Repetition, difference, freedom and faith. Repetition,
variation and style.
Perrier, E. Les colonies animales et la formation des organismes, Paris:
Masson, 1881. Differenciation and repetition in biology.
Piaget, J. Introduction a I'epistemologie genetique, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1949. Difference and intensity.
Plato Plato: The Collected Dialogues, ed. E. Hamilton and H. Cairns,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1963. The Logic and ontology
of difference (the method of division and simulacra).
Porphyry The Phoenician Isagoge, transl. Edward W. Warren, Toronto:
The Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975. The logic of difference according to Aristotle.
Pradines, M. Traite de Psychologic generale, Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1943. Depth, distance, intensity.
Proclus A Commentary on the first Book of Euclid's Elements, transl.
Glenn R. Morrow, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1970;
Neo-Platonic dialectic of difference; Idea and problem.
Commentaire du Parmenide, transl. into French by A.E. Chaignet, Paris:
Leroux, 1903. Neo-Platonic dialectic of difference; Idea and problem.
Proust, M. A la recherche du temps perdu, Paris: NRF, 1919.
(Remembrance of Things Past, transl. C.K. Scott-Moncrief and Terence
Kilmartin, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1986). Difference and repetition
in lived experience.
Renouvier, C. 'Les labyrinthes de la metaphysique', La Critique
philosophique, 6e annee, 1877. Critical examination of the theories of
differential calculus.
Ricoeur, P. Freud and Philosophy. An Essay on Interpretation, transl.
Denis Savage, New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press,
1970. Difference and repetition in the unconscious according to Freud.
Robbe-Grillet, A. Passim. Difference and repetition, displacements and
disguises.
Rosenberg, H. The Tradition of the New, London: Thames & Hudson,
1962. Repetition, theatre and history.
Rosny, J. H., the elder Les sciences et le pluralisme, Paris: Alcan, 1922. Intensity and difference.
Rougier, L. En marge de Curie, de Carnot et d'Einstein, Paris: Editions
Chiron, 1922. Intensity, dissymmetry and difference.

342

Difference and Repetition

Rousseau, J. J. La nouvelle Helo'ise, 1761. The attempt at repetition in
psychic life.
Roussel, R. Passim. Difference and repetition, variation and style.
Russell, B. The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1903. Difference, distance, intensity.
Ruyer, R. Elements de psycho-biologic, Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1946, 'Le relief axiologique et le sentiment de la profondeur',
Revue de metaphysique et de morale, July 1956; La genese des formes
vivantes, Paris: Flammarion, 1958. Biological differenciation.
Saussure, F. Cours de linguistique generate, Paris: Payot, 1956 (Course in
General Linguistics, New York: Fontana, 1974). The structural logic of
difference in language.
Schelling, F. Essais, Paris: Aubier, 1949; The Ages of the World, transl.
Frederick de Wolfe Bolman, New York: Columbia University Press,
1942. Difference, power and ground.
Schuhl, P. M. Etudes platoniciennes, Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1960. Repetition, variation and style in Plato.
Selme, L. Principe de Carnot contre formule empirique de Clausius, Paris:
H. Dunod 6c E. Pinat, 1917. Intensity, difference and entropy.
Servien, P. Principes d'Esthetique, Paris: Boivin, 1935; Equality and repetition.
Science et Poesie, Paris: Flammarion, 1947.
Simondon, G. L'individu et sa genese physico-biologique, Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1964. Difference, singularity and individuality.
Sellers, P. in 'Debat sur le roman', Tel Quel, no. 17, 1964; Drame, Paris:
Editions du Seuil, 1965. Problems, difference and repetition in the work
of art.
Spinoza, B. Ethics, in The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. I, transl. and
ed. E. Curley, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985. Univocity, formal distinction and individuating difference.
Tarde, G. Passim. Difference and repetition as categories of Nature and
Mind.
Tournier, M. Vendredi ou les limbes du Pacifique, Paris: Gallimard, 1967;
transl. Norman Denny as Friday, New York: Pantheon, 1985. The
Other and difference.
Trubetzkoy, N.S. Principes de phonologic, Paris: Klincksieck, 1939. The
structural logic of difference in language.
Verriest, C.G. *'Evariste Galois et la theorie des equations algebriques'
GZuvres mathematiques de Galois, Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1961. The
theory of problems and determination according to Galois.
Vialleton, L. Membres et ceintures des vertebres tetrapodes, Paris: Doin,
1924. Biological differenciation.

Bibliography

343

Vico, G. The New Science, transl. Thomas G. Bergin and Max H. Fische,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1968. Repetition and universal history.
Vuillemin, J. L'heritage kantien et la revolution copernicienne, Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 1954. The philosophy of difference in
Post-Kantianism and the role of intensive quantities according to the interpretation of H. Cohen.
La philosophic de I'algebre, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1962. The theory of problems and determination according to Abel and
Galois.
Wahl, J. Passim. The dialectic and difference.
Warrain, F. L'ceuvre philosophique de Hoene Wronski, Paris: Vega, 1933.
The philosophy of difference according to Wronski.
Weismann, A. Essais sur I'heredite et la selection naturelle, Paris:
Reinwald, 1892. Difference in biology.
Wronski, H. Philosophie de I'infini, Paris: Didot, 1814; Philosophic de la
technie algorithmique, Paris: Didot, 1817. The differential Idea and the
interpretation of calculus.

This page intentionally left blank

Index
Abel, N.H., 179-80,324-5
Abely, Xavier, 332
Abraham, 5, 7, 9,10, 95, 315
Actualisation, 185-6, 204-5, 206-7,
209-21,245-6
Adamov, Arthur, 332
Aesthetics, 56-7, 68-9, 98, 285
Affirmation, 52-4, 64,115-6,198-200,
206, 243, 267-8, 282-4
Aion, 284
Aleatory Point, 144,198-200, 283
Alleman, Beda, 65
Alquie, Ferdinand, 307
Althusser, Louis, 186, 310-1, 319, 325,
327
Analogy, 33-5, 37-9,137-8,142, 263,
269, 302-4
Apprenticeship, 22-3,164-7
Ariadne, 9, 56, 272, 275
Aristotle, xv, 15, 27, 30-5, 44, 59-61,
127,157,159-60,188, 218, 265,
275, 308-9, 312, 322, 324
Art, xix, xxi, 56, 68-9, 209,276,
293-4,308,313
Artaud, Antonin, 29,113,146-8, 205,
219,321
Atomism, 184-5
Axelos, Kostas, 321, 332
Bachelard, Gaston, 320
Balibar, Etienne, 325, 327
Beaufret, Jean, 65, 315
Beautiful Soul, xx, 52,196
Becoming: -identical, 41; -equal, 89,
110,115, 298; -similar, 115, 298;
-capable, 298; mad-, 141, 236
Being, 33-42, 58, 64-7,195-6,
199-200, 202,268-9,284-5, 301-4
Berg, Alban, 293
Bergson, Henri, 4, 71-3, 81, 83,101,
135,182, 212, 239, 286, 314-5,
327-8, 331
Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 16, 96,
307,317
Binswanger, Ludwig, 18
Bizet, A., 9

Blanchot, Maurice, 112,199, 200, 313,
317,318-9
Blood, Benjamin Paul, 57, 311-2
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 225-6, 329
Bordas-Demoulin, Jean, 170-3, 324
Borges, Jorge Luis, xxii, 110,115,123,
305,318
Bouligand, Georges, 323
Brunschvig, Jacques, 325
Biichner, Georg, 3-4, 305
Butler, Samuel, xx-xxi, 75,285, 313,
332
Butor, Michel, 294, 307
Calculus, 43,46-7,170-82, 244, 264,
280
Camus, Albert, 329
Canguilhem, Georges, 323
Carnot, L N. M., 175,177, 222-4,
228,240,318,328-9
Carroll, Lewis, 51,123, 322
Chance, 115-6,126,198-200, 202,
282-4, 312
Chaos, 67-9, 123-4, 280-1, 299
Cogito, 58, 85-6, 95,110, 118,
129-30,133, 138, 155,169, 174,
194, 199, 257, 276
Cohen, Hermann, 231, 330
Common Sense, xvi, 33, 36, 131-7,
148-9, 157, 160-1,165, 167,
192-6, 200, 208, 213, 226, 257,
266, 269, 303, 308-9, 320-1
Communication, 118-9,145-6, 277
Compossibility, 48, 51, 263, 273.
See Incompossibility
Concept: and empiricism, xx-xxi;
and philosophical thought, 130-1,
133; and the possible, 211-2;
and/of difference, xx, 12, 30-5,
40-2, 45, 47-8, 50, 58-60, 66;
and/of repetition, xx, 1,10, 11-6,
19-26, 91, 93, 220, 270-1; as
intensity, 118; identity in, 19, 24,
29, 30-4, 38, 42, 50, 56, 59,
115-6, 137-8,178, 203, 211, 220,
262, 265-6, 269-70; of

345

346

Index

understanding, 26,169-70,173-4,
182-3,218-9; opposition in, 203
Contraction, 70-82, 96-7,286-7
Contradiction, 44-5,49, 51-2, 263-4,
268-9
Copy, xx, 66-9,125-9, 202, 264-6,
272,278,293-4
Critique of Pure Reason, 87,134,180,
196,276,315,320,328
Crowned Anarchy, 37, 41, 224, 265,
278, 304. See Nomadic Distribution
Cuenot, Lucien, 328
Dalcq, Albert, 251, 331
Damascius, 325
Damourette, J. and Pichon, E., 327
Dark Precursor, 119-24,126,145,
256, 277, 291-2, 300
Darwin, Charles, 248-9
Death Instinct, 16-9, 87,103,111-5,
122,259,271,274,289
Depth, 229-31, 234-5, 238, 266, 277
Dequoy, Nicole, 330
Derrida, Jacques, 318
Descartes, Rene, 40, 85, 86,129-34,
139,161,170,196, 209, 213, 257,
319, 322-3
Destiny, 15, 83, 297; of thought, 135
Determination, 28-9, 86,169-70,172,
175-6,178,207,210,272,275
Dialectic, 59, 63,157-8,160,164,
178-9,188,268
Difference: conceptual, 185, 231,270;
generic and specific, 30-5, 38, 59-60,
303; individuating, 31, 38-40;
ontological, xix, 65-6,117; positive,
234; pure, 50,60,66,116-120
Differenciation, 207-21,225,236,239,
245-7,249-51,255, 258-9,277,
279-80, 284, 291-2
Differenciator, xix, 32, 65, 76,117,
120,122-3, 294, 299
Dionysus, 8, 9, 262, 275-7, 312
Disparate, 57, 69,120,198, 223, 236,
241, 246, 262, 277, 301
Distinct-Obscure, 213-4,252-4,280
Distinctive Point, 10,17, 21, 23, 26,
46-8,163,185-6,190,194, 245-7,
251-3,257-9
Divine Game, 116, 282-4
Dostoyevsky, Feodor, 107,276
Duns Scotus, 35-40, 66, 303, 309

Durkheim, Emile, 314
Eco, Umberto, 313
Ego, 17, 97, 99,108-11,114, 274, 317
Eliade, Mircea, 315
Elie, Hubert, 322
Embryology, 118,214-7, 249-50
Empedocles, 9
Empiricism, xx, 56, 70-9,161
Entropy, 223, 228-9, 255
Epicurus, 184-5
Eros: 85,117,122; and Mnemosyne,
102,108-9, 111, 113, 274; and
Thanatos, 18,111,113-4
Error, 148-51,153
Esoteric Word, 69,121-2
Eternal Return, 6-7, 8,11,41-2, 54-5,
57, 58, 61, 67-8, 90-1, 95-6,115-6,
125-6,241-4,297-301,304
Event, 89,93,124,188-9,191
Explication and Implication, 229-30,
232, 238, 244-6, 254-61, 281, 284
Expression, Expressed, Expressor,
35-7, 40, 47, 48,153-6, 253-8, 260,
261,322
Faculties, 136-8,143-4,148,192-4
Faure, Elie, 2
Faye, Jean-Pierre, 326, 332
Ferenczi, S. and Rank, O., 307
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 319
Fevrier, Paulette (Destouches-), 322,
330
Fichte,J.G., 87,196-7,325-6
Fink, Eugen, 332
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 315
Flaubert, Gustave, 153, 275-6, 321, 332
Formal Distinction: opposed to Real
Distinction, 39,303-4
Foucault, Michel, 262, 312-3, 320
Freedom, 83,193,293
Freud, Sigmund, 14-9, 95, 96,100,
103-4,106-7,111-3,117,124, 248,
259,271,306-7,317-9
Galois, Evariste, 180, 324-5
Generality, 1-2, 38, 71-2, 74-6, 79,
164,171, 215, 235, 242, 247, 270
Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire, Etienne, 184-5,
215,328
Ghyka, Matila, 307
Gilson, Etienne, 309

Index
God, 8,10,11, 39,45, 48, 58, 61, 79,
86-95,127,136-7,156,170,188,
191,197, 202, 222, 227, 233-4, 243,
282,298,306,312,321
Gogol, 5,101
Gombrowicz, Witold, 122-3, 318
Good Sense, 33, 36,131-4,146,149,
194, 213, 223-7, 257, 266, 269, 319
Goya, 29
Gredt, Joseph, 308
Gregory of Rimini, 322
Griss, G.F.C., 322, 330
Guattari, Felix, xv, xvii
Gueroult, Martial, 310, 324, 325-6,
331
Guillaume, Gustave, 205, 326-7
Guiraud, Paul, 333
Gurvitch, Georges, 326
Habit, See Contraction
Hamlet, 88, 89, 92, 298
Hegel, G. W. F., xv, xix, xxi, 7, 8,10,
26-7, 33, 42-5, 49-50, 52, 58, 63,
87, 88,107,129,136,150,164,
188,190,197, 207, 224, 262-3, 268,
273, 277, 306, 308, 310-1, 319, 321,
326
Heidegger, Martin, xix, 35, 64-6,116,
129,144,195-6, 200-1, 275, 321,
326, 333
Hero, 5,15,296
Heterogeneous Systems, 117-18
Heyting, A., 330
History, 90-3, 208, 268
Holderlin, J. C. F., 58, 65, 87, 88, 91,
92,315
Houel, Jules, 174,324
Hume, David, xv, 70-3, 313
Humour, 5, 7,11, 245
Husserl, Edmund, 66,182, 332
Hyppolite, Jean, 310
"I think", 58, 85-7,129,133,135,
138,145,151,159,257,276
Id, 96-8
Ideas, 26-7, 59,146,155,161-2,
168-221, 244-6, 252-6, 259,264-5,
267, 274, 278-80, 284, 288
Identity, xix, 49-50, 65-6, 68-9,137-8,
211,262-3,271-3,285-6
Illusion, Transcendental, 228-9,240,
244-5,265-7

347

Imagination, 70-3, 76,132-3,137-8,
143-6,160,174, 220, 285, 313,
320-1
Imitation, 22-3
Implication. See Explication
In Search of Lost Time, 17, 85,105,
122,124
Incompossibility, 48, 51, 263, 273. See
Compossibility
Individuation, 151-3,246-52, 258-61,
276-7, 281-2, 303
Infinite, 42-50,262-4
Intensity, 26,41,117-8,144,151,
222-4, 230-46, 251-6, 258, 277
Irony, 5, 7,11,63, 68,245
James, William, 311-2
Joachim of Flora, 93, 296-7
Job, 5, 7, 9,195
Joyce, James, 57, 69,121,123,195
Judgement, 33-5, 38-9, 43,137-8,161,
196, 248, 255, 262, 269, 271, 276,
288
Jung, Carl G., 104, 317
Kant, Immanuel, 4, 7,13-4, 26, 33, 45,
57, 58, 85-7, 97,107,133-7,143,
146,150,161,168-70,174,180,
192-3,196-7, 217, 222-3, 231, 269,
274-6, 306, 308, 315, 320-1, 323-4,
326, 328, 329
Kierkegaard, Soren, 5-11, 25, 94-5,
271,295,305-6,308,315,329
Klossowski, Pierre, 66-7, 90, 95, 312,
331
La Nouvelle Heloise, 2
Lacan, Jacques, 101-3,105, 316-7
Lagache, Daniel, 227, 315-6
Lagrange, Joseph, 175
Lalande, Andre, 329
Laplanche, J., and Pontalis, J.-B., 318
Laroche, E., 309
Lautman, Albert, 163-4,178,183,
323, 324
Law, 2-3, 6-7, 25, 37, 48, 56-7, 69,
108,122,125,136-7,139,183-4,
198,224,227,229,241-3
Learning, 22-3,164-7,192,194. See
Apprenticeship
Leclaire, Serge, 316
Leibniz, G., xv, 11, 26, 27, 42-4,

348

Index

45-51, 58, 84, 88,107-8,123,163,
165,170-2,191,197, 213-4,253-4,
262-3, 273,279, 282, 306, 309-10,
313, 315, 322, 325, 328, 330-31, 332
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 19-20, 307, 318
Logos, 7, 32, 36, 62,145,272
Lowry, Malcolm, 315
Macherey, Pierre, 327
Mai'mon, Salomon, 170,173-74,
192-3, 310, 324, 325
Maldiney, Henri, 316
Malebranche, Nicolas, 323
Mallarme, Stephane, 69
Marx, Karl, xxi, 10, 91,186, 207-8,
311
Meinong, Alois, 321, 330
Memory, 7, 71-2, 79-85,122,140-2,
144_5,147,239,273-4, 287
Meno, 63,166,180
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 64, 320
Meyer, Francois, 327, 332
Meyerson, Emile, 329
Miller, Henry, 19, 307
Miller,]-A., 316
Milner,J.-C.,316
Mugler, Charles, 331
Multiplicity, 50, 51, 60, 90,173,176,
182-6,188-93, 203-4,212,239,
245, 257-9, 267, 269, 278-80, 327,
331
'Ne' in language, 202, 205-6, 327
Negation, xix, xx, 55, 58, 63-4,106,
202-8, 235-6, 266-7
Neo-Platonism, 62-3,191, 325
Nerval, 18
Nicholas d'Autrecourt, 322
Nietzsche, Friedrich, xv, xxi, 5-11,
41-2, 53-8,68, 92, 93,95,125,
135-6,166,199,200-1,242-3, 258,
268, 283, 295, 297-9, 305-6, 309,
311-2, 319, 326, 329, 331, 332, 333
Nomadic Distribution, 36-7,41, 57,
224, 265, 278, 304. See Crowned
Anarchy
Nomos, 36, 309
Non-Being, 39, 63-6, 68, 78,107,114,
122,191,196, 202-3,262, 268, 280
Novalis, 222
Number, 172, 209, 220-1,232-3,242,
290

Object: partial, 100,102,108; virtual,
99-110, 212, 316; = x, 103,105,
109,120,122-4, 291-2, 317
Oedipus, 23, 37, 87-9, 92, 93,107,195
Opposition, 137-8,205
Ortigues, Edmond, 327
Osborne, H. F., 327
Other, 22-4,44-5, 91,165,260-1,
281-2, 332
Paliard, Jacques, 231, 329
Parntenides, 35, 36,196, 234, 271, 325
Peguy, Charles, 1, 5, 7, 22, 94,189,
292, 305, 306, 308, 325
Perplication, 187,201, 252,280-1
Perrier, Edmond, 216, 219, 328, 331
Phaedo, 142,244,296,315
Phaedrus, 60, 61,191
Phantasm, 126-8,144-5, 250, 285,
319. See Simulacra
Phantasy, 124-5,318-9
Phenomenology, 51-2, 64,137
philosophy: and art, xvi, 276; and
error, 150-1; and movement, 8-11,
52, 56; and science, xvi, xxi, 223-8;
and theatre, 3, 8-11; beginning in,
129-32; task of modern, 59, 284-5;
writing versus writing history of, xv,
xx-xxii

Piaget, Jean, 330
Plato, 28, 35, 36, 58-64, 67-8, 87, 94,
126-8,134,138-42,144-6,148-50,
163,166,170-1,188,191,196-7,
224, 233-4,235-6,238, 244,264-5,
271, 273, 296, 312, 315, 319, 320,
325, 330
Platonism, 28, 59-64, 66-8,126-8, 244,
264-5, 272, 273, 319, 325
Porphyry, The Phoenician, 308
Possible, 201-2,205, 211-5, 219, 247,
261,279
Post-Kantianism, 26, 58,170,173-4,
192-3,196-7,231
Powers, 174-6,190-1
Pradines, Maurice, 329-30
Problem, 63-4,106-8,146,157-67,
168-70,177-81,186,190,195-204,
207-8, 212,267, 280-1
Proclus, 163, 323, 325
Proposition, 35-6,153-6, 206
Proust, Marcel, xv, xvii, 17, 84-5,105,
121-2,124,196, 208, 261

Index

349

Selection, 6, 8,19,41-2, 54, 60-1,
295-6
Self, xxi, 7,11, 23, 41, 49, 56, 58, 73,
74, 78-9, 87, 95, 98,129,131,
133-6,145,147,151-2,170,174,
226, 243, 254, 256-61, 276, 281,
284,296,299,312
Selme, Leon, 228, 318, 329
Ranciere, Jacques, 327
Real Distinction. See Formal Distinction Sense, 153-9,191, 278, 291-2
Sensibility, 138-40,143-5,147,165,
Reason, Principle of Sufficient, 12,48,
236-7,243
49,107,138,154,160,162,171,
Servien, Pius, 2, 305
176,180, 210, 213, 221-3,263-4,
Shestov, Lev, 107,130, 276, 329
273-5, 282, 328
Sign, 20, 57, 73, 77,164, 222, 228
Recognition, 133-8,146,148
Signal, 20, 57,118,222,228
Redon, Odilon, 29, 308
Simondon, Gilbert, 246, 318, 330, 331
Reimann, Georg, 182
Simulacra, xix, 17, 60, 62, 66-9,125-8,
Reminiscence, 7, 85, 88, 91, 94, 95,
243,265, 272,274, 277-8, 285, 290,
140-4,147,150,154,166, 315
293-4,299-302,312-3
Renouvier, Charles, 324
Singular Point, 153,163,175-7,187,
Repetition: and concepts, 11-6,19,
189-91,198,206, 209-10, 220,246,
21-2, 25, 270-1,285-6, 288-90; and
264,324, 326
modification or variation, xix, 17,
Singularity, 1, 2, 5, 7, 8,13, 23, 25, 27,
286; and resemblance, 1, 25; bare
32, 43, 52,163,165,176,189-90,
and disguised, xix, 16-8, 21, 23-5,
198, 201-2, 210-3, 216,219, 221,
84,104, 201, 220, 271, 287-9, 292,
246, 249,255, 258, 263-4, 267,
300-2; ontological, 200-2, 293; static
276-84, 287,299,323, 324
and dynamic, 20-5, 287
Representation, xix, 29, 34-5,42-4,
Sellers, Philippe, 326
Solution, xvi, 63,106-8,116,157-68,
48-50, 55-6, 59, 65, 68,131-8,149,
177-81,186,189-90,192,196, 200,
262-77, 283,285-6, 300-4
202, 206-9,211, 244-6, 267,280-4,
Republic, 141-2,148-9, 236, 319-20,
323-4, 327
325
Resemblance, 137-8, 262, 266
Sophist, 61, 63, 68,126-8, 319
Ricoeur, Paul, 110, 317
Souriau, Michel, 314
Space, 3,10,12,13, 21, 26, 27, 36, 50,
Rimbaud, Arthur, 19, 283
Riviere, Jacques, 146-7, 321
51-2, 97,173-4,183, 210, 214,
Rosenberg, Harold, 91-2
216-9,222,228-32, 241, 270,
Rosny, J.-H., the elder, 237, 328-9
285-6, 289, 329-30
Rougier, Louis, 328
Species, 12, 30-4, 38, 43, 46-7, 59-62,
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 2
77,151-2,185,191,206-7,210,
Roussel, Raymond, 22,120,199, 292,
214-21,247-57, 269, 271, 279, 303,
307-8
307,310,318,331
Russell, Bertrand, 153, 321-2, 330
Spinoza, Benedict de, xv, 40,150, 259,
Ruyer, Raymond, 216, 328, 330
303, 323, 328
Statesman, 60, 61, 312
Sartor Resartus, 24
Stereotypes in Psychiatry, 17,100,
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 64, 260
291-3,333
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 204
Stoics, 3, 6, 77,150
Schelling, 190-1, 224, 230, 276-7, 321,
Structuralism, 176,183-4,185,191-2,
325
203-5
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 258, 276, 332
Stupidity, 150-3
Schuhl, P-M., 319
Substance, 40, 303
Qualitability, 173,175,176,181,186,
221,278
Quantitability, 171,172,175,176,
181,186,221,278
Question, 63-4, 66, 78,106-8,195-7,
201,283

350

Index

Symmetry and Dissymmetry, 19-21
Tarde, Gabriel, 25-6, 76, 307, 313-4,
326
The Birth of Tragedy, 9, 276
Theaetetus, 134,138,148-9, 319
Theatre, 3, 5-11,91-2,192
Thought, xvi-xvii, 113-4,130-67,194,
196,265-6, 276; dogmatic image of,
130-8,158-61,167; genesis of, 139,
147-8,154,161-2,266
Thus Spoke Zarathustra, 5-7, 9-11, 23,
53-4, 90-2, 242, 297-9, 305-6, 309,
332-3
Timaeus, 233, 319, 329
Time: 3,13, 51, 97,173, 214, 217-8,
220, 223, 225, 231, 265-6, 270, 276,
285-6, 289; active synthesis of, 71,
80-1, 93-4; Aion, 284; caesura, 89,
92-3, 295-6; future, 71, 296;
paradoxes of, 81-4; passive synthesis
of, 70-9, 93-4; past, 71,101-3;
present, 70-1, 76-7, 79-81,102,273;
third synthesis/empty form of, 87-91,
94,110-1,274,276,292,294-300
Tournier, Michel, 306, 332
Toynbee, Arnold, 327
Troubetzkoy, N.S., 51, 204
Truth, 135-6,148,153,158, 224

Unconscious, 16-9, 96-115; active
synthesis of, 98-9,108-9,114; passive
synthesis of, 96-8,108-9,114; third
synthesis of, 111-5
Ungrounding, Movement of, 62-3, 67-9,
91,136,194,200,202,230,275,292
Universal, the, 39, 46, 49,163,173,178,
258, 303
Univocal Being, 35-42, 66, 303-4
Untimely, xxi, 130,242
Varieties, 187
Verriest, C. Georges, 180, 324
Vialleton, Louis, 214, 328
Vice-Diction, 46-8,189-91,263
Vico, G., 93,296
Virtuality, 191, 201,207-14, 246,249,279
Vuillemin, Jules, 183, 324-5, 330
Wagner, Richard, 8, 9
Wahl, Jean, 311
Warhol, Andy, 294
Warrain, Francis, 324
Whitehead, Alfred North, 284-5
Will, 6,283
Will to power, 41, 200, 243, 258
Wronski, Hoene, 170,175, 324
Zola, Emile, 315

