AN!tEDIPUS

ANTCAPITALISM AND
~:;C~t-IIZOPt-1 REf\J IA
hy Gilles lleleuze and Felix Buattari
Tr:\Il\I,l1c:J n orn the

Fr~m:h

by Rohert Hurley , Mark Seem. and Helen R, Lane

Preface byMichel Foucault

----

Boy with Alachine, Richard Lindner ([QS-4, oil on cunvas , 40
RU':-ticr and I.efer hl.I)., P ..\. Pensi\.)[l Trust)

3()" Dr . .

fA

~"

University of Minnesota Press

s~ Minneapolis
TA

Copyright 1983 by the University of Minnesota
All rights reserved.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290, Minneapolis, 11N 55401-2520
http.,' Iwwvv.upress.umn.edu
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
Tenth priming 2000

Originally published as
L'Anti-Oedipe
© 1972 by Les Editions de Minuit
English language translation Copyright © Viking Penguin, 1977

CONTENTS

Reprinted by arrangement with Viking Penquin, a division of
Penquin Books USA Inc.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Deleuze, Gilles.
Anti-Oedipus.
Translation of: L'anti-Oedipe.
Reprint. Originally published: New York: Viking Press, 1977.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Social psychiatry. 2. Psychoanalysis-Social aspects. 3. Oedipus
complex-Social aspects. 4. Capitalism. 5. Schizophrenia-Social aspects.
I. Guattari , Felix. n. Title.
RC455.D42213 1983
150.19'52
83-14748
ISBN 0-8166-1225-0 (pbk.)

PREFACE by Michel Foucault

xi

INTRODUCTION by Mark Seem

xv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Calder and Boyars Ltd: From Collected Works, Antonin Artaud.

City Lights: From "Kaddish" from Kaddish & Other Poems by Allen Ginsberg. Copyright © 1961 by Allen Ginsberg. From Artaud Anthology by Antonin Artaud. Copyright © 1956, 1961, 1965 by Editions Gallimard and City
Lights Books. Reprinted by permission of City Lights Books.
Humanities Press Inc. and Athlone Press: From Rethinking Anthropology by
E. R. Leach.

Mercure de France: From Nietzsche ou le Cercle Vicieux by Pierre Klossowski.
Pantheon Books, a Division of Random House, Inc.: From Madness and Civilization by Michel Foucault, translated by Richard Howard. Copyright © 1965
by Random House. Inc.
Presses Universitaires de France: From L'Affect by Andre Green.

THE DESIRING-MACHINES
1. Desiring-Production
The schizo's stroll. Nature and industry. The process. Desiringmachine, partial objects and flows: and. , . and, , . • The first synthesis: the connective synthesis or production of production. The production of the body without organs.
2.

The Body without Organs

9

Anti-production. Repulsion and the paranoiac machine. Desiringproduction and social production: how anti-production appropriates the
productive forces. Appropriation or attraction, and the rniraculatingmachine-The second synthesis: the disjunctive synthesis or production
of recording. Either, .. or . .. • The schizophrenic genealogy.

3. The Subject and Enjoyment
16
The celibate machine .. The third synthesis' the conjunctive synthesis
or production of consumption-consummation .. So it's. " .. Matter,
egg. and intensities: I feel .. The names in history"

tiations and the nondifferentiated .. The second paralogism of psychoanalysis: the Oedipal double-bind - Oedipus wins at every turn - Does
the borderline pass between the Symbolic and the Imaginary?
5. The Conjunctive Synthesis of Consumption-Consummation
84
Its two uses, segregative and biunivocal, nomadic and polyvocal .. The
body without organs and intensities" Voyages. passages: I am becoming .. Every delirium is social, historical, and political" Races .. The
meaning of identification .. How psychoanalysis suppresses sociopolitical content .. An unrepentant familialism .. The family and the social
field .. Desiring-production and the investment of social production ..
From childhood .. The third paralogism of psychoanalysis: Oedipus as a
biunivocal "application" .. The disgrace of psychoanalysis with regard
to history .. Desire and the infrastructure" Segregation and nomadism ..

4. A Materialist Psychiatry
22
The unconscious and the category of production .. Theater or factory?
.. The process as production process" The idealist conception of
desire as lack (fantasy) .. The real and. desiring-production: the passive
syntheses" One and the same production, social and desiring .. The
reality of the group fantasy .. The differences in regime between
desiring-production and social production" The socius and the body
without organs" Capitalism, and schizophrenia as its limit (the counteracted tendency) .. Neurosis, psychosis, and perversion ..
5. The Machines
36
Desiring-machines are machines, no metaphor .. The first mode of
break: flows and selection from flows .. The second mode: chains or
codes, and detachments from them .. The third mode: subject and
residue ..

6. A Recapitulation of the Three Syntheses
106
Oedipus would make fools of us all - Oedipus and "belief" .. Meaning
is use" The immanent criteria of desiring-production .. Desire knows
nothing of the law, lack, and the signifier" "Were you born
Hamlet ... ? ..

6. The Whole and Its Parts
42
The status of multiplicities .. The partial objects .. The critique of
Oedipus, the Oedipal mystification" Already the child... .. The
orphan-conscious" What is wrong with psychoanalysis? ..
)

7. Social Repression and Psychic Repression
113
The law .. The fourth paralogism of psychoanalysis: the displacement,
or the disfiguration of the repressed" Desire is revolutionary .. The
delegated agent of psychic repression .. It is not psychoanalysis that
invents Oedipus ..

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALISM:
THE HOLY FAMILY
I. The Imperialism of Oedipus
51
Its modes" The Oedipal turning-point in psychoanalysis" Desiringproduction and representation - The abandonment of the desiringmachines 2. Three Texts of Freud
56
Oedipalization .. The flattening-out of Judge Schreber's delirium
.. How psychoanalysis is still pious" The ideology of lack: castration .. Every fantasy is collective .. The libido as flow .. The rebellion
of the flows 3. The Connective Synthesis of Production
68
Its two uses, global and specific, partial and non-specific .. The family
and the couple, filiation and alliance: triangulation .. The triangulation's
cause" The first paralogism of psychoanalysis: extrapolation .. The
transcendent use and the immanent use ..
75
4. The Disjunctive Synthesis of Recording
Its two uses, exclusive and restrictive, inclusive, and nonrestrictive - The inclusive disjunctions: genealogy .. The exclusive differen-

Neurosis and Psychosis
122
Reality" The inverse relation .. "Undecidable" Oedipus: resonance .. The meaning of actual factors" The fifth paralogism of psychoanalysis: the afterward .. The actuality of desiring-production ..

8.

130
9. The Process
Leaving .. The painter Turner - The interruptions of the process:
neurosis, psychosis, and perversion" The movement of deterritorialization and territorialities -

a

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN
I. The Inscribing Socius
139
The recording process" In what sense capitalism is universal .. The
social machine .. The problem of the socius, coding the flows .. Not
exchanging, but marking and being marked .. The investment and the
disinvestment of organs" Cruelty: creating a memory for man ..
145
2. The Primitive Territorial Machine
The full body of the earth" Filiation and alliance: their irreducibility .. The village pervert and local groups" Filiative stock and blocks of

alliance debt. Functional disequilibrium: surplus value of code. It
only works by breaking down. The segmentary machine. The great
fear of decoded flows. Death which rises from within, but comes from
without.
3,

The Problem of Oedipus

154

Incest. The inclusive disjunctions on the full body of the
earth. From intensities to extension: the sign. In what sense incest is
impossible. The limit. The conditions of coding. The in-depth elements of representation: the repressed representative, the repressing
representation, the displaced represented.
4. Psychoanalysis and Ethnology
166
Continuation of the Oedipal problem. A process of treatment in
Africa. The conditions of Oedipus and colonization. Oedipus and
ethnocide • Those who oedipalize don't know what they're doing. On
what is psychic repression brought to bear? • Culturalists and universalis ts: their common postulates. In what sense Oedipus is indeed
universal: the five meanings of limit, Oedipus as one of them. Use, or
functionalism in ethnology. The desiring-machines do not mean anything. Molar and molecular.
Territorial Representation
184
Its surface elements. Debts and exchange. The five postulates of the
exchangist conception. Voice, graphism, and eye: the theater of cruelty • Nietzsche. The death of the territorial system.
5.

6. The Barbarian Despotic Machine
192
The full body of the despot. New alliance and direct filiation. The
paranoiac. Asiatic production. The bricks. The mystifications of
the State • Despotic deterritorialization and the infinite debt. Overcoding the flows.
7. Barbarian or Imperial Representation
200
Its elements • Incest and overcoding • The in-depth elements and the
migration of Oedipus: incest becomes possible. The surface elements,
the new voice-graphism relationship. The transcendent object from on
high. The signifier as the deterritorialized sign. The despotic signifier, and the signifieds of incest. Terror, the law. The form of the
infinite debt: latency, vengeance, and ressentiment e This is still not
Oedipus . . . •
8,

The Urstaat

217

A single State? • The State as a category. Beginning and origin. The
evolution of the State:becoming-concrete and becoming-immanent.
9. The Civilized Capitalist Machine
222
The full body of money-capital • Decoding and the conjunction of
decoded flows. Cynicism. Filiative capital and alliance capi-

tal. The transformation of surplus value of code into a surplus value of
flux. The two forms of money, the two inscriptions. The falling
tendency. Capitalism and deterritorialization • Human surplus value
and machinic surplus value. Anti-production. The various aspects of
the capitalist immanence • The flows •

10. Capitalist Representation
240
Its elements. The figures or schizzes-flows • The two meanings of the
schiz-flow: capitalism and schizophrenia. The difference between a
code and an axiomatic. The capitalist State, its relationship with the
Urstaat • The class. Class bipolarity. Desire and interest. Capitalist deterritorialization and re-territorializations: their relationship, and
the law of the falling tendency. The two poles of the axiomatic: the
despotic signifier and the schizophrenic figure, paranoia and schizophrenia. A recapitulation of the three great social machines: the territorial,
the despotic, and the capitalist (coding, overcoding, decoding) •
11.

Oedipus at Last
262
Application. Social reproduction and human reproduction - The two
orders of images. Oedipus and its limits. Oedipus and the recapitulation of the three states. The despotic symbol and capitalist
images. Bad conscience. Adam Smith and Freud TO SCHIZOANALYSIS
4 1.INTRODUCTION
The Social Field

273
Father and child. Oedipus, a father's idea. The unconscious as a
cycle. The primacy of the social investment: its two poles, paranoia
and schizophrenia. Molar and molecular.
2. The Molecular Unconscious
283
Desire and machine. Beyond vitalism and mechanism. The two
states of the machine. Molecular functionalism - The syntheses • The libido, the large aggregates and the micro-multiplicities. The
gigantism and the dwarfism of desire. The nonhuman sex: not one, not
two, but n sexes.

3. Psychoanalysis and Capitalism
296
Representation. Representation and production. Against myth and
tragedy. The ambiguous attitude of psychoanalysis with regard to
myth and tragedy. In what sense psychoanalysis fractures representation, in what sense it restores representation. The requirements of
capitalism. Mythic, tragic, and psychoanalytic representation. The
theater. Subjective representation and structural representation • Structuralism, familialism, and the cult of lack. The destructive
task of schizoanalysis, cleansing the unconscious: a malevolent activity • Deterritorialization and re-territorialization: their relationship, and
dreams. The machinic indices. Politicization: social alienation and
mental alienation. Artifice and process, old earths and the new earth.

4. The First Positive Task of Schlzoanalysis
322
Desiring-production and its machines. The status of partial
objects. The passive syntheses. The status of the body without
organs. The signifying chain and codes. The body without organs,
death, and desire. Schizophrenizing death. The strange death cult in
psychoanalysis: the pseudo-instinct. The problem of affinities between
the molar and the molecular. The mechanic's task of schizoanalysis •
5. The Second Positive Task
340
Social production and its machines. The theory of the two
poles. The first thesis: every investment is molar and social. Gregariousness, selection, and the form of gregariousness. The second thesis:
distinguish in social investments the preconscious investment of class or
interest, from the unconscious libidinal investment of desire or
group. The nature of this libidinal investment of the social field. The
two groups. The role of sexuality, the "sexual revolution" • The third
thesis: the libidinal investment of the social field is primary in relation to
the familial investments. The theory of "maids" in Freud, Oedipus and
universal Iamilialism e The poverty of psychoanalysis: 4, 3, 2, I,
O. Even antipsychiatry... • What is the schizophrenic sick
from? • The fourth thesis: the two poles of the libidinal social investment • Art and science. The task of schizoanalysis in relation to the
revolutionary movements.
REFERENCE NOTES

383

INDEX

397

PREFACE
by Michel Foucault
xjdsde
During the years 1945-1965 (I am referring to Europe),
there was a certain way of thinking correctly, a certain style of political
discourse, a certain ethics of the intellectual. One had to be on familiar
terms with Marx, not let one's dreams stray too far from Freud. And one
had to treat sign-systems-the signifier-with the greatest respect.
These were the three requirements that made the strange occupation of
writing and speaking a measure of truth about oneself and one's time
acceptable.
Then came the five brief, impassioned, jubilant, enigmatic years. At
the gates of our world, there was Vietnam, of course, and the first major
blow to the powers that be. But here, inside our walls, what exactly was
taking place? An amalgam of revolutionary and antirepressive politics?
A war fought on two fronts: against social exploitation and psychic
repression? A surge of libido modulated by the class struggle? Perhaps.
At any rate, it is this familiar, dualistic interpretation that has laid claim
xl

to the events of those years. The dream that cast its spell, between the
First World War and fascism, over the dreamiest parts of Europe-the
Germany of Wilhelm Reich, and the France of the surrealists-had
returned and set fire to reality itself: Marx and Freud in the same
incandescent light.
But is that really what happened? Had the utopian project of the
thirties been resumed, this time on the scale of historical practice? Or
was there, on the contrary, a movement toward political struggles that
no longer conformed to the model that Marxist tradition had prescribed?
Toward an experience and a technology of desire that were no longer
Freudian. It is true that the old banners were raised, but the combat
shifted and spread into new zones.
Anti-Oedipus shows first of all how much ground has been covered.
But it does much more than that. It wastes no time in discrediting the old
idols, even though it does have a great deal of fun with Freud. Most
important, it motivates us to go further.
It would be a mistake to read Anti-Oedipus as the new theoretical
reference (you know, that much-heralded theory that finally encompasses everything, that finally totalizes and reassures, the one we are told we
"need so badly" in our age of dispersion and specialization where
"hope" is lacking). One must not look for a "philosophy" amid the
extraordinary profusion of new notions and surprise concepts: AntiOedipus is not a flashy Hegel. I think that Anti-Oedipus can best be read
as an "art," in the sense that is conveyed by the term "erotic art," for
example. Informed by the seemingly abstract notions of multiplicities,
flows, arrangements, and connections, the analysis of the relationship of
desire to reality and to the capitalist "machine" yields answers to
concrete questions. Questions that are less concerned with why this or
that than with how to proceed. How does one introduce desire into
thought, into discourse, into action? How can and must desire deploy its
forces within the political domain and grow more intense in the process
of overturning the established order? Ars erotica, ars theoretica, ars

politica.
Whence the three adversaries confronted by Anti-Oedipus. Three
adversaries who do not have the same strength, who represent varying
degrees of danger, and whom the book combats in different ways:
1. The political ascetics, the sad militants, the terrorists of theory,
those who would preserve the pure order of politics and political
discourse. Bureaucrats of the revolution and civil servants of Truth.
2. The poor technicians of desire-psychoanalysts and serniolo-

xii

I

PREFACE

gists of every sign and symptom-who would subjugate the multiplicity
of desire to the twofold law of structure and lack.
3. Last but not least, the major enemy, the strategic adversary is
fascism (whereas Anti-Oedipus' opposition to the others is more of a
tactical engagement). And not only historical fascism, the fascism of
Hitler and Mussolini-which was able to mobilize and use the desire of
the masses so effectively-but also the fascism in us all, in our heads and
in our everyday behavior, the fascism that causes us to love power, to
desire the very thing that dominates and exploits us.
I would say that Anti-Oedipus (may its authors forgive me) is a book
of ethics, the first book of ethics to be written in France in quite a long
time (perhaps that explains why its success was not limited to a
particular "readership": being anti-oedipal has become a life style, a
way of thinking and living). How does one keep from being fascist, even
(especially) when one believes oneself to be a revolutionary militant?
How do we rid our speech and our acts, our hearts and our pleasures, of
fascism? How do we ferret out the fascism that is ingrained in our
behavior? The Christian moralists sought out the traces of the flesh
lodged deep within the soul. Deleuze and Guattari, for their part, pursue
the slightest traces of fascism in the body.
Paying a modest tribute to Saint Francis de Sales,* one might say
that Anti-Oedipus is an Introduction to the Non-Fascist Life.
This art of living counter to all forms of fascism, whether already
present or impending, carries with it a certain number of essential
principles which I would summarize as follows if I were to make this
great book into a manual or guide to everyday life:
• Free political action from all unitary and totalizing paranoia.
• Develop action, thought, and desires by proliferation, juxtaposition, and disjunction, and not by subdivision and pyramidal hierarchization.
• Withdraw allegiance from the old categories of the Negative (law,
limit, castration, lack, lacuna), which Western thought has so long held
sacred as a form of power and an access to reality. Prefer what is
positive and multiple, difference over uniformity, flows over unities,
mobile arrangements over systems. Believe that what is productive is
not sedentary but nomadic.
• Do not think that one has to be sad in order to be militant, even
though the thing one is fighting is abominable. It is the connection of
"A seventeenth-century priest and Bishop of Geneva, known for his Introduction to the Devout Life.

PREFACE

I

"III

desire to reality (and not its retreat into the forms of representation) that
possesses revolutionary force.
• Do not use thought to ground a political practice in Truth; nor
political action to discredit, as mere speculation, a line of thought. Use
political practice as an intensifier of thought, and analysis as a multiplier
of the forms and domains for the intervention of political action.
• Do not demand of politics that it restore the "rights" of the
individual, as philosophy has defined them. The individual is the product
of power. What is needed is to "de-individualize" by means of multiplication and displacement, diverse combinations. The group must not be
the organic bond uniting hierarchized individuals, but a constant generator of de-individualization.
• Do not become enamored of power.
It could even be said that Deleuze and Guattari care so little for
power that they have tried to neutralize the effects of power linked to
their own discourse. Hence the games and snares scattered throughout
the book, rendering its translation a feat of real prowess. But these are
not the familiar traps of rhetoric; the latter work to sway the reader
without his being aware of the manipulation, and ultimately win him
over against his will. The traps of Anti-Oedipus are those of humor: so
many invitations to let oneself be put out, to take one's leave of the text
and slam the door shut. The book often leads one to believe it is all fun
and games, when something essential is taking place, something of
extreme seriousness: the tracking down of all varieties of fascism, from
the enormous ones that surround and crush us to the petty ones that
constitute the tyrannical bitterness of our everyday lives.

INTRODUCTION
by Mark Seem
"We must die as egos and be
born again in the swarm, not
separate and self-hypnotized, but
individual and related."
-Henry Miller, Sexus

The Anti-Ego
"Lie down, then, on the soft couch which the analyst
provides, and try to think up something different. The analyst has
endless time and patience; every minute you detain him means money in
his pocket. . .. Whether you whine, howl, beg, weep, cajole, pray or
curse-he listens. He is just a big ear minus a sympathetic nervous
system. He is impervious to everything but truth. If you think it pays to
fool him then fool him. Who will be the loser? If you think he can help
you, and not yourself, then stick to him until you rot."!" So concludes
Henry Miller in Sexus, and Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari are quick
to agree in their attack on psychoanalysis' own Oedipus complex (the
holy family: daddy-mommy-me), an attack that is at times brutal and
without pity, at other times sympathetic and full of a profound love of
·Reference notes begin on page 383.

"Iv

I

PREFACE

life, and often enormously amusing. An attack on the ego, on what is
all-too-human in mankind, on oedipalized and oedipalizing analyses and
neurotic modes of living.
In confronting and finally overturning the Oedipal rock on which
Man has chosen to take his stand, Anti-Oedipus comes as a kind of
sequel to another similar venture, the attack on Christ, Christianity, and
the herd in Nietzsche's The AntiChrist. For who would deny, AntiOedipus begins, that psychoanalysis was from the start, still is, and
perhaps always will be a well-constituted church and a form of
treatment based on a set of beliefs that only the very faithful could
adhere to, ie., those who believe in a security that amounts to being lost
in the herd and defined in terms of common and external goals? But
where do such beliefs originate? What are they based on? For it is
absolutely hopeless to think in terms of security, as Miller states in
Sexus; "there is none. The man who looks for security, even in the mind,
is like a man who would chop off his limbs in order to have artificial ones
which will give him no pain or trouble" (page 428). No pain, no
trouble-this is the neurotic's dream of a tranquilized and conflict-free
existence.
Such a set of beliefs, Deleuze and Guattari demonstrate, such a
herd instinct, is based on the desire to be led, the desire to have someone
else legislate life. The very desire that was brought so glaringly into
focus in Europe with Hitler, Mussolini, and fascism; the desire that is
still at work, making us all sick, today. Anti-Oedipus starts by reviving
Reich's completely serious question with respect to the rise of fascism:
'How could the masses be made to desire their own repression?' This is
a question which the English and Americans are reluctant to deal with
directly, tending too often to respond: "Fascism is a phenomenon that
took place elsewhere, something that could only happen to others, but
not to us; it's their problem." Is it though? Is fascism really a problem
for others to deal with? Even revolutionary groups deal gingerly with the
fascisizing elements we all carry deep within us, and yet they often
possess a rarely analyzed but overriding group 'superego' that leads
them to state, much like Nietzsche's man of ressentiment, that the other
is evil (the Fascist! the Capitalist! the Communist!), and hence that they
themselves are good. This conclusion is reached as an afterthought and a
justification, a supremely self-righteous rationalization for a politics that
can only "squint" at life, through the thick clouds of foul-smelling air
that permeates secret meeting places and "security" councils. The man
of ressentiment, as Nietzsche explains, "loves hiding places, secret paths
and back doors, everything covert entices him as his world, his security,
his refreshment; he understands how to keep silent, how not to forget,
xvi )

INTRODUCTION

how to wait, how to be provisionally self-deprecating and humble."?
Such a man, Nietzsche concludes, needs very much to believe in some
neutral, independent "subject"-the ego-for he is prompted by an
instinct of self-affirmation and self-preservation that cares little about
preserving or affirming life, an instinct "in which every lie is sanctified.?" This is the realm of the silent majority. And it is into these back
rooms, behind the closed doors of the analyst's office, in the wings of the
Oedipal theater, that Deleuze and Guattari weave their way, exclaiming
as does Nietzsche that it smells bad there, and that what is needed is "a
breath of fresh air, a relationship with the outside world."
In examining the problem of the subject, the behind-the-scenes
reactive and reactionary man, Anti-Oedipus develops an approach that
is decidedly diagnostic ("What constitutes our sickness today?") and
profoundly healing as well. What it attempts to cure us of is the cure
itself. Deleuze and Guattari term their approach "schizoanalysis,"
which they oppose on every count to psychoanalysis. Where the latter
measures everything against neurosis and castration, schizoanalysis
begins with the schizo, his breakdowns and his breakthroughs. For, they
affirm, "a schizophrenic out for a walk is a better model than a neurotic
lying on the analyst's couch...." Against the Oedipal and oedipalized
territorialities (Family, Church, School, Nation, Party), and especially
the territoriality of the individual, Anti-Oedipus seeks to discover the
"deterritorialized" flows of desire, the flows that have not been reduced
to the Oedipal codes and the neuroticized territorialities, the desiringmachines that escape such codes as lines of escape leading elsewhere.
Much like R. D. Laing, Deleuze and Guattari aim to develop a
materialistically and experientially based analysis of the "breakdowns"
and the "breakthroughs" that characterize some of those labeled
schizophrenic by psychiatry. Rather than view the creations and productions of desire-all of desiring-production-from the point of view
of the norm and the normal, they force their analysis into the sphere of
extremes. From paranoia to schizophrenia, from fascism to revolution,
from breakdowns to breakthroughs, what is investigated is the process
of life flows as they oscillate from one extreme to the other, on a scale of
intensity that goes from 0 ("I never asked to be born ... leave me in
peace"), the body without organs, to the nth power ("I am all that exists,
all the names in history"), the schizophrenic process of desire.

The Experience of Delirium
In order to carry out this ambitious undertaking, AntiOedipus makes joyously unorthodox use of many writers and thinkers,
INTRODUCTION

I

xvII

whose concepts flow together with all the other elements in the book in
what might well be described as a carefully constructed and executed
experiment in delirium.
While Deleuze and Guattari quote frequently from Marx and Freud,
it would be an error to view Anti-Oedipus as yet another attempt at a
Freud/Marx synthesis. For such an attempt always treats political
economy (the flows of capital and interest) and the economy of the
libido (the flows of desire) as two separate economies, even in the work
of Reich, who went as far as possible in this direction. Deleuze and
Guattari, on the other hand, postulate one and the same economy, the
economy of flows. The flows and productions of desire will simply be
viewed as the unconscious of the social productions. Behind every
investment of time and interest and capital, an investment of desire, and
vice versa.
In order to reach this conclusion a new confrontation was required.
Not the standard confrontation between a bourgeois Freud and a
revolutionary Marx, where Freud ends up the loser, but a more radical
confrontation, between Marx the revolutionary and Nietzsche the
madman. The result of this confrontation, as the authors demonstrate
convincingly, is that Freud and psychoanalysis (and perhaps even
Lacan, although they remain ambiguous on this point) become "impossible."
"Why Marx and Nietzsche? Now that's really mixing things up!"
one might protest at this point. But there is really no cause for alarm.
Readers of Marx will be happy to learn that Marx fares quite well in this
confrontation. One might even say he is trimmed down to bare essentials
and improved upon from the point of view of use. Given Deleuze and
Guattari's perspective, this confrontation was inevitable. If one wants to
do an analysis of the flows of money and capital that circulate in society,
nothing is more useful than Marx and the Marxist theory of money. But
if one wishes also to analyze the flows of desire, the fears and the
anxieties, the loves and the despairs that traverse the social field as
intensive notes from the underground (i.e., libidinal economy), one must
look elsewhere. Since psychoanalysis is of no help, reducing as it does
every social manifestation of desire to the familial complex, where is
one to turn? To Nietzsche, and the Nietzschean theory of affects and
intensity, Anti-Oedipus suggests. For here, and especially in On the
Genealogy of Morals, is a theory of desire and will, of the conscious and
the unconscious forces, that relates desire directly to the social field and
to a monetary system based on profit. What Nietzsche teaches, as a
complement to Marx's theory of alienation, is how the history of
mankind is the history of a becoming-reactive. And it is Nietzsche,
xvIII

I

INTRODUCTION

Deleuze and Guattari stress, whose thought already pointed a way out
for humanity, whereas Marx and Freud were too ingrained in the culture
that they were working against.
One could not really view Anti-Oedipus as a purely Nietzschean
undertaking, however, for the book would be nothing without the
tension between Nietzsche and Marx, between philosophy and politics
between thought and revolution; the tension, in short, between Deleuze
the philosopher and Guattari the militant. This tension is quite novel,
and leads to a combination of the artistic "machine," the revolutionary
"machine," and the analytical "machine"; a combination of three modes
of knowledge-the intuitive, the practical, and the reflective, which all
become joined as bits and pieces of one and the same strategical
machine whose target is the ego and the fascist in each of us. Extending
thought to the point of madness and action to the point of revolution,
theirs is indeed a politics of experience. The experience, however, is no
longer that of man, but of what is nonhuman in man, his desires and his
forces: a politics of desire directed against all that is egoic-and
heroic-in man.
In addition to Nietzsche they also found it necessary to listen to
others: to Miller and Lawrence and Kafka and Beckett, to Proust and
Reich and Foucault, to Burroughs and Ginsberg, each of whom had
different insights concerning madness and dissension, politics and
desire. They needed everything they could get their hands on and they
took whatever they could find, in an eclectic fashion closer to Henry
Miller than it is to Marx or Freud. More poetic, undoubtedly, but also
more fun.
. While Deleuze and Guattari use many authors and concepts, this is
never done in an academic fashion aimed at persuading the reader.
Rather, they use these names and ideas as effects that traverse their
analyses, generating ever new effects, as points of reference indeed, but
also as points of intensity and signs pointing a way out: points-signs that
offer a multiplicity of solutions and a variety of directions for a new
style of politics. Such an approach carries much along with it, in the
course of its flow, but it also leaves much behind. Chunks of Marx and
Freud that cannot keep up with the fast current will be left behind,
buried or forgotten, while everything in Marx and Freud that has to do
with how things and people and desires actually flow will be kept, and
added to the infernal machine evoked above. This political analysis of
desire, this schizoanalysis, becomes a mighty tool where schizophrenia
as a process-the schiz-serves as a point of departure as well as a point
of destination. Like Laing, they encourage mankind to take a journey,
the journey through ego-loss. They go much further than Laing on this
INTRODUCTION

I

xix

point, however. They urge mankind to strip itself of all anthropomorphic
and anthropological armoring, all myth and tragedy, and all existentialism, in order to perceive what is nonhuman in man, his will and his
forces, his transformations and mutations. The human and social
sciences have accustomed us to see the figure of Man behind every
social event, just as Christianity taught us to see the Eye of the Lord
looking down upon us. Such forms of knowledge project an image of
reality, at the expense of reality itself. They talk figures and icons and
signs, but fail to perceive forces and flows. They blind us to other
realities, and especially the reality of power as it subjugates us. Their
function is to tame, and the result is the fabrication of docile and
obedient subjects.

Schizoanalysis and Collectivity
To be anti-oedipal is to be anti-ego as well as anti-homo,
willfully attacking all reductive psychoanalytic and political analyses
that remain caught within the sphere of totality and unity, in order to
free the multiplicity of desire from the deadly neurotic and Oedipal
yoke. For Oedipus is not a mere psychoanalytic construct, Deleuze and
Guattari explain. Oedipus is the figurehead of imperialism, "colonization
pursued by other means, it is the interior colony, and we shall see that
even here at home ... it is our intimate colonial education." This
internalization of man by man, this "oedipalization," creates a new
meaning for SUffering, internal suffering, and a new tone for life: the
depressive tone. Now depression does not just come about one fine day,
Anti-Oedipus goes on, nor does Oedipus appear one day in the Family
and feel secure in remaining there. Depression and Oedipus are agencies
of the State, agencies of paranoia, agencies of power, long before being
delegated to the family. Oedipus is the figure of power as such, just as
neurosis is the result of power on individuals. Oedipus is everywhere.
For anti-oedipalists the ego, like Oedipus, is "part of those things
we must dismantle through the united assault of analytical and political
forces."4 Oedipus is belief injected into the unconscious, it is what gives
us faith as it robs us of power, it is what teaches us to desire our own
repression. Everybody has been oedipalized and neuroticized at home,
at school, at work. Everybody wants to be a fascist. Deleuze and
Guattari want to know how these beliefs succeed in taking hold of a
body, thereby silencing the productive machines of the libido. They also
want to know how the opposite situation is brought about, where a body
successfully wards off the effects of power. Reversing the Freudian
distinction between neurosis and psychosis that measures everything
xx !INTRODUCTION

against the former, Anti-Oedipus concludes: the neurotic is the one on
whom the Oedipal imprints take, whereas the psychotic is the one
incapable of being oedipalized, even and especially by psychoanalysis.
The first task of the revolutionary, they add, is to learn from the
psychotic how to shake off the Oedipal yoke and the effects of power, in
order to initiate a radical politics of desire freed from all beliefs. Such a
politics dissolves the mystifications of power through the kindling, on all
levels, of anti-oedipal forces-the schizzes-flows-forces that escape
coding, scramble the codes, and flee in all directions: orphans (no
daddy-mommy-me), atheists (no beliefs), and nomads (no habits, no
territories) .
A schizoanalysis schizophrenizes in order to break the holds of
power and institute research into a new collective subjectivity and a
revolutionary healing of mankind. For we are sick, so sick, of our selves!
It is actually not accurate to say that Deleuze and Guattari develop
the schizoanalytic approach, for, as they show, it has always been at
work in writers like Miller or Nietzsche or Artaud. Stoned thinking
based on intensely lived experiences: Pop Philosophy.
To put it simply, as does Miller, "everybody becomes a healer the
moment he forgets about himself." And Miller continues: "Reality is
here and now, everywhere, gleaming through every reflection that meets
the eye ... , Everybody is a neurotic, down to the last man and woman.
The healer, or the analyst, if you like, is only a super-neurotic.... To
be cured we must rise from our graves and throw off the cerements of
the dead. Nobody can do it for another-it is a private affair which is
best done collectively."5 Once we forget about our egos a non-neurotic
form of politics becomes possible, where singularity and collectivity are
no longer at odds with each other, and where collective expressions of
desire are possible. Such a politics does not seek to regiment individuals
according to a totalitarian system of norms, but to de-normalize and
de-individualize through a multiplicity of new, collective arrangements
against power. Its goal is the transformation of human relationships in a
struggle against power. And it urges militant groups, as well as lone
individuals, to analyze and fight against the effects of power that
subjugate them: "For a revolutionary group at the preconscious level
remains a subjugated group, even in seizing power, as long as this power
itself refers to a form of force that continues to enslave and crush
desiring-production. . .. A subject-group, on the contrary, is a group
whose libidinal investments are themselves revolutionary, it causes
desire to penetrate into the social field, and subordinates the socius or
the forms of power to desiring-production; productive of desire and a
desire that produces, the subject-group always invents mortal formaINTRODUCTION

I ""I

tions that exorcize the effusion in it of a death instinct; it opposes real
coefficients of transversality to the symbolic determinations of subjugation, coefficients without a hierarchy or a group superego." There can be
no revolutionary actions, Anti-Oedipus concludes, where the the relations between people and groups are relations of exclusion and segregation. Groups must multiply and connect in ever new ways, freeing up
territorialities for the construction of new social arrangements. Theory
must therefore be conceived as a toolbox, producing tools that work; or
as Ivan Illich says, we must learn to construct tools for conviviality
through the use of counterfoil research." When Illich speaks of "convivial reconstruction," he is very close to Deleuze and Guattari's notion of
a "desiring-revolution." Like Deleuze and Guattari, Illich also cal1sfor a
radical reversal of the relationships between individuals and tools or
machines: "This reversal would permit the evolution of a life-style and
of a political system which give priority to the protection, the maximum
use, and the enjoyment of the one resource that is almost equally
distributed among all people: personal energy under personal control."?
All three authors agree that such a reversal must be governed by a
collective political process, and not by professionals and experts. The
ultimate answer to neurotic dependencies on professionals is mutual
self-care. 8
Freed from a psychoanalytic framework, the political group or
collective cannot, however, push aside the problem of desire. Nor can it
leave desire in the hands of new experts. It must analyze the function of
desire, in itself and in the groups with which it is involved. What is the
function of desire, Anti-Oedipus asks, if not one of making connections?
For to be bogged down in arrangements from which escape is possible is
to be neurotic, seeing an irresolvable crisis where alternatives in fact
exist. And as Deleuze and Guattari comment, "perhaps it will be
discovered that the only incurable is the neurotic."
We defend so cautiously against our egoically limited experiences,
states Laing in The Politics of Experience, that it is not surprising to see
people grow defensive and panic at the idea of experiencing ego-loss
through the use of drugs or collective experiences. But there is nothing
pathological about ego-loss, Laing adds; quite the contrary. Ego-loss is
the experience of all mankind, "of the primal man, of Adam and perhaps
even [a journey] further into the beings of animals, vegetables and
minerals."9 No age, Laing concludes, has so lost touch with this healing
process as has ours. Deleuze and Guattari's schizoanalytic approach
serves to begin such a healing process. Its major task is to destroy the
oedipalized and neuroticized individual dependencies through the Iorg-

"'In

I

INTRODUCTION

ing of a col1ective subjectivity, a nonfascist subject-anti-Oedipus.
Anti-Oedipus is an individual or a group that no longer functions in
terms of beliefs and that comes to redeem mankind, as Nietzsche
foresaw, not only from the ideals that weighed it down, "but also from
that which was bound to grow out of it, the great nausea, the will to
nothingness, nihilism; this bel1-stroke of noon and of the great decision
that liberates the will again and restores its goal to the earth and his hope
to man; this AntiChrist and antinihilist. .. He must come one day._"10
Unlike Nietzsche's antinihilist, however, Deleuze and Guattari's
anti-Oedipus is not alone. Anti-Oedipus is not the superman. It is not
transcendent. Where Nietzsche grew progressively more isolated to the
point of madness, Deleuze and Guattari call for actions and passions of a
collective nature, here and now. Madness is a radical break from power
in the form of a disconnection. Militancy, in Deleuze and Guattari's
framework, would learn from madness but then move beyond it, beyond
disconnections and deterritorializations, to ever new connections. A
politics of desire would see loneliness and depression as the first things
to go. Such is the anti-oedipal strategy: if man is connected to the
machines of the universe, if he is in tune with his desires, if he is
"anchored," "he ceases to worry about the fitness of things, about the
behavior of his fellow-men, about right or wrong and justice and
injustice. If his roots are in the current of life he will float on the surface
like a lotus and he will blossom and give forth fruit. ... The life that's
in him will manifest itself in growth, and growth is an endless, eternal
process. The process is everything."l1 It is this process-of desiringproduction-that Anti-Oedipus sets out to analyze.
For if desire is repressed in a society, Deleuze and Guattari state,
this is hardly because "it is a desire for the mother or for the death of the
father; on the contrary, desire becomes that only because it is repressed,
it takes that mask on under the reign of the repression that models the
mask for it and plasters it on its face .... The real danger is elsewhere.
If desire is repressed, it is because every position of desire, no matter
how small, is capable of calling into question the established order of a
society: not that desire is asocial; on the contrary. But it is explosive;
there is no desiring-machine capable of being assembled without demolishing entire social sectors."
Deleuze and Guattari conclude that desire, any desiring-machine, is
always a combination of various elements and forces of all types. Hence
the need to listen not only to revolutionaries but to all those who know
how to be truly objective: "Revolutionaries, artists, and seers an

INTRODUCTION

11Ill11

content to be objective, merely objective: they know that desire clasps
life in its powerfully productive embrace, and reproduces it in a way all
the more intense because it has few needs. And never mind those who
believe that this is very easy to say, or that it is the sort of idea to be
found in books."

ANTI-

C!)EDIPUS

xxiv !INTRODUCTION

THE
DESIRING-MACHINES
Translated by Helen R. Lane, Robert Hurley, and Mark Seem

1

I Desiring-Production

It is at work everywhere, functioning smoothly at times,
at other times in fits and starts. It breathes, it heats, it eats. It shits and
fucks. What a mistake to have ever said the id. Everywhere it is
machines-real ones, not figurative ones: machines driving other rnachines, machines being driven by other machines, with all the necessary
couplings and connections. An organ-machine is plugged into an
energy-source-machine: the one produces a flow that the other inter
rupts. The breast is a machine that produces milk, and the mouth ~
machine coupled to it. The mouth of the anorexic wavers betweer
several functions: its possessor is uncertain as to whether it is ar
eating-machine, an anal machine, a talking-machine, or a breathing
machine (asthma attacks). Hence we are all handymen: each with hi:
little machines. For every organ-machine, an energy-machine: all th:

time, flows and interruptions. Judge Schreber* has sunbeams in his ass.
A solar anus. And rest assured that it works: Judge Schreber feels
something, produces something, and is capable of explaining the process
theoretically. Something is produced: the effects of a machine, not mere
metaphors.
A schizophrenic out for a walk is a better model than a neurotic
lying on the analyst's couch. A breath of fresh air, a relationship with the
outside world. Lenz's stroll, for example, as reconstructed by BUchner.
This walk outdoors is different from the moments when Lenz finds
himself closeted with his pastor, who forces him to situate himself
socially, in relationship to the God of established religion, in relationship
to his father, to his mother. While taking a stroll outdoors, on the other
hand, he is in the mountains, amid falling snowflakes, with other gods or
without any gods at all, without a family, without a father or a mother,
with nature. "What does my father want? Can he offer me more than
that? Impossible. Leave me in peace."! Everything is a machine.
Celestial machines, the stars or rainbows in the sky, alpine machinesall of them connected to those of his body. The continual whirr of
machines. "He thought that it must be a feeling of endless bliss to be in
contact with the profound life of every form, to have a soul for rocks,
metals, water, and plants, to take into himself, as in a dream, every
element of nature, like flowers that breathe with the waxing and waning
of the rnoon.v-- To be a chlorophyll- or a photosynthesis-machine, or at
least slip his body into such machines as one part among the others.
Lenz has projected himself back to a time before the man-nature
dichotomy, before all the co-ordinates based on this fundamental
dichotomy have been laid down. He does not live nature as nature, but
as a process of production. There is no such thing as either man or
nature now, only a process that produces the one within the other and
couples the machines together. Producing-machines, desiring-machines
everywhere, schizophrenic machines, all of species life: the self and the
non-self, outside and inside, no longer have any meaning whatsoever.
Now that we have had a look at this stroll of a schizo, let us
compare what happens when Samuel Beckett's characters decide to
venture outdoors. Their various gaits and methods of self-locomotion
constitute, in and of themselves, a finely tuned machine. And then there
is the function of the bicycle in Beckett's works: what relationship does
the bicycle-horn machine have with the mother-anus machine? "What a

rest to speak of bicycles and horns. Unfortunately it is not of them I
have to speak, but of her who brought me into the world, through the
hole in her arse if my memory is correct."? It is often thought that
Oedipus* is an easy subject to deal with, something perfectly obvious, a
"given" that is there from the very beginning. But that is not so at all:
Oedipus presupposes a fantastic repression of desiring-machines. And
why are they repressed? To what end? Is it really necessary or desirable
to submit to such repression? And what means are to be used to
accomplish this? What ought to go inside the Oedipal triangle, what sort
of thing is required to construct it? Are a bicycle horn and my mother's
arse sufficient to do the job? Aren't there more important questions than
these, however? Given a certain effect, what machine is capable of
producing it? And given a certain machine, what can it be used for? Can
we possibly guess, for instance, what a knife rest is used for if all we are
given is a geometrical description of it? Or yet another example: on
being confronted with a complete machine made up of six stones in the
right-hand pocket of my coat (the pocket that serves as the source of the
stones), five stones in the right-hand pocket of my trousers, and five in
the left-hand pocket (transmission pockets), with the remaining pocket
of my coat receiving the stones that have already been handled, as each
of the stones moves forward one pocket, how can we determine the
effect of this circuit of distribution in which the mouth, too, plays a role
as a stone-sucking machine? Where in this entire circuit do we find the
production of sexual pleasure? At the end of Malone Dies, Lady Pedal
takes the schizophrenics out for a ride in a van and a rowboat, and on a
picnic in the midst of nature: an infernal machine is being assembled.
"Under the skin the body is an over-heated factory,/ and outside,! the
invalid shines,/ glows,! from every burst pore."3
This does not mean that we are attempting to make nature one of
the poles of schizophrenia. What the schizophrenic experiences, both as
an individual and as a member of the human species, is not at all anyone
specific aspect of nature, but nature as a process of production. What do
we mean here by process? It is probable that at a certain level nature and
industry are two separate and distinct things: from one point of view,
industry is the opposite of nature; from another, industry extracts its
raw materials from nature; from yet another, it returns its refuse to
nature; and so on. Even within society, this characteristic man-nature,
industry-nature, society-nature relationship is responsible for the dis-

"Daniel Paul Schreber was a German judge who began psychiatric treatment in 1884 at the age of
forty-two, and spent the remaining twenty-seven years of his life in and out of mental institutions. In
1903, at the age of sixty-one, he published his Denkwiirdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken (Memoirs of a
Nervous Illness), which Freud used as the basis of his influential 1911 study on paranoia, "PsychoAnalytic Notes" (reference note 7, page 384 of this volume). pp. 390-472. (Translators 'note.)

"As will be seen below, the term Oedipus has many widely varying connotations in this volume. It
refers, for instance, not only to the Greek myth of Oedipus and to the Oedipus complex as defined by
classical psychoanalysis, but also to Oedipal mechanisms, processes, and structures. The translators
follow the authors' use and employ the word "Oedipus" by itself, using the more traditional term
"Oedipus complex" only when the authors do so, (Translators' note.)

~I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

13

tinction of relatively autonomous spheres that are called production,
distribution, consumption. But in general this entire level of distinctions,
examined from the point of view of its formal developed structures,
presupposes (as Marx has demonstrated) not only the existence of
capital and the division of labor, but also the false consciousness that the
capitalist being necessarily acquires, both of itself and of the supposedly
fixed elements within an over-all process. For the -eal truth of the
matter-the glaring, sober truth that resides in delirium-Is that there is
no such thing as relatively independent spheres or circuits: production is
immediately consumption and a recording process (enregistrement*),
without any sort of mediation, and the recording process and consumption directly determine production, though they do so within the
production process itself. Hence everything is production: production of
productions, of actions and of passions; productions of recording
processes, of distributions and of co-ordinates that serve as points of
reference; productions of consumptions, of sensual pleasures, of anxieties, and of pain. Everything is production, since the recording processes
are immediately consumed, immediately consummated, and these consumptions directly reproduced. t This is the first meaning of process as
we use the term: incorporating recording and consumption within
production itself, thus making them the productions of one and the same
process.
Second, we make no distinction between man and nature: the
human essence of nature and the natural essence of man become one
within nature in the form of production or industry, just as they do
within the life of man as a species. Industry is then no longer considered
from the extrinsic point of view of utility, but rather from the point of
view of its fundamental identity with nature as production of man and
by man." Not man as the king of creation, but rather as the being who is
in intimate contact with the profound life of all forms or all types of
beings, who is responsible for even the stars and animal life, and who
ceaselessly plugs an organ-machine into an energy-machine, a tree into
his body, a breast into his mouth, the sun into his asshole: the eternal
custodian of the machines of the universe. This is the second meaning of
process as we use the term: man and nature are not like two opposite
"The ~rench term enregistrement has a number of meanings, among them the process of making a
recording to be played back by ~ mechanical device (~.g., a p~onograph), the recording so made (e.g., a
phonogra~h rec~rd Or a magnetic tape), and the entering of births, deaths, deeds, marriages, and so DO,
111 an official register. (Translators' note.)

terms confronting each other-not even in the sense of bipolar opposites
within a relationship of causation, ideation, or expression (cause and
effect, subject and object, etc.); rather, they are one and the same
essential reality, the producer-product. Production as process overtakes
all idealistic categories and constitutes a cycle whose relationship to
desire is that of an immanent principle. That is why desiring-production
is the principal concern of a materialist psychiatry, which conceives of
and deals with the schizo as Homo natura. This will be the case,
however, only on one condition, which in fact constitutes the third
meaning of process as we use the term: it must not be viewed as a goal or
an end in itself, nor must it be confused with an infinite perpetuation of
itself. Putting an end to the process or prolonging it indefinitely-which,
strictly speaking, is tantamount to ending it abruptly and prematurelyis what creates the artificial schizophrenic found in mental institutions: a
limp rag forced into autistic behavior, produced as an entirely separate
and independent entity. D. H. Lawrence says of love: "We have pushed
a process into a goal. The aim of any process is not the perpetuation of
that process, but the completion thereof. ... The process should work
to a completion, not to some horror of intensification and extremity
wherein the soul and body ultimately perish.'?' Schizophrenia is like
love: there is no specifically schizophrenic phenomenon or entity;
schizophrenia is the universe of productive and reproductive desiringmachines, universal primary production as "the essential reality of man
and nature."
Desiring-machines are binary machines, obeying a binary law or set
of rules governing associations: one machine is always coupled with
another. The productive synthesis, the production of production, is
inherently connective in nature: "and ..." "and then ..." This is
because there is always a flow-producing machine, and another machine
connected to it that interrupts or draws off part of this flow (the
breast-the mouth). And because the first machine is in turn connected
to another whose flow it interrupts or partially drains off, the binary
series is linear in every direction. Desire constantly couples continuous
flows and partial objects that are by nature fragmentary and fragmented.
Desire causes the current to flow, itself flows in turn, and breaks the
flows. "I love everything that flows, even the menstrual flow that carries
away the seed unfecund."* Amniotic fluid spilling out of the sac and
kidney stones; flowing hair; a flow of spittle, a flow of sperm, shit, OJ
urine that are produced by partial objects and constantly cut off by othei

tWhen .Geor~es Bataille speaks of sumptuary. nonproductive expenditures or consumptions in
~Ith the energy of nature, these are expenditures or consumptions that are not part of the
independent sphere of hll:man production, insofar as .the latter is determined by "the
They therefore have to do With what we call the production of consumption. See Georges
Bataille, La part maudite, precede de La notion de depense (Paris: Editions de Minuit).

connection
suppos~dlY

usef~l.

4

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

"Henry Miller, Tropic of Cancer, Ch. 13. See in this same chapter the celebration of desire-as-flu
expressed in the phrase: "... and my guts spilled out in a grand schizophrenic rush, an evacuation the
leaves me face to face with the Absolute."

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

partial objects, which in turn produce other flows, interrupted by other
partial objects. Every "object" presupposes the continuity of a flow;
every flow, the fragmentation of the object. Doubtless each organmachine interprets the entire world from the perspective of its own flux,
from the point of view of the energy that flows from it: the eye interprets
everything-speaking, understanding, shitting, fucking-in terms of
seeing. But a connection with another machine is always established,
along a transverse path, so that one machine interrupts the current of the
other or "sees" its own current interrupted.
Hence the coupling that takes place within the partial object-flow
connective synthesis also has another form: product/producing. Producing is always something "grafted onto" the product; and for thatreason
desiring-production is production of production, just, as every machine
is a machine connected to another machine. We cannot accept the
idealist category of "expression" as a satisfactory or sufficient explanation of this phenomenon. We cannot, we must not attempt to describe
the schizophrenic object without relating it to the process of production.
The Cahiers de l'art brut" are a striking confirmation of this principle,
since by taking such an approach they deny that there is any such thing
as a specific, identifiable schizophrenic entity. Or to take another
example, Henri Michaux describes a schizophrenic table in terms of a
process of production which is that of desire: "Once noticed, it
continued to occupy one's mind. It even persisted, as it were, in going
about its own business .... The striking thing was that it was neither
simple nor really complex, initially or intentionally complex, or constructed according to a complicated plan. Instead, it had been desimplified in the course of its carpentering.... As it stood, it was a table of
additions, much like certain schizophrenics' drawings, described as
'overstuffed,' and if finished it was only in so far as there was no way of
adding anything more to it, the table having become more and more an
accumulation, less and less a table .... It was not intended for any
specific purpose, for anything one expects of a table. Heavy, cumbersome, it was virtually immovable. One didn't know how to handle it
(mentally or physically). Its top surface, the useful part of the table,
having been gradually reduced, was disappearing, with so little relation
to the clumsy framework that the thing did not strike one as a table, but
as some freak piece of furniture, an unfamiliar instrument ... for which
there was no purpose. A dehumanized table, nothing cozy about it,
nothing 'middle-class,' nothing rustic, nothing countrified, not a kitchen
table or a work table. A table which lent itself to no function,
*A series of monographs; issued periodically, containing reproductions of art works created by inmates
of the psychiatric asylums of Europe. L 'Art brut is edited by Jean Dubuffet.
6

I

ANTI-OEDiPUS

self-protective, denying itself to service and communication alike. There
was something stunned about it, something petrified. Perhaps it suggested a stalled engine."?
The schizophrenic is the universal producer. There is no need to
distinguish here between producing and its product. We need merely
note that the pure "thisness" of the object produced is carried over into
a new act of producing. The table continues to "go about its business."
The surface of the table, however, is eaten up by the supporting
framework. The nontermination of the table is a necessary consequence
of its mode of production. When Claude Levi-Strauss defines bricolage, *
he does so in terms of a set of closely related characteristics: the
possession of a stock of materials or of rules of thumb that are fairly
extensive, though more or less a hodgepodge-multiple and at the same
time limited; the ability to rearrange fragments continually in new and
different patterns or configurations; and as a consequence, an indifference toward the act of producing and toward the product, toward the set
of instruments to be used and toward the over-all result to be achieved.r
The satisfaction the handyman experiences when he plugs something
into an electric socket or diverts a stream of water can scarcely be
explained in terms of "playing mommy and daddy," or by the pleasure
of violating a taboo. The rule of continually producing production, of
grafting producing onto the product, is a characteristic of desiringmachines or of primary production: the production of production. A
painting by Richard Lindner, "Boy with Machine," shows a huge,
pudgy, bloated boy working one of his little desiring-machines, after
having hooked it up to a vast technical social machine-which, as we
shall see, is what even the very young child does.
Producing, a product: a producing/product identity. It is this
identity that constitutes a third term in the linear series: an enormous
undifferentiated object. Everything stops dead for a moment, everything
freezes in place-and then the whole process will begin all over again.
From a certain point of view it would be much better if nothing worked,
if nothing functioned. Never being born, escaping the wheel of continual
birth and rebirth, no mouth to suck with, no anus to shit through. Will
*bricolage: The tinkering about of the bricoleur, or amateur handyman. The art of making do with

what's at hand. (Translators' note.)
tClaude Levi-Strauss, The Savage Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966), p. 17: "The

'bricoleur' is adept at performing a large number of diverse tasks; but unlike the engineer, he does not
subordinate each of them to the availability of raw materials and tools conceived and procured for the
purpose of the project. His universe of instruments is closed and the rules of his game are always to
make do with 'whatever is at hand,' that is to say with a set of tools and materials which is always finite
and is also heterogeneous because what it contains bears no relation to the current project, Or indeed to
any particular project, but is the contingent result of all the occasions there have been to renew Or
enrich the stock or to maintain it with the remains of previous constructions or destructions,"

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

7

the machines run so badly, their component pieces fall apart to such a
point that they will return to nothingness and thus allow us to return to
nothingness? It would seem, however, that the flows of energy are still
too closely connected, the partial objects still too organic, for this to
happen. What would be required is a pure fluid in a free state, flowing
without interruption, streaming over the surface of a full body.
Desiring-machines make us an organism; but at the very heart of this
production, within the very production of this production, the body
suffers from being organized in this way, from not having some other
sort of organization, or no organization at all. "An incomprehensible,
absolutely rigid stasis" in the very midst of process, as a third stage:
"No mouth. No tongue. No teeth. No larynx. No esophagus. No belly.
No anus." The automata stop dead and set free the unorganized mass
they once served to articulate. The full body without organs is the
unproductive, the sterile, the unengendered, the unconsumable. Antonin
Artaud discovered this one day, finding himself with no shape or form
whatsoever, right there where he was at that moment. The death
instinct: that is its name, and death is not without a model. For desire
desires death also, because the full body of death is its motor, just as it
desires life, because the organs of life are the working machine. We shall
not inquire how all this fits together so that the machine will run: the
question itself is the result of a process of abstraction.
Desiring-machines work only when they break down, and by
continually breaking down. Judge Schreber "lived for a long time
without a stomach, without intestines, almost without lungs, with a torn
oesophagus, without a bladder, and with shattered ribs; he used sometimes to swallow part of his own larynx with his food, etc."? The body
without organs is nonproductive; nonetheless it is produced, at a certain
place and a certain time in the connective synthesis, as the identity of
producing and the product: the schizophrenic table is a body without
organs. The body without organs is not the proof of an original
nothingness, nor is it what remains of a lost totality. Above all, it is not a
projection; it has nothing whatsoever to do with the body itself, or with
an image of the body. It is the body without an image. This irnageless,
organless body, the nonproductive, exists right there where it is produced, in the third stage of the binary-linear series. It is perpetually
reinserted into the process of production. The catatonic body is produced in the water of the hydrotherapy tub. The full body without
organs belongs to the realm of antiproduction; but yet another characteristic of the connective or productive synthesis is the fact that it
couples production with antiproduction, with an element of anti pro duetion,
II

I

2

I The Body without Organs

An apparent conflict arises between desiring-machines
and the body without organs. Every coupling of machines, every
production of a machine, every sound of a machin.e running, ?ecomcs
unbearable to the body without organs. Beneath Its organs It senses
there are larvae and loathsome worms, and a God at work messing it all
up or strangling it by organizing it. "The body is the body/it is all by
itself/and has no need of organs/the body is never an organism/
organisms are the enemies of the body."* Merely so .many nails pie~cing
the flesh, so many forms of torture. In order to resist organ-machines,
the body without organs presents its smooth, slippery, opaque, taut
surface as a barrier. In order to resist linked, connected, and interrupted
flows it sets up a counterflow of amorphous, undifferentiated fluid. In
order'to resist using words composed of articulated phonetic units, it
utters only gasps and cries that are sheer unarticulated blocks of sound.
We are of the opinion that what is ordinarily referred to as "primary
repression" means precisely that: it is not a "countercathexis," but
rather this repulsion of desiring-machines by the body without organs.
This is the real meaning of the paranoiac machine: the desiring-machines
attempt to break into the body without organs, and the body without
organs repels them, since it experiences them as an over-all persecution
apparatus. Thus we cannot agree with Victor Tausk when he regards the
paranoiac machine as a mere projection of. "a ~erson 's.own bodY~' and
the genital organs." The genesis of the machine lies precisely here: in the
opposition of the process of production of the desiring-machines and the
nonproductive stasis of the body without organs. The anonymous nature
of the machine and the non differentiated nature of its surface are proof
of this. Projection enters the picture only secondarily, as does counterinvestrnent.t as the body without organs invests a counterinside or a
counteroutside, in the form of a persecuting organ or some exterior
agent of persecution. But in and of itself the paranoiac machine is
merely an avatar of the desiring-machines: it is a result of the relationship between the desiring-machines and the body without organs, and
occurs when the latter can no longer tolerate these machines.
*Antonin Artaud, in 84, nos. 5--6(948). The French text reads: "L~ corps est Ie carps/il ~st seufjet n'~
pas besoin d'organe/le corps n'est jamais li.n organism:/les orgamsmes :oot .les ennerrus ,du corps.
(Translators' note.y (Throughout, all English translations of works Cited 10 the text are by the
translators, unless otherwise noted.)
tWe have adopted this term throughout, except when quoting directly from. psychoanalytic liter~tur~,
because it renders more faithfully the meaning of investissement, which 10 French does servrce In
libidinal as well as political economy. We have likewise chosen to translate investir as "to invest"

instead of "to cathect." (Translators' note.)

THE DESIRING-MACHINES i l l
ANTI-OEDIPUS

If we wish to have some idea of the forces that the body without
organs exerts later on in the uninterrupted process, we must first
establish a parallel between desiring-production and social production.
We intend such a parallel to be regarded as merely phenomenological:
we are here drawing no conclusions whatsoever as to the nature and the
relationship of the two productions, nor does the parallel we are about to
establish provide any sort of a priori answer to the question whether
desiring-production and social production are really two separate and
distinct productions. Its one purpose is to point out the fact that the
forms of social production, like those of desiring-production, involve an
unengendered nonproductive attitude, an element of antiproduction
coupled with the process, a full body that functions as a socius. This
socius may be the body of the earth, that of the tyrant, or capital. This is
the body that Marx is referring to when he says that it is not the product
of labor, but rather appears as its natural or divine presupposition. In
fact, it does not restrict itself merely to opposing productive forces in
and of themselves. It falls back on (it se rabat sur)* all production,
constituting a surface over which the forces and agents of production
are distributed, thereby appropriating for itself all surplus production
and arrogating to itself both the whole and the parts of the process,
which now seem to emanate from it as a quasi cause. Forces and agents
come to represent a miraculous form of its own power: they appear to be
"rniraculated" (miraculesi by it. In a word, the socius as a full body
forms a surface where all production is recorded, whereupon the entire
process appears to emanate from this recording surface. Society constructs its own delirium by recording the process of production; but it is
not a conscious delirium, or rather is a true consciousness of a false
movement, a true perception of an apparent objective movement, a true
perception of the movement that is produced on the recording surface.
Capital is indeed the body without organs of the capitalist, or rather
of the capitalist being. But as such, it is not only the fluid and petrified
substance of money, for it will give to the sterility of money the form
whereby money produces money. It produces surplus value, just as the
body without organs reproduces itself, puts forth shoots, and branches
out to the farthest corners of the universe. It makes the machine
responsible for producing a relative surplus value, while embodying
itself in the machine as fixed capital. Machin~s and agents cling so
*The verb se rabottre sur (and the noun rebattement), used by the authors here and in numerous
instances in the text below, has several different connotations, as for instance: in descriptive geometry.
to describe the rotation of a plane so as to coincide with another plane, usually followed by a reverse
rotation back into its original position; a retreat to a previously held position, as in a battle; and a
reduction to a lower level. In the English text below, it will be translated in various ways, depending on
the context, followed by the French expression in parentheses. (Translators' note.)

10

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

closely to capital that their very functioning appears to be miraculated
by it. Everything seems objectively to be produced by capital as quasi
cause. As Marx observes, in the beginning capitalists are necessarily
conscious of the opposition between capital and labor, and of the use of
capital as a means of extorting surplus labor. But a perverted, bewitched
world quickly comes into being, as capital increasingly plays the role of
a recording surface that falls back on (se rabat sur) all of production.
(Furnishing or realizing surplus value is what establishes recording
rights.) "With the development of relative surplus-value in the actual
specifically capitalist mode of production, whereby the productive
powers of social labour are developed, these productive powers and the
social interrelations of labour in the direct labour-process seem transferred from labour to capital. Capital thus becomes a very mystic being
since all of labour's social productive forces appear to be due to capital,
rather than labour as such, and seem to issue from the womb of capital
itself."? What is specifically capitalist here is the role of money and the
use of capital as a full body to constitute the recording or inscribing
surface. But some kind of full body, that of the earth or the despot, a
recording surface, an apparent objective movement, a fetishistic, perverted, bewitched world are characteristic of all types of society as a
constant of social reproduction.
The body without organs now falls back on (se rabat sur) desiringproduction, attracts it, and appropriates it for its own. The organmachines now cling to the body without organs as though it were a
fencer's padded jacket, or as though these organ-machines were medals
pinned onto the jersey of a wrestler who makes them jingle as he starts
toward his opponent. An attraction-machine now takes the place, or may
take the place, of a repulsion-machine: a miraculating-machine succeeding the paranoiac machine. But what is meant here by "succeeding"?
The two coexist, rather, and black humor does not attempt to resolve
contradictions, but to make it so that there are none, and never were
any. The body without organs, the unproductive, the unconsumable,
serves as a surface for the recording of the entire process of production
of desire, so that desiring-machines seem to emanate from it in the
apparent objective movement that establishes a relationship between
the machines and the body without organs. The organs are regenerated,
"rniraculated " on the body of Judge Schreber, who attracts God's rays
to himself. Doubtless the former paranoiac machine continues to exist in
the form of mocking voices that attempt to "dc-rniraculate " (demiracuLa) the organs, the Judge's anus in particular. But the essential thing is
the establishment of an enchanted recording or inscribing surface that
arrogates to itself all the productive forces and all the organs of
THE DESIRING-MACHINES

1"

production, and that acts as a quasi cause by communicating the
apparent movement (the fetish) to them. So true is it that the schizo
practices political economy, and that all sexuality is a matter of
economy.
Production is not recorded in the same way it is produced, however.
Or rather, it is not reproduced within the apparent objective movement
in the same way in which it is produced within the process of
constitution. In fact, we have passed imperceptibly into a domain of the
production of recording, whose law is not the same as that of the
production of production. The law governing the latter was connective
synthesis or coupling. But when the productive connections pass from
machines to the body without organs (as from labor to capital), it would
seem that they then come under another law that expresses a distribution in relation to the nonproductive element as a "natural or divine
presupposition" (the disjunctions of capital). Machines attach themselves to the body without organs as so many points of disjunction,
between which an entire network of new syntheses is now woven,
marking the surface off into co-ordinates, like a grid. The "either ... or
... or" of the schizophrenic takes over from the "and then": no matter
what two organs are involved, the way in which they are attached to the
body without organs must be such that all the disjunctive syntheses
between the two amount to the same on the slippery surface. Whereas
the "either/or" claims to mark decisive choices between immutable
terms (the alternative: either this or that), the schizophrenic "either ...
or ... or" refers to the system of possible permutations between
differences that always amount to the same as they shift and slide about.
As in the case of Beckett's mouth that speaks and feet that walk: "He
sometimes halted without saying anything. Either he had finally nothing
to say, or while having something to say he finally decided not to say
it. ... Other main examples suggest themselves to the mind. Immediate
continuous communication with immediate redeparture. Same thing
with delayed redeparture. Delayed continuous communication with
immediate redeparture. Same thing with delayed redeparture. Immediate discontinuous communication with immediate redeparture. Same
thing with delayed redeparture. Delayed discontinuous communication
with immediate redeparture. Same thing with delayed redeparture.:"?
Thus the schizophrenic, the possessor of the most touchingly
meager capital-Malone's belongings, for instance-inscribes on his
own body the litany of disjunctions, and creates for himself a world of
parries where the most minute of permutations is supposed to be a
response to the new situation or a reply to the indiscreet questioner. The
disjunctive synthesis of recording therefore comes to overlap the
12

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

connective syntheses of production. The process as process of production extends into the method as method of inscription. Or rather, if what
we term libido is the connective "labor" of desiring-production, it
should be said that a part of this energy is transformed into the energy of
disjunctive inscription (Numen). A transformation of energy. But why
call this new form of energy divine, why label it Numen, in view of all
the ambiguities caused by a problem of the unconscious that is only
apparently religious? The body without organs is not God, quite the
contrary. But the energy that sweeps through it is divine, when it attracts
to itself the entire process of production and server as its miraculate,
enchanted surface, inscribing it in each and everyone of its disjunctions.
Hence the strange relationship that Schreber has with God. To anyone
who asks: "Do you believe in God?" we should reply in strictly Kantian
or Schreberian terms: "Of course, but only as the master of the
disjunctive syllogism, or as its a priori principle (God defined as the
Omnitudo realitatis, from which all secondary realities are derived by a
process of division)."
Hence the sole thing that is divine is the nature of an energy of
disjunctions. Schreber's divine is inseparable from the disjunctions he
employs to divide himself up into parts: earlier empires, later empires;
later empires of a superior God, and those of an inferior God. Freud
stresses the importance of these disjunctive syntheses in Schreber's
delirium in particular, but also in delirium as a general phenomenon. "A
process of decomposition of this kind is very characteristic of paranoia.
Paranoia decomposes just as hysteria condenses. Or rather, paranoia
resolves once more into their elements the products of the condensations and identifications which are effected in the unconscious."" But
why does Freud thus add that, on second thought, hysterical neurosis
comes first, and that disjunctions appear only as a result of the
projection of a more basic, primordial condensed material? Doubtless
this is a way of maintaining intact the rights of Oedipus in the God of
delirium and the schizoparanoiac recording process. And for that very
reason we must pose the most far-reaching question in this regard: does
the recording of desire go by way of the various stages in the formation
of the Oedipus complex? Disjunctions are the form that the genealogy of
desire assumes; but is this genealogy Oedipal, is it recorded in the
Oedipal triangulation? Is it not more likely that Oedipus is a requirement
or a consequence of social reproduction, insofar as this latter aims at
domesticating a genealogical form and content that are in every way
intractable? For there is no doubting the fact that the schizo is
constantly subjected to interrogation, constantly cross-examined. Precisely because his relationship with nature does not constitute a specific
THE DESIRING·MACHINES

113

pole, the questions put to him are formulated in terms of the existing
social code: your name, your father, your mother? In the course of his
exercises in desiring-production, Beckett's Molloy is cross-examined by
a policeman: "Your name is Molloy, said the sergeant. Yes, I said, now I
remember. And your mother? said the sergeant. I didn't follow. Is your
mother's name Molloy too? said the sergeant. I thought it over. Your
mother, said the sergeant, is your mother's- Let me think! I cried. At
least I imagine that's how it was. Take your time, said the sergeant. Was
mother's name Molloy? Very likely. Her name must be Molloy too, I
said. They took me away, to the guardroom I suppose, and there I was
told to sit down. I must have tried to explain."12
We cannot say that psychoanalysis is very innovative in this
respect: it continues to ask its questions and develop its interpretations
from the depths of the Oedipal triangle as its basic perspective, even
though today it is acutely aware that this frame of reference is not at all
adequate to explain so-called psychotic phenomena. The psychoanalyst
says that we must necessarily discover Schreber's daddy beneath his
superior God, and doubtless also his elder brother beneath his inferior
God. At times the schizophrenic loses his patience and demands to be
left alone. Other times he goes along with the whole game and even
invents a few tricks of his own, introducing his own reference points in
the model put before him and undermining it from within ("Yes, that's
my mother, all right, but my mother's the Virgin Mary, you know"). One
can easily imagine Schreber answering Freud: "Yes, I quite agree,
naturally the talking birds are young girls, and the superior God is my
daddy and the inferior God my brother." But little by little he will
surreptitiously "reimpregnate" the series of young girls with all talking
birds, his father with the superior God, and his brother with the inferior
God, all of them divine forms that become complicated, or rather
"desimplified," as they break through the simplistic terms and functions
of the Oedipal triangle. As Artaud put it:

I don't believe in father
in mother,
got no
papamummy

Desiring-production forms a binary-linear system. The full body is
introduced as a third term in the series, without destroying, however, the
essential binary-linear nature of this series: 2, 1,2,1. ... The series is
completely refractory to a transcription that would transform and mold

1'"

I

P,NTI-OEDIPUS

it into a specifically ternary and triangular schema such as Oedipus. The
full body without organs is produced as antiproduction, that is to say it
intervenes within the process as such for the sale purpose of rejecting
any attempt to impose on it any sort of triangulation implying that it was
produced by parents. How could this body have been produced by
parents, when by its very nature it is such eloquent witness of its own
self-production, of its own engendering of itself? And it is precisely here
on this body, right where it is, that the Numen is distributed and
disjunctions are established, independent of any sort of projection. Yes,
I have been my father and I have been my SOIL "I, Antonin Artaud, am
my son, my father, my mother, and myselt.?'> The schizo has his own
system of co-ordinates for situating himself at his disposal, because,
first of all, he has at his disposal his very own recording code, which
does not coincide with the social code, or coincides with it only in order
to parody it. The code of delirium or of desire proves to have an
extraordinary fluidity. It might be said that the schizophrenic passes
from one code to the other, that he deliberately scrambles all the codes,
by quickly shifting from one to another, according to the questions
asked him, never giving the same explanation from one day to the next,
never invoking the same genealogy, never recording the same event in
the same way. When he is more or less forced into it and is not in a
touchy mood, he may even accept the banal Oedipal code, so long as he
can stuff it full of all the disjunctions that this code was designed to
eliminate.
Adolf Wolfli's drawings reveal the workings of all sorts of clocks,
turbines, dynamos, celestial machines, house-machines, and so on. And
these machines work in a connective fashion, from the perimeter to the
center, in successive layers or segments. But the "explanations" that he
provides for them, which he changes as often as the mood strikes him,
are based on genealogical series that constitute the recording of each of
his drawings. What is even more important, the recording process
affects the drawings themselves, showing up in the form of lines
standing for "catastrophe" or "collapse" that are so many disjunctions
surrounded by spiralsP The schizo maintains a shaky balance for
the simple reason that the result is always the same, no matter what
the disjunctions. Although the organ-machines attach themselves to the
body without organs, the latter continues nonetheless to be without
organs and does not become an organism in the ordinary sense of the
word. It remains fluid and slippery. Agents of production likewise alight
on Schreber's body and cling to it-the sunbeams, for instance, that he
attracts, which contain thousands of tiny spermatozoids. Sunbeams,

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

115

birds, voices, nerves enter into changeable and genealogically complex
relationships with God and forms of God derived from the godhead by
division. But all this happens and is all recorded on the surface of the
body without organs: even the copulations of the agents, even the
divisions of God, even the genealogies marking it off into squares like a
grid, and their permutations. The surface of this uncreated body swarms
with them, as a lion's mane swarms with fleas.

3

I The Subject and Enjoyment

Conforming to the meaning of the word "process," recording falls back on (se rabat sur) production, but the production of
recording itself is produced by the production of production. Similarly,
recording is followed by consumption, but the production of consumption is produced in and through the production of recording. This is
because something on the order of a subject can be discerned on the
recording surface. It is a strange subject, however, with no fixed
identity, wandering about over the body without organs, but always
remaining peripheral to the desiring-machines, being defined by the
share of the product it takes for itself, garnering here, there, and
everywhere a reward in the form of a becoming or an avatar, being born
of the states that it consumes and being reborn with each new state. "It's
me, and so it's mine ...." Even suffering, as Marx says, is a form of
self-enjoyment. Doubtless all desiring-production is, in and of itself,
immediately consumption and consummation, and therefore, "sensual
pleasure." But this is not yet the case for a subject that can situate itself
only in terms of the disjunctions of a recording surface, in what is left
after each division. Returning yet again to the case of Judge Schreber,
we note that he is vividly aware of this fact: the rate of cosmic sexual
pleasure remains constant, so that God will find a way of taking his
pleasure with Schreber, even if in order to do so Schreber must
transform himself into a woman. But Schreber experiences only a
residual share of this pleasure, as a recompense for his suffering or as a
reward for his becoming-woman. "On the other hand, God demands a
constant state of enjoyment . . . and it is my duty to provide him with
this ... in the shape of the greatest possible output of spiritual voluptuousness. And if, in this process, a little sensual pleasure falls to my
share, I feel justified in accepting it as some slight compensation for the
inordinate measure of suffering and privation that has been mine for so
many past years.">' Just as a part of the libido as energy of production
was transformed into energy of recording (Nurnen), a part of this energy

is

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

of recording is transformed into energy of consummation (Voluptas).* It
is this residual energy that is the motive force behind the third synthesis
of the unconscious: the conjunctive synthesis "so it's ... ," or the
production of consumption.
We must examine how this synthesis is formed or how the subject is
produced. Our point of departure was the opposition between desiringmachines and the body without organs. The repulsion of these machines,
as found in the paranoiac machine of primary repression, gave way to an
attraction in the rniraculating machine. But the opposition between
attraction and repulsion persists. It would seem that a genuine reconciliation of the two can take place only on the level of a new machine,
functioning as "the return of the repressed." There are a number of
proofs that such a reconciliation does or can exist. With no further
details being provided, we are told of Robert Gie , the very talented
designer of paranoiac electrical machines: "Since he was unable to free
himself of these currents that were tormenting him, he gives every
appearance of having finally joined forces with them, taking passionate
pride in portraying them in their total victory, in their triumph."!" Freud
is more specific when he stresses the crucial turning point that occurs in
Schreber's illness when Schreber becomes reconciled to becomingwoman and embarks upon a process of self-cure that brings him back to
the equation Nature = Production (the production of a new humanity).
As a matter of fact, Schreber finds himself frozen in the pose and
trapped in the paraphernalia of a transvestite, at a moment when he is
practically cured and has recovered all his faculties: "I am sometimes to
be found, standing before the mirror or elsewhere, with the upper
portion of my body partly bared, and wearing sundry feminine adornments, such as ribbons, trumpery necklaces, and the like. This occurs
only, I may add, when I am by myself, and never, at least so far as I am
able to avoid it, in the presence of other people."!" Let us borrow the
term "celibate machine" to designate this machine that succeeds the
paranoiac machine and the miraculating machine, forming a new alliance
between the desiring-machines and the body without organs so as to give
birth to a new humanity or a glorious organism. This is tantamount to
saying that the subject is produced as a mere residuum alongside the
desiring-machines, or that he confuses himself with this third productive
machine and with the residual reconciliation that it brings about: a
*The French term here is energiede consommatton. The word consommation has a number of meanings
in French, among them consummation (as of a marriage); an ultimate fulfillment or perfection; and
consumption (as of raw material, fuel, or products). The term has therefore been translated variously
below, depending on the context. (Translators' note.)

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

111

conjunctive synthesis of consummation in the form of a wonders truck
"So that's what it was!"
Michel Carrouges has identified a certain number of fantastic
machines-"celibate machines"-that he has discovered in works of
literature. The examples he points to are of many very different sorts,
and at first glance do not seem to belong to a single category: Marcel
Duchamp's painting "La mariee mise a nu par ses .celibataires, rneme"
("The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even'), the machine in
Kafka's "In the Penal Colony," Raymond Roussel's machines, those of
Jarry's Surmiile (Supermale), certain of Edgar Allan Poe's machines,
Villiers's Eve future (The Future Eve), etc.!" The characteristics that
allow us to classify all of them in this one category-though their
importance varies according to the example considered-are as follows:
the celibate machine first of all reveals the existence of a much older
paranoiac machine, with its tortures, its dark shadows, its ancient Law.
The celibate machine itself is not a paranoiac machine, however.
Everything about it is different: its cogs, its sliding carriage, its shears,
needles, magnets, rays. Even when it tortures or kills, it manifests
something new and different, a solar force. In the second place, this
transfiguration cannot be explained by the "miraculating" powers the
machine possesses due to the inscription hidden inside it, though it in
fact contains within itself the most impressive sort of inscriptions (d.
the recording supplied by Edison for Eve future). A genuine consummation is achieved by the new machine, a pleasure that can rightly be called
autoerotic, or rather automatic: the nuptial celebration of a new alliance,
a new birth, a radiant ecstasy, as though the eroticism of the machine
liberated other unlimited forces.
The question becomes: what does the celibate machine produce?
what is produced by means of it? The answer would seem to be:
intensive quantities. There is a schizophrenic experience of intensive
quantities in their pure state, to a point that is almost unbearable-a
celibate misery and glory experienced to the fullest, like a cry suspended
between life and death, an intense feeling of transition, states of pure,
naked intensity stripped of all shape and form. These are often
described as hallucinations and delirium, but the basic phenomenon of
hallucination (I see, I hear) and the basic phenomenon of delirium (I
think . . . ) presuppose an I feel at an even deeper level, which gives
hallucinations their object and thought delirium its content-an "I feel
that I am becoming a woman," "that I am becoming a god," and so on,
which is neither delirious nor hallucinatory, but will project the hallucination or internalize the delirium. Delirium and hallucination are secondary in relation to the really primary emotion, which in the beginning
18

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

only experiences intensities, becomings, transitions.* Where do these
pure intensities come from? They come from the two preceding forces,
repulsion and attraction, and from the opposition of these two forces. It
must not be thought that the intensities themselves are in opposition to
one another, arriving at a state of balance around a neutral state. On the
contrary, they are all positive in relationship to the zero intensity that
designates the full body without organs. And they undergo relative rises
or falls depending on the complex relationship between them and the
variations in the relative strength of attraction and repulsion as determining factors. In a word, the opposition of the forces of attraction and
repulsion produces an open series of intensive elements, all of them
positive, that are never an expression of the final equilibrium of a
system, but consist, rather, of an unlimited number of stationary,
metastable states through which a subject passes. The Kantian theory
according to which intensive quantities fill up, to varying degrees, matter
that has no empty spaces, is profoundly schizoid.
Further, if we are to believe Judge Schreber's doctrine, attraction
and repulsion produce intense nervous states that fill up the body
without organs to varying degrees-states through which Schreber-thesubject passes, becoming a woman and many other things as well,
following an endless circle of eternal return. The breasts on the judge's
naked torso are neither delirious nor hallucinatory phenomena: they
designate, first of all, a band of intensity, a zone of intensity on his body
without organs. The body without organs is an egg: it is crisscrossed
with axes and thresholds, with latitudes and longitudes and geodesic
lines, traversed by gradients marking the transitions and the becornings,
the destinations of the subject developing along these particular vectors.
Nothing here is representative; rather, it is all life and lived experience:
the actual, lived emotion of having breasts does not resemble breasts, it
does not represent them, any more than a predestined zone in the egg
resembles the organ that it is going to be stimulated to produce within
itself. Nothing but bands of intensity, potentials, thresholds, and gradients. A harrowing, emotionally overwhelming experience, which brings
the schizo as close as possible to matter, to a burning, living center of
matter: " ... this emotion, situated outside of the particular point where
the mind is searching for it ... one's entire soul flows into this emotion
that makes the mind aware of the terribly disturbing sound of matter,
and passes through its white-hot flame. "18
How is it possible that the schizo was conceived of as the autistic
*W.R.Bion is the first to have stressed this importance of the I feel. but he places it in the realm of
fantasy and makes it an affective parallel of the I think. See Elements of Psycho-analysis (London:
Heinemann, 1963). pp. 94ff.

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

/Hl

rag-separated from the real and cut off from life-that he is so often
thought to be? Worse still: how can psychiatric practice have made him
this sort of rag, how can it have reduced him to this state of a body
without organs that has become a dead thing-this schizo who sought to
remain at that unbearable point where the mind touches matter and lives

its every intensity, consumes it? Andshouldn't thisquestion immediately compel us to raise another one, which at first glance seems quite
different: how does psychoanalysis go about reducing a person, who this
time is not a schizophrenic but a neurotic, to a pitiful creature who
eternally consumes daddy-and-mommy and nothing else whatsoever?
How could the conjunctive synthesis of "So that's what it was!" and
"So it's me!" have been reduced to the endless, dreary discovery of
Oedipus: "So it's my father, my mother"? We cannot answer these two
questions at this point. We merely see how very little the consumption
of pure intensities has to do with family figures, and how very different
the connective tissue of the "So it's ..." is from the Oedipal tissue.
How can we sum up this entire vital progression? Let us trace it
along a first path (the shortest route): the points of disjunction on the
body without organs form circles that converge on the desiringmachines; then the subject-produced as a residuum alongside the
machine, as an appendix, or as a spare part adjacent to the machinepasses through all the degrees of the circle, and passes from one circle to
another. This subject itself is not at the center, which is occupied by the
machine, but on the periphery, with no fixed identity, forever decentered, defined by the states through which it passes. Thus the circles
traced by Beckett's Unnamable: "a succession of irregular loops, now
sharp and short as in the waltz, now of a parabolic sweep.'?" with
Murphy, Watt, Mercier, etc., as states, without the family having
anything whatsoever to do with all of this. Or, to follow a path that is
more complex, but leads in the end to the same thing: by means of the
paranoiac machine and the miraculating machine, the proportions of
attraction and repulsion on the body without organs produce, starting
from zero, a series of states in the celibate machine; and the subject is
born of each state in the series, is continually reborn of the following
state that determines him at a given moment, consuming-consummating
all these states that cause him to be born and reborn (the lived state
coming first, in relation to the subject that lives it).
This is what Klossowski has admirably demonstrated in his commentary on Nietzsche: the presence of the Stimmung as a material
emotion, constitutive of the most lofty thought and the most acute
perception. "The centrifugal forces do not flee the center forever, but
approach it once again, only to retreat from it yet again: such is the

20

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

nature of the violent oscillations that overwhelm an individual so long as
he seeks only his own center and is incapable of seeing the circle of
which he himself is a part; for if these oscillations overwhelm him, it is
because each one of them corresponds to an individual other than the
one he believes himself to be, from the point of view of the unlocatable
center. As a result, an identity is essentially fortuitous, and a series of
individualities must be undergone by each of these oscillations, so that
as a consequence the fortuitousness of this or that particular individuality will render all of them necessary.'?" The forces of attraction and
repulsion, of soaring ascents and plunging falls, produce a series of
intensive states based on the intensity = 0 that designates the body
without organs ("but what is most unusual is that here again a new afflux
is necessary, merely to signify this absence'Y'). There is no Nietzschethe-self, professor of philology, who suddenly loses his mind and
supposedly identifies with all sorts of strange people; rather, there is the
Nietzschean subject who passes through a series of states, and who
identifies these states with the names of history: "every name in history
is 1. ... "22 The subject spreads itself out along the entire circumference
of the circle, the center of which has been abandoned by the ego. At the
center is the desiring-machine, the celibate machine of the Eternal
Return. A residual subject of the machine, Nietzsche-as-subject garners
a euphoric reward (Voluptas) from everything that this machine turns
out, a product that the reader had thought to be no more than the
fragmented oeuvre by Nietzsche. "Nietzsche believes that he is now
pursuing, not the realization of a system, but the application of a
program ... in the form of residues of the Nietzschean discourse,
which have now become the repertory, so to speak, of his histrionicism."23 It is not a matter of identifying with various historical personages, but rather identifying the names of history with zones of intensity
on the body without organs; and each time Nietzsche-as-subject exclaims: "They're me! So it's me!" No one has ever been as deeply
involved in history as the schizo, or dealt with it in this way. He
consumes all of universal history in one fell swoop. We began by
defining him as Homo natura, and 10 and behold, he has turned out to be
Homo historia. This long road that leads from the one to the other
stretches from Holderlin to Nietzsche, and the pace becomes faster and
faster. "The euphoria could not be prolonged in Nietzsche for as long a
time as the contemplative alienation of Hdderlin.... The vision of the
world granted to Nietzsche does not inaugurate a more or less regular
succession of landscapes or stilllifes, extending over a period of forty
years or so; it is, rather, a parody of the process of recollection of an
event: a single actor will play the whole of it in pantomime in the course
THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I 21

of a single solemn day-because the whole of it reaches expression and
then disappears once again in the space of just one day-even though it
may appear to have taken place between December 31 and January
6--in a realm above and beyond the usual rational calendar.">'

4

I

A Materialist Psychiatry

The famous hypothesis put forward by the psychiatrist
G. de Clerambault seems well founded: delirium, which is by nature
global and systematic, is a secondary phenomenon, a consequence of
partial and local automatistic phenomena. Delirium is in fact characteristic of the recording that is made of the process of production of the
desiring-machines; and though there are syntheses and disorders (affections) that are peculiar to this recording process, as we see in paranoia
and even in the paranoid forms of schizophrenia, it does not constitute
an autonomous sphere, for it depends on the functioning and the
breakdowns of desiring-machines. Nonetheless Clerambault used the
term "(mental) automatism" to designate only athematic phenomenaecholalia, the uttering of odd sounds, or sudden irrational outburstswhich he attributed to the mechanical effects of infections or intoxications. Moreover, he explained a large part of delirium in turn as an effect
of automatism; as for the rest of it, the "personal" part, in his view it
was of the nature of a reaction and had to do with "character," the
manifestations of which might well precede the automatism (as in the
paranoiac character, for instancej.s" Hence Clerambault regarded automatism as merely a neurological mechanism in the most general sense
of the word, rather than a process of economic production involving
desiring-machines. As for history, he was content merely to mention its
innate or acquired nature. Clerambault is the Feuerbach of psychiatry,
in the sense in which Marx remarks: "Whenever Feuerbach looks at
things as a materialist, there is no history in his works, and whenever he
takes history into account, he no longer is a materialist." A truly
materialist psychiatry can be defined, on the contrary, by the twofold
task it sets itself: introducing desire into the mechanism, and introducing
production into desire.
There is no very great difference between false materialism and
typical forms of idealism. The theory of schizophrenia is formulated in
terms of three concepts that constitute its trinary schema: dissociation
(Kraepelin), autism (Bleuler), and space-time or being-in-the-world
(Binswanger). The first of these is an explanatory concept that supposedly locates the specific dysfunction or primary deficiency. The second

22

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

is an ideational concept indicating the specific nature of the effect of the
disorder: the delirium itself or the complete withdrawal from the outside
world, "the detachment from reality, accompanied by a relative or an
absolute predominance of [the schizophrenic's] inner life." The third
concept is a descriptive one, discovering or rediscovering the delirious
person in his own specific world. What is common to these three
concepts is the fact that they all relate the problem of schizophrenia to
the ego through the intermediary of the "body image"-the final avatar
of the soul, a vague conjoining of the requirements of spiritualism and
positivism.
The ego, however, is like daddy-mommy: the schizo has long since
ceased to believe in it. He is somewhere else, beyond or behind or below
these problems, rather than immersed in them. And wherever he is,
there are problems, insurmountable sufferings, unbearable needs. But
why try to bring him back to what he has escaped from, why set him
back down amid problems that are no longer problems to him, why mock
his truth by believing that we have paid it its due by merely figuratively
taking our hats off to it? There are those who will maintain that the
schizo is incapable of uttering the word I, and that we must restore his
ability to pronounce this hallowed word. All of which the schizo sums up
by saying: they're fucking me over again. "I won't say I any more, I'll
never utter the word again; it's just too damn stupid. Every time I hear
it, I'll use the third person instead, if I happen to remember to. If it
amuses them. And it won't make one bit of difference. "26 And if he does
chance to utter the word I again, that won't make any difference either.
He is too far removed from these problems, too far past them.
Even Freud never went beyond this narrow and limited conception
of the ego. And what prevented him from doing so was his own tripartite
formula-the Oedipal, neurotic one: daddy-mommy-me. We may well
ponder the possibility that the analytic imperialism of the Oedipus
complex led Freud to rediscover, and to lend all the weight of his
authority to, the unfortunate misapplication of the concept of autism to
schizophrenia. For we must not delude ourselves: Freud doesn't like
schizophrenics. He doesn't like their resistance to being oedipalized , and
tends to treat them more or less as animals. They mistake words for
things, he says. They are apathetic, narcissistic, cut off from reality,
incapable of achieving transference; they resemble philosophers-"an
undesirable resemblance."
The question as to how to deal analytically with the relationship
between drives (pulsions) and symptoms, between the symbol and what
is symbolized, has arisen again and again. Is this relationship to be

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

23

considered causal? Or is it a relationship of comprehension? A mode of
expression? The question, however, has been posed too theoretically.
The fact is, from the moment that we are placed within the framework of
Oedipus-from the moment that we are measured in terms of
Oedipus-the cards are stacked against us, and the only real relationship, that of production, has been done away with. The great discovery
of psychoanalysis was that of the production of desire, of the productions of the unconscious. But once Oedipus entered the picture, this
discovery was soon buried beneath a new brand of idealism: a classical
theater was substituted for the unconscious as a factory; representation
was substituted for the units of production of the unconscious; and an
unconscious that was capable of nothing but expressing itself-in myth,
tragedy, dreams-was substituted for the productive unconscious.
Every time that the problem of schizophrenia is explained in terms
of the ego, all we can do is "sample" a supposed essence or a presumed
specific nature of the schizo, regardless of whether we do so with love
and pity or disgustedly spit out the mouthful we have tasted. We have
"sampled" him once as a dissociated ego, another time as an ego cut off
from the world, and yet again-most temptingly-as an ego that had not
ceased to be, who was there in the most specific way, but in his very own
world, though he might reveal himself to a clever psychiatrist, a
sympathetic superobserver-in short, a phenomenologist. Let us remember once again one of Marx's caveats: we cannot tell from the mere
taste of wheat who grew it; the product gives us no hint as to the system
and the relations of production. The product appears to be all the more
specific, incredibly specific and readily describable, the more closely the
theoretician relates it to ideal forms of causation, comprehension, or
expression, rather than to the real process of production on which it
depends. The schizophrenic appears all the more specific and recognizable as a distinct personality if the process is halted, or if it is made an end
and a goal in itself, or if it is allowed to go on and on endlessly in a void,
so as to provoke that "horror of ... extremity wherein the soul and
body ultimately perish"27 (the autist). Kraepelin's celebrated terminal
state ... But the moment that one describes, on the contrary, the
material process of production, the specificity of the product tends to
evaporate, while at the same time the possibility of another outcome,
another end result of the process appears. Before being a mental state of
the schizophrenic who has made himself into an artificial person through
autism, schizophrenia is the process of the production of desire and
desiring-machines. How does one get from one to the other, and is this
transition inevitable? This remains the crucial question. Karl Jaspers has

24

I

AI'JT!-OEDIPUS

given us precious insights, on this point as on so many others, because
his "idealism" was remarkably atypical. Contrasting the concept of
process with those of reaction formation or development of the personality, he views process as a rupture or intrusion, having nothing to do
with an imaginary relationship with the ego; rather, it is a relationship
with the "demoniacal" in nature. The one thing Jaspers failed to do was
to view process as material economic reality, as the process of production wherein Nature = Industry, Nature = History.
To a certain degree, the traditional logic of desire is all wrong from
the very outset: from the very first step that the Platonic logic of desire
forces us to take, making us choose between production and acquisition.
From the moment that we place desire on the side of acquisition, we
make desire an idealistic (dialectical, nihilistic) conception, which
causes us to look upon it as primarily a lack: a lack of an object, a lack of
the real object. It is true that the other side, the "production" side, has
not been entirely ignored. Kant, for instance, must be credited with
effecting a critical revolution as regards the theory of desire, by
attributing to it "the faculty of being, through its representations, the
cause of the reality of the objects of these representations."28 But it is
not by chance that Kant chooses superstitious beliefs, hallucinations,
and fantasies as illustrations of this definition of desire: as Kant would
have it, we are well aware that the real object can be produced only by
an external causality and external mechanisms; nonetheless this knowledge does not prevent us from believing in the intrinsic power of desire
to create its own object-if only in an unreal, hallucinatory, or delirious
form-or from representing this causality as stemming from within
desire itself. The reality of the object, insofar as it is produced by desire,
is thus a psychic reality. Hence it can be said that Kant's critical
revolution changes nothing essential: this way of conceiving of productivity does not question the validity of the classical conception of desire
as a lack; rather, it uses this conception as a support and a buttress, and
merely examines its implications more carefully.
In point of fact, if desire is the lack of the real object, its very nature
as a real entity depends upon an "essence of lack" that produces the
fantasized object. Desire thus conceived of as production, though
merely the production of fantasies, has been explained perfectly by
psychoanalysis. On the very lowest level of interpretation, this means
that the real object that desire lacks is related to an extrinsic natural or
social production, whereas desire intrinsically produces an imaginary
object that functions as a double of reality, as though there were a
"dreamed-of object behind every real object," or a mental production

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

25

behind all real productions. This conception does not necessarily compel
psychoanalysis to engage in a study of gadgets and markets, in the form
of an utterly dreary and dull psychoanalysis of the object: psychoanalytic studies of packages of noodles, cars, or "thingumajigs." But even
when the fantasy is interpreted in depth, not simply as an object, but as a
specific machine that brings desire itself front and center, this machine is
merely theatrical, and the complementarity of what it sets apart still
remains: it is now need that is defined in terms of a relative lack and
determined by its own object, whereas desire is regarded as what
produces the fantasy and produces itself by detaching itself from the
object, though at the same time it intensifies the lack by making it
absolute: an "incurable insufficiency of being," an "inability-to-be that is
life itself." Hence the presentation of desire as something supported by
needs, while these needs, and their relationship to the object as
something that is lacking or missing, continue to be the basis of the
productivity of desire (theory of an underlying support). In a word,
when the theoretician reduces desiring-production to a production of
fantasy, he is content to exploit to the fullest the idealist principle that
defines desire as a lack, rather than a process of production, of
"industrial" production. Clement Rosset puts it very well: every time
the emphasis is put on a lack that desire supposedly suffers from as a
way of defining its object, "the world acquires as its double some other
sort of world, in accordance with the following line of argument: there is
an object that desire feels the lack of; hence the world does not contain
each and every object that exists; there is at least one object missing, the
one that desire feels the lack of; hence there exists some other place that
contains the key to desire (missing in this world)."29
If desire produces, its product is real. If desire is productive, it can
be productive only in the real world and can produce only reality. Desire
is the set of passive syntheses that engineer partial objects, flows, and
bodies, and that function as units of production. The real is the end
product, the result of the passive syntheses of desire as autoproduction
of the unconscious. Desire does not lack anything; it does not lack its
object. It is, rather, the subject that is missing in desire, or desire that
lacks a fixed subject; there is no fixed subject unless there is repression.
Desire and its object are one and the same thing: the machine, as a
machine of a machine. Desire is a machine, and the object of desire is
another machine connected to it. Hence the product is something
removed or deducted from the process of producing: between the act of
producing and the product, something becomes detached, thus giving
the vagabond, nomad subject a residuum. The objective being of desire

26

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

is the Real in and of itself. * There is no particular form of existence that
can be labeled "psychic reality." As Marx notes, what exists in fact is
not lack, but passion, as a "natural and sensuous object." Desire is not
bolstered by needs, but rather the contrary; needs are derived from
desire: they are counterproducts within the real that desire produces.
Lack is a countereffect of desire; it is deposited, distributed, vacuolized
within a real that is natural and social. Desire always remains in close
touch with the conditions of objective existence; it embraces them and
follows them, shifts when they shift, and does not outlive them. For that
reason it so often becomes the desire to die, whereas need is a measure
of the withdrawal of a subject that has lost its desire at the same time
that it loses the passive syntheses of these conditions. This is precisely
the significance of need as a search in a void: hunting about, trying to
capture or become a parasite of passive syntheses in whatever vague
world they may happen to exist in. It is no use saying: We are not green
plants; we have long since been unable to synthesize chlorophyll, so it's
necessary to eat. . .. Desire then becomes this abject fear of lacking
something. But it should be noted that this is not a phrase uttered by the
poor or the dispossessed. On the contrary, such people know that they
are close to grass, almost akin to it, and that desire "needs" very few
things-not those leftovers that chance to come their way, but the I'ery
things that are continually taken from them-and that what is missing is
not things a subject feels the lack of somewhere deep down inside
himself, but rather the objectivity of man, the objective being of man,
for whom to desire is to produce, to produce within the realm of the real.
The real is not impossible; on the contrary, within the real everything is possible, everything becomes possible. Desire does not express
a molar lack within the subject; rather, the molar organization deprives
desire of its objective being. Revolutionaries, artists, and seers are
content to be objective, merely objective: they know that desire clasps
life in its powerfully productive embrace, and reproduces it in a way that
is all the more intense because it has few needs. And never mind those
who believe that this is very easy to say, or that it is the sort of idea to be
found in books. "From the little reading I had done I had observed that
the men who were most in life, who were moulding life, who were life
itself, ate little, slept little, owned little or nothing. They had no illusions
about duty, or the perpetuation of their kith and kin, or the preservation
"Lacan's admirable theory of desire appears to liS to have two poles: one related to "the object small a"
as a desiring-machine, which defines desire in terms of a rea! production, thus going beyond both any
idea of need and any idea of fantasy; and the other related to the "great Other" as a signifier, which
reintroduces a certain notion of lack. In Serge Leclaire's article "La realit e du dcsir" (Ch. 4, reference
note 26), the oscillation between these two poles can be seen quite clearly.

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

r

27

of the State .... The phantasmal world is the world which has never
been fully conquered over. It is the world of the past, never of the
future. To move forward clinging to the past is like dragging a ball and
chain."30 The true visionary is a Spinoza in the garb of a Neapolitan
revolutionary. We know very well where lack-and its subjective
correlative-come from. Lack (manque)* is created, planned, and
organized in and through social production. It is counterproduced as a
result of the pressure of antiproduction; the latter falls back on (se rabat
sur) the forces of production and appropriates them. It is never primary;
production is never organized on the basis of a pre-existing need or lack
(manque). It is lack that infiltrates itself, creates empty spaces or
vacuoles, and propagates itself in accordance with the organization of an
already existing organization of production.r The deliberate creation of
lack as a function of market economy is the art of a dominant class. This
involves deliberately organizing wants and needs (manque) amid an
abundance of production; making all of desire teeter and fall victim to
the great fear of not having one's needs satisfied; and making the object
dependent upon a real production that is supposedly exterior to desire
(the demands of rationality), while at the same time the production of
desire is categorized as fantasy and nothing but fantasy.
There is no such thing as the social production of reality on the one
hand, and a desiring-production that is mere fantasy on the other. The
only connections that could be established between these two productions would be secondary ones of introjection and projection, as though
all social practices had their precise counterpart in introjected or
internal mental practices, or as though mental practices were projected
upon social systems, without either of the two sets of practices ever
having any real or concrete effect upon the other. As long as we are
content to establish a perfect parallel between money, gold, capital, and
the capitalist triangle on the one hand, and the libido, the anus, the
phallus, and the family triangle on the other, we are engaging in an
enjoyable pastime, but the mechanisms of money remain totally unaffected by the anal projections of those who manipulate money. The
Marx-Freud parallelism between the two remains utterly sterile and
*The French word manque may mean both lack and need in a psychological sense, as well as want or
privation or scarcity in an economic sense. Depending upon the context, it will hence be translated in
various ways below. (Translators' note.)
tMaurice Clave} remarks, apropos of Jean-Paul Sartre, that a Marxist philosophy cannot allow itself to
introduce the notion of scarcity as its initial premise: "Such a scarcity antedating exploitation makes of
the law of supply and demand a reality that will remain forever independent, since it is situated at a
primordial Ievel. Hence it is no longer a question of including or deducing this law within Marxism,
since it is immediately evident at a prior stage, at a level from which Marxism itself derives. Being a
rigorous thinker, Marx refuses to employ the notion of scarcity, and is quite correct to do so, for this
category would be his undoing." In QUi est aiiene? (Paris: Flammarion, 1970), p. 330.

llll

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

insignificant as long as it is expressed in terms that make them
introjections or projections of each other without ceasing to be utterly
alien to each other, as in the famous equation money = shit. The truth of
the matter is that social production is purely and simply desiringproduction itself under determinate conditions. We maintain that the
social field is immediately invested by desire, that it is the historically
determined product of desire, and that libido has no need of any
mediation or sublimation, any psychic operation, any transformation, in order to invade and invest the productive forces and the relations of production. There is only desire and the social, and nothing
else.
Even the most repressive and the most deadly forms of social
reproduction are produced by desire within the organization that is the
consequence of such production under various conditions that we must
analyze. That is why the fundamental problem of political philosophy is
still precisely the one that Spinoza saw so clearly, and that Wilhelm
Reich rediscovered: "Why do men fight for their servitude as stubbornly
as though it were their salvation?" How can people possibly reach the
point of shouting: "More taxes! Less bread!"? As Reich remarks, the
astonishing thing is not that some people steal or that others occasionally go out on strike, but rather that all those who are starving do not steal
as a regular practice, and all those who are exploited are not continually
out on strike: after centuries of exploitation, why do people still tolerate
being humiliated and enslaved, to such a point, indeed, that they actually
want humiliation and slavery not only for others but for themselves?
Reich is at his profoundest as a thinker when he refuses to accept
ignorance or illusion on the part of the masses as an explanation of
fascism, and demands an explanation that will take their desires into
account, an explanation formulated in terms of desire: no, the masses
were not innocent dupes; at a certain point, under a certain set of
conditions, they wanted fascism, and it is this perversion of the desire of
the masses that needs to be accounted fOr.31
Yet Reich himself never manages to provide a satisfactory explanation of this phenomenon, because at a certain point he reintroduces
precisely the line of argument that he was in the process of demolishing,
by creating a distinction between rationality as it is or ought to be in the
process of social production, and the irrational element in desire, and by
regarding only this latter as a suitable subject for psychoanalytic
investigation. Hence the sole task he assigns psychoanalysis is the
explanation of the "negative," the "subjective," the "inhibited" within
the social field. He therefore necessarily returns to a dualism between
the real object rationally produced on the one hand, and irrational,
THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

211

fantasizing production on the other.* He gives up trying to discover the
common denominator or the coextension of the social field and desire. In
order to establish the basis for a genuinely materialistic psychiatry, there
was a category that Reich was sorely in need of: that of desiringproduction, which would apply to the real in both its so-called rational
and irrational forms.
The fact there is massive social repression that has an enormous
effect on desiring-production in no way vitiates our principle: desire
produces reality, or stated another way, desiring-production is one and
the same thing as social production. It is not possible to attribute a
special form of existence to desire, a mental or psychic reality that is
presumably different from the material reality of social production.
Desiring-machines are not fantasy-machines or dream-machines, which
supposedly can be distinguished from technical and social machines.
Rather, fantasies are secondary expressions, deriving from the identical
nature of the two sorts of machines in any given set of circumstances.
Thus fantasy is never individual: it is group fantasy-as institutional
analysist has successfully demonstrated. And if there is such a thing as
two sorts of group fantasy, it is because two different readings of this
identity are possible, depending upon whether the desiring-machines are
regarded from the point of view of the great gregarious masses that they
form, or whether social machines are considered from the point of view
of the elementary forces of desire that serve as a basis for them. Hence
in group fantasy the libido may invest all of an existing social field,
including the latter's most repressive forms; or on the contrary, it may
launch a counterinvestment whereby revolutionary desire is plugged
into the existing social field as a source of energy. (The great socialist
utopias of the nineteenth century function, for example, not as ideal
*We find in the case of culturalists a distinction between rational systems and projective systems, with
psychoanalysis applying only to these latter (as for example in Abram Kardiner). Despite their hostility
to culturalism, we find in both Wilhelm Reich and Herbert Marcuse certain traces of this same dualism,
even though they define the rational and the irrational in a completely different way and assign them
quite different roles.

t Institutional analysis is the

~ore politic.al tendency of institutional psychotherapy, begun in the late
19505as an attempt to c?l~ectlveJy ~eal v..:lth what psychoanalysis so hypocritically avoided, namely the
psychoses. La Borde Clime, established 10 1955 by Jean Oury of the Ecole Freudienne de Paris, served
as the locus for discussions on institutional psychotherapy, and Jacques Lacan's seminars served as the
intellectual basis for these discussions "in the beginning." Felix Guattari joined the clinic in 1956 as a
milita~t interested. in the notions of desire under discussion-a topic rarely dealt with by militants at
that time. Preferring the term "institutional analysis" over "institutional psychotherapy," Guattar!
sought. to push ~he movement in a more political direction, toward what he later described as a political
analysts o.f d7slr~. In any case this injection of a psychoanalytical discourse (Lacan's version) into a
custodial institution led to a collectivization of the analytical concepts. Transference came to be seen as
institutional, and fantasies were seen to be collective: desire was a problem of groups and for groups.
See Jacques ~onzelot's excellent article on Anti-Oedipus, "Une anti-sociologie" in Esprit, December
1972" and Gilles Deleuze's detailed' discussion of Guattari's notion of groups and desire, "Trois
problemes de groupe" in Felix Guattari, Psvchonatyse et transversatue (Paris: Maspero, 1972).

(Translators' note.)

30

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

models but as group fantasies-that is, as agents of the real productivity
of desire, making it possible to disinvest the current social field, to
"de institutionalize" it, to further the revolutionary institution of desire
itself.) But there is never any difference in nature between the desiringmachines and the technical social machines. There is a certain distinction between them, but it is merely a distinction of regime, * depending
on their relationships of size. Except for this difference in regime, they
are the same machines, as group fantasies clearly prove.
When in the course of our discussion above, we laid down the broad
outlines of a parallelism between social production and desiringproduction, in order to show that in both cases there is a strong tendency
on the part of the forces of antiproduction to operate retroactively on (se
rabattre sur) productive forms and appropriate them, this parallelism
was in no way meant as an exhaustive description of the relationship
between the two systems of production. It merely enables us to point to
certain phenomena having to do with the difference in regime between
them. In the first place, technical machines obviously work only if they
are not out of order; they ordinarily stop working not because they
break down but because they wear out. Marx makes use of this simple
principle to show that the regime of technical machines is characterized
by a strict distinction between the means of production and the product;
thanks to this distinction, the machine transmits value to the product,
but only the value that the machine itself loses as it wears out.
Desiring-machines, on the contrary, continually break down as they run,
and in fact run only when they are not functioning properly: the product
is always an offshoot of production, implanting itself upon it like a graft,
and at the same time the parts of the machine are the fuel that makes it
run.
Art often takes advantage of this property of desiring-machines by
creating veritable group fantasies in which desiring-production is used to
short-circuit social production, and to interfere with the reproductive
function of technical machines by introducing an element of dysfunction. Arman's charred violins, for instance, or Cesar's compressed car
bodies. More generally, Dali's method of critical paranoia assures the
explosion of a desiring-machine within an object of social production.
But even earlier, Ravel preferred to throw his inventions entirely out of
gear rather than let them simply run down, and chose to end his
compositions with abrupt breaks, hesitations, tremolos, discordant
notes, and unresolved chords, rather than allowing them to slowly wind
"The word regime has a number of different meanings in French, including: regimen or form of
government; a set of.laws,. rules, or regulations; rate of flow, as of a current; rate or speed of operation,
as of a ffi?tor or engine. Since the authors use the word in several senses, the French word regime has
been retained throughout the English text. (Translators' note.)

THE DESIRING-MACHINES , 31

down to a close or gradually die away into silence.t" The artist is the
master of objects; he puts before us shattered, burned, broken-down
objects, converting them to the regime of desiring-machines, breaking
down is part of the very functioning of desiring-machines; the artist
presents paranoiac machines, miraculating-rnachines, and celibate machines as so many technical machines, so as to cause desiring-machines
to undermine technical machines. Even more important, the work of art
is itself a desiring-machine. The artist stores up his treasures so as to
create an immediate explosion, and that is why, to his way of thinking,
destructions can never take place as rapidly as they ought to.
From this, a second difference in regime results: desiring-machines
produce antiproduction all by themselves, whereas the antiproduction
characteristic of technical machines takes place only within the extrinsic
conditions of the reproduction of the process (even though these
conditions do not come into being at some "later stage"). That is why
technical machines are not an economic category, and always refer back
to a socius or a social machine that is quite distinct from these machines,
and that conditions this reproduction. A technical machine is therefore
not a cause but merely an index of a general form of social production:
thus there are manual machines and primitive societies, hydraulic
machines and "Asiatic" forms of society, industrial machines and
capitalism. Hence when we posited the socius as the analogue of a full
body without organs, there was nonetheless one important difference.
For desiring-machines are the fundamental category of the economy of
desire; they produce a body without organs all by themselves, and make
no distinction between agents and their own parts, or between the
relations of production and their own relations, or between the social
order and technology. Desiring-machines are both technical and social.
It is in this sense that desiring-production is the locus of a primal psychic
repression," whereas social production is where social repression takes
place, and it is between the former and the latter that there occurs
something that resembles secondary psychic repression in the "strictest" sense: the situation of the body without organs or its equivalent is
the crucial factor here, depending on whether it is the result of an
internal process or of an extrinsic condition (and thus affects the role of
the death instinct in particular).
But at the same time they are the same machines, despite the fact
that they are governed by two different regimes-and despite the fact
that it is admittedly a strange adventure for desire to desire repression.
There is only one kind of production, the production of the real. And
doubtless we can express this identity in two 'different ways, even
though these two ways together constitute the autoproduction of the
32

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

unconscious as a cycle. We can say that social production, under
determinate conditions, derives primarily from desiring-production:
which is to say that Homo natura comes first. But we must also say,
more accurately, that desiring-production is first and foremost social in
nature, and tends to free itself only at the end: which is to say that Homo
historia comes first. The body without organs is not an original primordial entity that later projects itself into different sorts of socius, as though
it were a raving paranoiac, the chieftain of the primitive horde, who was
initially responsible for social organization. The social machine or socius
may be the body of the Earth, the body of the Despot, the body of
Money. It is never a projection, however, of the body without organs.
On the contrary: the body without organs is the ultimate residuum of a
deterritorialized socius. The prime function incumbent upon the socius,
has always been to codify the flows of desire, to inscribe them, to record
them, to see to it that no flow exists that is not property dammed up,
channeled, regulated. When the primitive territorial machine proved
inadequate to the task, the despotic machine set up a kind of overcoding
system. But the capitalist machine, insofar as it was built on the ruins of
a despotic State more or less far removed in time, finds itself in a totally
new situation: it is faced with the task of decoding and deterritorializing
the flows. Capitalism does not confront this situation from the outside,
since it experiences it as the very fabric of its existence, as both its
primary determinant and its fundamental raw material, its form and its
function, and deliberately perpetuates it, in all its violence, with all the
powers at its command. Its sovereign production and repression can be
achieved in no other way. Capitalism is in fact born of the encounter of
two sorts of flows: the decoded flows of production in the form of
money-capital, and the decoded flows of labor in the form of the "free
worker." Hence, unlike previous social machines, the capitalist machine
is incapable of providing a code that will apply to the whole of the social
field. By substituting money for the very notion of a code, it has created
an axiomatic of abstract quantities that keeps moving further and
further in the direction of the deterritorialization of the socius. Capitalism tends toward a threshold of decoding that will destroy the socius in
order to make it a body without organs and unleash the flows of desire
on this body as a deterritorialized field. Is it correct to say that in this
sense schizophrenia is the product of the capitalist machine, as manicdepression and paranoia are the product of the despotic machine, and
hysteria the product of the territorial machine?*
*On hysteria. schizophrenia, and their relationships with social structures, see the analyses by Georges
Devereux in his Essais d'ethnopsychlatrie generate (Paris: Gallirnard), p. 67ff., and the wonderful pages
in Karl Jaspers' Strindberg und Van Gogh (Berlin: J. Springer, 1926). (English translation. Strindberg

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

33

The decoding of flows and the deterritorialization of the socius thus
constitutes the most characteristic and the most important tendency of
capitalism. It continually draws near to its limit, which is a genuinely
schizophrenic limit. It tends, with all the strength at its command, to
produce the schizo as the subject of the decoded flows on the body
without organs-more capitalist than the capitalist and more proletarian
than the proletariat. This tendency is being carried further and further,
to the point that capitalism with all its flows may dispatch itself straight
to the moon: we really haven't seen anything yet! When we say that
schizophrenia is our characteristic malady, the malady of our era, we do
not merely mean to say that modern life drives people mad. It is not a
question of a way of life, but of a process of production. Nor is it merely
a question of a simple parallelism, even though from the point of view of
the failure of codes, such a parallelism is a much more precise
formulation of the relationship between, for example, the phenomena of
shifting of meaning in the case of schizophrenics and the mechanisms of
ever increasing disharmony and discord at every level of industrial
society.
What we are really trying to say is that capitalism, through its
process of production, produces an awesome schizophrenic accumulation of energy or charge, against which it brings all its vast powers of
repression to bear, but which nonetheless continues to act as capitalism's limit. For capitalism constantly counteracts, constantly inhibits
this inherent tendency while at the same time allowing it free rein; it
continually seeks to avoid reaching its limit while simultaneously
tending toward that limit. Capitalism institutes or restores all sorts of
residual and artificial, imaginary, or symbolic territorialities, thereby
attempting, as best it can, to recede, to rechannel persons who have
been defined in terms of abstract quantities. Everything returns or
recurs: States, nations, families. That is what makes the ideology of
capitalism "a motley painting of everything that has ever been believed." The real is not impossible; it is simply more and more artificial.
Marx termed the twofold movement of the tendency to a falling rate of
profit, and the increase in the absolute quantity of surplus value, the law
of the counteracted tendency. As a corollary of this law, there is the
twofold movement of decoding or de territorializing flows on the one
hand, and their violent and artificial reterritorialization on the other. The
and '/an Gogh, trans. Oskar Grunow [Tucson, Arizona: University of Arizona Press.]) The question
has been asked: is madness in Our time "a state of total sincerity, in areas where in less chaotic times
one would have been capable of honest experience and expression without it?" Jaspers reformulates

this question by adding: "We have seen that in former times human beings attempted to drive
themselves into hysteria; and we might say that today many human beings attempt to drive themselves
into madness in much the same way. But if the former attempt was to a certain extent psychologically
possible. the latter is not possible at all, and can lead only to inauthenticity."

34

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

more the capitalist machine deterritorializes, decoding and axiomatizing
flows in order to extract surplus value from them, the more its ancillary
apparatuses, such as government bureaucracies and the forces of law
and order, do their utmost to reterritorialize, absorbing in the process a
larger and larger share of surplus value.
There is no doubt that at this point in history the neurotic, the
pervert, and the psychotic cannot be adequately defined in terms of
drives, for drives are simply the desiring-machines themselves. They
must be defined in terms of modern territorialities. The neurotic is
trapped within the residual or artificial territorialities of our society, and
reduces all of them (les rabat toutes) to Oedipus as the ultimate
territoriality-as reconstructed in the analyst's office and projected upon
the full body of the psychoanalyst (yes, my boss is my father, and so is
the Chief of State, and so are you, Doctor). The pervert is someone who
takes the artifice seriously and plays the game to the hilt: if you want
them, you can have them-territorialities infinitely more artificial than
the ones that society offers us, totally artificial new families, secret lunar
societies. As for the schizo, continually wandering about, migrating
here, there, and everywhere as best he can, he plunges further and
further into the realm of deterritorialization, reaching the furthest limits
of the decomposition of the socius on the surface of his own body
without organs. It may well be that these peregrinations are the schizo's
own particular way of rediscovering the earth. The schizophrenic
deliberately seeks out the very limit of capitalism: he is its inherent
tendency brought to fulfillment, its surplus product, its proletariat, and
its exterminating angel. He scrambles all the codes and is the transmitter
of the decoded flows of desire. The real continues to flow. In the schizo,
the two aspects of process are conjoined: the metaphysical process that
puts us in contact with the "demoniacal" element in nature or within the
heart of the earth, and the historical process of social production that
restores the autonomy of desiring-machines in relation to the deterritorialized social machine. Schizophrenia is desiring-production as the limit
of social production. Desiring-production, and its difference in regime as
compared to social production, are thus end points, not points of
departure. Between the two there is nothing but an ongoing process of
becoming that is the becoming of reality. And if materialist psychiatry
may be defined as the psychiatry that introduces the concept of
production into consideration of the problem of desire, it cannot avoid
posing in eschatological terms the problem of the ultimate relationship
between the analytic machine, the revolutionary machine, and desiringmachines.

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

35

5

I The Machines

In what respect are desiring-machines really machines, in
anything more than a metaphorical sense? A machine may be defined as
a system of interruptions or breaks (coupures). These breaks should in
no way be considered as a separation from reality; rather, they operate
along lines that vary according to whatever aspect of them we are
considering. Every machine, in the first place, is related to a continual
material flow (lzyle) that it cuts into. It functions like a ham-slicing
machine, removing portions* from the associative flow: the anus and the
flow of shit it cuts off, for instance; the mouth that cuts off not only the
flow of milk but also the flow of air and sound; the penis that interrupts
not only the flow of urine but also the flow of sperm. Each associative
flow must be seen as an ideal thing, an endless flux, flowing from
something not unlike the immense thigh of a pig. The term hvl« in fact
designates the pure continuity that anyone sort of matter ideally
possesses. When Robert Jaulin describes the little balls and pinches of
snuff used in a certain initiation ceremony, he shows that they are
produced each year as a sample taken from "an infinite series that
theoretically has one and only one origin," a single ball that extends to
the very limits of the universe.>' Far from being the opposite of
continuity, the break or interruption conditions this continuity: it
presupposes or defines what it cuts into as an ideal continuity. This is
because, as we have seen, every machine is a machine of a machine. The
machine produces an interruption of the flow only insofar as it is
connected to another machine that supposedly produces this flow. And
doubtless this second machine in turn is really an interruption or break,
too. But it is such only in relationship to a third machine that ideallythat is to say, relatively-produces a continuous, infinite flux: for
example, the anus-machine and the intestine-machine, the intestinemachine and the stomach-machine, the stomach-machine and the
mouth-machine, the mouth-machine and the flow of milk of a herd of
dairy cattle ("and then ... and then ... and then ..."). In a word,
every machine functions as a break in the flow in relation to the machine
to which it is connected, but at the same time is also a flow itself, or the
production of a flow, in relation to the machine connected to it. This is
the law of the production of production. That is why, at the limit point of
*The authors' word for this process is preievement. The French word has a number of meanings.
including: a skimming or a draining off; a removal of a certain qu~ntity as a sample or for purposes of
testing; a setting apart of a portion or share of the whole; a deduct1,o~ from a sum of money on ?eposlt.

In the English text that follows, in a number o~ ca~es the nou~ prelevement or ,the corresponding verb
prelever will be indicated in parentheses following Its translation. (Translators note.)

36

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

all the transverse or transfinite connections, the partial object and the
continuous flux, the interruption and the connection, fuse into one:
everywhere there are breaks-flows out of which desire wells up, thereby constituting its productivity and continually grafting the process of
production onto the product. (It is very curious that Melanie Klein,
whose discovery of partial objects was so far-reaching, neglects to study
flows from this point of view and declares that they are of no
importance; she thus short-circuits all the connections.)*
"Connecticut, Connect-I-cut!" cries little Joey. In his study The
Empty Fortress, Bruno Bettelheim paints the portrait of this young child
who can live, eat, defecate, and sleep only if he is plugged into machines
provided with motors, wires, lights, carburetors, propellers, and steering
wheels: an electrical feeding machine, a car-machine that enables him to
breathe, an anal machine that lights up. There are very few examples
that cast as much light on the regime of desiring-production, and the way
in which breaking down constitutes an integral part of the functioning,
or the way in which the cutting off is an integral part of mechanical
connections. Doubtless there are those who will object that this mechanical, schizophrenic life expresses the absence and the destruction of
desire rather than desire itself, and presupposes certain extremely
negative attitudes on the part of his parents to which the child reacts by
turning himself into a machine. But even Bettelheim, who has a
noticeable bias in favor of Oedipal or pre-oedipal causality, admits that
this sort of causality intervenes only in response to autonomous aspects
of the productivity or the activity of the child, although he later discerns
in him a nonproductive stasis or an attitude of total withdrawal. Hence
there is first of all, according to Bettelheim, an autonomous reaction to
the total life experience, of which the mother is only a part. Also we
must not think that the machines themselves are proof of the loss or
repression of desire (which Bettelheim translates in terms of autism).
We find ourselves confronted with the same problem once again: How
has the process of the production of desire, how have the child's
desiring-machines begun to turn endlessly round and round in a total
vacuum, so as to produce the child-machine? How has the process
turned into an end in itself? Or how has the child become the victim of a
premature interruption or a terrible frustration? It is only by means of
the body without organs (eyes closed tight, nostrils pinched shut, ears
*"ChiJdren of both sexes regard urine in its positive aspect as equivalent to their mother's milk, in
accordance with the unconscious, which equates all bodily substances with one another:' Melanie
Klein, The Psycho-Analysis of Children. trans. Alix Strachey, The International Psycho-Analytic
Library, no. 22 (London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psycho-Analysis, 1954). p. 291. (First
edition, 1932.)

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

31

stopped up) that something is produced, counterproduced, something
that diverts or frustrates the entire process of production, of which it is
nonetheless still a part. But the machine remains desire, an investment
of desire whose history unfolds, by way of the primary repression and
the return of the repressed, in the succession of the states of paranoiac
machines, miraculating machines, and celibate machines through which
little Joey passes as Bettelheim's therapy progresses.
In the second place, every machine has a sort of code built into it,
stored up inside it. This code is inseparable not only from the way in
which it is recorded and transmitted to each of the different regions of
the body, but also from the way in which the relations of each of the
regions with all the others are recorded. An organ may have connections
that associate it with several different flows; it may waver between
several functions, and even take on the regime of another organ-the
anorectic mouth, for instance. All sorts of functional questions thus
arise: What flow to break? Where to interrupt it? How and by what
means? What place should be left for other producers or antiproducers
(the place of one's little brother, for instance)? Should one, or should
one not, suffocate from what one eats, swallow air, shit with one's
mouth? The data, the bits of information recorded, and their transmission form a grid of disjunctions of a type that differs from the previous
connections. We owe to Jacques Lacan the discovery of this fertile
domain of a code of the unconscious, incorporating the entire chain-or
several chains-of meaning: a discovery thus totally transforming
analysis. (The basic text in this connection is his La lettre volee [The
Purloined Letter].) But how very strange this domain seems, simply
because of its multiplicity-a multiplicity so complex that we can
scarcely speak of one chain or even of one code of desire. The chains are
called "signifying chains" (chaines signifiantesv because they are made
up of signs, but these signs are not themselves signifying. The code
resembles not so much a language as a jargon, an open-ended, polyvocal
formation. The nature of the signs within it is insignificant, as these signs
have little or nothing to do with what supports them. Or rather, isn't the
support completely immaterial to these signs? The support is the body
without organs. These indifferent signs follow no plan, they function at
all levels and enter into any and every sort of connection; each one
speaks its own language, and establishes syntheses with others that are
quite direct along transverse vectors, whereas the vectors between the
basic elements that constitute them are quite indirect.
The disjunctions characteristic of these chains still do not involve
any exclusion, however, since exclusions can arise only as a function of

391

ANTI-OEDIPUS

inhibiters and repressers that eventually determine the support and
firmly define a specific, personal subject." No chain is homogeneous; all
of them resemble, rather, a succession of characters from different
alphabets in which an ideogram, a pictogram , a tiny image of an elephant
passing by, or a rising sun may suddenly make its appearance. In a chain
that mixes together phonemes, morphemes, etc., without combining
them, papa's mustache, mama's upraised arm, a ribbon, a little girl, a
cop, a shoe suddenly turn up. Each chain captures fragments of other
chains from which it "extracts" a surplus value, just as the orchid code
"attracts" the figure of a wasp: both phenomena demonstrate the
surplus value of a code. It is an entire system of shuntings along certain
tracks, and of selections by lot, that bring about partially dependent,
aleatory phenomena bearing a close resemblance to a Markov chain.
The recordings and transmissions that have come from the internal
codes, from the outside world, from one region to another of the
organism, all intersect, following the endlessly ramified paths of the
great disjunctive synthesis. If this constitutes a system of writing, it is a
writing inscribed on the very surface of the Real: a strangely poly vocal
kind of writing, never a biunivocalized, linearized one; a transcursive
system of writing, never a discursive one; a writing that constitutes the
entire domain of the "real inorganization" of the passive syntheses,
where we would search in vain for something that might be labeled the
Signifier-writing that ceaselessly composes and decomposes the chains
into signs that have nothing that impels them to become signifying. The
one vocation of the sign is to produce desire, engineering it in every
direction.
These chains are the locus of continual detachments-schizzest on
every hand that are valuable in and of themselves and above all must not
be filled in. This is thus the second characteristic of the machine: breaks
that are a detachment icoupures-detachements), which must not be
confused with breaks that are a slicing off (coupures-pretevemcntsv. The
latter have to do with continuous fluxes and are related to partial
objects. Schizzes have to do with heterogeneous chains, and as their
basic unit use detachable segments or mobile stocks resembling building
*See Jacques Lacan, "Remarque sur Ie rapport de Daniel Lagache," in Ecrits (reference

note.~6),

of

"an exclusion having its source in these signs as such being able to come about only a~ a c?n?~tlon ~f
consistency within a chain that is to be constituted; let us also add that .the on~ dimension hffiltHl? this

condition is the translation of which such a chain is capable. Let us consider this game of lotto for Just a
moment more. We may then discover that it is only because these elements turn up by sheer chance
within an ordinal series, in a truly unorganized way, that [heir appearance makes us draw lots" (p. 653).

tA coined word (French schize), based on the Greek verb schizein; "to split," "to cleave," "to divide."
(Translators' notes

THE DESIRING-MACHINES

j

39

blocks or flying bricks. We must conceive of each brick as having been
launched from a distance and as being composed of heterogeneous
elements: containing within it not only an inscription with signs from
different alphabets, but also various figures, plus one or several straws,
and perhaps a corpse. Cutting into the flows (le prelevement du flux)
involves detachment of something from a chain; and the partial objects
of production presuppose stocks of material or recording bricks within
the coexistence and theinteraction of all the syntheses.
How could part of a flow be drawn off without a fragmentary
detachment taking place within the code that comes to inform the flow?
When we noted a moment ago that the schizo is at the very limit of the
decoded flows of desire, we meant that he was at the very limit of the
social codes, where a despotic Signifier destroys all the chains, linearizes
them, biunivocalizes them, and uses the bricks as so many immobile
units for the construction of an imperial Great Wall of China. But the
schizo continually detaches them, continually works them loose and
carries them off in every direction in order to create a new polyvocity
that is the code of desire. Every composition, and also every decomposition, uses mobile bricks as the basic unit. Diaschisis and diaspasis, as
Monakow put it: either a lesion spreads along fibers that link it to other
regions and thus gives rise at a distance to phenomena that are
incomprehensible from a purely mechanistic (but not a machinic) point
of view; or else a humoral disturbance brings on a shift in nervous
energy and creates broken, fragmented paths within the sphere of
instincts. These bricks or blocks are the essential parts of desiringmachines from the point of view of the recording process: they are at
once component parts and products of the process of decomposition
that are spatially localized only at certain moments, by contrast with the
nervous system, which is a great chronogeneous machine: a melodyproducing machine of the "music box" type, with a nonspatial localization. 3 5 What makes Monakow and Mourgue 's study an unparalleled one,
going far beyond the entire Jacksonist philosophy that originally inspired it, is the theory of bricks or blocks, their detachment and
fragmentation, and above all what such a theory presupposes: the
introduction of desire into neurology.
The third type of interruption or break characteristic of the
desiring-machine is the residual break (coupure-reste) or residuum,
which produces a subject alongside the machine, functioning as a part
adjacent to the machine. And if this subject has no specific or personal
identity, if it traverses the body without organs without destroying
its indifference, it is because it is not only a part that is peripheral to
the machine, but also a part that is itself divided into parts that corres40

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

pond to the detachments from the chain idetachements de chaine) and
the removals from the flow (preltivements de flux) brought about by
the machine. Thus this subject consumes and consummates each of the
states through which it passes, and is born of each of them anew,
continuously emerging from them as a part made up of parts, each one
of which completely fills up the body without organs in the space of an
instant. This is what allows Lacan to postulate and describe in detail an
interplay of elements that is more machinic than etymological: parere: to
procure; separare: to separate; se parere: to engender oneself. At the
same time he points out the intensive nature of this interplay: the part
has nothing to do with the whole; "it performs its role all by itself. In this
case, only after the subject has partitioned itself does it proceed to its
parturition ... that is why the subject can procure what is of particular
concern to it here, a state that we would label a legitimate status within
society. Nothing in the life of any subject would sacrifice a very large
part of its interests. "36
Like all the other breaks, the subjective break is not at all an
indication of a lack or need (manque), but on the contrary a share that
falls to the subject as a part of a whole, income that comes its way as
something left over. (Here again, how bad a model the Oedipal model of
castration is!) That is because breaks or interruptions are not the result
of an analysis; rather, in and of themselves, they are syntheses.
Syntheses produce divisions. Let us consider, for example, the milk the
baby throws up when it burps; it is at one and the same time the
restitution of something that has been levied from the associative flux
(restitution de prelevement sur Ie flux associatif); the reproduction of the
process of detachment from the signifying chain (reproduction de
detachement sur la chaine signifiante); and a residuum (residui that
constitutes the subject's share of the whole. The desiring-machine is not
a metaphor; it is what interrupts and is interrupted in accordance with
these three modes. The first mode has to do with the connective
synthesis, and mobilizes libido as withdrawal energy (energie de
pretevement). The second has to do with the disjunctive synthesis, and
mobilizes the Numen as detachment energy ienergie de detachementy.
The third has to do with the conjunctive synthesis, and mobilizes
Voluptas as residual energy (energie residuelley. It is these three aspects
that make the process of desiring-production at once the production of
production, the production of recording, and the production of consumption. To withdraw a part from the whole, to detach, to "have
something left over," is to produce, and to carry out real operations of
desire in the material world.

THE DESIRING·MACHINES

I

41

6

I The Whole and Its Parts

In desiring-machines everything functions at the same
time, but amid hiatuses and ruptures, breakdowns and failures, stalling
and short circuits, distances and fragmentations, within a sum that never
succeeds in bringing its various parts together so as to form a whole.
That is because the breaks in the process are productive, and are
reassemblies in and of themselves. Disjunctions, by the very fact that
they are disjunctions, are inclusive. Even consumptions are transitions,
processes of becoming, and returns. Maurice Blanchot has found a way
to pose the problem in the most rigorous terms, at the level of the
literary machine: how to produce, how to think about fragments whose
sale relationship is sheer difference-fragments that are related to one
another only in that each of them is different-without having recourse
either to any sort of original totality (not even one that has been lost), or
to a subsequent totality that may not yet have come about P? It is only
the category of multiplicity, used as a substantive and going beyond both
the One and the many, beyond the predicative relation of the One and
the many, that can account for desiring-production: desiring-production
is pure multiplicity, that is (0 say, an affirmation that is irreducible to any
sort of unity.
We live today in the age of partial objects, bricks that have been
shattered to bits, and leftovers. We no longer believe in the myth of the
existence of fragments that, like pieces of an antique statue, are merely
waiting for the last one to be turned up, so that they may all be glued
back together to create a unity that is precisely the same as the original
unity. We no longer believe in a primordial totality that once existed, or
in a final totality that awaits us at some future date. We no longer believe
in the dull gray outlines of a dreary, colorless dialectic of evolution,
aimed at forming a harmonious whole out of heterogeneous bits by
rounding off their rough edges. We believe only in totalities that are
peripheral. And if we discover such a totality alongside various separate
parts, it is a whole of these particular parts but does not totalize them; it
is a unity of all of these particular parts but does not unify them; rather,
it is added to them as a new part fabricated separately.
"It comes into being, but applying this time to the whole as some
inspired fragment composed separately...." So Proust writes of the
unity of Balzac's creation, though his remark is also an apt description
of his own oeuvre. 38 In the literary machine that Proust's In Search of
Lost Time constitutes, we are struck by the fact that all the parts are
produced as asymmetrical sections, paths that suddenly come to an end,
hermetically sealed boxes, noncommunicating vessels, watertight com42

I

partments, in which there are gaps even between things that are
contiguous, gaps that are affirmations, pieces of a puzzle belonging not
to anyone puzzle but to many, pieces assembled by forcing them into a
certain place where they mayor may not belong, their unmatched edges
violently bent out of shape, forcibly made to fit together, to interlock,
with a number of pieces always left over. It is a schizoid work par
excellence: it is almost as though the author's guilt, his confessions of
guilt are merely a sort of joke. (In Kleinian terms, it might be said that
the depressive position is only a cover-up for a more deeply rooted
schizoid attitude.) For the rigors of the law are only an apparent
expression of the protest of the One, whereas their real object is the
absolution of fragmented universes, in which the law never unites
anything in a single Whole, but on the contrary measures and maps out
the divergences, the dispersions, the exploding into fragments of
something that is innocent precisely because its source is madness. This
is why in Proust's work the apparent theme of guilt is tightly interwoven
with a completely different theme totally contradicting it; the plantlike
innocence that results from the total compartmentalization of the sexes,
both in Charlus's encounters and in Albertine's slumber, where flowers
blossom in profusion and the utter innocence of madness is revealed,
whether it be the patent madness of Charlus or the supposed madness of
Albertine.
Hence Proust maintained that the Whole itself is a product,
produced as nothing more than a part alongside other parts, which it
neither unifies nor totalizes, though it has an effect on these other parts
simply because it establishes aberrant paths of communication between
noncommunicating vessels, transverse unities between elements that
retain all their differences within their own particular boundaries. Thus
in the trip on the train in In Search of Lost Time, there is never a totality
of what is seen nor a unity of the points of view, except along the
transversal that the frantic passenger traces from one window to the
other, "in order to draw together, in order to reweave intermittent and
opposite fragments." This drawing together, this reweaving is what
Joyce called re-embodying. The body without organs is produced as a
whole, but in its own particular place within the process of production,
alongside the parts that it neither unifies nor totalizes. And when it
operates on them, when it turns back upon them (se rabat sur elles), it
brings about transverse communications, transfinite summarizations,
polyvocal and transcursive inscriptions on its own surface, on which the
functional breaks of partial objects are continually intersected by breaks
in the signifying chains, and by breaks effected by a subject that uses
them as reference points in order to locate itself. The whole not only

ANTI·OEDIPUS
THE DESIRING·MACHINES

I

43

coexists with all the parts; it is contiguous to them, it exists as a product
that is produced apart from them and yet at the same time is related to
them. Geneticists have noted the same phenomenon in the particular
language of their science: " ... amino acids are assimilated individually
into the cell, and then are arranged in the proper sequence by a
mechanism analogous to a template onto which the distinctive side chain
of each acid keys into its proper position."39 As a general rule, the
problem of the relationships between parts and the whole continues to
be rather awkwardly formulated by classic mechanism and vitalism, so
long as the whole is considered as a totality derived from the parts, or as
an original totality from which the parts emanate, or as a dialectical
totalization. Neither mechanism nor vitalism has really understood the
nature of desiring-machines, nor the twofold need to consider the role of
production in desire and the role of desire in mechanics.
There is no sort of evolution of drives that would cause these drives
and their objects to progress in the direction of an integrated whole, any
more than there is an original totality from which they can be derived.
Melanie Klein was responsible for the marvelous discovery of partial
objects, that world of explosions, rotations, vibrations. But how can we
explain the fact that she has nonetheless failed to grasp the logic of these
objects? It is doubtless because, first of all, she conceives of them as
fantasies and judges them from the point of view of consumption, rather
than regarding them as genuine production. She explains them in terms
of causal mechanisms (introjection and projection, for instance), of
mechanisms that produce certain effects (gratification and frustration),
and of mechanisms of expression (good or bad)-an approach that
forces her to adopt an idealist conception of the partial object. She does
not relate these partial objects to a real process of production-of the
sort carried out by desiring-machines, for instance. In the second place,
she cannot rid herself of the notion that schizoparanoid partial objects
are related to a whole, either to an original whole that has existed earlier
in a primary phase, or to a whole that will eventually appear in a final
depressive stage (the complete Object). Partial objects hence appear to
her to be derived from (pnileves sur) global persons; not only are they
destined to play a role in totalities aimed at integrating the ego, the
object, and drives later in life, but they also constitute the original type
of object relation between the ego, the mother, and the father. And in
the final analysis that is where the crux of the matter lies. Partial objects
unquestionably have a sufficient charge in and of themselves to blow up
all of Oedipus and totally demolish its ridiculous claim to represent the
unconscious, to triangulate the unconscious, to encompass the entire
production of desire. The question that thus arises here is not at all that

441

ANTI-OEDIPUS

of the relative importance of what might be called the pre-oedipal in
relation to Oedipus itself, since "pre-oedipal" still has a developmental
or structural relationship to Oedipus. The question, rather, is that of the
absolutely anoedipal nature of the production of desire. But because
Melanie Klein insists on considering desire from the point of view of the
whole, of global persons, and of complete objects-and also, perhaps,
because she is eager to avoid any sort of contretemps with the
International Psycho-Analytic Association that bears above its door the
inscription "Let no one enter here who does not believe in Oedipus"she does not make use of partial objects to shatter the iron collar of
Oedipus; on the contrary, she uses them-or makes a pretense of using
them-to water Oedipus down, to miniaturize it, to find it everywhere, to
extend it to the very earliest years of life.
If we here choose the example of the analyst least prone to see
everything in terms of Oedipus, we do so only in order to demonstrate
what a forcing was necessary for her to make Oedipus the sole measure
of desiring-production. And naturally this is all the more true in the case
of run-of-the-mill practitioners who no longer have the slightest notion
of what the psychoanalytic "movement" is all about. It is no longer a
question of suggestion, but of sheer terrorism. Melanie Klein herself
writes: "The first time Dick came to me ... he manifested no sort of
affect when his nurse handed him over to me. When I showed him the
toys I had put ready, he looked at them without the faintest interest. I
took a big train and put it beside a smaller one and called them
'Daddy-train' and 'Dick-train.' Thereupon he picked up the train I called
'Dick' and made it roll to the window and said 'Station.' I explained: 'The
station is mummy; Dick is going into mummy.' He left the train, ran into
the space between the outer and inner doors of the room, shutting
himself in, saying 'dark,' and ran out again directly. He went through this
performance several times. I explained to him: 'It is dark inside mummy.
Dick is inside dark mummy.' Meantime he picked up the train again, but
soon ran back into the space between the doors. While I was saying that
he was going into dark mummy, he said twice in a questioning way:
'Nurse?' ... As his analysis progressed . . . Dick had also discovered
the wash-basin as symbolizing the mother's body, and he displayed an
extraordinary dread of being wetted with water." Say that it's Oedipus,
or you'll get a slap in the face. The psychoanalyst no longer says to the
patient: "Tell me a little bit about your desiring-machines, won't you?"
Instead he screams: "Answer daddy-and-mommy when I speak to you!"
Even Melanie Klein. So the entire process of desiring-production is
trampled underfoot and reduced to (rabuttu sur) parental images, laid
out step by step in accordance with supposed pre-oedipal stages,
THE DESIRING-MACHINES , 45

totalized in Oedipus, and the logic of partial objects is thereby reduced
to nothing. Oedipus thus becomes at this point the crucial premise in the
logic of psychoanalysis. For as we suspected at the very beginning,
partial objects are only apparently derived from (preleves sur) global
persons; they are really produced by being drawn from (preleves sur) a
flow or a nonpersonal hyl«, with which they re-establish contact by
connecting themselves to other partial objects. The unconscious is
totally unaware of persons as such. Partial objects are not representations of parental figures or of the basic patterns of family relations; they
are parts of desiring-machines, having to do with a process and with
relations of production that are both irreducible and prior to anything
that may be made to conform to the Oedipal figure.
When the break between Freud and Jung is discussed, the modest
and practical point of disagreement that marked the beginning of their
differences is too often forgotten: Jung remarked that in the process of
transference the psychoanalyst frequently appeared in the guise of a
devil, a god, or a sorcerer, and that the roles he assumed in the patient's
eyes went far beyond any sort of parental images. They eventually came
to a total parting of the ways, yet Jung's initial reservation was a telling
one. The same remark holds true of children's games. A child never
confines himself to playing house, to playing only at being daddy-andmommy. He also plays at being a magician, a cowboy, a cop or a robber,
a train, a little car. The train is not necessarily daddy, nor is the train
station necessarily mommy. The problem has to do not with the sexual
nature of desiring-machines, but with the family nature of this sexuality.
Admittedly, once the child has grown up, he finds himself deeply
involved in social relations that are no longer familial relations. But
since these relations supposedly come into being at a later stage in life,
there are only two possible ways in which this can be explained: it must
be granted either that sexuality is sublimated or neutralized in and
through social (and metaphysical) relations, in the form of an analytic
"afterward"; or else that these relations bring into playa nonsexual
energy, for which sexuality has merely served as the symbol of an
anagogical "beyond."
It was their disagreement on this particular point that eventually
made the break between Freud and Jung irreconcilable. Yet at the same
time the two of them continued to share the belief that the libido cannot
invest a social or metaphysical field without some sort of mediation.
This is not the case, however. Let us consider a child at play, or a child
crawling about exploring the various rooms of the house he lives in. He
looks intently at an electrical outlet, he moves his body about like a
machine, he uses one of his legs as though it were an oar, he goes into
411

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

the kitchen, into the study, he runs toy cars back and forth. It is obvious
that his parents are present all this time, and that the child would have
nothing were it not for them. But that is not the real matter at issue. The
matter at issue is to find out whether everything he touches is experienced as a representative of his parents. Ever since birth his crib, his
mother's breast, her nipple, his bowel movements are desiring-machines
connected to parts of his body. It seems to us self-contradictory to
maintain, on the one hand, that the child lives among partial objects, and
that on the other hand he conceives of these partial objects as being his
parents, or even different parts of his parents' bodies. Strictly speaking,
it is not true that a baby experiences his mother's breast as a separate
part of her body. It exists, rather, as a part of a desiring-machine
connected to the baby's mouth, and is experienced as an object
providing a nonpersonal flow of milk, be it copious or scanty. A
desiring-machine and a partial object do not represent anything. A
partial object is not representative, even though it admittedly serves as a
basis of relations and as a means of assigning agents a place and a
function; but these agents are not persons, any more than these relations
are intersubjective. They are relations of production as such, and agents
of production and antiproduction. Ray Bradbury demonstrates this very
well when he describes the nursery as a place where desiring-production
and group fantasy occur, as a place where the only connection is that
between partial objects and agents." The small child lives with his
family around the clock; but within the bosom of this family, and from
the very first days of his life, he immediately begins having an amazing
nonfamilial experience that psychoanalysis has completely failed to take
into account. Lindner's painting attracts our attention once again.
It is not a question of denying the vital importance of parents or the
love attachment of children to their mothers and fathers. It is a question
of knowing what the place and the function of parents are within desiring-production, rather than doing the opposite and forcing the entire
interplay of desiring-machines to fit within trabattre tout Ie jeu des
machines desirantes dans) the restricted code of Oedipus. How does the
child first come to define the places and the functions that the parents
are going to occupy as special agents, closely related to other agents?
From the very beginning Oedipus exists in one form and one form only:
open in all directions to a social field, to a field of production directly
invested by libido. It would seem obvious that parents indeed make their
appearance on the recording surface of desiring-production. But this is
in fact the crux of the entire Oedipal problem: What are the precise
forces that cause the Oedipal triangulation to close up? Under what
conditions does this triangulation divert desire so that it flows across a
THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

41

surface within a narrow channel that is not a natural conformation of
this surface? How does it form a type of inscription for experiences and
the workings of mechanisms that extend far beyond it in every direction? It is in this sense and this sense only that the child relates the breast
as a partial object to the person of his mother, and constantly watches
the expression on his mother's face. The word "relate" in this case does
not designate a natural productive relationship, but rather a relation in
the sense of a report or an account, an inscription within the over-all
process of inscription, within the Numen. From his very earliest
infancy, the child has a wide-ranging life of desire-a whole set of
nonfamilial relations with the objects and the machines of desire-that
is not related to the parents from the point of view of immediate
production, but that is ascribed to them (with either love or hatred) from
the point of view of the recording of the process, and in accordance with
the very special conditions of this recording, including the effect of these
conditions upon the process itself (feedback).
It is amid partial objects and within the nonfamilial relations of
desiring-production that the child lives his life and ponders what it
means to live, even though the question must be "related" to his parents
and the only possible tentative answer must be sought in family
relations. "I remember that ever since I was eight years old, and even
before that, I always wondered who I was, what I was, and why I was
alive; I remember that at the age of six, on a house on the Boulevard de
la Blancarde in Marseilles (number 29, to be precise), just as I was eating
my afternoon snack-a chocolate bar that a certain woman known as my
mother gave me-I asked myself what it meant to exist, to be alive, what
it meant to be conscious of oneself breathing, and I remember that I
wanted to inhale myself in order to prove that I was alive and to see if I
liked being alive, and if so why."42 That is the crucial point: a question
occurs to the child that will perhaps be "related" to the woman known as
mommy, but that is not formulated in terms of her, but rather produced
within the interplay of desiring-machines-at the level, for example, of
the mouth-air machine or the tasting-machine: What does it mean to be
alive? What does it mean to breathe? What am I? What sort of thing is
this breathing-machine on my body without organs?
The child is a metaphysical being. As in the case of the Cartesian
cogito, parents have nothing to do with these questions. And we are
guilty of an error when we confuse the fact that this question is
"related" to the parents, in the sense of being recounted or communicated to them, with the notion that it is "related" to them in the sense of a
fundamental connection with them. By boxing the life of the child up
within the Oedipus complex, by making familial relations the universal
48

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

mediation of childhood, we cannot help but fail to understand the
production of the unconscious itself, and the collective mechanisms that
have an immediate bearing on the unconscious: in particular, the entire
interplay between primal psychic repression, the desiring-machines, and
the body without organs. For the unconscious is an orphan, and
produces itself within the identity of nature and man. The autoproduction of the unconscious suddenly became evident when the subject of
the Cartesian cogito realized that it had no parents, when the socialist
thinker discovered the unity of man and nature within the process of
production, and when the cycle discovers its independence from an
indefinite parental regression. To quote Artaud once again: "I got
no/papamummy."
We have seen how a confusion arose between the two meanings of
"process": process as the metaphysical production of the demoniacal
within nature, and process as social production of desiring-machines
within history. Neither social relations nor metaphysical relations
constitute an "afterward" or a "beyond." The role of such relations
must be recognized in all psychopathological processes, and their
importance will be all the greater when we are dealing with psychotic
syndromes that would appear to be the most animal-like and the most
desocialized. It is in the child's very first days of life, in the most
elementary behavior patterns of the suckling babe, that these relations
with partial objects, with the agents of production, with the factors of
antiproduction are woven, in accordance with the laws of desiringproduction as a whole. By failing from the beginning to see what the
precise nature of this desiring-production is, and how, under what
conditions, and in response to what pressures, the Oedipal triangulation
plays a role in the recording of the process, we find ourselves trapped in
the net of a diffuse, generalized oedipalism that radically distorts the life
of the child and his later development, the neurotic and psychotic
problems of the adult, and sexuality as a whole. Let us keep D.H.
Lawrence's reaction to psychoanalysis in mind, and never forget it. In
Lawrence's case, at least, his reservations with regard to psychoanalysis
did not stem from terror at having discovered what real sexuality was.
But he had the impression-the purely instinctive impression-that
psychoanalysis was shutting sexuality up in a bizarre sort of box painted
with bourgeois motifs, in a kind of rather repugnant artifical triangle,
thereby stifling the whole of sexuality as production of desire so as to
recast it along entirely different lines, making of it a "dirty little secret,"
the dirty little family secret, a private theater rather than the fantastic
factory of Nature and Production. Lawrence had the impression that
sexuality possessed more power or more potentiality than that. And
THE DESIRING-MACHINES

I

411

though psychoanalysis may perhaps have managed to "disinfect the
dirty little secret," the dreary, dirty little secret of Oedipus-the-moderntyrant benefited very little from having been thus disinfected.
Is it possible that, by taking the path that it has, psychoanalysis is
reviving an age-old tendency to humble us, to demean us, and to make us
feel guilty? Foucault has noted that the relationship between madness
and the family can be traced back in large part to a development that
affected the whole of bourgeois society in the nineteenth century: the
family was entrusted with functions that became the measuring rod of
the responsibility of its members and their possible guilt. Insofar as
psychoanalysis cloaks insanity in the mantle of a "parental complex,"
and regards the patterns of self-punishment resulting from Oedipus as a
confession of guilt, its theories are not at all radical or innovative. On the
contrary: it is completing the task begun by nineteenth-century psychology, namely, to develop a moralized, familial discourse of mental
pathology, linking madness to the "half-real, half-imaginary dialectic of
the Family," deciphering within it "the unending attempt to murder the
father," "the dull thud of instincts hammering at the solidity of the
family as an institution and at its most archaic symbols."43 Hence,
instead of participating in an undertaking that will bring about genuine
liberation, psychoanalysis is taking part in the work of bourgeois
repression at its most far-reaching level, that is to say, keeping European
humanity harnessed to the yoke of daddy-mommy and making no effort
to do away with this problem once and for all.

PSYCHOANALYSIS
AND FAMILIALISM:
THE HOLY FAMILY
Translated by Robert Hurley and Mark Seem

1

I The Imperialism of Oedipus

Oedipus restrained is the figure of the daddy-mommy-me
triangle, the familial constellation in person. But when psychoanalysis
makes of Oedipus its dogma, it is not unaware of the existence of
relations said to be pre-oedipal in the child, exo-oedipal in the psychotic,
para-oedipal in others. The function of Oedipus as dogma, or as the
"nuclear complex," is inseparable from a forcing by which the psychoanalyst as theoretician elevates himself to the conception of a generalized Oedipus. On the one hand, for each subject of either sex, he takes
into consideration an intensive series of instincts, affects, and relations
that link the normal and positive form of the complex to its inverse or
negative form: a standard model Oedipus, such as Freud presents in The
Ego and the Id, which makes it possible to connect the pre-Oedipal
phases with the negative complex when this seems called for. On the
50

I ANTI·OEDIPUS

51

other hand, he takes into consideration the coexistence in extension of
the subjects themselves and their multiple interactions: a group Oedipus
that brings together relatives, descendants, and ascendants. (It is in this
manner that the schizophrenic's visible resistance to oedipalization, the
obvious absence of the Oedipal link, can be obscured in a grandparental
constellation, either because an accumulation of three generations is
deemed necessary in order to produce a psychotic, or because an even
more direct mechanism of intervention by the grandparents in the
psychosis is discovered, and Oedipuses of Oedipus are constituted, to
the second power: neurosis, that's father-mother, but grandma, that's
psychosis.) Finally, the distinction between the Imaginary" and the
Symbolic* permits the emergence of an Oedipal structure as a system of
positions and functions that do not conform to the variable figure of
those who come to occupy them in a given social or pathological
formation: a structural Oedipus (3+ I) that does not conform to a
triangle, but performs all the possible triangulations by distributing in a
given domain desire, its object, and the law.
It is certain that the two preceding modes of generalization attain
their full scope only in structural interpretation. Structural interpretation
makes Oedipus into a kind of universal Catholic symbol, beyond all the
imaginary modalities. It makes Oedipus into a referential axis not only
for the pre-oedipal phases, but also for the para-oedipal varieties, and
the exo-oedipal phenomena. The notion of "foreclosure," for example,
seems to indicate a specifically structural deficiency, by means of which
the schizophrenic is of course repositioned on the Oedipal axis, set back
into the Oedipal orbit in the perspective, for example, of the three
generations, where the mother was not able to posit her desire toward
her own father, nor the son, consequently, toward the mother. One of
Lacan's disciples writes: we are going to consider "the means by which
the Oedipal organization plays a role in psychoses; next, what the forms
of psychotic pregenitality are and how they are able to maintain the
Oedipal reference." Our preceding criticism of Oedipus therefore risks
being judged totally superficial and petty, as if it applied solely to an
imaginary Oedipus and aimed at the role of parental figures, without at
all penetrating the structure and its order of symbolic positions and
functions.
For us, however, the problem is one of knowing if, indeed, that is
where the difference enters in. Wouldn't the real difference be between
Oedipus, structural as well as imaginary, and something else that all the
Oedipuses crush and repress: desiring-production-the machines of
"In capitalizing these terms, Vie have followed the suggestion of Jacques Lacan's translator, Anthony
Wilden: see The Language of tile Self (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1968), p. xv.

52

I

A,NTI-OEDIPUS

desire that no longer allow themselves to be reduced to the structure any
more than to persons, and that constitute the Real in itself, beyond or
beneath the Symbolic as well as the Imaginary? We in no way claim to
be taking up an endeavor such as Malinowski's, showing that the figures
vary according to the social form under consideration. We even believe
what we are told when Oedipus is presented as a kind of invariant. But
the question is altogether different: is there an equivalence between the
productions of the unconscious and this invariant-between the
desiring-machines and the Oedipal structure? Or rather, does not the
invariant merely express the history of a long mistake, throughout all its
variations and modalities; the strain of an endless repression? What we
are calling into question is the frantic Oedipalization to which psychoanalysis devotes itself, practically and theoretically, with the combined
resources of image and structure. And despite some fine books by
certain disciples of Lacan, we wonder if Lacan's thought really goes in
this direction. Is it merely a matter of oedipalizing even the schizo? Or is
it a question of something else, and even the contrary?* Wouldn't it be
better to schizophrenize-to schizophrenize the domain of the unconscious as well as the sociohistorical domain, so as to shatter the iron
collar of Oedipus and rediscover everywhere the force of desiring,
production; to renew, on the level of the Real, the tie between the
analytic machine, desire, and production? For the unconscious itself is
no more structural than personal, it does not symbolize any more than it
imagines or represents; it engineers, it is machinic. Neither imaginary
nor symbolic, it is the Real in itself, the "impossible real" and its
production.
But what is this long history, if we consider it only during the period
of psychoanalysis? It does not take place without doubts, detours, and
repentances. Laplanche and Pontalis note that Freud "discovers" the
Oedipus complex in 1897 in the course of his self-analysis, but that he
doesn't give a generalized theoretical form to it until 1923, in The Ego
and the Id, and that, between these two formulations, Oedipus leads a
more or less marginal existence, "confined for example to a separate
chapter on object-choice at puberty (Three Essays), or to a chapter on
typical dreams (The Interpretation of Dreams)." They say that this is
because a certain abandonment by Freud of the theory of traumatism
*"Nevertheless. it is not because I preach a return to Freud that I am not able to say that Totem and
Taboo is a twisted story. It is in fact for that reason that we must return to Freud. No one helped me to
make this known: the ionnauons of the unconscious . . . . I am not saying Oedipus serves no purpose,
nor that it (~a) bears no relationship with what we do. It serves no purpose for the psychoanalysts, that
is indeed true! But since psychoanalysts are assuredly not psychoanalysts, that proves nothing ....
These are things I set forth in their appropriate time and place; that was a time when I was speaking to
people who had to be dealt with tactfully-psychoanalysts. On that level, I spoke of the paternal
metaphor, I have never spoken of an Oedipus complex." (Jacques Lacan in a seminar, 1970.)

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY F,AMILY

153

~--

and seduction leads not to a univocal determination of Oedipus, but to
the description as well of a spontaneous infantile sexuality of an
endogenous nature. It is as if "Freud never managed to articulate the
interrelations of Oedipus and infantile sexuality," the latter referring to
a biological reality of development, the former to a psychic fantasy
reality. Oedipus is what all but got lost "for the sake of a biological
realism.'"
But is it correct to present things in this way? Did the imperialism of
Oedipus require only the renunciation of biological realism? Or wasn't
something else sacrificed to Oedipus, something infinitely stronger? For
what Freud and the first analysts discover is the domain of free
syntheses where everything is possible: endless connections, nonexclusive disjunctions, nonspecific conjunctions, partial objects and flows.
The desiring-machines pound away and throb in the depths of the
unconscious: Irma's injection, the Wolf Man's ticktock, Anna's coughing machine, and also all the explanatory apparatuses set into motion by
Freud, all those neurobiologico-desiring-machines. And the discovery of
the productive unconscious has what appear to be two correlates: on the
one hand, the direct confrontation between desiring-production and
social production, between symptomological and collective formations,
given their identical nature and their differing regimes; and on the other
hand, the repression that the social machine exercises on desiringmachines, and the relationship of psychic repression with social repression. This will all be lost, or at least singularly compromised, with the
establishment of a sovereign Oedipus. Free association, rather than
opening onto polyvocal connections, confines itself to a univocal
impasse. All the chains of the unconscious are biunivocalized, linearized, suspended from a despotic signifier. The whole of desiringproduction is crushed, subjected to the requirements of representation,
and to the dreary games of what is representative and represented' in
representation. And there is the essential thing: the reproduction of
desire gives way to a simple representation, in the process as well as
theory of the cure. The productive unconscious makes way for an
unconscious that knows only how to express itself-express itself in
myth, in tragedy, in dream.
But who says that dream, tragedy, and myth are adequate to the
formations of the unconscious, even if the work of transformation is
taken into account? Groddeck remained more faithful than Freud to an
autoproduction of the unconscious in the coextension of man and
Nature. It is as if Freud had drawn back from this world of wild
production and explosive desire, wanting at all costs to restore a little
order there, an order made classical owing to the ancient Greek theater.
54

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

-------------------

For what does it mean to say that Freud discovered Oedipus in his own
self-analysis? Was it in his self-analysis, or rather in his Goethian
classical culture? In his self-analysis he discovers something about
which he remarks: Well now, that looks like Oedipus! And at first he
considers this -something as a variant of the "familial romance," a
paranoiac recording by which desire causes precisely the familial
determinations to explode. It is only little by little that he makes the
familial romance, on the contrary, into a mere dependence on Oedipus,
and that he neuroticizes everything in the unconscious at the same time
as he oedipalizes, and closes the familial triangle over the entire
unconscious. The schizo-there is the enemy! Desiring-production is
personalized, or rather personologized (personnoiogisee), imaginarized
(imaginarisee), structuralized. (We have seen that the real difference or
frontier did not lie between these terms, which are perhaps complementary.) Production is reduced to mere fantasy production, production of
expression. The unconscious ceases to be what it is-a factory, a
workshop-to become a theater, a scene and its staging. And not even
an avant-garde theater, such as existed in Freud's day (Wedekind), but
the classical theater, the classical order of representation. The psychoanalyst becomes a director for a private theater, rather than the engineer
or mechanic who sets up units of production, and grapples with
collective agents of production and antiproduction.
Psychoanalysis is like the Russian Revolution; we don't know when
it started going bad. We have to keep going back further. To the
Americans? To the First International? To the secret Committee? To the
first ruptures, which signify renunciations by Freud as much as betrayals
by those who break with him? To Freud himself, from the moment of
the "discovery" of Oedipus? Oedipus is the idealist turning point. Yet it
cannot be said that psychoanalysis set to work unaware of desiringproduction. The fundamental notions of the economy of desire-work
and investment-keep their importance, but are subordinated to the
forms of an expressive unconscious and no longer to the formations of
the productive unconscious. The anoedipal nature of desiringproduction remains present, but it is fitted over the co-ordinates of
Oedipus, which translate it into "pre-oedipal," "para-oedipal," "quasioedipal," etc. The desiring-machines are always there, but they no
longer function except behind the consulting-room walls. Behind the
walls or in the wings, such is the place the primal fantasy concedes to
desiring-machines, when it reduces everything to the Oedipal scene."
They continue nevertheless to make a hellish racket. Even the psychoanalyst can't ignore them. He tends therefore to maintain an attitude of
denial: all of that is surely true, but it is still daddy-mommy. Over the
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

I

1I11

---------~-----

consulting-room door is written, "Leave your desiring-machines at the
door, give up your orphan and celibate machines, your tape recorder and
your little bike, enter and allow yourself to be oedipalized." Everything
follows from that, beginning with the untellable character of the cure, its
interminable and highly contractual nature, flows of speech in exchange
for flows of money. All that is needed is what is called a psychotic
episode: after a schizophrenic flash, one day we bring our tape recorder
into the analyst's office-stop I-with this insertion of a desiringmachine everything is reversed: we have broken the contract, we are not
faithful to the major principle of the exclusion of a third party, we have
introduced a third element-the desiring-machine in person. * Yet every
psychoanalyst should know that, underneath Oedipus, through Oedipus,
behind Oedipus, his business is with desiring-machines. At the beginning, psychoanalysts could not be unaware of the forcing employed to
introduce Oedipus, to inject it into the unconscious. Then Oedipus fell
back on and appropriated desiring-production as if all the productive
forces emanated from Oedipus itself. The psychoanalyst became the
carrier of Oedipus, the great agent of antiproduction in desire. The same
history as that of Capital, with its enchanted, "rniraculated" world. (Also
at the beginning, said Marx, the first capitalists could not be unaware
of ... )

2

I

Three Texts of Freud

It is easy to see that the problem is first of all practical,
that it concerns above all else the practice of the cure. For the frenzied
oedipalization process takes form precisely at the moment when Oedipus has not yet received its full theoretical formulation as the "nuclear
complex" and leads a marginal existence. The fact that Schreber's
analysis was not in vivo detracts nothing from its exemplary value from
the point of view of practice. In this text (1911) Freud encounters the
most formidable of questions: how does one dare reduce to the paternal
theme a delirium so rich, so differentiated, so "divine" as the Judge'ssince the Judge in his memoirs makes only very brief references to the
"Jean-Jacques Abrahams, "L'homme au rnagnetophone, dialogue psychanalytique,' Les Temps
modernes, no. 274 (April 1969): "A: You see, it really isn't so serious; I'm not your father, and I can still
shout, of course not! There, that's enough.-Dr. X: You are imitating your father at this moment?-A:
Of course not, come off it, I'm imitating your father! The one I see in your eyes.-Dr. X: You are trying
to take the role .. , . -A: ... You can't cure people, you can only palm off your father problems on
them-problems you can't get away from. And from session to session you drag along your victims that
way with your father problem .... I was the sick one, you were the doctor. You'd finally reversed your
childhood problem of being the child to your father .... -Dr. X: I was just telephoning extension 609
to make you leave-609, the police, to have you thrown out.-A: The police? That's it-Daddy! Your
father's a policeman! And you were going to call your father to come get me.... What insanity! You
got all unnerved, excited, just because I brought out a little device that'll let us understand what's going
on here."

HI

ANTI-OEDIPUS

memory of his father. On several occasions Freud's text marks the
extent to which he felt the difficulty: to begin with, it appears difficult to
assign as cause of the malady-even if only an occasional cause-an
"outburst of homosexual libido" directed at Dr. Flechsig's person." But
when we replace the doctor with the father and commission the father to
explain the God of delirium, we ourselves have trouble following this
ascension; we take liberties that can be justified only by the advantages
they afford us in our attempt to understand the delirium." Yet the more
Freud states such scruples, the more he thrusts them aside and sweeps
them away with a firm and confident response. And this response is
double: it is not my fault if psychoanalysis attests to a great monotony
and encounters the father everywhere-in Flechsig, in the God, in the
sun; it is the fault of sexuality and its stubborn symbolism." Furthermore, it is not surprising that the father returns constantly in current
deliriums in the most hidden and least recognizable guises, since he
returns in fact everywhere and more visibly in religions and ancient
myths, which express forces or mechanisms eternally active in the
unconscious." It should be noted that Judge Schreber's destiny was not
merely that of being sodomized, while still alive, by the rays from
heaven, but also that of being posthumously oedipalized by Freud. From
the enormous political, social, and historical content of Schreber's
delirium not one word is retained, as though the libido did not bother
itself with such things. Freud invokes only a sexual argument, which
consists in bringing about the union of sexuality and the familial
complex, and a mythological argument, which consists in positing the
adequation of the productive force of the unconscious and the "edifying
forces of myths and religions."
This latter argument is very important, and it is not by chance that
here Freud declares himself in agreement with Jung. In a certain way
this agreement subsists after their break. If the unconscious is thought to
express itself adequately in myths and religions (taking into account, of
course, the work of transformation), there are two ways of reading this
adequation, but they have in common the postulate that measures the
unconscious against myth, and that from the start substitutes mere
expressive forms for the productive formations. The basic question is
never asked, but cast aside: Why return to myth 7 Why take it as the
model? The supposed adequation can then be interpreted in what is
termed anagogical fashion, toward the "higher." Or inversely, in analytical fashion, toward the "lower," relating the myth to the drives. But
since the drives are transferred from myth, traced from myth with the
transformations taken into account. .. What we mean is that, starting
from the same postulate, Jung is led to restore the most diffuse and
PSYCHOANALYStS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

/51

spiritualized religiosity, whereas Freud is confirmed in his most rigorous
atheism. Freud needs to deny the existence of God as much as lung
needs to affirm the essence of the divine, in order to interpret the
commonly postulated adequation. But to render religion unconscious, or
the unconscious religious, still amounts to injecting something religious
into the unconscious. (And what would Freudian analysis be without the
celebrated guilt feelings ascribed to the unconscious?)
What came to pass in the history of psychoanalysis? Freud held to
his atheism in heroic fashion. But all around him, more and more, they
respectfully allowed him to speak, they let the old man speak, ready to
prepare behind his back the reconciliation of the churches and psychoanalysis, the moment when the Church would train its own psychoanalysts, and when it would become possible to write in the history of the
movement: so even we are still pious! Let us recall Marx's great
declaration: he who denies God does only a "secondary thing," for he
denies God in order to posit the existence of man, to put man in God's
place (the transformation taken into account)," But the person who
knows that the place of man is entirely elsewhere does not even allow
the possibility of a question to subsist concerning "an alien being, a
being placed above man and nature": he no longer needs the mediation
of myth, he no longer needs to go by way of this mediation-the
negation of the existence of God-since he has attained those regions of
an auto production of the unconscious where the unconscious is no less
atheist than orphan-immediately atheist, immediately orphan. And
doubtless an examination of the first argument would lead us to a similar
conclusion. By joining sexuality to the familial complex, by making
Oedipus into the criterion of sexuality in analysis-the test of orthodoxy
par excellence-Freud himself posited the whole of social and.metaphysical relations as an afterward or a beyond that desire was incapable
of investing immediately. He then became rather indifferent to the fact
that this beyond derives from the familial complex through the analytical transformation of desire, or is signified by it in an anagogical
symbolization.
Let us consider another text of Freud's, a later one, where Oedipus
is already designated as the "nuclear complex": "A Child Is Being
Beaten."? The reader cannot escape the impression of a disquieting
strangeness. Never was the paternal theme less visible, and yet never
was it affirmed with as much passion and resolution. The imperialism of
Oedipus is founded here on an absence. After all, of the three supposed
phases of the girl's fantasy, the first is such that the father does not yet
appear, while in the third the father no longer appears: that leaves the
second, then, where the father shines forth in all his brilliance, "clearly
58

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

without doubt"-but indeed, "this second phase has never had a real
existence. It is never remembered, it has never succeeded in becoming
conscious. It is a construction of analysis, but it is no less a necessity on
that account.?"
What is at issue in this fantasy? Some boys are beaten by someone-the teacher, for example-in the presence of the little girls. We are
present from the start at a double Freudian reduction, which is in no way
imposed by the fantasy, but is required by Freud in the manner of a
presupposition. On the one hand Freud wants to deliberately reduce the
group character of the fantasy to a purely individual dimension: the
beaten children must in a way be the ego ("substitutes for the subject
himself") and the one who does the beating must be the father ("father
substitute"). On the other hand it is necessary for the variations of the
fantasy to be organized in disjunctions whose use must be strictly
exclusive. Hence there will be a girl-series and a boy-series, but
dissyrnrnetrical, the female fantasy having three phases, the last of
which is "boys are beaten by the teacher," while the male fantasy has
only two, the last of which is "my mother beats me." The only common
phase-the second for the girls and the first for the boys-affirms
without doubt the prevalence of the father in both cases, but this is the
famous nonexistent phase.
Such is always the case with Freud. Something common to the two
sexes is required, but something that will be lacking in both, and that will
distribute the lack in two nonsymmetrical series, establishing the
exclusive use of the disjunctions: you are girl or boy! Such is the case
with Oedipus and its "resolution," different in boys and in girls. Such is
the case with castration, and its relationship to Oedipus in both
instances. Castration is at once the common lot-that is, the prevalent
and transcendent Phallus, and the exclusive distribution that presents
itself in girls as desire for the penis, and in boys as fear of losing it or
refusal of a passive attitude. This something in common must lay the
foundation for the exclusive use of the disjunctions of the unconscious-and teach us resignation. Resignation to Oedipus, to castration:
for girls, renunciation of their desire for the penis; for boys, renunciation of male protest-in short, "assumption of one's sex.":" This
*Sigmund Freud, "Analysis Terminable and Interminable" (937), in Standard Edition ojshe Complete
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, ed. James Strachey (New York: Macmillan; London: Hogarth
Press, 1964), Vol. 23, pp. 250-52: "The two corresponding themes are in the female, an envy for the
penis~a positive striving to possess a male genital-and, in the male, a struggle against his passive or
feminine attitude to another male .... At no other point ... does one suffer more from an oppressive
feeling that Doe has been 'preaching to the winds,' than when one is trying to persuade a woman to
abandon her wish .for a I?enis on the ground of its being unrealizable or when One is seeking to convince
a man that a passive attitude to men does not always signify castration and that it is indispensable in
many relationships in life. The rebellious overcompensation of the male produces one of the strongest
transference-resistances. He refuses to subject himself to a. father-substitute, or to feel indebted to him

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMllIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY , 51!!

something in common, the great Phallus, the Lack with two nonsuperirnposable sides, is purely mythical; it is like the One in negative theology,
it introduces lack into desire and causes exclusive series to emanate, to
which it attributes a goal, an origin, and a path of resignation.
The contrary should be said: neither is there anything in common
between the two sexes, nor do they cease communicating with each
other in a transverse mode where each subject possesses both of them,
but with the two of them partitioned off, and where each subject
communicates with one sex or the other in another subject. Such is the
law of partial objects. Nothing is lacking, nothing can be defined as a
lack; nor are the disjunctions in the unconscious ever exclusive, but
rather the object of a properly inclusive use that we must analyze. Freud
had a concept at his disposal for stating this contrary notion: the concept
of bisexuality; and it was not by chance that he was never able or never
wanted to give this concept the analytical position and extension it
required. Without even going that far, a lively controversy developed
when certain analysts, following Melanie Klein, tried to define the
unconscious forces of the female sexual organ by positive characteristics in terms of partial objects and flows. This slight shift-which did not
suppress mythical castration but made it depend secondarily on the
organ, instead of the organ's depending on it-met with great opposition
from Freud." He maintained that the organ, from the viewpoint of the
unconscious, could not be understood except by proceeding from a lack
or a primal deprivation, and not the opposite.
Here we have a properly analytical fallacy (which will be found
again, to a considerable degree, in the theory of the signifier) that
consists in passing from the detachable partial object to the position of a
complete object as the thing detached (phallus). This passage implies a
subject, defined as a fixed ego of one sex or the other, who necessarily
experiences as a lack his subordination to the tyrannical complete
object. This is perhaps no longer the case when the partial object is
posited for itself on the body without organs, with-as its sole
subject-not an "ego," but the drive that forms the desiring-machine
along with it, and that enters into relationships of connection, disjunction, and conjunction with other partial objects, at the core of the
corresponding multiplicity whose every element can only be defined
positively. We must speak of "castration" in the same way we speak of
oedipalization, whose crowning moment it is: castration designates the
operation by which psychoanalysis castrates the unconscious, injects
castration into the unconscious. Castration as a practical operation on
for anything, and consequently he refuses to accept his recovery from the doctor." (Translators' note:
Hereafter this source will be cited as Standard Edition.)

60 \ ANTI-OEDIPUS

the unconscious is achieved when the thousand breaks-flows of
desiring-machines-all positive, all productive-are projected into the
same mythical space, the unary stroke of the signifier.
We have not finished chanting the litany of the ignorances of the
unconscious; it knows nothing of castration or Oedipus, just as it knows
nothing of parents, gods, the law, lack. The Women's Liberation
movements are correct in saying: We are not castrated, so you get
fucked.!? And far from being able to get by with anything like the
wretched maneuver where men answer that this itself is proof that
women are castrated-or even console women by saying that men are
castrated, too, all the while rejoicing that they are castrated the other
way, on the side that is not superimposable-it should be recognized
that Women's Liberation movements contain, in a more or less ambiguous state, what belongs to all requirements of liberation: the force of the
unconscious itself, the investment by desire of the social field, the
disinvestment of repressive structures. Nor are we going to say that the
question is not that of knowing if women are castrated, but only if the
unconscious "believes it," since all the ambiguity lies there. What does
belief applied to the unconscious signify? What is an unconscious that
no longer does anything but "believe," rather than produce? What are
the operations, the artifices that inject the unconscious with "beliefs"
that are not even irrational, but on the contrary only too reasonable and
consistent with the established order?
Let us return to the fantasy, "a child is being beaten, children are
beaten"-a typical group fantasy where desire invests the social field
and its repressive forms. If there is a mise en scene, it is directed by a
social desiring-machine whose product should not be considered abstractly, separating the girl's and the boy's cases, as if each were a little
ego taking up its own business with daddy and mommy. On the contrary,
we should consider the complementary em semble made up of boy-girl
and parents-agents of production and antiproduction, this ensemble
being present at the same time in each individual and in the socius that
presides over the organization of the group fantasy. Simultaneously the
boys are beaten-initiated by the teacher on the little girl's erotic stage
(seeing-machine), and obtain satisfaction in a masochistic fantasy
involving the mother (anal machine). The result is that the boys are able
to see only by becoming little girls, and the girls cannot experience the
pleasure of punishment except by becoming boys. It is a whole chorus, a
montage: back in the village after a raid in Vietnam, in the presence of
their weeping sisters, the filthy Marines are beaten by their instructor, on
whose knees the mommy is seated, and they have orgasms for having
been so evil, for having tortured so well. It's so bad, but also so good!
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

161

Perhaps one will recall a sequence from the film Hearts and Minds:
we see Colonel Patton, the general's son, saying that his guys are great,
that they love their mothers, their fathers, and their country, that they
cry at the religious services for their dead buddies, fine boys; then the
colonel's face changes, grimaces, and reveals a big paranoiac in uniform
who shouts in conclusion: but still, they're a bloody good bunch of
killers! It is obvious that when traditional psychoanalysis explains that
the instructor is the father, and that the colonel too is the father, and that
the mother is nonetheless the father too, it reduces all of desire to a
familial determination that no longer has anything to do with the social
field actually invested by the libido. Of course there is always something
from the father or the mother that is taken up in the signifying
chain-daddy's mustache, the mother's raised arm-but it comes furtively to occupy a place among the collective agents. The terms of
Oedipus do not form a triangle, but exist shattered into all corners of the
social field-the mother on the instructor's knees, the father next to the
colonel. Group fantasy is plugged into and machined on the socius.
Being fucked by the socius, wanting to be fucked by the socius, does not
derive from the father and mother, even though the father and mother
have their roles there as subordinate agents of transmission or execution.
When the notion of group fantasy was elaborated in the perspective
of institutional analysis-in the works of the team at La Borde Clinic,
assembled around Jean Oury-the first task was to show how it differed
from individual fantasy. It became evident that group fantasy was
inseparable from the "symbolic" articulations that define a social field
insofar as it is real, whereas the individual fantasy fitted the whole of
this field over "imaginary" givens. If this first distinction is drawn out,
we see that the individual fantasy is itself plugged into the existing social
field, but apprehends it in the form of imaginary qualities that confer on
it a kind of transcendence or immortality under the shelter of which the
individual, the ego, plays out its pseudo destiny: what does it matter if I
die, says the general, since the Army is immortal? The imaginary
dimension of the individual fantasy has a decisive importance over the
death instinct, insofar as the immortality conferred on the existing social
order carried into the ego all the investments of repression, the
phenomena of identification, of "superegoization" and castration, all the
resignation-desires (becoming a general; acquiring low, middle, or high
rank), including the resignation to dying in the service of this order,
whereas the drive itself is projected onto the outside and turned against
the others (death to the foreigner, to those who are not of our own
ranks !). The revolutionary pole of group fantasy becomes visible, on the
Ill!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

contrary, in the power to experience institutions themselves as mortal,
to destroy them or change them according to the articulations of desire
and the social field, by making the death instinct into a veritable
institutional creativity. For that is precisely the criterion-at least the
formal criterion-that distinguishes the revolutionary institution from
the enormous inertia which the law communicates to institutions in an
established order. As Nietzsche says; churches, armies, States-which
of all these dogs wants to die?
There results a third difference between group fantasy and the
so-called individual fantasy. The latter has as subject the ego, insofar as
it is determined by the legal and legalized institutions in which it
"imagines itself," to the point where, even in its perversions, the ego
conforms to the exclusive use of the disjunctions imposed by the law
(for example, Oedipal homosexuality). But group fantasy no longer has
anything but the drives themselves as subject, and the desiring-machines
formed by them with the revolutionary institutions. The group fantasy
includes the disjunctions, in the sense that each subject, discharged of
his personal identity but not of his singularities, enters into relations
with others following the communication proper to partial objects:
everyone passes into the body of the other on the body without organs.
In this respect Klossowski has convincingly shown the inverse
relationship that pulls the fantasy in two directions, as the economic law
establishes perversion in the "psychic exchanges," or as the psychic
exchanges on the contrary promote a subversion of the law: "Anachronistic, relative to the institutional level of gregariousness, the singular
state can, according to its more or less forceful intensity, bring about a
deactualization of the institution itself and denounce it in turn as
anachronistic."l1 The two kinds of fantasy, or rather the two regimes,
are therefore distinguished according to whether the social production
of "goods" imposes its rule on desire through the intermediary of an ego
whose fictional unity is guaranteed by the goods themselves, or whether
the desiring-production of affects imposes its rule on institutions whose
elements are no longer anything but drives. If we must still speak of
utopia in this sense, a la Fourier, it is most assuredly not as an ideal
model, but as revolutionary action and passion. In his recent works
Klossowski indicates to us the only means of bypassing the sterile
parallelism where we flounder between Freud and Marx: by discovering
how social production and relations of production are an institution of
desire, and how affects or drives form part of the infrastructure itself.
For they are part of it, they are present there in every way while creating
within the economic forms their own repression, as well as the means
for breaking this repression.·
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY 1 83

The development of distinctions between group and individual
fantasy shows sufficiently well, at last, that there is no individual
fantasy. Instead there are two types of groups, subject-groups and
subjugated groups, with Oedipus and castration forming the imaginary
structure under which members of the subjugated groups are induced to
live or fantasize individually their membership in the group. It must still
be said that the two types of groups are perpetually shifting, a
subject-group always being threatened with subjugation, a subjugated
group capable in certain cases of being forced to take on a revolutionary
role. It is therefore all the more disturbing to see to what extent Freudian
analysis retains from the fantasy only its lines of exclusive disjunction,
and flattens it into its individual or pseudoindividual dimensions, which
by their very nature refer the fantasy to subjugated groups, rather than
carrying out the opposite operation and disengaging in the fantasy the
underlying element of a revolutionary group potential. When we learn
that the instructor, the teacher, is daddy, and the colonel too, and also
the mother-when all the agents of social production and antiproduction
are in this way reduced to the figures of familial reproduction-we can
understand why the panicked libido no longer risks abandoning Oedipus,
and internalizes it. The libido internalizes it in the form of a castrating
duality between the subject of the statement (['enonce) and the subject
of the enunciation, as is characteristic of the pseudoindividual fantasy
("I, as a man, understand you, but as judge, as boss, as colonel or
general, that is to say as the father, I condemn you"). But this duality is
artificial, derived, and supposes a direct relationship proceeding from
the statement to the collective agents of enunciation in the group
fantasy.
Institutional analysis tries to trace its difficult path between the
repressive asylum and the legalistic hospital on the one hand, and
contractual psychoanalysis on the other. From the outset, the psychoanalytic relationship modeled itself after the contractual relationship of the
most traditional bourgeois medicine: the feigned exclusion of a third
party; the hypocritical role of money, to which psychoanalysis brought
farcical new justifications; the pretended time limitation that contradicts
itself by reproducing a debt to infinity, by feeding an inexhaustible
transference, and by always nursing new "conflicts." We are astonished
when we hear that a terminated analysis is by that very fact a failure,
even if this proposition is accompanied by the analyst's little smile. We
are surprised when we hear a knowledgeable analyst mention, in
passing, that one of his "patients" still dreams of being invited to eat or
have a drink at his place, after several years of analysis, as if this were

64

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

not a tiny sign of the abject dependence to which analysis reduced the
patients. How can we ward off, in the practice of the cure, this abject
desire that makes us bend our knees, lays us on the couch, and makes us
remain there?
Let us consider a third and final text of Freud's, "Analysis
Terminable and Interminable" (l937).J2 We prefer not to follow a recent
suggestion that it would be better to translate "Analysis Finite, Analysis
Infinite," since finite-infinite is almost mathematics or logic, whereas the
problem is particularly practical and concrete. Does this story have an
ending? Can an analysis be ended, can the process of analysis be
terminated, yes or no? Can it be completed, or is it condemned to a
constant self-perpetuation? As Freud says, can a currently given
"conflict" be exhausted, can the one who is sick be forewarned against
ulterior conflicts, can even new conflicts be awakened for a preventive
purpose? A great beauty animates this text of Freud's: an undefined
something that is hopeless, disenchanted, tired, and at the same time a
serenity, a certitude in the finished work. It is Freud's testament. He is
going to die, and knows it. He knows something is wrong in psychoanalysis. The cure tends to be more and more interminable! He knows that
soon he will no longer be there to see how things are going. So he takes
stock of the obstacles to treatment, with the serenity of the person who
senses what a treasure his work is, but senses too the poisons that have
already filtered in. Everything would be fine if the economic problem of
desire were merely quantitative; it would be a matter of reinforcing the
ego against the drives. The celebrated strong, mature ego, the "contract," the "pact" between the analyst and an ego that is normal in spite
of everything ... Except that there are qualitative factors in the
desiring-economy that indeed present an obstacle to treatment, and
Freud reproaches himself for not having taken them sufficiently into
account.
The first of these factors is the "rock" of castration, the rock with
two nonsymmetrical faces, which creates in us an incurable alveous, and
against which the analyst stumbles. The second is a qualitative aptitude
for conflict, which means that the quantity of libido does not branch into
two variable forces corresponding to heterosexuality and homosexuality, but creates in most people irreducible oppositions between the two
forces. Finally, the third factor-of such economic importance that it
outweighs the dynamic and topical considerations-concerns a type of
resistance that is nonlocalizable. It would seem that certain subjects
have such a viscous libido, or on the contrary such a liquid one, that
nothing succeeds in "taking hold." It would be a mistake to see in this

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

IS5

remark of Freud's nothing more than an observation of detail, a mere
anecdote. In fact, it concerns what is most essential in the phenomenon
of desire: the qualitative flows of the libido.
In some fine pages, Andre Green recently took up the question
again by making up a list of three types of "sessions," the first two of
which comprise counterindications, the third alone constituting the ideal
session in analysis. According to Type I (viscosity, resistance of a
hysterical form), "the session is dominated by a heavy, weighty, boggy
climate. The silences are leaden, the discourse is dominated by the
events of the day, ... is uniform, it is a descriptive narration where no
reference to the past is disclosable, it unfolds along a continuous thread,
unable to allow itself any break.... Dreams are narrated, ... the
enigma of dream is taken up in the secondary elaboration that makes
dream as narration and as event take precedence over dream as a
working over of thoughts .... Sticky transference .... "13 According to
Type II (liquidity, resistance of an obsessional form), "here the session
is dominated by an extreme mobility of representations of all sorts, ...
the language is unfettered, rapid, almost torrential, ... everything enters here, ... the patient could just as easily say the opposite of
everything he is uttering without changing anything fundamental to the
analytic situation.... All of this is without consequence, since the
analysis slides off the couch like water off a duck's back. The unconscious does not cause anything to 'stick,' there is no anchoring in the
transference. Here the transference is volatile...." Only the third type
remains, whose characteristics define a good analysis. The patient
"speaks in order to constitute the process of a chain of signifiers. The
meaning is not attached to the signified to which each of the enunciated
signifiers refers, but is constituted by process, suture, the concatenation
of bound elements.... Every interpretation furnished by [the patient]
can offer itself as an already-signified awaiting its meaning. For this
reason interpretation is always retrospective, as the perceived meaning.
So that was what this meant. . . ."
What is serious is that Freud never questions the process of the
cure. Of course it is too late for him, but is it too late for those who come
after him? He interprets these things as obstacles to the cure, and not as
shortcomings of the treatment itself, or as effects or countereffects of
his method. For castration as an analyzable state-or nonanalyzable; the
ultimate rock-is the effect of castration as a psychoanalytic act. And
Oedipal homosexuality-the qualitative aptitude for conflict-is rather
the effect of oedipalization, which the treatment does not invent, but
precipitates and accentuates within the artificial conditions of its exercise (transference). And inversely, when flows of libido resist therapeu66

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

tic practice, rather than being a resistance of the ego, this is the intense
outcry of all of desiring-production. We already knew that the pervert
resisted oedipalization: why should he surrender, since he has invented
for himself other territorialities, more artificial still and more lunar than
that of Oedipus? We knew the schizo was not oedipalizable, because he
is beyond territoriality, because he has carried his flows right into the
desert. But what remains, once we learn that "resistances" of an
hysterical or an obsessional form bear witness to the anoedipal quality
of the flows of desire on the very terrain of Oedipus? That is precisely
what qualitative economy shows: flows ooze, they traverse the triangle,
breaking apart its vertices. The Oedipal wad does not absorb these
flows, any more than it could seal off a jar of jam or plug a dike. Against
the walls of the triangle, toward the outside, flows exert the irresistible
pressure of lava or the invincible oozing of water.
What are the most favorable conditions for the cure, it is asked? A
flow that lets itself be plugged by Oedipus; partial objects that let
themselves be subsumed under the category of a complete object, even
if absent-the phallus of castration; breaks-flows that let themselves be
projected onto a mythical space; polyvocal chains that let themselves be
biunivocalized, linearized, suspended from a signifier; an unconscious
that lets itself be expressed; connective syntheses that let themselves be
taken in a global and specific use; disjunctive syntheses that let
themselves be taken in an exclusive, restrictive use; conjunctive syntheses that let themselves be taken in a personal and segregative use. For
what is the meaning of "so that was what this meant"? The crushing of
the "so" onto Oedipus and castration. The sigh of relief: you see, the
colonel, the instructor, the teacher, the boss, all of this meant that:
Oedipus and castration, "all history in a new version."
We are not saying that Oedipus and castration do not amount to
anything. We are oedipalized, we are castrated; psychoanalysis didn't
invent these operations, to which it merely lends the new resources and
methods of its genius. But is this sufficient to silence the outcry of
desiring-production: We are all schizos! We are all perverts! Weare all
libidos that are too viscous and too fluid-and not by preference, but
wherever we have been carried by the deterritorialized flows. What
neurotic, provided he is somewhat serious, is not leaning against the
rock of schizophrenia, a rock in this case mobile, aerolitic? Who does
not haunt the perverse territorialities, beyond the kindergartens of
Oedipus? Who does not feel in the flows of his desire both the lava and
the water? And above all, what brings about our sickness? Schizophrenia itself, as a process? Or is it brought about by the frantic neuroticization to which we have been delivered, and for which psychoanalysis has
PSYCHOANALYSIS

Ar~D FAMILIALlSM,

THE HOLY FAMILY

167

invented new means-Oedipus and castration? Is it schizophrenia as a
process that makes us sick, or is it the self-perpetuation of the process in
the void-a horrible exasperation (the production of the schizophrenicas-entity)? Or is it the confusion of the process with a goal (the
production of the pervert-artifice), or the premature interruption of the
process (the production of the neurotic analysis)? We are forcibly
confronted with Oedipus and castration, we are reduced to them: either
so as to measure us against that cross, or to establish that we cannot
measure up to it. But in any case the harm has been done, the treatment
has chosen the path of oedipalization, all cluttered with refuse, instead
of the schizophrenization that must cure us of the cure.

3

I The Connective Synthesis
of Production

Given the syntheses of the unconscious, the practical
problem is that of their use, legitimate or not, and of the conditions that
define a use of synthesis as legitimate or not. Take the example of
homosexuality-though it is something more than an example. We noted
how, in Proust, the famous pages of Sodom and Gomorrah (Cities of the
Plain) interlaced two openly contradictory themes; the fundamental
guilt of the "accursed races" and the radical innocence of flowers. The
diagnosis of Oedipal homosexuality with a mother fixation, of a dominant depressive nature and a sadomasochistic guilt, was quickly applied
to Proust. In a more general way still, some critics were too quick in
discovering contradictions, either in order to declare them irreducible,
or to resolve them, or to show that they were merely apparent, according
to preference. In truth, there are never contradictions, apparent or real,
but only degrees of humor. And inasmuch as reading itself has its
degrees of humor, from black to white, with which it evaluates the
coexisting degrees of what it reads, the sole problem is always one of
allocation on a scale of intensities that assigns the position and use of
each thing, each being, or each scene: there is this and then that, and
let's make do with it, too bad if it doesn't suit us.
In this regard it is possible that Charlus's coarse admonition is
prophetic: "A lot we care about our old grandmother, you little shit!"
For what does in fact take place in In Search of Lost Time, one and the
same story with infinite variations? It is clear that the narrator sees
nothing, hears nothing, and that he is a body without organs, or like a
spider poised in its web, observing nothing, but responding to the
slightest sign, to the slightest vibration by springing on its prey.
Everything begins with nebulae, statistical wholes whose outlines are

"I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

blurred, molar or collective formations comprising singularities distributed haphazardly (a living room, a group of girls, a landscape). Then,
within these nebulae or these collectives, "sides" take shape, series are
arranged, persons figure in these series, under strange laws of lack,
absence, asymmetry, exclusion, noncommunication, vice, and guilt.
Next, everything becomes blurred again, everything comes apart, but
this time in a molecular and pure multiplicity, where the partial objects,
the "boxes," the "vessels" all have their positive determinations, and
enter into aberrant communication following a transversal that runs
through the whole work; an immense flow that each partial object
produces and cuts again, reproduces and cuts at the same time. More
than vice, says Proust, it is madness and its innocence that disturb us. If
schizophrenia is the universal, the great artist is indeed the one who
scales the schizophrenic wall and reaches the land of the unknown,
where he no longer belongs to any time, any milieu, any school.
Such is the case in an illustrative passage, the first kiss given
Albertine. Albertine's face is at first a nebula, barely extracted from the
collective of girls. Then her person disengages itself, through a series of
views that are like distinct personalities, with Albertine's face jumping
from one plane to another as the narrator's lips draw nearer her cheek.
At last, within the magnified proximity, everything falls apart like a face
drawn in sand, Albertine's face shatters into molecular partial objects,
while those on the narrator's face rejoin the body without organs, eyes
closed, nosrils pinched shut, mouth filled. What is more, their entire love
tells the same story. From the statistical nebula, from the molar entirety
of men-women loves, there emerge the two accursed and guilty series
that bear witness to the same castration with two nonsuperimposable
sides, the Sodom series and the Gomorrah series, each one excluding the
other.
This is not all, however, since the vegetal theme-the innocence of
flowers-brings us yet another message and another code: everyone is
bisexual, everyone has two sexes, but partitioned, noncommunicating;
the man is merely the one in whom the male part, and the woman the one
in whom the female part, dominates statistically. So that at the level of
elementary combinations, at least two men and two women must be
made to intervene to constitute the multiplicity in which transverse
communications are established-connections of partial objects and
flows':': the male part of a man can communicate with the female part of
a woman, but also with the male part of a woman, or with the female part
of another man, or yet again with the male part of the other man, etc.
Here all guilt ceases, for it cannot cling to such flowers as these. In
contrast to the alternative of the "either/or" exclusions, there is the
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

I

Gil

"either ... or ... or" of the combinations and permutations where the
differences amount to the same without ceasing to be differences.
We are statistically or molarly heterosexual, but personally homosexual, without knowing it or being fully aware of it, and finally we are
transsexual in an elemental, molecular sense. That is why Proust, the
first to deny all oedipalizing interpretations of his own interpretations,
contrasts two kinds of homosexuality, or rather two regions only one of
which is Oedipal, exclusive, and depressive, the other being anoedipal
schizoid, included, and inclusive: "For some, doubtless those whose
childhoods were timid, the material kind of pleasure they take does not
matter, so long as they can relate it to a male countenance. While others,
whose sensuality is doubtless more violent, give their material pleasure
certain imperious localizations. The second group would shock most
people by their avowals. They live perhaps less exclusively under
Saturn's satellite, for in their case women are not entirely excluded ....
But those in the second group seek out women who prefer women,
women who suggest young men ... indeed, they can take, with such
women, the same pleasure as with a man .... For in their relations with
women, they play-for the woman who prefers women-the role of
another womall, and at the same time a woman offers them approximately what they find in a mall. "15
The opposition here is between two uses of the connective syntheses: a global and specific use, and a partial and nonspecific use. In the
first, desire at the same time receives a fixed subject, an ego specified
according to a given sex, and complete objects defined as global persons.
The complexity and the foundations of such an operation appear more
distinctly if we consider the mutual reactions between the different
syntheses of the unconscious following a given use. It is first of all the
synthesis of recording that in effect situates, on its surface of inscription
within the conditions of Oedipus, a definable and differentiable ego in
relation to parental images serving as co-ordinates (mother, father).
There we have a triangulation that implies in its essence a constituent
prohibition, and that conditions the differentiation between persons:
prohibition of incest with the mother, prohibition against taking the
father's place. But a strange sort of reasoning leads one to conclude that,
since it is forbidden, that very thing was desired. In reality, global
persons-even the very form of persons-do not exist prior to the
prohibitions that weigh on them and constitute them, any more than they
exist prior to the triangulation into which they enter: desire receives its
first complete objects and is forbidden them at one and the same time.
Therefore it is indeed the same Oedipal operation that lays the foundations for the possibility of its own "resolution," by way of a differentia70

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

tion of persons in conformity with the prohibition, as well as the
possibility for its own failure or stagnation, by falling into the undifferentiated as the reverse side of the differentiation created by the
prohibitions (incest by identification with the father, homosexuality by
identification with the mother). The personal material of transgression
does not exist prior to the prohibition, any more than does the form of
persons.
We can therefore see the property the prohibition has of displacing
itself, since from the start it displaces desire. It displaces itself in the
sense that the Oedipal inscription does not force its way into the
synthesis of recording without reacting on the synthesis of production,
and profoundly changing the connections of this synthesis by introducing new global persons. These new images of persons are the sister and
the spouse, after the father and the mother. It has often been remarked
in fact that the prohibition existed in two forms, the one negative, having
to do above all with the mother and imposing differentiation, the other
positive, concerning the sister and requiring exchange: I have a moral
obligation to take as wife someone other than my sister, and an
obligation to keep my sister for someone else; I must give up my sister to
a brother-in-law, receive my wife from a Iather-in-law.!" And although
new stases or relapses are produced at this level, such as new forms of
incest and homosexuality, it is certain that the Oedipal triangle would
have no way of transmitting and reproducing itself without this second
step: the first step elaborates the form of the triangle, but it is only the
second step that ensures the transmission of this figure. I take a woman
other than my sister in order to constitute the differentiated base of a
new triangle whose inverted vertex will be my child-which is called
surmounting Oedipus, but reproducing it as well, transmitting it rather
than dying all alone, incestuous, homosexual, and a zombie.
Thus the parental or familial use of the synthesis of recording
extends into a conjugal use, or an alliance use, of the connective
syntheses of production: a regime for the pairing of people replaces the
connection of partial objects. On the whole, the connections of organmachines suited to desiring-production give way to a pairing of people
under the rules of familial reproduction. Partial objects now seem to be
taken from people, rather than from the nonpersonal flows that pass
from one person to another. The reason is that persons are derived from
abstract quantities, instead of from flows. Instead of a connective
appropriation, partial objects become the possessions of a person and,
when required, the property of another person. Just as he draws upon
centuries of scholastic reflection in defining God as the principle of the
disjunctive syllogism, Kant draws upon centuries of Roman juridical
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

111

reflection when he defines marriage as the tie that makes a person the
owner of the sexual organs of another person."? One need only consult a
religious manual of sexual casuistry to see with what restrictions the
organ-desiring machine connections remain tolerated within the regime
for the pairing of people, which legally determines what may be
appropriated from the body of the wife.
Clearer still, the difference in regime becomes apparent each time a
society permits an infantile stage of sexual promiscuity to subsist, where
everything is permitted until the age when the young man in turn submits
to the principle of pairing that regulates the social production of
children. It is true that the connections of desiring-production were
found to comply with a binary rule; and we have even seen that a third
term intervened in this binarity, the body without organs that reinjects
producing into the product, extends the connections of machines, and
serves as a surface of recording. But here no biunivocal process is in
fact produced that would fit production into the mold of representatives;
no triangulation appears at this level that would refer the objects of
desire to global persons, or desire to a specific subject. The only subject
is desire itself on the body without organs, inasmuch as it machines
partial objects and flows, selecting and cutting the one with the other,
passing from one body to another, following connections and appropriations that each time destroy the factitious unity of a possessive or
proprietary ego (anoedipal sexuality).
The triangle takes form in the parental use, and reproduces itself in
the conjugal use. We do not yet know what forces bring about this
triangulation that interferes with the recording of desire in order to
transform all its productive connections. But we are able at least to
follow, abstractly, the manner in which these forces proceed. We are
told that partial objects are caught up in an intuition of precocious
totality, just as the ego is caught up in an intuition of unity that precedes
its fulfillment. (Even in Melanie Klein, the schizoid partial object is
related to a whole that prepares for the advent of the complete object in
the depressive phase.) It is clear that such a totality-unity is posited only
in terms of a certain mode of absence, as that which partial objects and
subjects of desire "lack." Consequently, everything is played out from
the start: everywhere we encounter the analytic process that consists in
extrapolating a transcendent and common something, but that is a
common-universal for the sole purpose of introducing lack into desire,
in situating and specifying persons and an ego under one aspect or
another of its absence, and imposing an exclusive direction on the
disjunction of the sexes.
Such is the case in Freud: for Oedipus, for castration, for the
72

1

ANTI-OEDIPUS

second phase of the fantasy "A Child Is Being Beaten," or again for the
famous latency period where the analytical mystification culminates.
This common, transcendent, absent something will be called phallus or
law, in order to designate "the" signifier that distributes the effects of
meaning throughout the chain and introduces exclusions there (whence
the oedipalizing interpretations of Lacanism). This signifier acts as the
formal cause of the triangulation-that is to say, makes possible both the
form of the triangle and its reproduction: Oedipus has as its formula
3+ I, the One of the transcendent phallus without which the terms
considered would not take the form of a triangle. * It is as if the so-called
signifying chain, made up of elements that are themselves
nonsignifying-of polyvocal writing and detachable fragments-were
the object of a special treatment, a crushing operation that extracted a
detached object from the chain, a despotic signifier from whose law the
entire chain seems consequently to be suspended, each link triangulated.
There we have a curious paralogism implying a transcendent use of the
syntheses of the unconscious: we pass from detachable partial objects to
the detached complete object, from which global persons derive by an
assigning of lack. For example, in the capitalist code and its trinitary
expression, money as detachable chain is converted into capital as
detached object, which exists only in the fetishist view of stocks and
lacks.
The same is true of the Oedipal code: the libido as energy of
selection and detachment is converted into the phallus as detached
object, the latter existing only in the transcendent form of stock and lack
(something common and absent that is just as lacking in men as in
women). It is this conversion that makes the whole of sexuality shift into
the Oedipal framework: this projection of all the breaks-flows onto the
same mythical locale, and all the non signifying signs into the same major
signifier. "The effective triangulation makes it possible to assign sexuality to one of the sexes. The partial objects have lost nothing of their
virulence and efficacy . Yet the reference to the penis gives its full
meaning to castration. Through it, all the external experiences linked to
deprivation, to frustration, to the lack of partial objects take on meaning
after the fact. All previous history is recast in a new version in the light
of castration."?"
That is indeed what disturbs us, this recasting of history and this
"lack" attributed to partial objects. And how could partial objects not
have lost their virulence and efficacy, once they had been introduced
*M. C. and Edmond Ortigues, Oedipe africain (Ch. 3, reference note 22), p. 83: "In order that the
necessary conditions for the existence of a structure in the familial institution or in the Oedipus
complex be fulfilled, at least four terms are required-that is, one term more than is naturally
necessary,"

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

173

into a use of synthesis that remains fundamentally illegitimate with
regard to them? We do not deny that there is an Oedipal sexuality, an
Oedipal heterosexuality and homosexuality, an Oedipal castration, as
well as complete objects, global images, and specific egos. We deny that
these are productions of the unconscious. What is more, castration and
oedipalization beget a basic illusion that makes us believe that real
desiring-production is answerable to higher formations that integrate it,
subject it to transcendent laws, and make it serve a higher social and
cultural production; there then appears a kind of "unsticking " of the
social field with regard to the production of desire, in whose name all
resignations are justified in advance. Psychoanalysis, at the most
concrete level of therapy, reinforces this apparent movement with its
combined forces. Psychoanalysis itself ensures this conversion of the
unconscious. In what it calls the pre-oedipal, it sees a stage that must be
surmounted in the direction of an evolutive integration (toward the
depressive position under the reign of the complete object), or organized
in the direction of a structural integration (toward the position of a
despotic signifier, under the reign of the phallus). The aptitude for
conflict of which Freud spoke, the qualitative opposition between
homosexuality and heterosexuality, is in fact a consequence of Oedipus:
far from being an obstacle to treatment encountered from without, it is a
product of oedipalization, and a countereffect of the treatment that
reinforces it.
In reality the problem has nothing to do with pre-oedipal stages that
would still revolve around an Oedipal axis, but rather with the existence
and the nature of an anoedipal sexuality, an anoedipal heterosexuality
and homosexuality, an anoedipal castration: the breaks-flows of
desiring-production do not let themselves be projected onto a mythical
locale; the signs of desire do not let themselves be extrapolated from a
signifier; transsexuality does not let any qualitative opposition between
a local and nonspecific heterosexuality and a local and nonspecific
homosexuality arise. Everywhere, in this reversion, the innocence of
flowers instead of the guilt of conversion. But rather than ensuring, or
tending to ensure, the reversion of the entire unconscious according to
the anoedipal form and within the anoedipal content of desiringproduction, analytic theory and practice never cease to promote the
conversion of the unconscious to Oedipus, form and content. (We shall
see in effect what psychoanalysis calls "resolving" Oedipus.) This
conversion is therefore promoted by psychoanalysis first of all by
making a global and specific use of the connective syntheses. This use
can be defined as transcendent, and implies a first paralogism in the
psychoanalytic process. For a simple reason, we again make use of

741

ANTI·OEDIPUS

Kantian terminology. In what he termed the critical revolution, Kant
intended to discover criteria immanent to understanding so as to
distinguish the legitimate and the illegitimate uses of the syntheses of
consciousness. In the name of transcendental philosophy (immanence of
criteria), he therefore denounced the transcendent use of syntheses such
as appeared in metaphysics. In like fashion we are compelled to say that
psychoanalysis has its metaphysics-its name is Oedipus. And that a
revolution-this time materialist-can proceed only by way of a critique
of Oedipus, by denouncing the illegitimate use of the syntheses of the
unconscious as found in Oedipal psychoanalysis, so as to rediscover a
transcendental unconscious defined by the immanence of its criteria,
and a corresponding practice that we shall call schizoanalysis.
4

I The Disjunctive Synthesis
of Recording

When Oedipus slips into the disjunctive syntheses of
desiring-recording, it imposes the ideal of a certain restrictive or
exclusive use on them that becomes identical with the form of triangulation: being daddy, mommy, or child. This is the reign of the "either/or"
in the differentiating function of the prohibition of incest: here is where
mommy begins, there daddy, and there you are-stay in your place.
Oedipus's misfortune is indeed that it no longer knows who begins
where, nor who is who. And "being parent or child" is also accompanied
by two other differentiations on the other sides of the triangle; "being
man or woman," "being dead or alive." Oedipus must not know whether
it is alive or dead, man or woman, any more than it knows whether it is
parent or child. Commit incest and you'll be a zombie and a hermaphrodite. In this sense, indeed, the three major neuroses that are termed
familial seem to correspond to Oedipal lapses in the differentiating
function or in the disjunctive synthesis: the phobic person can no longer
be sure whether he is parent or child; the obsessed person, whether he is
dead or alive; the hysterical person, whether he is man or woman.'? In
short, the familial triangulation represents the minimum condition under
which an "ego" takes on the co-ordinates that differentiate it at one and
the same time with regard to generation, sex, and vital state. And the
religious triangulation confirms this result in another mode: thus in the
trinity, the obliteration of the feminine image in favor of a phallic
symbol demonstrates how the triangle displaces itself toward its own
cause and attempts to integrate it. This time it is a matter of the
maximum conditions under which persons are differentiated. Hence the
importance of the Kantian definition that posits God as the a priori
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALISM THE HOLY FAMILY

/75

principle of the disjunctive syllogism, so that all things derive from it by
a restriction of a larger reality (omnitudo realitatis); Kant's humor
makes God into the master of a syllogism.
The action characteristic of Oedipal recording is the introduction of
an exclusive, restrictive, and negative use of the disjunctive synthesis.
We are so molded by Oedipus that we find it hard to imagine another
use, and even the three familial neuroses do not escape this use,
although they suffer from no longer being capable of applying it.
Everywhere in psychoanalysis, in Freud, we have seen this taste for
exclusive disjunctions assert itself. It becomes nevertheless apparent
that schizophrenia teaches us a singular extra-Oedipal lesson, and
reveals to us an unknown force of the disjunctive synthesis, an
immanent use that would no longer be exclusive or restrictive, but fully
affirmative, nonrestrictive, inclusive. A disjunction that remains disjunctive, and that still affirms the disjoined terms, that affirms them throughout their entire distance, without restricting one by the other or excluding
the other from the one, is perhaps the greatest paradox. "Either ... or
... or," instead of "either/or."
The schizophrenic is not man and woman. He is man or woman, but
he belongs precisely to both sides, man on the side of men, woman on
the side of women. Likable Jayet (Albert Desire, matriculation number
54161001) intones the litany of the parallel series of the masculine and
the feminine, and places himself on both sides: "Mat Albert 5416 ricu-le
sultan romain vesin," "Mat Desire 1001 ricu-la sultane romaine vesine"
("Mat Albert 5416 ricu-the insane Roman sultan," Mat Desire 1001
ricu-the insane Roman sultaness ").20 The schizophrenic is dead or alive,
not both at once, but each of the two as the terminal point of a distance
over which he glides. He is child or parent, not both, but the one at the
end of the other, like the two ends of a stick in a nondecomposable
space. This is the meaning of the disjunctions where Beckett records his
characters and the events that befall them: everything divides, but into
itself. Even the distances are positive, at the same time as the included
disjunctions.
It would be a total misunderstanding of this order of thought if we
concluded that the schizophrenic substituted vague syntheses of identification of contradictory elements for disjunctions, like the last of the
Hegelian philosophers. He does not substitute syntheses of contradictory elements for disjunctive syntheses; rather, for the exclusive and
restrictive use of the disjunctive synthesis, he substitutes an affirmative
use. He is and remains in disjunction: he does not abolish disjunction by
identifying the contradictory elements by means of elaboration; instead,
he affirms it through a continuous overflight spanning an indivisible
16

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

distance. He is not simply bisexual, or between the two, or intersexual.
He is transsexual. He is trans-alivedead, trans-parentchild. He does not
reduce two contraries to an identity of the same; he affirms their
distance as that which relates the two as different. He does not confine
himself inside contradictions; on the contrary, he opens out and, like a
spore case inflated with spores, releases them as so many singularities
that he had improperly shut off, some of which he intended to exclude
while retaining others, but which now become points-signs (points~
signes),21 all affirmed by their new distance. The disjunction, being now
inclusive, does not closet itself inside its own terms. On the contrary it is
nonrestrictive. "I was then no longer this closed box to which lowed
being so well preserved, but a partition came crashing down"-an event
that will liberate a space where Molloy and Moran no longer designate
persons, but singularities flocking from all sides, evanescent agents of
production. This is free disjunction; the differential positions persist in
their entirety, they even take on a free quality, but they are all inhabited
by a faceless and transpositional subject. Schreber is man and woman,
parent and child, dead and alive: which is to say, he is situated wherever
there is a singularity, in all the series and in all the branches marked by a
singular point, because he is himself this distance that transforms him
into a woman, and at its terminal point he is already the mother of a new
humanity and can finally die.
That is why the schizophrenic God has so little to do with the God
of religion, even though they are related to the same syllogism. In Le
Baphomet Klossowski contrasts God as the master of the exclusions
and restrictions that derive from the disjunctive syllogism, with an
antichrist who is the prince of modifications, determining instead the
passage of a subject through all possible predicates. I am God I am not
God, I am God I am Man: it is not a matter of a synthesis that would go
beyond the negative disjunctions of the derived reality, in an original
reality of Man-God, but rather of an inclusive disjunction that carries
out the synthesis itself in drifting from one term to another and
following the distance between terms. Nothing is primal. It is like the
famous conclusion to Molloy: "It is midnight. The rain is beating on the
windows. It was not midnight. It was not raining."22 Nijinsky wrote: "I
am God I was not God I am a clown of God; I am Apis. I am an
Egyptian. I am a red Indian. I am a Negro. I am a Chinaman. I am a
Japanese. I am a foreigner, a stranger. I am a sea bird. I am a land bird. I
am the tree of Tolstoy. I am the roots of Tolstoy.... I am husband and
wife in one. I love my wife. I love my husband.">"
What counts is not parental designations, nor racial or divine
designations, but merely the use made of them. No problem of meaning,
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

I

77

but only of usage. Nothing original or derived, but a generalized drift. It
would seem that the schizo liberates a raw genealogical material,
nonrestrictive, where he can situate himself, record himself, and take his
bearings in all the branches at once, on all sides. He explodes the
Oedipal genealogy. Through graduated relationships he performs absolute overflights spanning indivisible distances. The genealogist-madman
lays out a disjunctive network on the body without organs. And God,
who designates none other than the energy of recording, can be the
greatest enemy in the paranoiac inscription, but also the greatest friend
in the miraculating inscription. In any case, the question of a being
superior to man and to nature does not arise here at all. Everything is on
the body without organs, both what is inscribed and the energy that
inscribes it. On the unengendered body, the nondecomposable distances
are necessarily surveyed, while the disjoined terms are all affirmed. I am
the letter and the pen and the paper. It was in this fashion that Nijinsky
kept his diary: yes, I was my father and I was my son.
The disjunctive synthesis of recording therefore leads us to the
same result as the connective synthesis: it too is capable of two uses, the
one immanent, the other transcendent. And here again, why does
psychoanalysis reinforce the transcendent use that introduces exclusions and restrictions everywhere in the disjunctive network, and that
makes the unconscious swing over into Oedipus? And why is oedipalization precisely that? It is because the exclusive relation introduced by
Oedipus comes into play not only between the various disjunctions
conceived as differentiations, but between the whole of the differentiations that it imposes and an undifferentiated (un indifferencie) that it
presupposes. Oedipus informs us: if you don't follow the lines of
differentiation daddy-mommy-me, and the exclusive alternatives that
delineate them, you will fall into the black night of the undifferentiated.
It should be made clear that the exclusive disjunctions are not at all the
same as the inclusive disjunctions; neither God nor the parental
designations play the same role in the two. In exclusive disjunctions,
parental appellations no longer designate intensive states through which
the subject passes on the body without organs and in the unconscious
that remains an orphan (yes, I was ... ); rather, they designate global
persons who do not exist prior to the prohibitions that found them, and
they differentiate among these global persons and in relation to the ego.
So that the transgression of the prohibition becomes correlatively a
confusion of persons, where the ego identifies with the global persons,
with the loss of differentiating rules or differential functions.
But we should stress the fact that Oedipus creates both the
differentiations that it orders and the undifferentiated with which it
78 t

ANTI-OEDIPUS

threatens us. With the same movement the Oedipus complex inserts
desire into triangulation, and prohibits desire from satisfying itself with
the terms of the triangulation. It forces desire to take as its object the
differentiated parental persons, and, brandishing the threats of the
undifferentiated, prohibits the correlative ego from satisfying its desires
with these persons, in the name of the same requirements of differentiation. But it is this undifferentiated that Oedipus creates as the reverse of
the differentiations that it creates. Oedipus says to us: either you will
internalize the differential functions that rule over the exclusive disjunctions, and thereby "resolve" Oedipus, or you will fall into the neurotic
night of imaginary identifications. Either you will follow the lines of the
triangle-lines that structure and differentiate the three terms-or you
will always bring one term into playas if it were one too many in relation
to the other two, and you will reproduce in every sense the dual relations
of identification in the undifferentiated. But there is Oedipus on either
side. And everybody knows what psychoanalysis means by resolving
Oedipus: internalizing it so as to better rediscover it on the outside, in
social authority, where it will be made to proliferate and be passed on to
the children. 'The child becomes a man only by resolving the Oedipus
complex, whose resolution introduces him into society, where he finds,
within the figure of Authority, the obligation to relive it, this time with no
way out. Nor is it by any means certain that, between the impossible
return to that which precedes the _stage of culture and the growing
malaise that this stage provokes, a point of equilibrium can be found."24
Oedipus is like the labyrinth, you only get out by re-entering it-or by
making someone else enter it. Oedipus as either problem or solution is
the two ends of a ligature that cuts off all desiring-production. The
screws are tightened, nothing relating to production can make its way
through any longer, except for a far-distant murmur. The unconscious
has been crushed, triangulated, and confronted with a choice that is not
its own. With all of the exits now blocked, there is no longer any possible
use for the inclusive, nonrestrictive disjunctions. Parents have been
found for the (orphan) unconscious!
Double bind is the term used by Gregory Bateson to describe the
simultaneous transmission of two kinds of messages, one of which
contradicts the other, as for example the father who says to his son: go
ahead, criticize me, but strongly hints that all effective criticism-at
least a certain type of criticism-will be very unwelcome. Bateson sees
in this phenomenon a particularly schizophrenizing situation, which he
interprets as a "contrary" from the viewpoint of Russell's theory of
types.:" It seems to us that the double bind, the double impasse, is
instead a common situation, oedipalizing par excellence. And although it
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

I

79

would require formalization, the other type of non-sense spoken of by
Russell is brought to mind by the double-bind situation: an alternative,
an exclusive disjunction is defined in terms of a principle which,
however, constitutes its two terms or underlying wholes, and where the
principle itself enters into the alternative (a completely different case
from what happens when the disjunction is inclusive). Here we have the
second paralogism of psychoanalysis. In short, the "double bind" is none
other than the whole of Oedipus. It is in this sense that Oedipus should be
presented as a series, or an oscillation between two poles: the neurotic
identification, and the internalization that is said to be normative. On
either side is Oedipus, the double impasse. And if a schizo is produced
here as an entity, this occurs for the simple reason that there is no other
means of escaping this double path, where normality is no less blocked
than neurosis, and where the solution offers no more of a way out than
does the problem. Hence the schizo's withdrawal to the body without
organs.
It seems that Freud himself was acutely aware of Oedipus's
inseparability from a double impasse into which he was precipitating the
unconscious. Thus in the 1936 letter to Romain Rolland, Freud writes:
"Everything unfolds as if the essential were to go beyond the father, as
if going beyond the father were always forbidden." This becomes even
more clear when Freud elaborates the entire historico-mythical series: at
one end the Oedipal bond is established by the murderous identification,
at the other end it is reinforced by the restoration and internalization of
paternal authority ("revival of the old state of things at a new level").26
Between the two there is latency-the celebrated latency-which is
without doubt the greatest psychoanalytic mystification: this society of
"brothers" who forbid themselves the fruits of the crime, and spend all
the time necessary for internalizing. But we are warned: the society of
brothers is very dejected, unstable, and dangerous, it must prepare the
way for the rediscovery of an equivalent to parental authority, it must
cause us to pass over to the other pole. In accord with a suggestion of
Freud's, American society-the industrial society with anonymous
management and vanishing personal power, etC.-is presented to us as a
resurgence of the "society without the father." Not surprisingly, the
industrial society is burdened with the search for original modes for the
restoration of the equivalent-for example, the astonishing discovery by
Mitscherlich that the British Royal Family, after all, is not such a bad
thing.F"
It is therefore understood that we leave one pole of Oedipus only to
pass on to the other. No way of getting out, neurosis or normality. The
society of brothers rediscovers nothing of production and desiringIlll

I

ANTI· OEDIPUS

machines; on the contrary, it spreads the veil of latency. As to those who
refuse to be oedipalized in one form or another, at one end or the other
in the treatment, the psychoanalyst is there to call the asylum or the
police for help. The police on our side !-never did psychoanalysis better
display its taste for supporting the movement of social repression, and
for participating in it with enthusiasm. Let it not be thought that we are
alluding to the folkloric aspects of psychoanalysis. The fact that there
are some, around Lacan, who are developing another conception of
psychoanalysis, does not mean that we should take no notice of the
dominant tone in the most respected associations: consider Dr. Mendel
and the Drs. Stephane, the state of fury that is theirs, and their literally
police-like appeal at the thought that someone might claim to escape the
Oedipal dragnet. Oedipus is one of those things that becomes all the
more dangerous the less people believe in it; then the cops are there to
replace the high priests. The first profound example of an analysis of
double bind, in this sense, can be found in Marx's On the Jewish
Question: between the family and the State-the Oedipus of familial
authority and the Oedipus of social authority.
Oedipus is completely useless, except for tying off the unconscious
on both sides. We shall see in what sense Oedipus is strictly "undecidable" (indecidable), as the mathematicians would put it. We are extremely tired of those stories where one is said to be in good health because of
Oedipus, sick from Oedipus, and suffering from various illnesses under
the influence of Oedipus. It sometimes happens that an analyst becomes
fed up with this myth that is the bed and board of psychoanalysis, and
goes back to the sources: Freud never managed to escape the world of
the father, or of guilt. ... While offering the possibility of constructing a
logic of the relation to the father, he was the first to open the way for a
release from the father's hold on man. The possibility of living beyond
the father's law, beyond all law , is perhaps the most essential possibility
brought forth by Freudian psychoanalysis. But paradoxically, and
perhaps because of Freud, everything leads us to conclude that this
release, made possible by psychoanalysis, wiII be achieved, is already
being achieved, outside it. 28
We cannot, however, share either this pessimism or this optimism.
For there is much optimism in thinking psychoanalysis makes possible a
veritable solution to Oedipus: Oedipus is like God; the father is like
God; the problem is not resolved until we do away with both the problem
and the solution. It is not the purpose of schizoanalysis to resolve
Oedipus, it does not intend to resolve it better than Oedipal psychoanalysis does. Its aim is to de-oedipalize the unconscious in order to reach
the real problems. Schizoanalysis proposes to reach those regions of the
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

I

81

orphan unconscious-indeed "beyond all law"-where the problem of
Oedipus can no longer even be raised. By the same token, we do not
share the pessimism that consists in thinking that this change, this
release, can be achieved only outside psychoanalysis. We believe, on the
contrary, in the possibility of an internal reversal that would make the
analytic machine into an indispensable part of the revolutionary machinery. What is more, the objective conditions for such a practice appear to
be already present.
Everything takes place as if Oedipus of itself had two poles: one
pole characterized by imaginary figures that lend themselves to a
process of identification, and a second pole characterized by symbolic
functions that lend themselves to a process of differentiation. But in any
case we are oedipalized: if we don't have Oedipus as a crisis, we have it
as a structure. Then the crisis is passed on to others, and the whole
movement starts all over again. Such is the Oedipal disjunction, the
swing of the pendulum, the exclusive inverse reasoning. That is why,
when we are invited to go beyond a simplistic conception of Oedipus
based on parental images, in order to define symbolic functions within a
structure, it is in vain that the traditional daddy-mommy are replaced by
a mother-function, a father-function; we don't quite see what there is to
gain by this, except for the founding of the universality of Oedipus
beyond the variability of images; the fusing of desire even more strongly
to law and prohibitions; and the pushing of the process of oedipalization
of the unconscious to its limits. Here Oedipus encounters its two
extremes, its minimum and its maximum, depending on whether it is
regarded as tending toward an undifferentiated value of its variable
images, or toward the force of differentiation of its symbolic functions.
"When one draws nearer to the material imagination, the differential
function diminishes, one tends toward equivalences; when one draws
nearer to the formative elements, the differential function increases, one
tends toward distinctive valences. "29 It will hardly come as a surprise to
learn that Oedipus as a structure is the Christian Trinity, whereas
Oedipus as a crisis is a familial trinity insufficiently structured by faith:
always the two poles in inverse proportion, Oedipus forever!*
How many interpretations of Lacanism, overtly or secretly pious as
the case may be, have in this manner invoked a structural Oedipus to
create and shut the double impasse. to lead us back to the question of the
"See J. M. Pohier, "La paternite de Dieu," L'Inconscient, no. 5 (January 1968). This article contains a
perfect formulation of Oedipus as double bind: "The psychic life of man unfolds in a sort of dialectical
tension between 1\\'0 ways of living the Oedipus complex: one that consists in living it, and the other
that consists in living according to the structures that might be called Oedipal. Experience also shows us
that these structures are not foreign to the most critical phase of this complex. For Freud, man is
definitively marked by this complex: it constitutes both his grandeur and his misery," etc. (pp. 57-58).

!112

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

father, to oedipalize even the schizo, and to show that a gap in the
Symbolic would bring us back to the Imaginary, and inversely that
imaginary drivel or confusions would lead us to the structure! As a
famous predecessor said to these creatures, you've already made this
into an old refrain. As for us, that is why we were unable to posit any
difference in nature, any border line, any limit at all between the
Imaginary and the Symbolic, or between Oedipus-as-crisis and
Oedipus-as-structure, or between the problem and its solution. It is
solely a question of a correlative double impasse, a swing of a pendulum
responsible for sweeping away the entire unconscious, and that continuously carries us from one pole to the other. A double pincer action that
crushes the unconscious caught in its exclusive disjunction.
The true difference in nature is not between the Symbolic and the
Imaginary, but between the real machinic (machinique) element, which
constitutes desiring-production, and the structural whole of the Imaginary and the Symbolic, which merely forms a myth and its variants. The
difference is not between two uses of Oedipus, but between the
anoedipal use of the inclusive, nonrestrictive disjunctions, and the
Oedipal use of exclusive disjunctions, whether this last use borrows
from the paths of the Imaginary or the values of the Symbolic. It would
also be necessary to heed Lacan's word of caution concerning the
Freudian myth of Oedipus, which "has no way of holding its own
indefinitely in the forms of society where the tragic sense is increasingly
lost ... : a myth cannot sustain itself when it supports no ritual, and
psychoanalysis is not the Oedipus ritual. "30 Even if we go back from the
images to the structure, from imaginary figures to symbolic functions,
from the father to the law, from the mother to the great Other, in truth
the question merely retreats. And if we try to envisage the time put into
this retreat, Lacan goes on to say, the sole foundation for the society of
brothers, for fraternity, is "segregation" (what does he mean here?).
In any case, it was inopportune to tighten the nuts and bolts where
Lacan had just loosened them; or to oedipalize the schizo where on the
contrary he had just schizophrenized even neurosis, injecting a schizophrenic flow capable of subverting the field of psychoanalysis. The
object (small 0) erupts at the heart of the structural equilibrium in the
manner of an infernal machine, the desiring-machine. Then a second
generation of disciples of Lacan supervenes, less and less sensitive to
the false problems of Oedipus. But if the first disciples were tempted to
reclose the Oedipus yoke, didn't they do so to the extent that Lacan
seemed to maintain a kind of projection of the signifying chains onto a
despotic signifier, lacking unto itself and reintroducing lack into the
series of desire on which it imposed an exclusive use? Was it possible to
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

183

denounce Oedipus-as-myth, and nevertheless maintain that the castration complex itself was not a myth but in fact something real? (Wasn't
this tantamount to taking up the cry of Aristotle: "We really must come
to a halt," in the face of this Freudian Ananke, this Rock?)

5

I The Conjunctive Synthesis

of Consumption-Consummation

In the third synthesis, the conjunctive synthesis of consumption, we have seen how the body without organs was in fact an egg,
crisscrossed with axes, banded with zones, localized with areas and
fields, measured off by gradients, traversed by potentials, marked by
thresholds. In this sense, we believe in a biochemistry of schizophrenia
(in conjunction with the biochemistry of drugs), that will be progressively more capable of determining the nature of this egg and the distribution
of field-gradient-threshold. It is a matter of relationships of intensities
through which the subject passes on the body without organs, a process
that engages him in becomings, rises and falls, migrations and displacements. R. D. Laing is entirely right in defining the schizophrenic process
as a voyage of initiation, a transcendental experience of the loss of the
Ego, which causes a subject to remark: "I had existed since the very
beginning ... from the lowest form of life [the body without organs] to
the present time, ... 1 was looking ... -not looking so much as just
feeling-ahead of me was lying the most horrific journey.":" When we
speak here of a voyage, this is no more a metaphor than before when we
spoke of an egg, and of what takes place in and on it-morphogenetic
movements, displacements of cellular groups, stretchings, folds, migrations, and local variations of potentials. There is no reason to oppose an
interior voyage to exterior ones: Lenz's stroll, Nijinsky's stroll, the
promenades of Beckett's creatures are effective realities, but where the
reality of matter has abandoned all extension, just as the interior voyage
has abandoned all form and quality, henceforth causing pure
intensities-coupled together, almost unbearable-to radiate within and
without, intensities through which a nomadic subject passes. Here it is
not a case of an hallucinatory experience nor of a delirious mode of
thought, but a feeling, a series of emotions and feelings as a consummation and a consumption of intensive quantities, that form the material for
subsequent hallucinations and deliriums. The intensive emotion, the
affect, is both the common root and the principle of differentiation of
deliriums and hallucinations.
We are also of a mind to believe that everything commingles in
these intense becornings, passages, and migrations-all this drift that
84

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

ascends and descends the flows of time: countries, races, families,
parental appellations, divine appellations, geographical and historical
designations, and even miscellaneous news items. (I feel that) I am
becoming God, I am becoming woman, I was Joan of Arc and I am
Heliogabalus and the Great Mongol, I am a Chinaman, a redskin, a
Ternplar, 1 was my father and I was my son. And all the criminals, the
whole list of criminals, the decent criminals and the scoundrels: Szondi
rather than Freud and his Oedipus. "Perhaps it's by trying to be Worm
that I'll finally succeed in being Mahood .... Then all I'll have to do is be
Worm. Which no doubt I shall achieve by trying to be Jones. Then all I'll
have to do is be Jones." But if everything commingles in this fashion it
does so in intensity, with no confusion of spaces and forms, since these
have indeed been undone on behalf of a new order: the intense and
intensive order.
What is the nature of this order? The firs t things to be distributed on
the body without organs are races, cultures, and their gods. The fact has
often been overlooked that the schizo indeed participates in history; he
hallucinates and raves universal history, and proliferates the races. All
delirium is racial, which does not necessarily mean racist. It is not a
matter of the regions of the body without organs "representing" races
and cultures. The full body does not represent anything at all. On the
contrary, the races and cultures designate regions on this body-that is,
zones of intensities, fields of potentials. Phenomena of individualization
and sexualization are produced within these fields. We pass from one
field to another by crossing thresholds: we never stop migrating, we
become other individuals as well as other sexes, and departing becomes
as easy as being born or dying. Along the way we struggle against other
races, we destroy civilizations, in the manner of the great migrants in
whose wake nothing is left standing once they have passed throughalthough these destructions can be brought about, as we shall see, in two
very different ways.
The crossing of a threshold entails ravages elsewhere-how could it
be otherwise? The body without organs closes round the deserted
places. The theater of cruelty cannot be separated from the struggle
against our culture, from the confrontation of the "races," and from
Artaud's great migration toward Mexico, its forces, and its religions:
individuations are produced only within fields of forces expressly
defined by intensive vibrations, and that animate cruel personages only
in so far as they are induced organs, parts of desiring-machines
(mannequinsj.s'' A season in hell-how could it be separated from
denunciations of European families, from the call for destructions that
don't come quickly enough, from the admiration for the convict, from
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

Illii!

the intense crossing of the thresholds of history, and from this prodigious migration, this becoming-woman, this becoming-Scandinavian or
Mongol, this "displacement of races and of continents," this feeling of
raw intensity that presides over delirium as well as over hallucinations,
and especially this deliberate, stubborn, material will to be "of a race
inferior for all eternity": "I have known every son of good birth, I have
never been of this people, I have never been Christian, ... yes my eyes
are closed to your light. I am a beast, a Negro."33
And can Zarathustra be separated from the "grand politics," and
from the bringing to life of the races that leads Nietzsche to say, I'm not
a German, I'm Polish. Here again individuations are brought about
solely within complexes of forces that determine persons as so many
intensive states embodied in a "criminal," ceaselessly passing beyond a
threshold while destroying the factitious unity of a family and an ego: "I
am Prado, I am also Prado's father. I venture to say that I am also
Lesseps .... I wanted to give my Parisians, whom I love, a new
idea-that of a decent criminal. I am also Chambige-also a decent
criminal. ... The unpleasant thing, and one that nags at my modesty, is
that at root every name in history is 1. "34 Yet it was never a question of
identifying oneself with personages, as when it is erroneously maintained that a madman "takes himself for so-and-so...." It is a question
of something quite different: identifying races, cultures, and gods with
fields of intensity on the body without organs, identifying personages
with states that fill these fields, and with effects that fulgurate within and
traverse these fields. Whence the role of names, with a magic all their
own: there is no ego that identifies with races, peoples, and persons in a
theater of representation, but proper names that identify races, peoples,
and persons with regions, thresholds, or effects in a production of
intensive quantities. The theory of proper names should not be conceived of in terms of representation; it refers instead to the class of
"effects": effects that are not a mere dependence on causes, but the
occupation of a domain, and the operation of a system of signs. This can
be clearly seen in physics, where proper names designate such effects
within fields of potentials: the Joule effect, the Seebeck effect, the
Kelvin effect. History is like physics: a Joan of Arc effect, a HeliogabaIus effect-all the names of history, and not the name of the father.
Everything has been said about the paucity of reality, the loss of
reality, the lack of contact with life, autism and athymia. Schizophrenics
themselves have said everything there is to say about this, and have
been quick to slip into the expected clinical mold. Dark world, growing
desert: a solitary machine hums on the beach, an atomic factory
installed in the desert. But if the body without organs is indeed this
86

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

desert, it is as an indivisible, nondecomposable distance over which the
schizo glides in order to be everywhere something real is produced,
everywhere something real has been and will be produced. It is true that
reality has ceased to be a principle. According to such a principle, the
reality of the real was posed as a divisible abstract quantity, whereas the
real was divided up into qualified unities, into distinct qualitative forms.
But now the real is a product that envelops the distances within
intensive quantities. The indivisible is enveloped, and signifies that what
envelops it does not divide without changing its nature or form. The
schizo has no principles: he is something only by being something else.
He is Mahood only by being Worm, and Worm only by being Jones. He
is a girl only by being an old man who is miming or simulating the girl. Or
rather, by being someone who is simulating an old man simulating a girl.
Or rather, by simulating someone ... , etc. This was already true of the
completely oriental art of the Roman Emperors, the twelve paranoiacs
of Suetonius. In a great book by Jacques Besse, we encounter once
again the double stroll of the schizo, the geographic exterior voyage
following nondecomposable distances, and the interior historical voyage
enveloping intensities: Christopher Columbus calms his mutinous crew
and becomes admiral again only by simulating a (false) admiral who is
simulating a whore who is dancing.s"
But simulation must be understood in the same way as we spoke of
identification. It expresses those nondecomposable distances always
enveloped in the intensities that divide into one another while changing
their form. If identification is a nomination, a designation, then simulation is the writing corresponding to it, a writing that is strangely
polyvocal, flush with the real. It carries the real beyond its principle to
the point where it is effectively produced by the desiring-machine. The
point where the copy ceases to be a copy in order to become the Real
and its artifice. To seize an intensive real as produced in the coextension
of nature and history, to ransack the Roman Empire, the Mexican cities,
the Greek gods, and the discovered continents so as to extract from
them this always-surplus reality, and to form the treasure of the
paranoiac tortures and the celibate glories-all the pogroms of history,
that's what I am, and all the triumphs, too, as if a few simple univocal
events could be extricated from this extreme polyvocity: such is the
"histrionisrn " of the schizophrenic, according to Klossowski's formula,
the true program for a theater of cruelty, the mise-en-scene of a machine
to produce the real. Far from having lost who knows what contact with
life, the schizophrenic is closest to the beating heart of reality, to an
intense point identical with the production of the real, and that leads
Reich to say: "What belongs specifically to the schizophrenic patient is
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

IS7

that ... he experiences the vital biology of the body .... With respect
to their experiencing of life, the neurotic patient and the perverted
individual are to the schizophrenic as the petty thief is to the daring
safecracker."36 So the question returns: what reduces the schizophrenic
to his autistic, hospitalized profile, cut off from reality? Is it the process,
Or is it rather the interruption of the process, its aggravation, its
continuation in the void? What forces the schizophrenic to withdraw to
a body without organs that has become deaf, dumb, and blind?
We often hear it said: he thinks he's Louis XVII. Not true. In the
Louis XVII affair, or rather in the finest case, that of the pretender
Richemont, there is a desiring-machine or a celibate machine in the
center: the horse with short, jointed paws, inside which they supposedly
put the Dauphin so he could flee. And then, all around, there are agents
of production and antiproduction, the organizers of the escape, the
accomplices, the allied sovereigns, the revolutionary enemies, the
jealous and hostile uncles, who are not persons but so many states of
rising and falling through which the pretender passes. Moreover, the
pretender Richernont's stroke of genius is not simply that he "takes into
account" Louis XVII, or that he takes other pretenders into account by
denouncing them as fake. What is so ingenious is that he takes other
pretenders into account by assuming them, by authenticating them-that
is to say, by making them too into states through which he passes: I am
Louis XVII, but I am also Hervagault and Mathurin Bruneau, who
claimed to be Louis XVII.37 Richemont doesn't identify with Louis
XVII, he lays claim to the premium due the person who traverses all the
singularities of the series converging around the machine for kidnapping
Louis XVII. There is no ego at the center, any more than there are
persons distributed on the periphery. Nothing but a series of singularities in the disjunctive network, Or intensive states in the conjunctive
tissue, and a transpositional subject moving full circle, passing through
all the states, triumphing over some as over his enemies, relishing others
as his allies, collecting everywhere the fraudulent premium of his
avatars. Partial object: a well situated scar-e-ambiguous besides-is
better proof than all the memories of childhood that the pretender lacks.
The conjunctive synthesis can therefore be expressed: "So I am the
king! So the kingdom belongs to me!" But this me is merely the residual
subject that sweeps the circle and concludes a self from its oscillations
on the circle.
All delirium possesses a world-historical, political, and racial content, mixing and sweeping along races, cultures, continents, and kingdoms; some wonder whether this long drift merely constitutes a
derivative of Oedipus. The familial order explodes, families are chalIll!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

lenged , son, father, mother, sister-"I mean those families like my own,
that owe all to the Declaration of the Rights of Man !"; "When I seek out
my most profound opposite, I always encounter my mother and my
sister; to see myself related to such German rabble is, as it were, a
blasphemy with respect to my doctrine of the Eternal Return!" It is a
question of knowing if the historico-political, the racial, and the cultural
are merely part of a manifest content and formally depend on a work of
elaboration, or if, on the contrary, this content should be followed as the
thread of latency that the order of families hides from us. Should the
rupture with families be taken as a sort of "familial romance" that would
indeed bring us back again to families and refer us to an event or a
structural determination inside the family itself? Or is this rather the sign
that the problem must be raised in a completely different manner,
because it is already raised elsewhere for the schizo himself, outside the
family? Are "the names of history" derivatives of the name of the
father, and are the races, cultures, and continents substitutes for
daddy-mommy, dependent on the Oedipal genealogy? Is history's
signifier the dead father?
Once again let us consider Judge Schreber's delirium. To be sure,
the use of races and the mobilization or notion of history are developed
there in a manner totally different from that employed by the authors we
have previously mentioned. The fact remains that Schreber's memoirs
are filled with a theory of God's chosen peoples, and with the dangers
that face the currently chosen people, the Germans, who are threatened
by the Jews, the Catholics, and the Slavs. In his intense metamorphoses
and passages, Schreber becomes a pupil of the Jesuits, the burgomaster
of a city where the Germans are fighting against the Slavs, and a girl
defending Alsace against the French. At last he crosses the Aryan
gradient or threshold to become a Mongol prince. What does this
becoming-pupil, burgomaster, girl, and Mongol signify? All paranoiac
deliriums stir up similar historical, geographic, and racial masses. The
error would lie in concluding, for example, that fascists are mere
paranoiacs. This would be an error precisely because, in the current
state of affairs, this would still amount to leading the historical and
political content of the delirium back to an internal familial determination. And what is even more disturbing to us is the fact that the entirety
of this enormous content disappears completely from Freud's analysis:
not one trace of it remains; everything is ground, squashed, triangulated
into Oedipus; everything is reduced to the father, in such a way as to
reveal in the crudest fashion the inadequacies of an Oedipal psychoanalysis.
Let us consider another paranoiac delirium as related by Maud
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

11111

Mannoni, a delirium whose political nature is especially vivid. This
example appears all the more striking to us, given our great admiration
for Maud Mannoni's work and for the manner in which she poses
antipsychiatric and institutional problems. Here then we see a man from
Martinique who, in the process of his delirium, situates himself in
relation to the Arabs and the Algerian War, in relation to the whites and
the May '68 events, and so on: "I fell sick from the Algerian problem. I
had partaken in the same foolishness as they (sexual pleasure). They
adopted me as one of their own race. Mongol blood flows through my
veins. Every time I attempted to put something into effect, the Algerians
argued against it. I had racist notions.... I descend from the Gallic
dynasty. By this right I am a man of noble lineage .... Let my name be
determined, let it be determined scientifically, and then I shall be able to
set up a harem."38 Though aware of the character of "revolt" and of
"truth for all" implied in the psychosis, Maud Mannoni argues that the
origin of the breakup of familial relations in favor of themes that the
subject himself declares to be racist, metaphysical, and political, is to be
found in the familial structure serving as a matrix. This origin would
exist therefore in the symbolic void or in "the initial foreclosure
(jorclusion) of the signifier of the father."39 The name to be determined
scientifically, the name that haunts all history, is simply the paternal
name.
In this case as in many others, the utilization of the Lacanian
concept of foreclosure leads to the forced oedipalization of the rebel:
the absence of Oedipus is interpreted as a lack with regard to the father,
a gaping hole in the structure; next, in the name of this lack, we are
referred to the other Oedipal pole, the pole of imaginary identifications
within the maternal undifferentiated. The law of the double bind
operates relentlessly, ruthlessly, flinging us from one pole to the other, in
such a way that what is foreclosed in the Symbolic must reappear in the
Real in a hallucinatory form. But in this fashion the entire historicopolitical theme gets interpreted as a constellation of imaginary identifications depending on Oedipus, or on that which the subject "lacks" in
order to become oedipalized.* And to be sure, it is not a question of
knowing whether or not the familial determinations or indeterminations
playa role. It is obvious that they do. But is this an initial role as
*"The Oedipal personages are all in their places, but in the play of permutations brought about, there is
something like an empty place .... What appears as rejected is everything referring to the phallus and
the father .... Each time Georges tries to take hold of himself as a desiring-person, he is driven back to
a form of dissolution of identities. He is another, enthralled by a maternal image .... He remains
trapped within an imaginary position in which he is captivated by the maternal imago; he situates
himself within the Oedipal triangle in terms of this locale, which implies an impossible process of
identification, involving forever after, in the mode of a pure imaginary dialectic, the destruction of one

or the other of the partners."-Mannoni (reference note 38), pp. 104-107.

II

symbolic organizer (or symbolic disorganizer) from which the floating
contents of the historical delirium would derive, as so many glittering
reflections in an imaginary mirror? Is the trinitary formula for the
schizo-s-which leads him, forced and constrained, back to Oedipus-this
void left by the absence of the father and this cancerous development of
the mother and the sister? And yet, as we have seen, if there is one
problem that does not exist in schizophrenia, it is the problem of
identifications. And if getting well amounts to getting oedipalized, we
can easily understand the outbursts of the patient who "does not want to
be cured," and who treats the analyst as one of the family, then as an
ally of the police. Is the schizophrenic sick and cut off from reality
because he lacks Oedipus, because he "is lacking" in something only to
be found in Oedipus-or on the contrary is he sick by virtue of the
oedipalization he is unable to bear, and around which everything
combines in order to force him to submit (social repression even before
psychoanalysis)?
The schizophrenic egg is like the biological egg: they have a similar
history, and our knowledge of them has run up against the same sort of
difficulties and illusions. During the development of the differentiation
of the egg, it was first believed that veritable "organizers" decided the
destiny of the parts. But it was soon noticed that on the one hand, all
kinds of other variable substances had the same action as the envisaged
organizing stimulus, and that on the other hand, the parts themselves
had specific abilities and potentials for development that did not exist
for the stimulus (experiments with grafting). Whence the idea that the
stimuli are not organizers, but mere inductors: ultimately, the nature of
these inductors is a matter of indifference. Many different kinds of
substances and materials, when killed, boiled, and pulverized, have the
same effect. It was the beginnings of the development that favored the
illusion: the simplicity of the beginning-consisting, for example, of
cellular divisions-could lead one to believe in some sort of adequation
between the inductor and what is induced. But we are well aware thai,
when considered in terms of its beginnings, a thing is always poorly
judged because, in order to become apparent, it is forced to simulate
structural states and to slip into states of forces that serve it as masks.
What is more,from the beginning we can see that it makes use of masks
in an entirely different manner, and that underneath the mask and by
means of it, it already invests the terminal forms and the specific higher
states whose integrity it will subsequently establish.
Such is the history of Oedipus: the parental figures are in no way
organizers, but rather inductors or stimuli of varying, vague import that
trigger processes of an entirely different nature, processes that are

!

90

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

!

I

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY /91

endowed with what amounts to an indifference with regard to the
stimulus. Doubtless one can believe that, in the beginning (7), the
stimulus-the Oedipal inductor-is a real organizer. But believing is an
operation of a conscious or preconscious nature, an extrinsic perception
rather than an operation of the unconscious upon itself. From the
beginning of the life of the child, it is already an altogether different
undertaking that pierces the mask of Oedipus, a different flow running
through the openings in the mask, a different adventure-that of
desiring-production. Yet it cannot be said that psychoanalysis was
unaware of this in a certain respect. In his theory of the primal fantasy,
of the traces of an archaic heredity, and the endogenous sources of the
superego, Freud constantly asserts that the active factors are not the
real parents, nor even the parents as the child imagines them. Such is
also the case, and all the more so, for Lacan's disciples, when they take
up the distinction between the Imaginary and the Symbolic, when they
oppose the name of the father to the imago, and the foreclosure
concerning the signifier to a real deficiency or absence of the paternal
personage. There is no better example than this to show that the parental
figures are indifferent inductors and that the true organizer is
elsewhere-on the side of what is induced, not on that of the inductor.
But that is just the beginning of the question, the same question as
in the case of the biological egg. For under these conditions is there no
solution but to revive the notion of a "terrain," whether in the form of a
phylogenetic innateness of preformation, or a cultural symbolic a priori
linked to prematuration? Worse yet: it is clear that by invoking such an a
priori one does not by any means abandon familialism in the strictest
sense, which burdens all of psychoanalysis; on the contrary, one thereby
plunges deeper into familialism and generalizes it. Parents have been put
in their true places within the workings of the unconscious, as inductors
of an indifferent nature, yet the role of organizer continues to be
entrusted to symbolic or structural elements that are still part of the
family and its Oedipal matrix. Once again one is caught, without a way
out: it is simply that the means have been found to render the family
transcendent.
There we have it-the incurable familialism of psychoanalysis,
enclosing the unconscious within Oedipus, cutting off all vital flows,
crushing desiring-production, conditioning the patient to respond
daddy-mommy, and to always consume daddy-mommy. Thus Foucault
was entirely right in saying that, in a certain sense, the psychoanalyst
completed and perfected what the psychiatry of nineteenth-century
asylums, with Pinel and Tuke, had set out to do: to fuse madness with a
parental complex, to link it to "the half-real, half-imaginary dialectic of
1)2

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

the Family"; to constitute for the madman a microcosm symbolizing
"the massive structures of bourgeois society and its values," relations of
Family-Child, Transgression-Punishment, Madness-Disorder; to arrange
things so that disalienation goes the same route as alienation, with
Oedipus at both ends; to establish the moral authority of the doctor as
Father and Judge, Family and Law; and finally to culminate in the
following paradox: "While the victim of mental illness is entirely
alienated in the real person of his doctor, the doctor dissipates the reality
of the mental illness in the critical concept of madness."* Luminous
pages.
Let us add that by enveloping the illness in a familial complex
internal to the patient, and then the familial complex itself in the
transference or the doctor-patient relationship, Freudian psychoanalysis
made a somewhat intensive use of the family. Granted, this use distorted
the nature of the intensive quantities in the unconscious. Nevertheless it
still respected in part the general principle of a production of these
quantities. When it became necessary once again to confront psychosis
directly, however, the family was immediately reopened in extension,
and was in itself considered as the indicator for measuring the forces of
alienation and disalienation. In this manner the study of the families of
schizophrenics has breathed new life into Oedipus by making it reign
over the extensive order of an expanded family, where not only each
person would combine to a greater or lesser extent his or her triangle
with the triangle of others, but where the entirety of the extended family
also would oscillate between the two poles of a "healthy" triangulation,
structuring and differentiating, and forms of perverted triangles, bringing about their fusion in the realm of the undifferentiated.
Jacques Hochman analyzes some interesting varieties of psychotic
families under the same "fusionist postulate": the properly fusionist
family, where differentiations are no longer made except between the
inside and the outside (those who are outside the family); the divisive
(scissionnelle) family that establishes blocks, clans, or coalitions within
itself; the tubular family, where the triangle multiplies endlessly, each
*Foucault (Ch. 1, reference note 43). "And it is to this degree that all nineteenth-century psychiatry
really converges on Freud, the first man to accept in all its seriousness the reality of the physicianpatient couple .... To the doctor, Freud transferred all the structures Pinel and Tuke had set up within
confinement. He did deliver the patient from the existence of the asylum within which his 'liberators'
had alienated him; but he did not deliver him from what was essential in this existence; he regrouped its
powers, extending them to the maximum by uniting them in the doctor's hands; he created the
psychoanalytical situation where, by an inspired short circuit, alienation becomes disalienating
because, in the doctor, it becomes a subject.
"The doctor, as an alienating figure, remains the key to psychoanalysis. Perhaps because it did not
suppress this ultimate structure, and because it referred all the others to it, psychoanalysis has not been
able, will not be able, to hear the voices of unreason, nor to decipher in themselves the signs of the
madman. Psychoanalysis can unravel some of the forms of madness; it remains a stranger to the
sovereign enterprise of unreason" (pp. 254,274,276-78).

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

193

member having his own triangle that interlocks with others without
one's being able to discern the limits of a nuclear family; the foreclosing
family, where differentiation is both included and warded off in the
person of one of its members who has been eliminated, rendered null,
and foreclosed.w
We can understand how such a concept as foreclosure operates
within this extensive framework of a family where several
generations-at least three-form the condition of fabrication of a
psychotic: as for example when the troubles a mother has with regard to
her own father lead to the son's inability, in turn, to even "posit his
desire" toward his mother. Whence the strange notion that if a psychotic
escapes the Oedipal apparatus, this is solely due to the fact that he is
doubly embedded there, to the second power, in a field of extension that
includes the grandparents. The problem of the cure then becomes rather
similar to an operation of differential calculus, where one proceeds by
way of depotentialization in order to rediscover the primary functions
and reestablish the characteristic or nuclear triangle-always a holy
trinity, the means of access to a three-sided situation. It is clear that this
extended familiaIism, wherein the family receives the very forces of
alienation and disalienation, carries with it a renunciation of the
fundamental positions of psychoanalysis concerning sexuality, despite
the formal conservation of an analytic vocabulary. A veritable regression in favor of a taxonomy of families. This is clearly visible in the
projects of community psychiatry or of so-called familial psychotherapy, which effectively break apart asylum existence while nonetheless
still maintaining all the presuppositions of the asylum, and basically
renewing the thrust of nineteenth-century psychiatry according to the
slogan put forward by Hochman: "From the family to the institution of
the hospital, from the institution of the hospital to the familial
institution, ... a therapeutic return to the family"!
But even within the progressive or revolutionary sectors of institutional analysis on the one hand, and antipsychiatry on the other, the
danger of this familialism in extension is ever present, conforming to the
double impasse of an extended Oedipus, just as much in the diagnostic
of pathogenic families in themselves as in the constitution of therapeutic
quasi families. Once it has been said that it is no longer a matter of
re-forming cadres of familial and social adaptation or integration, but
rather of instituting original forms of active groups, the question arises
as to what extent these core groups resemble artificial families, and to
what extent they still lend themselves to oedipalization. These questions
have been analyzed in depth by Jean Oury. They demonstrate how
revolutionary psychiatry broke in vain with the ideals of community
94

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

adaptation, with everything that Maud Mannoni calls the adaptation
police force, since at every moment it still risks being thrust back into
the framework of a structural Oedipus whose deficiencies are diagnosed
but whose integrity is restored; a holy trinity that continues to strangle
desiring-production and suffocate its problems. The political, cultural,
world-historical, and racial content is left behind, crushed in the Oedipal
treadmill. This is because psychiatrists persist in treating the family as a
matrix, or better still as a microcosm, an expressive milieu that provides
its own justifications, and that-however capable of expressing the
action of the alienating forces*-"mediates" them precisely by suppressing the true categories of production in the machines of desire.
It seems to us that such a viewpoint is present even in Cooper. (In
this respect Laing is better able to disengage himself from familialism,
thanks to the resources of a flux from the Orient.) Cooper writes:
"Families mediate social reality to their children. If the social reality in
question is rife with alienated social forms, then this alienation will be
mediated to the individual child and will be experienced as estrangement
in the family relationships ... for example he may say that his mind is
controlled by an electrical machine or by men from outer space. These
constructions, however, are largely embodiments of the family process,
which has the illusion of substantiality but which is none other than the
alienated form of the action of praxis of the family members that
literally dominates the mind of the psychotic member. These metaphysical men from outer space are the literal mother, father, and sibling who
sit around the breakfast table with the so-called psychotic patient. "41
Even the essential hypothesis of antipsychiatry, which ultimately posits
an identity in nature between social alienation and mental alienation,
must be understood in terms of a maintained Iamilialism , and not in
terms of a refutation of this familialism. For it is to the extent that the
family-microcosm, the family-social-indicator, expresses social alienation that it is believed to "organize" mental alienation in the mind of its
own members or its psychotic member. (And among all the members,
who is the real psychotic?)
With his general conception of microcosm-macrocosm relationships, Bergson brought about a discreet revolution that deserves further
consideration. Likening the living to a microcosm is an ancient platitude.
But if the living organism was thought to be similar to the world, this was
attributed to the fact that it was or tended to be an isolated system,
naturally closed: the comparison between microcosm and macrocosm
*des forces alienantes: The French word alienation means both social alienation and what we
English-speakers call "mental derangement." Obviously, the authors aim at discrediting the distinction
between the two terms. (Translators' note.)

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMIUAUSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

1115

was thus a comparison between two closed figures, one of which
expressed the other and was inscribed within the other. At the beginning
of Creative Evolution, Bergson completely alters the scope of the
comparison by opening up both ends. If the living being resembles
the world, this is true, on the contrary, insofar as it opens itself to the
opening of the world; if it is a whole, this is true to the extent that the
whole, of the world as of the living being, is always in the process of
becoming, developing, coming into being or advancing, and inscribing
itself within a temporal dimension that is irreducible and nonclosed.
We believe that this is also true in the case of the family-society
relationship. There is no Oedipal triangle: Oedipus is always open in an
open social field. Oedipus opens to the four winds, to the four corners of
the social field (not even 3+1, but 4+n). A poorly closed triangle, a
porous or seeping triangle, an exploded triangle from which the flows of
desire escape in the direction of other territories. It is strange that we
had to wait for the dreams of colonized peoples in order to see that, on
the vertices of the pseudo triangle, mommy was dancing with the
missionary, daddy was being fucked by the tax collector, while the self
was being beaten by a white man. It is precisely this pairing of the
parental figures with agents of another nature, their locking embrace
similar to that of wrestlers, that keeps the triangle from closing up again,
from being valid in itself, and from claiming to express or represent this
different nature of the agents that are in question in the unconscious
itself. When Frantz Fanon encounters a case of persecution psychosis
linked to the death of the mother, he first asks himself if he has "to deal
with an unconscious guilt complex following on the death of the mother,
as Freud had described in Mourning and Melancholia." But he soon
learns that the mother has been killed by a French soldier, and that the
subject himself has murdered the wife of a colonist whose disemboweled ghost perpetually appears before him, carrying along with it and
tearing apart the memory of the mother.s? It could always be said that
these extreme situations of war trauma, of colonization, of dire poverty,
and so on, are unfavorable to the construction of the Oedipal
apparatus-and that it is precisely because of this that these situations
favor a psychotic development or explosion-but we have a strong
feeling that the problem lies elsewhere. Apart from the fact that a certain
degree of comfort found in the bourgeois family is admittedly necessary
to turn out oedipalized subjects, the question of knowing what is
actually invested in the comfortable conditions of a supposedly normal
or normative Oedipus is pushed still further into the background.
The revolutionary is the first to have the right to say: "Oedipus?
Never heard of it." For 'the disjointed fragments of Oedipus remain
96

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

stuck to all the corners of the historical social field, as a battlefield and
not a scene from bourgeois theater. Too bad if the psychoanalysts roar
their disapproval at this point. Fanon pointed out that troubled times
had unconscious effects not only on the active militants, but also on
those claiming to be neutral and to remain outside the affair, uninvolved
in politics. The same could also be said with respect to apparently
peaceful times: what a grotesque error to think that the unconscious-aschild is acquainted only with daddy-mommy, and that it doesn't know
"in its own way" that its father has a boss who is not a father's father, or
moreover that its father himself is a boss who is not a father. Therefore
we formulate the following rule, which we feel to be applicable in all
cases: the father and the mother exist only as fragments, and are never
organized into a figure or a structure able both to represent the
unconscious, and to represent in it the various agents of the collectivity;
rather, they always shatter into fragments that come into contact with
these agents, meet them face to face, square off with them, or settle the
differences with them as in hand-to-hand combat.
The father, the mother, and the self are at grips with, and directly
coupled to, the elements of the political and historical situation-the
soldier, the cop, the occupier, the collaborator, the radical, the resister,
the boss, the boss's wife-who constantly break all triangulations, and
who prevent the entire situation from falling back on the familial
complex and becoming internalized in it. In a word, the family is never a
microcosm in the sense of an autonomous figure, even when inscribed in
a larger circle that it is said to mediate and express. The family is by
nature eccentric, decentered. We are told of fusional, divisive, tubular,
and foreclosing families. But what produces the hiatuses (coupuresi and
their distribution that indeed keep the family from being an "interior"?
There is always an uncle from America; a brother who went bad; an aunt
who took off with a military man; a cousin out of work, bankrupt, or a
victim of the Crash; an anarchist grandfather; a grandmother in the
hospital, crazy or senile. The family does not engender its own ruptures.
Families are filled with gaps and transected by breaks that are not
familial: the Commune, the Dreyfus Affair, religion and atheism, the
Spanish Civil War, the rise of fascism, Stalinism, the Vietnam war, May
'68-all these things form complexes of the unconscious, more effective
than everlasting Oedipus. And the unconscious is indeed at issue here. If
in fact there are structures, they do not exist in the mind, in the shadow
of a fantastic phallus distributing the lacunae, the passages, and the
articulations. Structures exist in the immediate impossible real. As
Witold Grombrowicz says, the structuralists "search for their structures
in culture. As for myself, I look for them in the immediate reality. My
PSYCHOANALYSIS AI'iD FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY /97

way of seeing things was in direct relationship to the events of the times:
Hitlerism , Stalinism, fascism .... I was fascinated by the grotesque and
terrifying forms that surfaced in the sphere of the interhuman, destroying all that was held dear until then."?"
Hellenists were right to remind us that, even in the case of worthy
Oedipus, it was already a matter of "politics." They are simply wrong in
concluding from this that the libido has nothing to do with any of it.
Quite the contrary: what is invested by the libido throughout the
disjoined elements of Oedipus-especially given the fact that these
elements never form a mental structure that is autonomous and
expressive-are these extrafamilial, subfamilial gaps and breaks (coupures), these forms of social production in conjunction with desiringproduction. Schizoanalysis therefore does not hide the fact that it is a
political and social psychoanalysis, a militant analysis: not because it
would go about generalizing Oedipus in culture, under the ridiculous
conditions that have been the norm until now. It is a militant analysis, on
the contrary, because it proposes to demonstrate the existence of an
unconscious libidinal investment of sociohistorical production, distinct
from the conscious investments coexisting with it. Proust is not wrong in
saying that, far from being the author of an "intimate" work, he goes
further than the proponents of a populist or proletarian art who are
content to describe the social and the political in "willfully" expressive
works. For his part, he is interested in the manner in which the Dreyfus
Affair and then World War I cut across families, introducing into them
new breaks and new connections resulting in a modification of the
heterosexual and homosexual libido (in the decomposed milieu of the
Guermantes, for example).
It is the function of the libido to invest the social field in unconscious forms, thereby hallucinating all history, reproducing in delirium
entire civilizations, races, and continents, and intensely "feeling" the
becoming of the world. There is no signifying chain without a Chinaman,
an Arab, and a black who drop in to trouble the night of a white
paranoiac. Schizoanalysis sets out to undo the expressive Oedipal
unconscious, always artificial, repressive and repressed, mediated by the
family, in order to attain the immediate productive unconscious. Yes,
the family is a stimulus-but a stimulus that is qualitatively indifferent,
an inductor that is neither an organizer nor a disorganizer. As for the
response, it always comes from another direction. If there is indeed
language (langage), it is on the side of the response, not the stimulus.
Even Oedipal psychoanalysis recognized the indifference of the effective parental images, the irreducibility of the response to the stimulation
performed by these images. But it contented itself with understanding
9ft

I

the response by starting from an expressive symbolism that was still
familial, instead of interpreting it in an unconscious system of production as such (analytical economy).
The great argument of familialism is: "at least in the beginning ..."
This argument may be explicitly formulated, but it also persists implicitly in theories that nevertheless refuse the viewpoint of genesis. At least
in the beginning, this argument runs, the unconscious is expressed in a
state of familial relations and constellations where the Real, the Imaginary, and the Symbolic intermingle. In this conception, the metaphysical
and social relations arise afterward, in the manner of a beyond. And
since the beginning always proceeds by twos-this is even the necessary
condition for rendering escape impossible-a first pre-oedipal beginning
is invoked, "the primitive nondifferentiation of the most precocious
stages of the personality" in the relationship with the mother; then a
second beginning is invoked; Oedipus itself with the law of the father
and the exclusive differentiations that this law prescribes at the heart of
the family; and finally latency, the celebrated latency, after which the
beyond begins. But since this beyond consists in duping others into
taking the same path (the children to come), and also since the first
beginning is said to be "pre-oedipal" only to indicate that it already
belongs to Oedipus as a referential axis, it is quite clear that the two ends
of Oedipus have simply been closed, and that the beyond and the
afterward will always be interpreted in terms of Oedipus, in relation to
Oedipus, within the framework of Oedipus. Everything will be reduced
to Oedipus, as the discussions on the comparative role of childhood
factors and actual factors in neurosis bear out: how could it be
otherwise, so long as the "actual" factor is conceived of in this form of
the afterward?
But we know in point of fact that the actual factors are there from
childhood, and that they determine the libidinal investments in terms of
breaks and connections that they introduce into the family. Over the
heads of the members of the family, and underneath, it is desiringproduction and social production that manifest, through the childhood
experience, their identical natures and their differing regimes. In this
regard let us consider three important works about children: L 'Enfant
by Jules Valles, Bas les coeurs by Georges Darien, Mort a credit by L.-F.
Celine, In them we see how bread, money, dwelling place, social
promotion, bourgeois and revolutionary values, wealth and poverty,
oppression and revolt, social classes, political events, metaphysical and
collective problems-what does it mean to be able to breathe? why be
poor? why are there rich people?-form the object of investments in
which the parents merely have a role as agents of a special production or
I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

I

00

antiproduction, always grappling with other agents that they express all
the less as they are increasingly at grips with them in the heaven and hell
of the child. And the child says: Why? Freud's Rat Man does not wait
until he is a man to invest the rich woman and the poor woman who
constitute the actual factor of his obsession. For inadmissible reasons,
the existence of an infantile sexuality is denied; but for hardly more
admissible reasons, this sexuality is reduced to desiring mommy and
wanting the place of the father. The Freudian blackmail is this: either
you recognize the Oedipal character of infantile sexuality, or you
abandon all positions of sexuality.
And yet, not even in the shadow of a transcendent phallus are the
unconscious effects of a "signified" established throughout the determinations of a social field; on the contrary, it is the libidinal investment of
these determinations that situates their particular use in desiringproduction, and the comparative operation of this production with social
production, whence derive the state of desire and its repression, the
distribution of the agents, and the degree of oedipalization of sexuality.
Lacan explains well how, in terms of the crises and the ruptures
(coupures) within science, there is a drama for the scientist that at times
goes as far as madness, and that "would have no way of including itself
in the Oedipal apparatus, unless by calling it into question" by way of a
consequence.v' In this sense every child is a little scientist, a little
Cantor.* Go back through the course of the ages, you will never find a
child caught in a familial order that is autonomous, expressive, or
signifying. Even the nursing child, in his games as in his feedings, his
chains, and his meditations, is already caught up in an immediate
desiring-production where the parents play the role of partial objects,
witnesses, reporters, and agents, in a process that outflanks them on all
sides, and places desire in an immediate relationship with a historical
and social reality. It is true that nothing is pre-oedipal, and that we must
take Oedipus back to the earliest age, but within the order of a
repression of the unconscious. It is equally true that everything within
the order of production is anoedipal, and that there are non-oedipal,
anoedipal currents that begin as early as Oedipus and continue just as
long, with another rhythm, in a different mode of operation, in another
dimension, with other uses of syntheses that feed the autoproduction of
the unconscious-the unconscious-as-orphan, the playful unconscious,
the meditative and social unconscious.
The Oedipal operation consists in establishing a constellation of
biunivocal relations between the agents of social production, reproduc"Georg Cantor (1845-1918), a German mathematician known for his theory of transfinite numbers.
(Translators' note.)

100

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

tion, and antiproduction on the one hand, and the agents of the so-called
natural reproduction of the family on the other. This operation is called
an application. It is as if a tablecloth were being folded, as if its 4 (+n)
corners were reduced to 3 (+ I, to designate the transcendent factor
performing the operation). From that moment it is a foregone conclusion
that the collective agents will be interpreted as derivatives of, or
substitutes for, parental figures, in a system of equivalence that rediscovers everywhere the father, the mother, and the ego. (And one merely
pushes the difficulty into the background when one considers the system
as a whole and then makes it depend on the transcendent term, the
phallus). There we have a faulty use of the conjunctive synthesis,
leading to the statement, "So it was your father, so it was your
mother ... " It is not at all surprising that only afterward is it discovered
that all of this was the father and the mother, since this is assumed to be
the case from the beginning, but is subsequently forgotten-repressed,
though still subject to a later rediscovery in relation to more recent
developments.* Whence the magical formula that characterizes
biunivocalization-the flattening of the polyvocal real in favor of a
symbolic relationship between two articulations: so that is what this
meant. Everything is made to begin with Oedipus, by means of
explanation, with all the more certainty as one has reduced everything to
Oedipus by means of application.
Only in appearance is Oedipus a beginning, either as a historical or
prehistorical origin, or as a structural foundation. In reality it is a
completely ideological beginning, for the sake of ideology. Oedipus is
always and solely an aggregate of destination fabricated to meet the
requirements of an aggregate of departure constituted by a social
formation. It can be applied to everything, in that the agents and
relations of social production, and the libidinal investments corresponding to them, are made to conform to the figures of familial reproduction.
In the aggregate of departure there is the social formation, or rather the
social formations: the races, the classes, the continents, the peoples, the
kingdoms, the sovereignties; Joan of Arc and the Great Mongol, Luther
and the Aztec Serpent. In the aggregate of destination, there remains
only daddy, mommy, and me.
Thus it must be said of Oedipus as well as of desiring-production: it
is at the end, not at the beginning. But not at all in the same fashion. We
have seen that desiring-production was the limit of social production,
always thwarted in the capitalist formation: the body without organs at
*Perhaps the reader would enjoy this parody of psychoanalytic logic in the authors' French: "Et qu'on
decouvre seulement par apres que tout ca c'etait Ic pere et Ia mere, n'a ricn d'etonnant, puisqu'on
suppose que ~a l'est des lc debut, mais que c'cst ensuite oublie-refoub , quitte a le retrouver apres par
rapport a Fensulte." (Translators' note.v

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

110f

the edge of the deterritorialized socius, the desert at the gates of the city.
But it is urgent, it is essential that the limit be displaced, rendered
inoffensive, and that it pass or seem to pass into the social formation
itself. Schizophrenia or desiring-production is the boundary between the
molar organization and the molecular multiplicity of desire; this limit of
deterritorialization must now pass into the interior of the molar organization, and it must be applied to a factitious and subjugated territoriality.
We are now able to surmise what Oedipus signifies: it displaces the limit,
it internalizes the limit. Rather a society of neurotics than one successful
schizophrenic who has not been made autistic. Oedipus, the incomparable instrument of gregariousness, is the ultimate private and subjugated
territoriality of European man. (Moreover the displaced, exorcised limit
or border shifts to the interior of Oedipus, between its two poles.)
One word here on the disgrace of psychoanalysis in history and
politics. The procedure is well known: two figures are made to appear,
the Great Man and the Crowd. One then claims to make history with
these two entities, these two puppets, the Great Crustacean and the
Crazy Invertebrate. Oedipus is placed at the beginning. On the one side
there is the great man defined oedipally: so he killed the father, in a
murder without end, either to annihilate him and identify with the
mother, or to internalize him, to take his place or reach a reconciliation
(with a host of variations in detail that correspond to neurotic, psychotic, perverse, or "normal" solutions, that is to say solutions of sublimation). In any case the great man is already great because, for good or for
evil, he has found a certain original solution to the Oedipal conflict.
Hitler annihilates the father and unleashes in him the forces of the Bad
Mother; Luther internalizes the father and reaches a compromise with
the superego. On the other side there is the crowd, also defined
oedipally, by means of parental images of a second order, this time
collective; the encounter can therefore take place between Luther and
the sixteenth-century Christians, or between Hitler and the German
people, with corresponding elements that do not necessarily imply
identity: Hitler plays the role of father through "homosexual transfusion" and in relation to the female crowd; Luther plays the role of
woman in relation to the God of the Christians. Naturally, to ensure
against the historian's justified anger, the psychoanalyst specifies that he
is concerned only with a certain causal order, that one must take "other"
causes into account, but that he alone cannot do everything. Besides, he
deals just enough with other causes so as to give us a foretaste: he takes
into account the institutions of a particular period (from the sixteenthcentury Church to twentieth-century capitalist power), if only to see in
them parental images of yet another order, associating the father and the
102

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

mother, who will then be dissociated and otherwise regrouped within the
action of the great man and the crowd. It hardly matters whether the
tone of these books is orthodox Freudian, culturalist, or Jungian.
Books like those are nauseating. Let's not dismiss them by saying
that they belong to the distant past of psychoanalysis: similar books-a
lot of them-are still written today. Let's not say that it is merely a
question of a careless use of Oedipus: w~at other. use c?uld be ,~ade. of
Oedipus? Nor is it a case of an ambiguous dimension of applied
psychoanalysis"; for all Oedipus-Oedipus in and of itself-is already
an application, in the strictest sense of the word. And w~en .the best
psychoanalysts forbid themselves historico-political applications, we
can't say things are much better, since the analysts retreat to the rock of
castration presented as the locus of an "untenable truth" that is
irreducible: they closet themselves in a phallocentrism that leads them
to think of the analytic activity as always having to evolve within a
familial microcosm, and they continue to treat the libido's direct
investments of the social field as simple imaginary dependencies on
Oedipus, where it becomes necessary to denounce "a fusional dream,"
"a fantasy of a-return-to-Oneness." "Castration," they say, "is what
separates us from politics, is what makes for our originality as
analysts-we who do not forget that society too is triangular and
symbolic!"
.
..,
If it is true that Oedipus is obtained by reduction or application , It
presupposes in itself a certain kind of libidinal. investment of. the social
field of the production and the formation of this field. There IS no more
an individual Oedipus than there is an individual fantasy. Oedipus is a
means of integration into the group, in both the adaptive form of its own
reproduction that makes it pass from one generation to the next, and in
its unadapted neurotic stases that block desire at prearranged impasses.
Oedipus also flourishes in subjugated groups, where an established order
is invested through the group's own repressive forms. And it is not the
forms of the subjugated group that depend on Oedipal projections and
identifications, but the reverse: it is Oedipal applications that depend on
the determinations of the subjugated group as an aggregate of departure
and on their libidinal investment (from the age of thirteen I've worked
hard, rising on the social ladder, getting promotions, being a part of the
exploiters). There is therefore a segregative use of the conjunctive
syntheses of the unconscious, a use that does not coincide with divisions
between classes, although it is an incomparable weapon in the service of
a dominating class: it is this use that brings about the feeling of "indeed
being one of us," of being part of a superior race threatened by enemies
from outside. Thus the Little White pioneers' son, the Irish Protestant
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY \103

who commemorates the victory of his ancestors, the fascist who belongs
to the master race.
Oedipus depends on this sort of nationalistic, religious, racist
sentiment, and not the reverse: it is not the father who is projected onto
the boss, but the boss who is applied to the father, either in order to tell
us "you will not surpass your father," or "you will surpass him to find
our forefathers." Lacan has demonstrated in a profound way the link
between Oedipus and segregation. Not, however, in the sense where
segregation would be a consequence of Oedipus, subjacent to the
fraternity of the brothers once the father is dead. On the contrary, the
segregative use is a precondition of Oedipus, to the extent that the social
field is not reduced to the familial tie except by presupposing an
enormous archaism, an incarnation of the race in person or in spirit: yes,
I am one of you.
It is not a question of ideology. There is an unconscious libidinal
investment of the social field that coexists, but does not necessarily
coincide, with the preconscious investments, or with what the preconscious investments "ought to be." That is why, when subjects, individuals, or groups act manifestly counter to their class interests-when they
rally to the interests and ideals of a class that their own objective
situation should lead them to combat-it is not enough to say: they were
fooled, the masses have been fooled. It is not an ideological problem, a
problem of failing to recognize, or of being subject to, an illusion. It is a
problem of desire, and desire is part of the infrastructure. Preconscious
investments are made, or should be made, according to the interests of
the opposing classes. But unconscious investments are made according
to positions of desire and uses of synthesis, very different from the
interests of the subject, individual or collective, who desires.
These investments of an unconscious nature can ensure the general
submission to a dominant class by making cuts (coupures) and segregations pass over into a social field, insofar as it is effectively invested by
desire and no longer by interests. A form of social production and
reproduction, along with its economic and financial mechanisms, its
political formations, and so on, can be desired as such, in whole or in
part, independently of the interests of the desiring-subject. It was not by
means of a metaphor, even a paternal metaphor, that Hitler was able to
sexually arouse the fascists. It is not by means of a metaphor that a
banking or stock-market transaction, a claim, a coupon, a credit, is able
to arouse people who are not necessarily bankers. And what about the
effects of money that grows, money that produces more money? There
are socioeconomic "complexes" that are also veritable complexes of the
unconscious, and that communicate a voluptuous wave from the top to
1 04

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

the bottom of their hierarchy (the military-industrial .com~lex). And
id ology Oedipus and the phallus have nothing to do WIththis, because
1 e,
,
F ..
tt r of
they depend on it rather than being its impetus. or It I~ a ~a e
flows, of stocks, of breaks in and fluctuations of flows; ~esI~e ~s present
wherever something flows and runs, carrying along With It mtereste~
subjects-but also drunken or slumbering subjects-toward lethal destiifi
t
f
nations.
Hence the goal of schizoanalysis: to analyze the speer c na me 0
the libidinal investments in the economic and political spheres, and
thereby to show how, in the subject who desires, desire c~n b.e m~de to
desire its own repression-whence the role of the de.ath mstmct m t~e
circuit connecting desire to the social sphere. All this happens, ~ot III
ideology, but well beneath it. An unconscious investment ~f a fa~C1st or
reactionary type can exist alongside a conscious revolutIOnary investment. Inversely, it can happen-rarely-that a revolutionary investm~nt
on the level of desire coexists with a reactionary investment conforming
to a conscious interest. In any case conscious and unconscious investments are not of the same type, even when they coincide or. are
superimposed on each other. We define the reactiona~y unconscious
investment as the investment that conforms to the interest of the
dominant class, but operates on its own account, according to the terms
of desire, through the segregative use of the conjunctive synthese~ from
which Oedipus is derived: 1 am of the superior race. The revolutionary
unconscious investment is such that desire, still in its own mode, cuts
across the interest of the dominated, exploited classes, and cau~es flows
to move that are capable of breaking apart both the segregatIOns and
their Oedipal applications-flows capable of hallucinating history, of
reanimating the races in delirium, of setting continents ablaze. No, I am
of your kind I am the outsider and the deterritorialized, "1 am of a
n ot
' .
"45
race inferior for all eternity.... 1 am a beast, a Negro.
There again it is a question of an intense potential for investment
and counterinvestment in the unconscious. Oedipus disintegrates because its very conditions have disintegrated. The nomadic and po~yvocal
use of the conjunctive syntheses is in opposition to the se~regatlve a.nd
biunivocal use. Delirium has something like two poles, racist and racial,
paranoiac-segregative and schizonomadic. And betwee.n th~ two, ev~r
so many subtle, uncertain shiftings where the unconscious Itself oS~Il­
lates between its reactionary charge and its revolutionary potential.
Even Schreber finds himself to be the Great Mongol when he breaks
through the Aryan segregation. Whence the ambiguity in the te~ts ~f
great authors, when they develop the theme of races, as nch III
ambiguity as destiny itself. Here schizoanalysis must unravel the thread.
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY 1 1 0 5

For reading a text is never a scholarly exercise in search of what is
signified, still less a highly textual exercise in search of a signifier. Rather
it is a productive use of the literary machine, a montage of desiringmachines, a schizoid exercise that extracts from the text its revolutionary force. The exclamation "So it's ... !", or the meditation of Igituron
race, in an essential relationship with madness.

6

I Three
A Recapitulation of the
Syntheses

Stupefying Oedipus, inexhaustible and ever present. We
are told that the father died "over a period of thousands of years" (well,
well 1) and that the "internalization" corresponding to the paternal image
was produced during the Paleolithic right up until the start of the
Neolithic, "approximately 8,000 years ago. "46 One analyzes historically
or one doesn't. But honestly, as to the death of the father, news doesn't
travel very fast: it would be a mistake to embark Nietzsche on that
particular voyage through history. For Nietzsche is not the kind to
ruminate Over the death of the father, and spend all his Paleolithic period
internalizing him. On the contrary, Nietzsche is exceedingly tired of all
these stories revolving around the death of the father, the death of God,
and wants to put an end to the interminable discourses of this nature
discourses already in vogue in his Hegelian epoch. Alas, he was wrong:
the discourses have continued. But Nietzsche wanted us finally to pass
on to serious things. He gives us twelve or thirteen versions of the death
of God, for good measure and to be done with it, so as to render the
event comical. And he explains that strictly speaking this event has no
importance whatever, that it merely concerns the latest Pope: God dead
o.r not dead, the father dead or not dead, it amounts to the same thing,
since the same psychic repression (re[oulement) and the same social
repression (repression) continue unabated, here in the name of God or a
living father, there in the name of man or the dead father.
Nietzsche says that what is important is not the news that God is
dead, but the time this news takes to bear fruit. Here the psychoanalyst
perks up his ears, believing he has heard a familiar chord: it is well
known that the unconscious takes a lot of time to digest a bit of news;
one can even quote some texts of Freud on the unconscious being
ignorant of time, conserving its objects like an Egyptian tomb. But that
is not at all what Nietzsche is saying: he does not mean that the death of
God spends a long time plodding around in the unconscious. He means
that what takes so long in coming to consciousness is the news that the
death of God makes no difference to the unconscious. The fruits of this
106 , ANTI-OEDIPUS

news are not the consequences brought about by the death of God, but
this other news that the death of God is of no consequence. In other
terms: that God and the father never existed (or if they did, it was so
long ago, perhaps during the Paleolithic). All they did was kill a dead
man, from time immemorial. The fruits of the news of the death of God
do away with the flower of His death as well as the bud of His life. For,
alive or dead, it is still a question of belief: the element of belief has not
been abandoned. The announcement of the father's death constitutes a
last belief, "a belief by virtue of nonbelief" about which Nietzsche says:
"This violence always manifests the need for a belief, for a prop, for a
structure." Oedipus-as-structure.
Engels paid hornagcto the genius of Bachofen, for having recognized in myth the figures of a maternal and a paternal law , their struggles
and their relationships. But Engels slips in a reproach that changes
everything: it really seems as if Bachofen believes all this, that he
believes in myths, in the Furies, Apollo, and Athena.s? The same
reproach applies even better to psychoanalysts: it would seem that they
believe in all of this-in myth, in Oedipus and castration. They reply: the
question is not one of knowing whether we believe in this, but whether
or not the unconscious itself believes in it. But what is this unconscious
when reduced to the state of belief? Who injects it with belief?
Psychoanalysis cannot become a rigorous discipline unless it accepts
putting belief in parentheses, which is to say a materialist reduction of
Oedipus as an ideological form. It is not a matter of saying that Oedipus
is a false belief, but rather that belief is necessarily something false that
diverts and suffocates effective production. That is why seers are the
least believing of men. When we relate desire to Oedipus, we are
condemned to ignore the productive nature of desire: we condemn
desire to vague dreams or imaginations that are merely conscious
expressions of it; we relate it to independent existences--the father, the
mother, the begetters-that do not yet comprise their elements as
internal elements of desire. The question of the father is like that of
God: born of an abstraction, it assumes the link to be already broken
between man and nature, man and the world, so that man must be
produced as man by something exterior to nature and to man. On this
point Nietzsche makes a remark completely akin to those of Marx or
Engels: "We now laugh when we find 'Man and World' placed beside
one another, separated by the sublime presumption of the little word
'and.'

"48

Coextensiveness is another matter entirely, the coextension of man
and nature; a circular movement by which the unconscious, always
remaining subject;: produces and reproduces itself. The unconscious
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

\107

does not follow the paths of a generation progressing (or regressing)
from one body to another: your father, your father's father, and so on.
The organized body is the object of reproduction by generation; it is not
its subject. The sole subject of reproduction is the unconscious itself
which holds to the circular form of production. Sexuality is not a mean;
in the service of generation; rather, the generation of bodies is in the
service of sexuality as an autoproduction of the unconscious. Sexuality
does not represent a premium for the ego, in exchange for its subordination to the process of generation; on the contrary, generation is the ego's
solace, its prolongation, the passage from one body to another through
which the unconscious does no more than reproduce itself in itself.
Indeed, in this sense we must say the unconscious has always been an
orphan-that is, it has engendered itself in the identity of nature and
man, of the world and man. The question of the father, the question of
?od, is what has become impossible, a matter of indifference, so true is
It that to affirm or deny such a being amounts to the same thing, or to live
it or kill it: one and the same misconception (contresens) concerning the
nature of the unconscious.
But psychoanalysts are bent on producing man abstractly, that is to
say ideologically, for culture. It is Oedipus who produces man in this
fashion, and who gives a structure to the false movement of infinite
progression and regression: your father, and your father's father, a
snowball gathering speed as it moves from Oedipus all the way to the
father of the primal horde, to God and the Paleolithic age. It is Oedipus
who makes us man, for better or for worse, say those who would make
fools of us all. The tone may vary, but the message remains basically the
same: you will not escape Oedipus, your sole choice is between the
"neurotic outlet" and the "nonncurotic outlet." The tone may be that of
the scandalized psychoanalyst, the psychoanalyst-as-cop: those who do
not bow to the imperialism of Oedipus are dangerous deviants, leftists
who ought to be handed over to social and police repression; they talk
too much and are lacking in anality (Dr. Gerard Mendel, Doctors
Stephane). What kind of disquieting play on words is it that can make
the analyst a promoter of anality? Or there is the psychoanalyst-aspriest, the pious psychoanalyst who is forever chanting the incurable
insufficiency of being: don't you see that Oedipus saves us from
Oedipus, it is our agony but also our ecstasy, depending on whether we
live it neurotically or live its structure; it is the mother of the holy faith
(1. M. Pohier). Or the technopsychoanalyst, the reform psychoanalyst
obsessed with the triangle, who wraps the splendid gifts of civilization in
Oedipus-identity, manic-depression, and liberty in an infinite progres-

108

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

sion: "Through Oedipus the individual learns to live the triangular
situation, the token of his identity, and at the same time he discoverssometimes in a depressive mode, sometimes in a mode of exaltationhis fundamental alienation, his irremediable solitude, the price of his
liberty. The basic structure of the Oedipal apparatus must not only be
generalized in time so as to account for all the triangular experiences of
the child and his parents, it must be generalized in space to include those
triangular relations other than the parent-child relations."49
The unconscious poses no problem of meaning, solely problems of
use. The question posed by desire is not "What does it mean?" but
rather "How does it work?" How do these machines, these desiringmachines, work-yours and mine? With what sort of breakdowns as a
part of their functioning? How do they pass from one body to another?
How are they attached to the body without organs? What occurs when
their mode of operation confronts the social machines? A tractable gear
is greased, or on the contrary an infernal machine is made ready. What
are the connections, what are the disjunctions, the conjunctions, what
use is made of the syntheses? It represents nothing, but it produces. It
means nothing, but it works. Desire makes its entry with the general
collapse of the question "What does it mean?" No one has been able to
pose the problem of language except to the extent that linguists and
logicians have first eliminated meaning; and the greatest force of
language was only discovered once a work was viewed as a machine,
producing certain effects, amenable to a certain use. Malcolm Lowry
says of his work: it's anything you want it to be, so long as it works- "It
works too, believe me, as I have found out"-a machinery.t" But on
condition that meaning be nothing other than use, that it become a firm
principle only if we have at our disposal immanent criteria capable of
determining the legitimate uses, as opposed to the illegitimate ones that
relate use instead to a hypothetical meaning and re-establish a kind of
transcendence.
Analysis termed transcendental is precisely the determination of
these criteria, immanent to the field of the unconscious, insofar as they
are opposed to the transcendent exercises of a "What does it mean?"
Schizoanalysis is at once a transcendental and a materialist analysis. It is
critical in the sense that it leads the criticism of Oedipus, or leads
Oedipus, to the point of its own self-criticism. It sets out to explore a
transcendental unconscious, rather than a metaphysical one; an unconscious that is material rather than ideological; schizophrenic rather than
Oedipal; nonfigurative rather than imaginary; real rather than symbolic;
machinic rather than structural-an unconscious, finally, that is molecu-

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY

FAMIL~

1109

lar, microphysical, and micrological rather than molar or gregarious;
productive rather than expressive. And it is a matter here of practical
principles as directions for the "cure."
Thus we have already seen how the immanent criteria of desiringproduction permitted a definition of legitimate uses of syntheses, uses
completely distinct from Oedipal uses. And in relation to this desiringproduction, the Oedipal illegitimate uses seemed to us to be multiform,
but always to revolve around the same error, and to envelop theoretical
and practical paralogisms. In the first place, a partial and nonspecific use
of the connective syntheses was found to be in opposition to the Oedipal
use, itself global and specific. This global-specific use was found to have
two aspects, parental and conjugal, to which the triangular form of
Oedipus and the reproduction of this form corresponded. This use
rested upon a paralogism of extrapolation that in fact constituted
Oedipus's formal cause-an extrapolation whose illegitimate nature
weighed on the whole operation: the extraction of a transcendent
complete object from the signifying chain, which served as a despotic
signifier on which the entire chain thereafter seemed to depend, assigning an element of lack to each position of desire, fusing desire to a law,
and engendering the illusion that this loosened up and freed the elements
of the chain.
In the second place, an inclusive or nonrestrictive use of the
disjunctive syntheses is in opposition to their Oedipal, exclusive,
restrictive use. This restrictive use in its turn has two poles, imaginary
and symbolic, since the only choice it permits is between the exclusive
symbolic differentiations and the undifferentiated Imaginary, correlatively determined by Oedipus. This use demonstrates this time how
Oedipus proceeds, it demonstrates Oedipus's method: a paralogism of
the double bind, the double impasse. (Or, in line with a suggestion made
by Henri Gobard, would it be better to translate this as "double hold"
like a full nelson hold in wrestling, so as to better describe the treatment
forced on the unconscious when it is bound at both ends, leaving it no
other choice than to respond Oedipus, to cry Oedipus, in sickness as in
health, in its crises as in their outcome, in its resolution as in its problem.
In any case, the double bind is not the schizophrenic process; on the
contrary, the double bind is Oedipus insofar as it arrests the motion of
the process, or forces it to spin around in the void.)
In the third place, a nomadic and polyvocal use of the conjunctive
syntheses is opposed to the segregative and biunivocal use made of
them. There again this biunivocal use, illegitimate from the point of view
of the unconscious itself, has what appear to be two moments: first, a
moment that is racist, nationalistic, religious, etc., and that, by means of
110

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

a segregation, constitutes an aggregate of d~par~u:e tha~ is always
presupposed by Oedipus, even if in a totally ImplICit. fas~lOn; next, a
familial moment that constitutes the aggregate of destmation by means
of an application. Whence the third paralogism, the paralo~is~ of
application, which fixes the precondition for ~edi.rus by estabh~hmg a
set of biunivocal relations between the determmatlOns of the SOCial field
and the familial determinations, thereby making possible and inevitable
the reduction of libidinal investments to the eternal daddy-mommy. We
still have not exhausted all the paralogisms that lead the practice of the
cure in the direction of a frenzied oedipalization, a betrayal of desire, the
unconscious closeted in a day nursery, a narcissistic machin~ f?r
arrogant and mouthy little egos, a perpetual absorption .of ca~ltalist
surplus value, flows of words against flows of money, the mtermmable
story-psychoanalysis.
The three errors concerning desire are called lack, law, and
signifier. It is one and the same error, an idealism that forms a p~ous
conception of the unconscious. And it is futile to interpret these notions
in terms of a combinative apparatus (une combinatoire) that makes of
lack an empty position and no longer a deprivation, that turns t~e .Iaw
into a rule of the game and no longer a commandment, and the signifier
into a distributor and no longer a meaning, for these notions cannot be
prevented from dragging their theological c.ortege be~ind-insufficiency
of being, guilt, signification. Structural interpretation challenges all
beliefs, rises above all images, and from the realm of the mother and the
father retains only functions, defines the prohibition and the transgression as structural operations. But what water will cleanse these concepts
of their background, their previous existences-religiosity? Scientific
knowledge as nonbelief is truly the last refuge of belief, and as
Nietzsche put it, there never was but one psychology, that of the p:i~st.
From the moment lack is reintroduced into desire, all of desiringproduction is crushed, reduced to being no more than the prod.uction of
fantasy; but the sign does not produce fantasies, it is a production ~f th.e
real and a position of desire within reality. From th~ moment.deslr~ IS
welded again to the law-we needn't point out what IS known smc~ time
began: that there is no desire without law-the eternal operation of
eternal repression recommences, the operation that closes around the
unconscious the circle of prohibition and transgression, white mass and
black mass; but the sign of desire is never a sign of the law, it is a sign of
strength (puissance). And who would dare use the term "law" for, t~e
fact that desire situates and develops its strength, and that wherever It IS,
it causes flows to move and substances to be intersected ("I am careful
not to speak of chemical laws, the word has a moral aftertaste")? From
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY \ 111

the moment desire is made to depend on the signifier, it is put back under
the yoke of a despotism whose effect is castration, there where one
recognizes the stroke of the signifier itself; but the sign of desire is never
signifying, it exists in the thousands of productive breaks-flows that
never allow themselves to be signified within the unary stroke of
castration. It is always a point-sign of many dimensions, polyvocity as
the basis for a punctual semiology.
It is said that the unconscious is dark and somber. Reich and
Marcuse are often reproached for their "Rousseauism," their naturalism: a conception of the unconscious that is thought to be too idyllic.
But doesn't one indeed lend to the unconscious horrors that could only
be those of consciousness, and of a belief too sure of itself? Would it be
an exaggeration to say that in the unconscious there is necessarily less
cruelty and terror, and of a different type, than in the consciousness of
an heir, a soldier, or a Chief of State? The unconscious has its horrors,
but they are not anthropomorphic. It is not the slumber of reason that
engenders monsters, but vigilant and insomniac rationality. The unconscious is Rousseauistic, being man-nature. And how much malice and
ruse there are in Rousseau! Transgression, guilt, castration: are these
determinations of the unconscious, or is this the way a priest sees things?
Doubtless there are many other forces besides psychoanalysis for
oedipalizing the unconscious, rendering it guilty, castrating it. But
psychoanalysis reinforces the movement, it invents a last priest. Oedipal
analysis imposes a transcendent use on all the syntheses of the
unconscious, ensuring their conversion.
The practical problem of schizoanalysis is, then, to ensure the
contrasting reversion: restoring the syntheses of the unconscious to their
immanent use. De-oedipalizing, undoing the daddy-mommy spider web,
undoing the beliefs so as to attain the production of desiring-machines,
and to reach the level of economic and social investments where the
militant analysis comes into play. Nothing is accomplished as long as
machines are not touched upon. This implies interventions that are in
fact very concrete; in place of the benevolent pseudo neutrality of the
Oedipal analyst, who wants and understands only daddy and mommy,
we must substitute a malevolent, an openly malevolent activity: your
Oedipus is a fucking drag, keep it up and the analysis will be stopped, or
else we'll apply a shock treatment to you; stop saying daddy-mommy; of
course "Hamlet lives in you as Werther lives in you," and Oedipus too,
and anything you want, but "you grow uterine arms and legs, uterine
lips, uterine mustache. In tracing back the 'memory deaths' your ego
becomes a sort of mineral theorem which constantly proves the futility
of living .... Were you born Hamlet? Or did you not rather create the

1121

ANTI-OEDIPUS

type in yourself? Whether this be so or not, what seems infinitely more
important is-why revert to myth ?"51
If myth is given up, a little joy, a little discovery, is restored to
psychoanalysis. For it has become very dismal, very sad, quite interminable, with everything decided in advance. Will it be retorted that the
schizo is not joyous either? But doesn't his sadness come from the fact
that he can no longer bear the forces of oedipalization and hamletization
that hem him in on all sides? Better to flee to the body without organs
and hide out there, closing himself up in it. The little joy lies in
schizophrenization as a process, not in the schizo as a clinical entity.
"You have pushed a process into a goal. ..." If we made a psychoanalyst enter into the domains of the productive unconscious, he would feel
as out of place with his theater as an actress from the ComedicFrancaise in a factory, a priest from the Middle Ages on an assembly
line. We must set up units of production, plug in desiring-machines.
What takes place in this factory, what this process is, its spasms and its
glories, its labors and its joys, still remain unknown.

7

I

Social Repression and Psychic Repression

We have attempted to analyze the form, the reproduction, the (formal) cause, the method, and the condition of the Oedipal
triangle. But we have postponed the analysis of the real forces, the real
causes on which the triangulation depends. The general line of the
response is simple, it has been sketched out by Reich: it is social
repression, the forces of social repression. This response, however,
leaves two problems untouched and makes them even more urgent: on
the one hand, the specific relationship between psychic repression and
social repression; on the other hand, the particular situation of Oedipus
in this social repression-psychic repression system. The two problems
are obviously linked because, if psychic repression did bear on incestuous desires, it would thereby gain a certain independence and primacy,
as a condition for constituting a system of exchange or any society, in
relation to social repression, which would then concern only the returns
of the psychically repressed in a constituted society. Therefore we
should first of all consider the second question: does psychic repressior
bear upon the Oedipus complex as an adequate expression of the
unconscious? Must we even follow Freud in saying that the Oedipus
complex, according to one or the other of its two poles, is eithei
repressed (not without leaving behind traces and returns that will be
confronted by the prohibitions), or suppressed (not without being passel
on to the children, with whom the same story begins all over again)?"
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY /11:

We wonder if Oedipus in fact expresses desire; if Oedipus is desired
then it is indeed on it that psychic repression comes to bear. Now the
Freudian argument is of a nature to leave us wondering: Freud quotes a
remark by Sir J. G. Frazer according to which "the law only forbids men
to do what their instincts incline them to do; ... Instead of assuming,
therefore, from the legal prohibition of incest that there is a natural
aversion to incest, we ought rather to assume that there is a natural
instinct in favor of it. "53 In other words: if it is prohibited, this is
because it is desired-there would be no need to prohibit what is not'
desired. Once again, it is this confidence in the law, the unawareness of
the ruses and the procedures of the law, that leaves us wondering.
The immortal father of Celine's Death on the Installment Plan (Mort
Ii credit) cries out: So you want to see me die, eh, is that what you want,
speak up? We didn't want anything of the sort, however. We didn't want
~he train to be daddy, Or the station mommy. We only wanted peace and
Innocence, and to be left alone to machine our little machines 0
desiring-production. Of course pieces from the bodies of the mother and
~he fath.e~ are taken up in the connections, parental appellations crop up
In the ~IsJ~nctions of the chain, the parents are there as ordinary stimuli
of an indifferent nature that trigger the becoming of adventures, of
races, and of continents. But what a bizarre Freudian mania-to relate
to ?e~ipus. what overflows it on every side and from all angles,
~egIn~Ing with the hallucination of books and the delirium of apprentiCeshIps (the teacher as father-substitute, and the book as family
romance). Freud couldn't abide a simple humorous remark by Jung, to
the effect that Oedipus must not really exist, since even the primitive
prefers a pretty young woman to his mother or his grandmother. If Jung
bet:ayed everything, it was nevertheless not by way of this remark,
WhICh can only suggest that the mother functions as a pretty girl as much
as. t~e. pretty girl functions as mother, since the main thing for the
pnmI:Ive or the child is to form and put into motion their desiringmachines , to make flows circulate and to perform breaks in these flows.
. The law tells us: You will not marry your mother, and you will not
kill your father. And we docile subjects say to ourselves: so that's what I
wanted! Will it ever be suspected that the law discredits-and has an
interest in discrediting and disgracing-the person it presumes to be
guilty, the person the law wants to be guilty and wants to be made to feel
guilty? One acts as if it were possible to conclude directly from psychic
repression the nature of the repressed, and from the prohibition the
nature of what is prohibited. There we have a typical paralogism-yet
another, a fourth paralogism that we shall have to call displacement. For
what really takes place is that the law prohibits something that is
114

I

perfectly fictitious in the order of desire or of the "instincts," so as to
persuade its subjects that they had the intention corresponding to this
fiction. This is indeed the only way the law has of getting a grip on
intention, of making the unconscious guilty. In short, we are not witness
here to a system of two terms where we could conclude from the formal
prohibition what is really prohibited. Instead we have before us a system
of three terms, where this conclusion becomes completely illegitimate.
Distinctions must be made: the repressing representation which performs the repression; the repressed representative, on which the repression actually comes to bear; the displaced represented, which gives a
falsified apparent image that is meant to trap desire.
Such is the nature of Oedipus-the sham image. Repression does
not operate through Oedipus, nor is it directed at Oedipus. It is not a
question of the return of the repressed. Oedipus is a factitious product
of psychic repression. It is only the represented, insofar as it is induced
by repression. Repression cannot act without displacing desire, without
giving rise to a consequent desire, all ready, all warm for punishment,
and without putting this desire in the place of the antecedent desire on
which repression comes to bear in principle or in reality ("Ah, so that's
what it was!").
D. H. Lawrence-who does not struggle against Freud in the name
of the rights of the Ideal, but who speaks by virtue of the flows of
sexuality and the intensities of the unconscious, and who is incensed and
bewildered by what Freud is doing when he closets sexuality in the
Oedipal nursery-has a foreboding of this operation of displacement,
and protests with all his might: no, Oedipus is not a state of desire and
the drives, it is an idea, nothing but an idea that repression inspires in us
concerning desire; not even a compromise, but an idea in the service of
repression, its propaganda, or its propagation. "The incest motive is a
logical deduction of the human reason, which has recourse to this last
extremity, to save itself ... which first and foremost is a logical
deduction made by the human reason, even if unconsciously made, and
secondly is introduced into the affective passional sphere, where it now
proceeds to serve as a principle for action ....This has nothing to do
with the active unconscious [which] sparkles, vibrates, travels ... we
realize that the unconscious contains nothing ideal, nothing in the least
conceptual, and hence nothing in the least personal, since personality,
like the ego, belongs to the conscious or mental-subjective self. So the
first analyses are, or should be, so impersonal that the so-called human
relations are not involved. The first relationship is neither personal nor
biological-a fact which psychoanalysis has not succeeded in
grasping."54

ANTI-OEDIPUS
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FA,MILY

1115

Oedipal desires are not at all repressed, nor do they have any reason
to be. They are nevertheless in an intimate relationship with psychic
repression, but in a different manner. Oedipal desires are the bait, the
disfigured image by means of which repression catches desire in the
trap. If desire is repressed, this is not because it is desire for the mother
and for the death of the father; on the contrary, desire becomes that only
because it is repressed, it takes on that mask only under the reign of the
repression that models the mask for it and plasters it on its face. Besides,
it is doubtful that incest was a real obstacle to the establishment of
society, as the partisans of an exchangist conception claim. We have
seen that there were other obstacles. The real danger is elsewhere. If
desire is repressed, it is because every position of desire, no matter how
small, is capable of calling into question the established order of a
society: not that desire is asocial, on the contrary. But it is explosive;
there is no desiring-machine capable of being assembled without demolishing entire social sectors. Despite what some revolutionaries think
about this, desire is revolutionary in its essence-desire, not left-wing
holidays !-and no society can tolerate a position of real desire without
its structures of exploitation, servitude, and hierarchy being compromised.
If a society is identical with its structures-an amusing
hypothesis-then yes, desire threatens its very being. It is therefore of
vital importance for a society to repress desire, and even to find
something more efficient than repression, so that repression, hierarchy,
exploitation, and servitude are themselves desired. It is quite troublesome to have to say such rudimentary things: desire does not threaten a
society because it is a desire to sleep with the mother, but because it is
revolutionary. And that does not at all mean that desire is something
other than sexuality, but that sexuality and love do not live in the
bedroom of Oedipus, they dream instead of wide-open spaces, and
cause strange flows to circulate that do not let themselves be stocked
within an established order. Desire does not "want" revolution, it is
revolutionary in its own right, as though involuntarily, by wanting what
it wants. From the beginning of this study we have maintained both that
social production and desiring-production are one and the same, and that
they have differing regimes, with the result that a social form of
production exercises an essential repression of desiring-production, and
also that desiring-production-a "real" desire-is potentially capable of
demolishing the social form. But what is a "real"desire, since repression
is also desired? How can we tell them apart? We demand the right to a
very deliberate analysis. For even in their contrary uses, let us make no
mistake about it, the same syntheses are at issue.
116

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

It is clear what psychoanalysis expects to gain from claiming a link,
where Oedipus would be the object of repression, and even its subject
through the intermediary of the superego. From this it expects a cultural
justification for psychic repression-a justification that makes psychic
repression move into the foreground and no longer considers the
problem of social repression as anything more than secondary from the
point of view of the unconscious. That is why critics have been able to
observe a conservative or reactionary turning point in Freud, from the
moment that he gave an autonomous value to psychic repression as a
condition of culture acting against the incestuous drives: Reich goes so
far as to say that the crucial turning point of Freudianism, the abandonment of sexuality, comes when Freud accepts the idea of a primary
anxiety that supposedly touches off psychic repression in an endogenous fashion. Consider the 1908 article on "civilized sexual morality":
Oedipus is not yet named here; psychic repression is considered in terms
of social repression, which gives rise toa displacement and acts on the
partial drives insofar as they represent in their own fashion a sort of
desiring-production, before being exercised against the incestuous or
other drives threatening legitimate marriage. But it then becomes
evident that, the more the problem of Oedipus and incest comes to
occupy center stage, the more psychic repression and its correlates,
suppression and sublimation, will be founded on supposedly transcendent requirements of civilization, at the same time that the psychoanalyst
plunges deeper into a familialist and ideological vision.
We do not need to relate again the reactionary compromises of
Freudianism, and even its "theoretical surrender": this work has been
accomplished several times, in a profound way, rigorously, and with
nuances." We see no special problem in the possibility of a coexistence
of revolutionary, reformist, and reactionary elements at the heart of the
same theoretical and practical doctrine. We refuse to play "take it or
leave it," under the pretext that theory justifies practice, being born
from it, or that one cannot challenge the process of "cure" except by
starting from elements drawn from this very cure. As if every great
doctrine were not a combined formation, constructed from bits and
pieces, various intermingled codes and flux, partial elements and derivatives, that constitute its very life or its becoming. As if we could
reproach someone for having an ambiguous relationship with psychoanalysis, without first mentioning that psychoanalysis owes its existence
to a relationship, theoretically and practically ambiguous, with what it
discovers and the forces that it wields.
While the critical study of Freudian ideology has been done, and
done well, on the other hand the history of the movement has never even
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY /117

been sketched out: the structure of the psychoanalytic group, its
politics, its tendencies and its focal points, its self-applications, its
suicides and its follies, the enormous group superego-everything that
took place on the body of the master. What has come to be called the
monumental work of Ernest Jones does not penetrate censorship, it
codifies it. And the way the three elements coexisted: the exploratory,
pioneering, revolutionary element, whereby desiring-production was
discovered; the classical cultural element, which reduces everything to a
scene from Oedipal theatrical representation (the return to myth!); and
finally the third element, the most disturbing, a sort of racket thirsting
after respectability, which will never have done with getting itself
recognized and institutionalized-a formidable enterprise of absorption
of surplus value, with its codification of the interminable cure, its cynical
justification of the role of money, and all the pledges it makes to the
established order. All these elements were present in Freud, a fantastic
Christopher Columbus, a brilliant bourgeois reader of Goethe, Shakespeare, and Sophocles, a masked Al Capone.
The strength of Reich consists in having shown how psychic
repression depended on social repression. Which in no way implies a
confusion of the two concepts, since social repression needs psychic
repression precisely in order to form docile subjects and to ensure the
reproduction of the social formation, including its repressive structures.
But social repression should not be understood by using as a starting
point a familial repression coextensive with civilization-far from it; it is
civilization that must be understood in terms of a social repression
inherent to a given form of social production. Social repression bears on
desire-and not solely on needs or interests-only by means of sexual
repression. The family is indeed the delegated agent of this psychic
repression, insofar as it ensures "a mass psychological reproduction of
the economic system of a society." Of course it should not be concluded
from this that desire is Oedipal. On the contrary, it is the social
repression of desire or sexual repression-that is, the stasis of libidinal
energy-that actualizes Oedipus and engages desire in this requisite
impasse, organized by the repressive society.
Reich was the first to raise the problem of the relationship between
desire and the social field (and went further than Marcuse , who treats
the problem lightly). He is the true founder of a materialist psychiatry.
Situating the problem in terms of desire, he is the first to reject the
explanations of a summary Marxism too quick to say the masses were
fooled, mystified. But since he had not sufficiently formulated the
concept of desiring-production, he did not succeed in determining the
insertion of desire into the economic infrastructure itself, the insertion
118

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

of the drives into social production. Consequently, revolutionary investment seemed to him such that the desire moving within it simply
coincided with an economic rationality; as to the reactionary mass
investments, they seemed to him to derive from ideology, so that
psychoanalysis merely had the role of explaining the subjective, the
negative, and the inhibited, without participating directly as psychoanalysis in the positivity of the revolutionary movement or in the desiringcreativity. (To a certain extent, didn't this amount to a reintroduction of
the error or the illusion?) The fact remains that Reich, in the name of
desire, caused a song of life to pass into psychoanalysis. He denounced,
in the final resignation of Freudianism, a fear of life, a resurgence of the
ascetic ideal, a cultural broth of bad consciousness. Better to depart in
search of the Orgone, he said to himself, in search of the vital and
cosmic element of desire, than to continue being a psychoanalyst under
those conditions. No one forgave him this, whereas Freud got full
pardon. Reich was the first to attempt to make the analytic machine and
the revolutionary machine function together. In the end, he only had his
own desiring-machines, his paranoiac, miraculous, and celibate boxes,
with metallic inner walls lined with cotton and wool.
Psychic repression distinguishes itself from social repression by the
unconscious nature of the operation and by its result ("even the
inhibition of revolt has become unconscious"), a distinction that expresses clearly the difference in nature between the two repressions. But
a real independence cannot be concluded from this. Psychic repression
is such that social repression becomes desired; it induces a consequent
desire, a faked image of its object, on which it bestows the appearance
of independence. Strictly speaking, psychic repression is a means in the
service of social repression. What it bears on is also the object of social
repression: desiring-production. But it in fact implies an original double
operation: the repressive social formation delegates its power to an
agent of psychic repression, and correlatively the repressed desire is as
though masked by the faked displaced image to which the repression
gives rise. Psychic repression is delegated by the social formation, while
the desiring-formation is disfigured, displaced by psychic repression.
The family is the delegated agent of psychic repression, or rather
the agent delegated to psychic repression; the incestuous drives are the
disfigured image of the repressed. The Oedipus complex, the process of
oedipalization, is therefore the result of this double operation. It is in one
and the same movement that the repressive social production is replaced
by the repressing family, and that the latter offers a displaced image of
desiring-production that represents the repressed as incestuous familial
drives. In this way the family/drives relationship is substituted for the
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

1119

relationship between the two orders of production, in a diversion where
the whole of psychoanalysis goes astray. And the interest of such an
operation, from the point of view of social production, becomes evident,
for the latter could not otherwise ward off desire's potential for revolt
and revolution. By placing the distorting mirror of incest before desire
(that's what you wanted, isn't it?), desire is shamed, stupefied, it is
placed in a situation without exit, it is easily persuaded to deny "itself"
in the name of the more important interests of civilization (what if
everyone did the same, what if everyone married his mother or kept his
sister for himself? there would no longer be any differentiation, any
exchanges possible). We must act quickly and soon. Incest, a slandered
shallow stream.
Although we can see social production's interest in such an
operation, it is less clear what makes this operation possible from the
point of view of desiring-production itself. We do have, however, the
elements of a response. Social production would need at its disposal, on
the recording surface of the socius, an agent that is also capable of
acting on, of inscribing the recording surface of desire. Such an agent
exists: the family. It belongs essentially to the recording of social
production, as a system of reproduction of the producers. And doubtless, at the other pole, the recording of desiring-production on the body
without organs is brought about through a genealogical network that is
not familial: parents only intervene here as partial objects, flows, signs,
and agents of a process that outflanks them on all sides. At most, the
child innocently "relates" to his parents some part of the astonishing
productive experience he is undergoing with his desire; but this experience is not related to them as such. Yet this is precisely where the
operation arises. Under the precocious action of social repression, the
family slips into and interferes with the network of desiring-genealogy;
it assumes the task of alienating the entire genealogy; it confiscates the
Numen (but see here, God is daddy). The desiring-experience is treated
as if it were intrinsically related to the parents, and as if the family were
its supreme law. Partial objects are subjected to the notorious law of
totality-unity acting as "lacking." The disjunctions are subjected to the
alternative of the undifferentiated or exclusion.
The family is therefore introduced into the production of desire and
will perform a displacement, an unparalleled repression of desire
commencing with the earliest age of the child. Social production
delegates the family to psychic repression. And if the family is able in
this manner to slip into the recording of desire, it is because the body
without organs on which this recording is accomplished already exercises on its own account, as we have seen, a primal repression of
120 ,

.~NT!-OEOIPUS

desiring-production. It falls to the family to profit from this, and to
superimpose the repression that is properly termed secondary, this being
a function delegated to the family or one to which the family is
delegated. (Psychoanalysis has clearly demonstrated the difference
between these two repressions, but has not shown the scope of this
difference or the distinction between their respective regimes.) That is
why psychic repression in the strict sense does not content itself with
repressing real desiring-production, but offers a displaced apparent
image of the repressed, by substituting a familial recording for the
recording of desire. Desiring-production taken as a whole does not
assume the well-known Oedipal figure except in the familial translation
of its recording. Translation-betrayal.
At times we say that Oedipus is nothing, almost nothing (within the
order of desiring-production, even in the child); at other times we say
that it is everywhere (in the enterprise of domesticating the unconscious,
of representing desire and the unconscious). To be sure, we have never
dreamed of saying that psychoanalysis invented Oedipus. Everything
points in the opposite direction: the subjects of psychoanalysis arrive
already oedipalized, they demand it, they want more. News flash:
Stravinsky declares before dying: "My misfortune, I am sure of it, came
from my father's being so distant with me and from the small amount of
affection shown me by my mother. So I decided that one day I would
show them." If even artists give in to this, it would be a mistake to stand
on ceremony and hold to the ordinary scruples of a diligent psychoanalyst. If a musician tells us that music does not attest to active and
conquering forces, but to reactive forces, to reactions to daddy-mommy,
we have only to play again on a paradox dear to Nietzsche, while barely
modifying it: Freud-as-musician.
No, psychoanalysts invent nothing, though they have invented
much in another way, and have legislated a lot, reinforced a lot, injected
a lot. All that psychoanalysts do is to reinforce the movement; they add
a last burst of energy to the displacement of the entire unconscious.
What they do is merely to make the unconscious speak according to the
transcendent uses of synthesis imposed on it by other forces: Global
Persons, the Complete Object, the Great Phallus, the Terrible Undifferentiated of the Imaginary, Symbolic Differentiations, Segregation. What
psychoanalysts invent is only the transference, a transference Oedipus,
a consulting-room Oedipus of Oedipus, especially noxious and virulent,
but where the subject finally has what he wants, and sucks away at his
Oedipus on the full body of the analyst. And that's already too much.
But Oedipus takes shape in the family, not in the analyst's office, which
merely acts as the last territoriality. And Oedipus is not made by the
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

1121

the person capable of setting whole continents and cultures adrift. He is
not suffering from a divided self or a shattered Oedipus, but on the
contrary, from having been brought back to everything he had left. A
drop in intensity to the body without organs = 0, autism: the schizo has
no other means of reacting to this blocking of all his investments of
reality, the barriers placed before him by the Oedipal system of social
and psychic repression. As Laing says, they are interrupted in their
journey. They have lost reality But when did they lose it? During the
journey, or during the interruption of the journey?
Hence another possible formulation of an inverse relationship:
there would be something like two groups, the psychotics and neurotics,
those who do not tolerate oedipalization, and those who tolerate it and
are even content with it and evolve within it. Those on whom the
Oedipal imprint does not take, and those on whom it does. "I believe my
friends cast off in a group at the start of the New Age, with forces for a
practical explosion that thrust them into a paternalistic deviation that I
find depraved .... A second group of loners, of which I am a part,
doubtless constituted by centers of collarbones, was deprived of any
possibility of individual success at the moment they were engaged in
laborious studies in innate science. With regard to them, my rebellion
against the paternalism of the first group placed me from the second year
in a socially difficult position that was growing more and more suffocating. So, do you believe these two groups are capable of being joined? I am
not too angry with these bastards of virile paternalism, I am not
vindictive.... In any case, if I have won, there will be no more struggles
between the Father and the Son! ... I am speaking of God's people,
naturally, not of those close to Him who take themselves for his
people."58 It is the recording of desire on the increate body without
organs, and the familial recording on the socius, that are in opposition
throughout the two groups. The innate science in psychosis and the
neurotic experimental sciences. The schizoid excentric circle and the
neurosis triangle.
On a more general level, it is the two kinds of use made of synthesis
that are in opposition. On the one hand there are the desiring-machines,
and on the other the Oedipal-narcissistic machine. In order to understand the details of this struggle, it must be borne in mind that the family
relentlessly operates on desiring-production. Inscribing itself into the
recording process of desire, clutching at everything, the family performs
a vast appropriation of the productive forces; it displaces and reorganizes in its own fashion the entirety of the connections and the hiatuses that
characterize the machines of desire. It reorganizes them all along the
lines of the universal castration that conditions the family itself ("a dead

1241

ANTI·OEDIPUS

rat's ass," said Artaud, "suspended from the ceiling of the sky"), but it
also redistributes these breaks in accordance with its own laws and the
requirements of social production. The inscription performed by the
family follows the pattern of its triangle, by distinguishing what belongs
to the family from what does not. It also cuts inwardly, along the lines of
differentiation that form global persons: there's daddy, there's mommy,
there you are, and then there's your sister. Cut into the flow of milk here,
it's your brother's turn, don't take a crap here, cut into the stream of shit
over there. Retention is the primary function of the family: it is a matter
of learning what elements of desiring-production the family is going to
reject, what it is going to retain, what it is going to direct along the
dead-end roads leading to its own undifferentiated (the miasma), and
what on the contrary it is going to lead down the paths of a contagious
and reproduceable differentiation. For the family creates at the same
time its disgraces and its honors, the nondifferentiation of its neurosis
and the differentiation of its ideal, which are distinguishable only in
appearance.
While this is taking place, what is desiring-production doing? The
retained elements do not enter into the new use of synthesis that
imposes such a profound change on them without causing the whole
triangle to reverberate. The desiring-machines are at the door, they
make everything shake when they enter. Moreover, what does not enter
causes perhaps even more vibrations to be felt. The desiring-machines
reintroduce or attempt to reintroduce their deviant cuts and breaks. The
child feels the task required of him. But what is to be put into the
triangle, how are selections to be made? The father's nose or the
mother's ear-will that do, can that be retained, will that constitute a
good Oedipal incision? And the bicycle horn? What is part of the family?
It is the triangle's job to vibrate, to resonate, under the pressure of what
it retains as much as what it thrusts aside. Resonance-here again, either
muffled or public, disgraceful or proud-s-is the family's second function.
The family is at the same time an anus that retains, a voice that
resounds, and a mouth that consumes: its very own three syntheses,
since it is a matter of connecting desire to the ready-made objects of
social production. Go buy madeleines in Combray if you really want to
feel the vibrations.
We now come to the realization that the simple opposition between
the two groups is inadequate, an opposition that would allow one to
define neurosis as an intra-oedipal disorder, and psychosis as an
extra-oedipal escape. It is not even enough to state that the two groups
are "capable of being joined." Rather it is the possibility of discriminating directly between the two that creates the difficulty. How can we
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

1125

distinguish between the pressure that familial reproduction exercises on
desiring-production, and the pressure that desiring-production exercises
on familial reproduction? The Oedipal triangle vibrates and trembles
but is this in terms of the hold over the machines of desire that it
constantly guarantees itself, or in terms of these machines that escape
the Oedipal imprint and cause the triangle to release its grip? Where
does the resonance of the triangle reach its limit? A familial romance
expresses an effort to save the Oedipal genealogy, but it also expresses a
free thrust of non-oedipal genealogy. Fantasies are never pregnant
forms, but border or frontier phenomena ready to cross over to one side
or the other. In short, Oedipus is strictly undecidable. It can be found
everywhere all the more readily for being undecidable, and in this sense
it is correct to say that Oedipus is strictly good for nothing.
Let us turn to the beautiful story of Gerard de Nerval: he wants
Aurelia, his fondest love, to be the same as Adrienne, the little girl of his
childhood; he "perceives" them as identical.w And Aurelie and Adrienne, both in one, are his mother. Will it be said that the identification as
"a perceptual identity" is here a sign of psychosis? One then encounters
the criterion of reality: the complex invades the psychotic consciousness only at the price of a rupture with the real, whereas in neurosis the
identity remains that of unconscious representations and does not
compromise perception. But what is there to gain from inscribing
everything in Oedipus, even psychosis? One step further and Aurelie,
Adrienne, and the mother are the Virgin. Nerval seeks the point where
the vibration of the triangle is at its limit. "You are simply seeking for
drama," says Aurelio. Everything is not inscribed in Oedipus without
everything at its extreme fleeing beyond the reach of Oedipus. These
identifications were not identifications with persons from the viewpoint
of perception, but identifications of names with regions of intensity that
provide the impetus toward other still more intense regions, stimuli of
one sort or another that set in motion another journey altogether, stases
that prepare for other breakthroughs, other movements where the
mother is no longer encountered, but the Virgin and God: "And twice I
have crossed and conquered the Acheron. "60 Thus the schizo will accept
the reduction of everything to the mother, since it is of no importance
whatsoever: he is sure of being able to make everything rise again from
the mother, and to keep for his Own secret use all the Virgins that had
been placed there.
Everything can be converted into neurosis, or warped out of shape
into psychosis: it is therefore not in this fashion that the question must
be posed. It would be inaccurate to maintain an Oedipal interpretation
for the neuroses, and to reserve an extra-oedipal explanation for the
126

I

psychoses. There are not two groups, there is no difference in nature
between neuroses and psychoses. For in any case desiring-production is
the cause, the ultimate cause of both the psychotic subversions that
shatter Oedipus or overwhelm it, and of the neurotic reverberations that
constitute it. Such a principle takes on its full meaning if it is related to
the problem of "actual factors." One of the most important points of
psychoanalysis was the evaluation of the role of these actual facto:s,
even in neurosis, insofar as they are distinguishable from the familial
infantile factors; all the major dissensions were linked to this evaluation.
The difficulties bore on several aspects. First, the nature of these
factors: were they somatic, social, metaphysical? Were they the famous
"problems of living," through which a very pure desexualized idealism
was reintroduced into psychoanalysis? In the second place, the modality
of these factors: did they act in a negative, privative fashion, by mere
frustration? Finally, their moment, their own time: was it not selfevident that the actual factor arose afterward, and signified "recent," in
opposition to the infantile or the oldest factor that could be sufficiently
explained by the familial complex? Even a writer like Reich-so careful
to situate desire in relation to the forms of social production, demonstrating thereby that there is no psychoneurosis that is not also an actual
neurosis-continues to present the actual factors as acting by means of a
repressive deprivation (the "sexual stasis") and as arising afterward.
Which leads him to maintain a kind of diffuse oedipalism, since the stasis
or the actual privative factor only defines the energy of the neurosis, but
not the content that for its own part refers to the infantile Oedipal
conflict, this old conflict becoming reactivated by the actual stasis.*
But the oedipalists are not saying anything different from this when
they remark that an actual deprivation or frustration cannot be experienced except in the midst of an older internal qualitative conflict, which
blocks not merely the roads prohibited by reality, but also those that
reality leaves open and that the ego forbids itself in its turn (the
double-impasse formula): "Could one find examples [illustrating the
diagram of actual neuroses] in the prisoner or the concentration-camp
victim or the worker harassed by work? It is not certain that they would
furnish a large quota.... Our systematic tendency is not to accept the
evident iniquities of reality without taking stock of them, without trying
to disclose in what sense the disorder of the world is manifested in the
subjective disorder, even if it is, with the passing of time, inscribed
*Reich, The Function of the Orgasm, p. 112: HAil neur~ti~ fantasies can be .traced back .to the child's
early sexual relationship to the parents. However, 1£ 11 were. not contmual1'y nourished by the
contemporary stasis of excitation which It initially produced, the child-parent conflict could not by Itself
cause a permanent disturbance of the psychic equilibrium."

ANTI-OEDIPUS
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILiALiSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

1127

within more or less irreversible structures."61 We understand this
sentence, but can't help finding its tone disturbing. The following choice
is imposed on us: either the actual factor is conceived in a totally
exterior privative fashion (which is an impossibility), or it descends into
an internal qualitative conflict that is necessarily understood in relation
to Oedipus. (Oedipus, the fountainhead where the psychoanalyst washes
his hands of the world's iniquities.)
In an altogether different direction, if we consider the idealist
deviations of psychoanalysis, we see in them an interesting attempt at
giving the actual factors a status other than ulterior or privative. This
came about as two concerns were found to be linked in an apparent
paradox, for example in lung: the concern for curtailing the interminable
cure by addressing oneself to the present or actual state of the disorder,
and the concern for going further than Oedipus, even further than the
pre-oedipal, for going much further back-as if what was most actual
was also the most primary, the shortest, the furthest removed.* lung
presents his archetypes as actual factors that extend in fact beyond the
familial images in the transference, as well as being archaic factors
infinitely older and from an order of time which is not that of the
infantile factors themselves. But nothing has been gained thereby, since
the actual factor ceases to be privative only provided it enjoys the rights
of the Ideal, and does not cease to be an afterward except by becoming a
beyond, which must be signified anagogically by Oedipus instead of
depending on it analytically. This necessarily results in the reintroduction of the afterward in the temporal difference, as the astonishing
distribution proposed by lung attests: for the young, whose problems
concern the family and love, Freud's method! For those less young,
whose problems have to do with social adaptation, Adler! And Jung for
the adults and the old people, whose problems have to do with the
Ideal.v" And we have seen what remains common to Freud and Jung: the
unconscious always measured against myths (and not against the units
of production), although the measuring is done in two contrary directions. But what does it matter, after all, if morality or religion find an
analytical and regressive meaning in Oedipus, or if Oedipus finds an
anagogical and prospective meaning in morality or religion?
We maintain that the cause of the disorder, neurosis or psychosis, is
always in desiring-production, in its relation to social production, in their
"The same remark applies to Otto Rank: the birth trauma not only implies going further back than
Oedipus, and the pre-oedipal phase, but should also be a means for shortening the cure. Freud notes
with bitterness in the beginning of "Analysis Terminable and Interminable": "Rank hoped that if this
primal trauma were dealt with by a subsequent analysis the whole neurosis would be got rid of. Thus
this one small piece of analytic work would save the necessity for all the rest."

1281

ANTI-OEDIPUS

different or conflicting regimes, and the modes of investment that
desiring-production performs in the system of social productio~. T~e
actual factor is desiring-production insofar as it is. ca~ght up tn. this
relationship, this conflict, and these modalities. Nor IS this fact~r el~h~r
ulterior or privative. Being constitutive of the full life. of d~sl:e, It.IS
contemporary with the most tender age, and it accompanies this life WIth
every step. It does not arise after Oedipus, it in no.wa~ presupposes an
Oedipal organization, nor a pre-oedipal preorgamzatI~n. O~ the contrary, it is Oedipus that depends on desiring-productIOn, elthe: as a
stimulus of one form or another, a simple inductor through. w~lch t~e
anoedipal organization of desiring-production is formed, beginning w.lth
early childhood, or as an effect of the psychic and social repression
imposed on desiring-production by social repr~duct~on by mean~ of the
family. The term "actual" is not used because It designates what IS most
recent and because it would be opposed to "former" or "infantile"; it is
used in terms of its difference with respect to "virtual." And it is the
Oedipus complex that is virtual, either inasmuch as it must be actualized
in a neurotic formation as a derived effect of the actual factor, or
inasmuch as it is dismembered and dissolved in a psychotic formation as
the direct effect of this same factor. It is indeed in this sense that the idea
of the afterward seemed to us to be a final paralogism in psychoanalytic
theory and practice; active desiring-production, in its. very ~rocess,
invests from the beginning a constellation of somatic, social, and
metaphysical relations that do not follow after Oedipal psychologi~al
relations but that on the contrary will be applied to the underlyIng
Oedipal 'constellation defined by reaction, or el.se .will eX.elude. t.his
constellation from the field of investment constitutmg their activity.
Undecidable, virtual, reactive or reactional (reactionnel), such is Oedipus. It is only a reactional formation, a formation that results. from .a
reaction to desiring-production. It is a serious mistake to consider this
formation in isolation, abstractly, independently of the actual factor that
coexists with it and to which it reacts.
Yet this is what psychoanalysis does when it closets itself in
Oedipus, and determines its progressions and regressions in term~ of
Oedipus, or even in relationship to it: thus the idea of pre-oedl~al
regression, by means of which one sometimes attempts to characte.nze
psychosis. It is like a Cartesian devil;* the regressions and progresslO~s
are made only within the artificially closed vessel of Oedipus, and In
*A Cartesian devil, or bottle imp, is a small hollow ~lass figure used in physics. Immersed in a clos~d
vessel of water, it can be made to rise or sink by varying the pressure, and hence the amount of water In
the figure. (Translators' note.)

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

1

' 29

reality depend on a state of forces that is changing, yet always actual
and contemporary, within anoedipal desiring-production. Desiringproduction has solely an actual existence; progressions and regressions
are merely the effectuations of a virtuality that is always fulfilled as
perfectly as it can be by virtue of the states of desire. Rarely have
psychiatrists and psychoanalysts been able to establish a really inspired
direct relationship with either child or adult schizophrenics; Gisela
Pankow and Bruno Bettelheim break new ground in this area by the
force of their theory and the efficacy of their therapy. It is not by chance
that both of them call into question the notion of regression. Taking the
example of the bodily cares administered to a schizophrenic-massages,
baths, swathings-Gisela Pankow asks if it is a matter of reaching the
invalid at the point of his regression, in order to give him indirect
symbolic satisfactions that would allow him to resume a progression, to
take up a progressive pace. It is not at all a question, she says, "of
administering care that the schizophrenic presumably did not receive
when he was a baby. It is a question of giving the patient tactile and
other bodily sensations that lead him to a recognition of the limits of his
body.... It is a question of the recognition of an unconscious desire,
and not of this desire's satisfaction."63 Recognizing the desire is
ta~tamount to se.tting desiring-production back into motion on the body
without organs, m the very place to which the schizo had retreated in
order to silence and suffocate this production. This recognition of desire
this position of desire, thiS-Sign refers to an order of real and actual
pr~ducti:,ity that is not to be confused with an indirect or symbolic
satisfaction, and that, in its stops as in its starts, is as distinct from a
pre-oedipal regression as from a progressive restoration of Oedipus.

9

I

The Process

Between neurosis and psychosis there is no difference in
nature, species, o.r gro~P. Neurosis can no more be explained oedipally
than can psychosis. It IS rather the contrary; neurosis explains Oedipus.
Then how do we conceive of the relationship between psychosis and
neurosis? E:,erything changes depending on whether we call psychosis
the process Itself, or on the contrary, an interruption of the process (and
what t~pe of i?t:rru~tion?). Schizophrenia as a process is desiringprodu~tlOn, but I~ ISthis production as it functions at the end, as the limit
of SOCial production determined by the conditions of capitalism. It is our
very own ".malad~," modern man's sickness. The end of history has no
other meaning. In It the two meanings of process meet, as the movement
of social production that goes to the very extremes of its deterritorializa130

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

tion, and as the movement of metaphysical production that carries
desire along with it and reproduces it in a new Earth. "The desert
grows ... the sign is near." The schizo carries along the decoded flows,
makes them traverse the desert of the body without organs, where he
installs his desiring-machines and produces a perpetual outflow of acting
forces. He has crossed over the limit, the schiz, which maintained the
production of desire always at the margins of social production,
tangential and always repelled.
The schizo knows how to leave: he has made departure into
something as simple as being born or dying. But at the same time his
journey is strangely stationary, in place. He does not speak of another
world, he is not from another world: even when he is displacing himself
in space, his is a journey in intensity, around the desiring-machine that is
erected here and remains here. For here is the desert propagated by our
world, and also the new earth, and the machine that hums, around which
the schizos revolve, planets for a new sun. These men of desire-or do
they not yet exist?-are like Zarathustra. They know incredible sufferings, vertigos, and sicknesses. They have their specters. They must
reinvent each gesture. But such a man produces himself as a free man,
irresponsible, solitary, and joyous, finally able to say and do something
simple in his own name, without asking permission; a desire lacking
nothing, a flux that overcomes barriers and codes, a name that no longer
designates any ego whatever. He has simply ceased being afraid of
becoming mad. He experiences and lives himself as the sublime sickness
that will no longer affect him. Here, what is, what would a psychiatrist
be worth?
In the whole of psychiatry only Jaspers, then Laing have grasped
what process signified, and its fulfillment-and so escaped the familialism that is the ordinary bed and board of psychoanalysis and psychiatry.
"If the human race survives, future men will, I suspect, look back on our
enlightened epoch as a veritable age of Darkness. They will presumably
be able to savor the irony of this situation with more amusement than we
can extract from it. The laugh's on us. They will see that what we call
'schizophrenia' was one of the forms in which, often through quite
ordinary people, the light began to break through the cracks in our
all-too-closed minds
Madness need not be all breakdown. It may
also be breakthrough
The person going through ego-loss or transcendental experiences mayor may not become in different ways
confused. Then he might legitimately be regarded as mad. But to be mad
is not necessarily to be ill, notwithstanding that in our culture the two
categories have become confused.... From the alienated starting point
of our pseudo-sanity, everything is equivocal. Our sanity is not 'true'
PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMilY

1131

sanity. Their madness is not 'true' madness. The madness of our
patients is an artifact of the destruction wreaked on them by us and by
them on themselves. Let no one suppose that we meet 'true' madness
any more than that we are truly sane. The madness that we encounter in
'patients' is a gross travesty, a mockery, a grotesque caricature of what
the natural healing of that estranged integration we call sanity might be.
True sanity entails in one way or another the dissolution of the normal
ego."*
The visit to London is our visit to Pythia. Turner is there. Looking
at his paintings, one understands what it means to scale the wall, and yet
to remain behind; to cause flows to pass through, without knowing any
longer whether they are carrying us elsewhere or flowing back over us
already. The paintings range over three periods. If the psychiatrist were
allowed to speak here, he could talk about the first two, although they
are in fact the most reasonable. The first canvases are of end-of-theworld catastrophes, avalanches, and storms. That's where Turner begins. The paintings of the second period are somewhat like the delirious
reconstruction, where the delirium hides, or rather where it is on a par
with a lofty technique inherited from Poussin, Lorrain, or the Dutch
tradition: the world is reconstructed through archaisms having a modern
function. But something incomparable happens at the level of the
paintings of the third period, in the series Turner does not exhibit, but
keeps secret. It cannot even be said that he is far ahead of his time: there
is here something ageless, and that comes to us from an eternal future,
or flees toward it. The canvas turns in on itself, it is pierced by a hole, a
lake, a flame, a tornado, an explosion. The themes of the preceding
paintings are to be found again here, their meaning changed. The canvas
is truly broken, sundered by what penetrates it. All that remains is a
background of gold and fog, intense, intensive, traversed in depth by
what has just sundered its breadth: the schizo Everything becomes
mixed and confused, and it is here that the breakthrough-not the
breakdown-occurs.
Strange Anglo-American litera ture: from Thomas Hardy, from D. H.
Lawrence to Malcolm Lowry, from Henry Miller to Allen Ginsberg
and Jack Kerouac, men who know how to leave, to scramble the codes,
"Laing, The Politics of Experience, pp. 129, 133, 138, 144. In a closely connected sense Michel Foucault
a~nounced: "Perhaps one day one will no longer know clearly what madness really was .... Artaud
will be,long to the ground .of,ouf language, and not to its rupture .... Everything that we experience
today. In the mode ,o.r the limit, or of strangeness, or of the unbearable, will have joined again with the
ser~mty ,of the posrtrve. And ~'hat for us currently designates this Exterior stands a chance, one day of
designating lIS. : •. Madness IS breaking its kinship ties with mental illness, ... madness and mental
Illness are ceasing to belong to the same anthropological entity" ("La folie I'absence d'oeuvre" La
Table ronde, May 1%4).
' .

132/

ANTI-OEDIPUS

to cause flows to circulate, to traverse the desert of the body without
organs. They overcome a limit, they shatter a wall, the capitalist bar~i.er.
And of course they fail to complete the process, they never cease falling
to do so. The neurotic impasse again closes-the daddy-mommy of
oedipalization, America, the return to the native land-s-or else the
perversion of the exotic territorialities, ~h.en drug.s, alcohol-or worse
still an old fascist dream. Never has delirium oscillated more between
its t~o poles. But through the impasses and the triangles a schizophrenic
flow moves, irresistibly; sperm, river, drainage, inflamed genital mucus,
or a stream of words that do not let themselves be coded, a libido that is
too fluid, too viscous: a violence against syntax, a concerted destruction
of the signifier, non-sense erected as a flow, polyvocity that returns to
haunt all relations. How poorly the problem of literature is put, starting
from the ideology that it bears, or from the co-option of it by a social
order. People are co-opted, not works, which will always come to awake
a sleeping youth, and which never cease extending their flame. As for
ideology, it is the most confused notion because it keeps us from seizing
the relationship of the literary machine with a field of production, and
the moment when the emitted sign breaks through this "Iorrn of the
content" that was attempting to maintain the sign within the order of the
signifier. Yet it has been a long time since Engels demonstrated, already
apropos of Balzac, how an author is great because he cannot preve~t
himself from tracing flows and causing them to circulate, flows that split
asunder the catholic and despotic signifier of his work, and that
necessarily nourish a revolutionary machine on the horizon. That is
what style is, or rather the absence of style-asyntactic, agrammatical:
the moment when language is no longer defined by what it says, even
less by what makes it a signifying thing, but by what causes it to move,
to flow, and to explode-desire. For literature is like schizophrenia: a
.
process and not a goal, a production and not an ex~ression.
Here again, oedipalization is one of the most Important factors III
the reduction of literature to an object of consumption conforming to
the established order, and incapable of causing anyone harm. It is not a
question here of the personal oedipalization of the author and his
readers, but of the Oedipal form to which one attempts to enslave the
work itself, to make of it this minor expressive activity that secretes
ideology according to the dominant codes. The work of art is supposed
to inscribe itself in this fashion between the two poles of Oedipus,
problem and solution, neurosis and sublimation, desire ~nd .truth-the
one regressive, where the work hashes out and redistributes the
nonresolved conflicts of childhood, and the other prospective, by which

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY \ 133

the work invents the paths leading toward a new solution concerning the
future of man. It is said that the work is constituted by a conversion
interior to itself as "cultural object." From this point of view, there is no
longer even any need for applying psychoanalysis to the work of art,
since the work itself constitutes a successful psychoanalysis, a sublime
"transference" with exemplary collective virtualities. The hypocritical
warning resounds: a little neurosis is good for the work of art, good
material, but not psychosis, especially not psychosis; we draw a line
between the eventually creative neurotic aspect, and the psychotic
aspect, alienating and destructive. As if the great voices, which were
capable of performing a breakthrough in grammar and syntax, and of
making all language a desire, were not speaking from the depths of
psychosis, and as if they were not demonstrating for our benefit an
eminently psychotic and revolutionary means of escape.
It is correct to measure established literature against an Oedipal
psychoanalysis, for this literature deploys a form of superego proper to
it, even more noxious than the nonwritten superego. Oedipus is in fact
literary before being psychoanalytic. There will always be a Breton
against Artaud, a Goethe against Lenz, a Schiller against Holderlin, in
order to superegoize literature and tell us: Careful, go no further! No
"errors for lack of tact"! Werther yes, Lenz no! The Oedipal form of
literature is its commodity form. We are free to think that there is finally
even less dishonesty in psychoanalysis than in the established literature,
since the neurotic pure and simple produces a solitary work, irresponsible, illegible, and nonmarketable, which on the contrary must pay not
only to be read, but to be translated and reduced. He makes at least an
economic error, an error in tact, and does not spread his values. Artaud
puts it well: all writing is so much pig shit-that is to say, any literature
that takes itself as an end or sets ends for itself, instead of being a
process that "ploughs the crap of being and its language," transports the
weak, the aphasiacs, the illiterate. At least spare us sublimation. Every
writer is a sellout. The only literature is that which places an explosive
device in its package, fabricating a counterfeit currency, causing the
superego and its form of expression to explode, as well as the market
value of its form of content.
But some reply: Artaud does not belong to the realm of literature,
he is outside it because he is schizophrenic. Others retort: he is not
schizophrenic, since he belongs to literature, and the most important
literature at that, the textual. Both groups hold at least one thing in
common; they subscribe to the same puerile and reactionary conception
of schizophrenia, and the same marketable neurotic conception of

1341

ANTI-OEDIPUS

literature. A shrewd critic writes: one need understand nothing of th,e
concept of the signifier "in order to declare absolutely that ~rtaud S
language is that of a schizophrenic; the psychotIc produces an Involuntary discourse, fettered, subjugated: therefore In all respects t?e contrary of textual writing." But what is this enormous tex~ual archaIsm,. the
signifier, that subjects literature to the mark of castr.atlOn and sa.n.ctlfies
th e two aspects of its Oedipal form? And who told this shrewdbientre that
the discourse of the psychotic was "involuntary, fettered, su Jugate d"?.
Not that it is more nearly the opposite, thank God. But these very
oppositions are singularly lacking in relevance. Artaud makes a shambles of psychiatry, precisely because he is schizophrenic and not because
he is not. Artaud is the fulfillment of literature, precisely becaus.e he IS
schizophrenic and not because he is not. It has been a long time SInce he
broke down the wall of the signifier: Artaud the Schizo. From the de~ths
of his suffering and his glory, he has the right to denounce what society
makes of the psychotic in the process of decoding the flows of desire
(Van Gogh, the Man Suicided by Society), but al.so.what it makes of
literature when it opposes literature to psychosis In the name of a
neurotic or perverse recoding (Lewis Carroll, or the coward of belleslettres).
.
Very few accomplish what Laing calls the breakthrough of this
schizophrenic wall or limit: "quite ordinary people," nevertheless. But
the majority draw near the wall and back away horrified. ~etter to f~lI
back under the law of the signifier, marked by castration, tnangulated In
Oedipus. So they displace the limit, they make it pass into the interio~ of
the social formation, between the social production and reproduction
that they invest, and the familial reproduction that they ~all bac~ on, to
which they apply all the investments. They make the limit pass Into the
interior of the domain thus described by Oedipus, between the two poles
of Oedipus. They never stop involuting and evolving between thes~ two
poles. Oedipus as the last rock, and castration as the cavern: the ultimate
territoriality, although reduced to the analyst's couch, rather than t~e
decoded flows of desire that flee, slip away, and take us where? Such IS
neurosis, the displacement of the limit, in order to create a little colon~al
world of one's own. But others want virgin lands, more truly. exotic,
families more artificial, societies more secret that they design and
institute along the length of the wall, in the locales of perversion. Still
others, sickened by the utensility (l'ustensilite) of Oedipus, but also by
the shoddiness and aestheticism of perversions, reach the wall and
rebound against it, sometimes with an extreme violence. Then t?e y
become immobile, silent, they retreat to the body without organs, stili a

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY

1 135

territoriality, but this time totally desert-like, where all desiringproduction is arrested, or where it becomes rigid, feigning stoppage:
psychosis.
These catatonic bodies have fallen into the river like lead weights,
immense transfixed hippopotamuses who will not come back up to the
surface. They have entrusted all their forces to primal repression, in
order to escape the system of social and psychic repression that
fabricates neurotics. But a more naked repression befalls them that
declares them identical with the hospital schizo, the great autistic one,
the clinical entity that "lacks" Oedipus. Why the same word, schizo, to
designate both the process insofar as it goes beyond the limit, and the
result of the process insofar as it runs up against the limit and pounds
endlessly away there? Why the same word to designate both the
eventual breakthrough and the possible breakdown, and all the transitions, the intrications of the two extremes? In point of fact, of the three
preceding adventures, the adventure of psychosis is the most intimately
related to the process: in the sense of Jaspers' demonstration, when he
shows that the "demonic"-ordinarily repressed-erupts by means of
such a state, or gives rise to such states, which endlessly run the risk of
making it topple into breakdown and disintegration.
We no longer know if it is the process that must truly be called
madness, the sickness being only disguise or caricature, or if the
sickness is our only madness and the process our only cure. But in any
case, the intimate nature of the relationship appears directly in inverse
ratio: the more the process of production is led off course, brutally
interrupted, the more the schizo-as-entity arises as a specific product.
That is why, on the other hand, we were unable to establish any direct
relationship between neurosis and psychosis. The relationships of
neurosis, psychosis, and also perversion depend on the situation of each
one with regard to the process, and on the manner in which each one
represents a mode of interruption of the process, a residual bit of ground
to which one still clings so as not to be carried off by the deterritorialized
flows of desire. Neurotic territoriality of Oedipus, perverse territorialities of the artifice, psychotic territoriality of the body without organs:
sometimes the process is caught in the trap and made to turn about
within the triangle, sometimes it takes itself as an end-in-itself, other
times it continues on in the void and substitutes a horrible exasperation
for its fulfillment. Each of these forms has schizophrenia as a foundation; schizophrenia as a process is the only universal. Schizophrenia is at
once the wall, the breaking through this wall, and the failures of this
breakthrough: "How does one get through this wall, for it is useless to
hit it hard, it has to be undermined and penetrated with a file, slowly and

1381

ith patience as I see it".64 What is at stake is not merely art or
. I
hi
d
literature. For either the artistic machine, the analytica ~ac I~e, an
the revolutionary machine will remain in extrinsic relationships t~at
make them function in the deadening framework of the system of social
and psychic repression, or they will become parts ~~d cogs ~f one
another in the flow that feed's one and the same desmng-machme, s.o
many local fires patiently kindled for a generalized explosion-the schiz
and not the signifier.

WI,

PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALlSM: THE HOLY FAMILY 1 137
ANTI-OEDIPUS

SAVAGES,
BARBARIANS,
CIVILIZED
MEN
Translated by Robert Hurley and Mark Seem

1 \ The Inscribing Socius

If the universal comes at the end-the body without
organs and desiring-production-under the conditions determined by an
apparently victorious capitalism, where do we find enough innocence for
generating universal history? Desiring-production also exists from the
beginning: there is desiring-production from the moment there is social
production and reproduction. But in a very precise sense it is true that
precapitalist social machines are inherent in desire: they code it, they
code the flows of desire. To code desire-and the fear, the anguish of
decoded flows-is the business of the socius. As we shall see, capitalism
is the only social machine that is constructed on the basis of decoded
flows, substituting for intrinsic codes an axiomatic of abstract quantities
in the form of money. Capitalism therefore liberates the flows of desire,
but under the social conditions that define its limit and the possibility of
139

its own dissolution, so that it is constantly opposing with all its
exasperated strength the movement that drives it toward this limit. At
capitalism's limit the deterritorialized socius gives way to the body
without organs, and the decoded flows throw themselves into desiringproduction. Hence it is correct to retrospectively understand all history
in the light of capitalism, provided that the rules formulated by Marx are
followed exactly.
First of all, universal history is the history of contingencies, and not
the history of necessity. Ruptures and limits, and not continuity. For
great accidents were necessary, and amazing encounters that could have
happened elsewhere, or before, or might never have happened, in order
for the flows to escape coding and, escaping, to nonetheless fashion a
new machine bearing the determinations of the capitalist socius. Thus
the encounter between private property and commodity production,
which presents itself, however, as two quite distinct forms of decoding,
by privatization and by abstraction. Or, from the viewpoint of private
property itself, the encounter between flows of convertible wealth
owned by capitalists and a flow of workers possessing nothing more than
their labor capacity* (here again, two distinct forms of deterritorialization). In a sense, capitalism has haunted all forms of society, but it haunts
them as their terrifying nightmare, it is the dread they feel of a flow that
would elude their codes. Then again, if we say that capitalism determines the conditions and the possibility of a universal history, this is
true only insofar as capitalism has to deal essentially with its own limit
its own destruction-as Marx says, insofar as it is capable of selfcriticism (at least to a certain point: the point where the limit appears, in
the very movement that counteracts the tendency).* In a word, universal
history is not only retrospective, it is also contingent, singular, ironic,
and critical.
The earth is the primitive, savage unity of desire and production.
For the earth is not merely the multiple and divided object of labor, it is
also the unique, indivisible entity, the full body that falls back on the
forces of production and appropriates them for its own as the natural or
divine precondition. While the ground can be the productive element
"force 4e tra.vaiL H~re we have followed Martin Nicolaus's translation of Marx's Grundrisse in
translating this Marxian term as "labor capacity" instead of "labor power." (Translators' note.)
"Marx, Grundrisse (see reference note 63), pp. 104-'108.Maurice Godelier comments: "The West's line
of development, far from bei~g uni~ersal because it will recur everywhere. appears universal because it
nowhere else.... It .1S typical th~refore because, in its singular progress, it has obtained a
Untv.er~al result. It h~s .furlllshed a pr~ctlcal base (industrial economy) and a theoretical conception
(socialism) that permit It to leave behmd, and to cause all other societies to leave behind the most
anCle?t ~nd the most recent ~orms of exp~oitation of man by man .... The authentic llniYers~lity of the
West s.lme of development lies therefore In its singularity. in its difference not in its resemblance to the
other lines of evolution;" (Godeltcr [see reference note 471. PP. 92-96.) ,
re~urs

140

I

and the result of appropriation, the Earth is the great unengendered
stasis, the element superior to production that conditions the co.mmon
appropriation and utilization of the ground. It is the surface on which the
whole process of production is inscribed, on which the forces and means
of labor are recorded, and the agents and the products distributed. It
appears here as the quasi cause of production a~d the object of .desire (it
is on the earth that desire becomes bound to Its own repression). The
territorial machine is therefore the first form of socius, the machine of
primitive inscription, the "megamachinc" that co~ers ~ social field. It is
not to be confused with technical machmes. In ItS simplest, so-called
manual forms, the technical machine already implies an acting, a
transmitting, or even a driving element that is nonhuman, and th~t
extends man's strength and allows for a certain disengageme.nt fron~ It.
The social machine, in contrast, has men for its parts, e:en If we .vlew
them with their machines, and integrate them, internalize them ~n. an
institutional model at every stage of action, transmission, and motrictty.
Hence the social machine fashions a memory without which there wou~d
be no synergy of man and his (technical) machines. The. latter do not III
fact contain the conditions for the reproduction of their process; they
point to the social machines that condition ~nd organize them, but als~
limit and inhibit their development. It Will be necessary to await
capitalism to find a semiautonomous organization of t~chmcal production that tends to appropriate memory and reproductIOn, and thereby
modifies the forms of the exploitation of man; but as a m~tter of f.act:
this organization presupposes a dismantling of the great social machmes
that preceded it.
.
The same machine can be both technical and social, but only w~en
viewed from different perspectives: for example, the clo~k as a te~hmcal
machine for measuring uniform time, and as a social machine for
reproducing canonic hours and for assuring order in. the city. Wh~n
Lewis Mumford coins the word "megamachine" to designate the s~c~al
.
collective entity he is literally correct (although he limits
mac h me as a
' . . . . . "If
I 'S in
it pplication to the barbarian despotic msututton):
, more ~r es
~~r:ement with Reuleaux's classic definition, one can consld~r t~e
machine to be the combination of solid elements, each. havmg ItS
specialized function and operating under human control in o:der to
transmit a movement and perform a task, th~n t~e h.uman machine :vas
. ddt
machine "1 The social machme IS literally a machine,
m ee a r u e ·
.
.,
.
.
irrespective of any metaphor, inasmuch as it exhibits an immobile motor
and undertakes a variety of interventions: flows are set apart, elements
are detached from a chain, and portions of the tasks to ~e perfor~~d are
distributed. Coding the flows implies all these operatIOns. This is the
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

ANTI-OEDIPUS

\ 141

c'.'da! machine's supreme task, inasmuch as the apportioning of produc! ;"ll corresponds to extractions from the chain, resulting in a residual
ct13re for each member, in a global system of desire and destiny that
'''ganizes the productions of production, the productions of recording,
and the productions of consumption. Flows of women and children;
!knvs of herds and of seed, sperm flows, flows of shit, menstrual
nr'thing must escape coding. The primitive territorial machine, with its
immobile motor, the earth, is already a social machine, a megamachine,
Iheet codes the flows of production, the flows of means of production,of
producers and consumers: the full body of the goddess Earth gathers
itself the cultivable species, the agricultural implements, and the human
organs,
Meyer Fortes makes a passing remark that is joyous and refreshingly sound: "The circulation of women is not the problem .... A woman
circulates of herself. She is not at one's disposal, but the juridical
governing progeniture are determined for the profit of a specific
person." 2 We see no reason in fact for accepting the postulate
underlies exchangist notions of society; society is not first of all a milieu
for exchange where the essential would be to circulate or to cause to
r-irculate, but rather a socius of inscription where the essential thing is
mark and to be marked. There is circulation only if inscription
or permits it. The method of the primitive territorial machine is in this
sense the collective investment of the organs; for flows are coded only
to the extent that the organs capable respectively of producing and
breaking them are themselves encircled, instituted as partial objects,
distributed on the socius and attached to it. A mask is such an institution
of organs. Initiation societies compose the pieces of a body, which are
the same time sensory organs, anatomical parts, and joints. Prohibitions
(see not, speak not) apply to those who, in a given state or on a
occasion, are deprived of the right to enjoy a collectively invested organ:
The mythologies sing of organs-partial objects and their relations
full body that repels or attracts them: vaginas riveted on the woman's
body, an immense penis shared by the men, an independent anus that
assigns itself a body without anus. A Gourma story begins: "When
mouth was dead, the other parts of the body were consulted to see which
of them would take charge of the burial. ..." The unities in question
never found in persons, but rather in series which determine the
cormections. disjunctions, and conjunctions of organs. That is why
fantasies are group fantasies. It is the collective investment of
organs that plugs desire into the socius and assembles social production
and desiring-production into a whole on the earth.
Our modern societies have instead undertaken a vast privatization

of~!'

(ANTI-OEDIPUS

the organs, which corresponds to the decoding of flows that have
become abstract. The first organ to suffer privatization, removal from
social field, was the anus. It was the anus that offered itself as a
for privatization, at the same time as money came to express the
new state of abstraction. Hence the relative truth of psychoanalytic remarks concerning the anal nature of monetary economy. But the
"logical" order is the following: the substitution of abstract quantity for
COded flows; the resulting collective disinvestment of the organs, on
model of the anus; the constitution of private persons as individual
of organs and functions derived from the abstract quantity. One
even compelled to say that, while in our societies the penis has
the position of a detached object distributing lack to the
of both sexes and organizing the Oedipal triangle, it is the anus
in this manner detaches it, it is the anus that removes and sublimates
penis in a kind of Aufhebung that will constitute the phallus.
Sublimation is profoundly linked to anality, but this is not to say that the
latter furnishes a material to be sublimated, for want of another use.
Anality does not represent a lower requiring conversion to a higher. It is
the anus itself that ascends on high, under the conditions (which we
must analyze) of its removal from the field, conditions that do not
presuppose sublimation; since on the contrary sublimation results from
them. It is not the anal that presents itself for sublimation, it is
sublimation in its entirety that is anal; moreover, the simplest critique of
sublimation is the fact that it does not by any means rescue us from the
shit (only the mind is capable of shitting). Anality is all the greater once
the anus is disinvested. The libido is indeed the essence of desire; but
when the libido becomes abstract quantity, the elevated and disinvested
anus produces the global persons and the specific egos that serve this
same quantity as units of measure. Artaud expresses it well: this "dead
rat's ass suspended from the ceiling of the sky," whence issues the
daddy-mommy-me triangle, "the uterine mother-father of a frantic
anality," whose child is only an angle, this "kind of covering eternally
hanging on something that is the self ,"
The whole of Oedipus is anal and implies an individual overinvestment of the organ to compensate for its collective disinvestment. That is
why the commentators most favorable to the universality of Oedipus
recognize nonetheless that one does not encounter in primitive societies
any of the mechanisms or any of the attitudes that make it a reality in
our society. No superego, no guilt. No identification of a specific ego
with global persons-but group identifications that are always partial,
following the compact, agglutinated series of ancestors, and the fragmented series of companions and cousins. No anality-although, or

rather because, there is a collectively invested anus. What remains then
for the making of Oedipus?* The structure-that is to say, an unrealized
potentiality? Are we to believe that a universal Oedipus haunts all
societies, but exactly as capitalism haunts them, that is to say, as the
nightmare and the anxious foreboding of what might result from the
decoding of flows and the collective disinvestment of organs, the
becoming-abstract of the flows of desire, and the becoming-private of
the organs?
The primitive territorial machine codes flows, invests organs, and
marks bodies. To such a degree that circulating-exchanging-is a
secondary activity in comparison with the task that sums up all the
others: marking bodies, which are the earth's products. The essence of
the recording, inscribing socius, insofar as it lays claim to the productive
forces and distributes the agents of production, resides in these operations: tattooing, excising, incising, carving, scarifying, mutilating, encircling, and initiating. Nietzsche thus defined the "morality of mores
( ... )-the labor performed by man upon himself during the greater
part of the existence of the human race, his entire prehistoric labor";" a
system of evaluations possessing the force of law concerning the
various members and parts of the body. Not only is the criminal
deprived of organs according to a regime (ordre) of collective investments; not only is the one who has to be eaten, eaten according to social
rules as exact as those followed in carving up and apportioning a steer;
but the man who enjoys the full exercise of his rights and duties has his
whole body marked under a regime that consigns his organs and their
exercise to the collectivity (the privatization of the organs will only
begin with "the shame felt by man at the sight of man "4). For it is a
founding act-that the organs be hewn into the socius, and that the flows
run over its surface-through which man ceases to be a biological
organism and becomes a full body, an earth, to which his organs become
attached, where they are attracted, repelled, miraculated, following the
requirements of a socius. Nietzsche says: it is a matter of creating a
memory for man; and man, who was constituted by means of an active
faculty of forgetting (oubli), by means of a repression of biological
memory, must create an other memory, one that is collective, a memory
of words (paroles) and no longer a memory of things, a memory of signs
and no longer of effects. This organization, which traces its signs
"Paul Parin et al., Les blanes pensent trap (Paris: Payot, 1963): "The pre-object relations with the
mothers pass over and are divided into relations of identification with the group of companions of the
same age. The conflict with the fathers finds itself neutralized in relations of identification with the
gro~p of o~de: brothers ..." (pp. 428-36). Similar analysis and results in M. C. and Edmond Ortigues,
Oedipeairicain ,(reference note 2~), pp. 302-305. But these authors indulge in a strange gymnastics to
maintain the existence of an Oedipal problem or complex, despite all the reasons they advance to the
contrary, and although they say this complex is not "clinically accessible."

144

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

directly on the body, constitutes a system of cruelty, a terrible alphal.er .
"Perhaps indeed there was nothing more fearful and uncanny in lk
whole prehistory of man than his mnemotechnics ( ... ) Man coui.i
never do without blood, torture, and sacrifices when he felt the need Ii,
create a memory for himself; the most dreadful sacrifices and pledge"
( ... ), the most repulsive mutilations ( ... ), the cruelist rites of all ti.e,
religious cults ... one has only to look at our former codes of puni.t.
ments to understand what effort it costs on this earth to breed a 'natio..
of thinkers' !"5
Cruelty has nothing to do with some ill-defined or natural violer..'.
that might be commissioned to explain the history of mankind; cruelty L
the movement of culture that is realized in bodies and inscribed on tkOIH
belaboring them. That is what cruelty means. This culture is not d",
movement of ideology: on the contrary, it forcibly injects producuc.,
into desire, and conversely, it forcibly inserts desire into social produ..
tion and reproduction. For even death, punishment, and torture
desired, and are instances of production (compare the history Gf
fatalism). It makes men or their organs into the parts and wheels of 1I,e:
social machine. The sign is a position of desire; but the first signs are lk
territorial signs that plant their flags in bodies. And if one wants to cau
this inscription in naked flesh "writing," then it must be said that speech
in fact presupposes writing, and that it is this cruel system of inscribed
signs that renders man capable of language, and gives him a memory (01
the spoken word.

2

I

The Primitive Territorial Machine

The notion of territoriality merely appears arnbiguou •
For if it is taken to mean a principle of residence or of geograpui..
distribution, it is obvious that the primitive social machine is fI,,) ,
territorial. Only the apparatus of the State will be territorial in this sellS"
because, following Engel's formula, it "subdivides not the people but lL
territory," and substitutes a geographic organization for the organizati.».
of gens. Yet even where kinship seems to predominate over the earth, i,
is not difficult to show the importance of local ties. This is because ik
primitive machine subdivides the people, but does so on an indivisil.r.,
earth where the connective, disjunctive, and conjunctive relations Of
each section are inscribed along with the other relations (thus, r..
example, the coexistence or complementarity of the section chief h'd
the guardian of the earth). When the division extends to the earth itsd!,
by virtue of an administration that is landed and residential, this cani'ui
be regarded as a promotion of territoriality; on the contrary, it is ralL,;,
SAVAGES, BARBARIAI'iS, CIVILIZED

fAE~J

1'"0

the effect of the first great movement of deterritorialization on the
primitive communes. The immanent unity of the earth as the immobile
motor gives way to a transcendent unity of an altogether different
nature-the unity of the State; the full body is no longer that of the
earth, it is the full body of the Despot, the Unengendered, which now
takes charge of the fertility of the soil as well as the rain from the sky
and the general appropriation of the productive forces. Hence the
savage, primitive socius was indeed the only territorial machine in the
strict sense of the term. And the functioning of such a machine consists
in the following: the declension of alliance and filiation-declining the
lineages on the body of the earth, before there is a State.
If declension characterizes the primitive machine, it is because it is
not possible simply to deduce alliance from filiation, the alliances from
the filiative lines. It would be erroneous to ascribe to alliance no more
than an individuating power over the persons of a lineage; it produces
instead a generalized distinguishability. E. R. Leach cites cases of very
diverse matrimonial regimes where no difference in filiation can be
inferred among the corresponding groups. In many analyses, "the stress
has been upon ties within the unilineal corporation or between different
corporations linked by ties of common descent. The structural ties
deriving from marriage between members of different corporations have
been largely ignored or else assimilated into the all-important descent
concept. Thus Fortes (1953), while recognizing that ties of affinity have
comparable importance to ties of descent, disguises the former under his
expression complementary filiation. The essence of this concept, which
resembles the Roman distinction between agnation and cognation, is
that any Ego is related to the kinsman of his two parents because he is
the descendant of both parents and not because his parents were
married .... [However] the cross ties linking the different patrilineages
laterally are not felt by the peoples themselves to be of the nature of
descent. The continuity of the structure vertically through time is
adequately expressed through the agnatic transmission of a patrilineage
name. But the continuity of the structure laterally is not so expressed.
Instead, it is maintained by a continuing chain of debt relationships of an
economic kind .... It is the existence of these outstanding debts which
assert the continuance of the affinal relationship."6
Filiation is administrative and hierarchical, but alliance is political
and economic, and expresses power insofar as it is not fused with the
hierarchy and cannot be deduced from it, and the economy insofar as it
is not identical with administration. Filiation and alliance are like the two
forms of a primitive capital: fixed capital or filiative stock, and circulating capital or mobile blocks of debts. There are two memories that

1461

ANTI·OEDIPUS

correspond to them, the one biofiliative, the other a memory of allian.;..
and of words. While production is recorded in the network of filialk;;
disjunctions on the socius, the connections of labor still must deta..r.
themselves from the productive process and pass into the element
recording that appropriates them for itself as quasi cause, But it C,H,
accomplish this only by reclaiming the connective regime for its own, L.
the form of an affinal tie or a pairing of persons that is compatible 1;'i,L
the disjunctions of filiation. It is in this sense that the economy goes toj
way of alliance. In the production of children, the child is inscribed I.,
relation to the disjunctive lines of its father or mother, but inversely, rt...
disjunctive lines inscribe it only through a connection represented by u.;
marriage of the father and the mother. At no time, therefore, ik,;;,
alliance derive from filiation, but both form an essentially open cycle;
where the socius acts on production, but also where production
on the socius.
Marxists are right to remind us that if kinship is dorninaur i"
primitive society, it is determined as dominant by economic and politice"j
factors. And if filiation expresses what is dominant while being itseu
determined, alliance expresses what is determinant, or rather the retu...
of the determinant in the determinate system of dominance. That is wli)'
it is essential to take into consideration how ties of alliance cornbir.;
concretely with relations of filiation on a given territorial surface. Lca..l.
has specifically underscored the importance of local lineages insofar ""
they are differentiated from lineages of filiation, and insofar as the)
operate at the level of small segments: it is these groups of men residing
in the same area, or in neighboring areas, who arrange marriages and
shape concrete reality to a much greater extent than do the systems or
filiation and the abstract matrimonial classes. A kinship system is no, .,
structure but a practice, a praxis, a method, and even a strategy, Louis
Berthe, analyzing a relationship of alliance and hierarchy, show;
convincingly that a village intervenes as a third party to permit rnatrirn»
nial connections between elements that the disjunction of two moierie ,
would forbid from the strict viewpoint of structure: "The third len,.
must be interpreted much more as a method than as a true strucrur.a
element."* Every time one interprets kinship relations in the primitive
commune in terms of a structure unfolding in the mind, one relapses int.,
an ideology of large segments that makes alliance depend on the maj,»
filiations, and that finds itself contradicted by practice. "It is necessa..
to ask if there exists in the asymmetrical systems of alliance "

r,","C

"Louis Berthe, "Aires et cadets, l'alliance et la hierarchic chez les Baduj," L 'Homme, July 1965.,
Luc de Reusch's statement, in "Levi-Strauss," L 'Arc, no. 26: "Akinship system is also and first ')I;:;.11 c.
praxis" (p. 11).

SAVAGES,

BARBARI~.NS,

CIVILIZED MEil

I

L,

fundamental tendency toward generalized exchange, that is to say,
toward the closing of the cycle. I have been unable to find anything of
that nature among the Mru .... Everyone behaves as if he were
ignorant of the compensation that would result from the closing of the'
cycle, and everyone stresses the relationship of asymmetry, emphasizing the creditor-debtor behavior."? A kinship system only appears
closed to the extent that it is severed from the political and economic
references that keep it open, and that make alliance something other
than an arrangement of matrimonial classes and filiative lineages.
It is the same for the whole project of coding the flows. How does
one ensure reciprocal adaptation, the respective embrace of a signifying
chain and flows of production? The great nomad hunter follows the
flows, exhausts them in place, and moves on with them to another place.
He reproduces in an accelerated fashion his entire filiation, and contracts it into a point that keeps him in a direct relationship with the
ancestor or the god. Pierre Clastres describes the solitary hunter who
becomes identical with his force and his destiny, and delivers his song in
a language that becomes increasingly rapid and distorted: Me, me, me,
"I am a powerful nature, a nature incensed and aggressive!"8 Such are
the two characteristics of the hunter, the great paranoiac of the bush or
the forest: real displacement with the flows and direct filiation with the
god. It has to do with the nature of nomadic space, where the full body
of the socius is as if adjacent to production; it has not yet brought
production under its sway. The space of the encampment remains
adjacent to that of the forest; it is constantly reproduced in the process
of production, but has not yet appropriated this process. The apparent
objective movement of inscription has not suppressed the real movement of nomadism. But a pure nomad does not exist; there is always and
already an encampment where it is a matter of stocking-however
little-and where it is a matter of inscribing and allocating, of marrying,
and of feeding oneself. (Clastres shows well how, among the Guayaki,
the connection between the hunters and the living animals is succeeded
in the encampment by a disjunction between the dead animals and the
hunters-a disjunction similar to an incest prohibition, since the hunter
cannot consume his own kill.) In short, as we shall see elsewhere, there
is always a pervert who succeeds the paranoiac or accompanies
him-sometimes the same man in two situations: the bush paranoiac and
the village pervert.
Once the socius becomes fixed, falling back on the productive
forces and appropriating them for its own, the problem of coding can no
longer be resolved by the simultaneity of a displacement from the
standpoint of the flows, and an accelerated reproduction from the
148/ ANTI-OEDIPUS

standpoint of the chain. The flows must be the object of deductions
(prelevements) that constitute a minimum of stock, and the signifying
chain must be the object of detachments (detachements) that constitute a
minimum of mediations. A flow is coded insofar as detachments from
the chain and deductions from the flows are effected in correspondence,
united in a mutual embrace. And this is already the highly perverse
activity of local groups who arrange marriages on the surface of the
primitive territoriality: a normal or nonpathological perversity, as Henry
Ey would say, referring to other cases where "a psychic work of
selection, refinement, and calculation" was manifested. And this is the
case from the start, since there does not exist a pure nomad who can be
afforded the satisfaction of drifting with the flows and singing direct
filiation, but always a socius waiting to bear down, already deducting
and detaching.
The flow deductions constitute a filiative stock in the signifying
chain; but inversely, the detachments from the chain constitute mobile
debts of alliance that guide and direct the flows. On the blanket that
serves as a familial stock, affinal stones or cowries are made to circulate.
There is a sort of vast cycle of flows of production and chains of
inscription, and a lesser cycle, between the stocks of filiation that
connect or encaste (encastent) the flows, and the blocks of alliance that
cause the chains to flow. Descent is at the same time flow of production
and chain of inscription, stock of filiation and fluxion of alliance.
Everything takes place as though the stock constituted a surface energy
of inscription or recording, the potential energy of the apparent movement; but debt is the actual direction of this movement, a kinetic energy
that is determined by the respective paths of the gifts and countergifts
on the surface. Among the Kula, the circulation of necklaces and
bracelets comes to a standstill in certain places, on certain occasions, so
that a stock may be re-formed. There are no productive connections
without disjunctions of filiation that appropriate them, but there are no
disjunctions of filiation that do not reconstitute lateral connections
across the alliances and pairings of persons. Not only the flows and the
chains, but the fixed stocks and the mobile debts-insofar as they in turn
imply relations between chains and flows in both directions-are in a
state of perpetual relativity: their elements vary-women, consumer
goods, ritual objects, rights, prestige, status.
If one postulates that somewhere there has to be a kind of
equilibrium of prices, one is compelled to see in the manifest disequilibrium of the relations a pathological consequence, which one explains by
saying that the supposedly closed system extends in one direction and
opens as the prestations become wider and more complex. But such a
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN , 149

conception is in contradiction with the primitive "cold economy," which
is without net investment, without money or market, and without
exchangist commodity relations. The mainspring of such an economy is
a veritable surplus value of code: each detachment from the chain
produces, on one side or the other in the flows of production, phenomena of excess and deficiency, phenomena of lack and accumulation,
which will be compensated for by nonexchangeable elements of the
acquired-prestige or distributed-consumption type. ("The chief converts
this perishable wealth into imperishable prestige through the medium of
spectacular feasting. The ultimate consumers are in this way the original
producers.'')* Surplus value of code is the primitive form of surplus
value, inasmuch as it corresponds to Mauss's celebrated formula: the
spirit of the thing given, or the force of circumstance that requires that
gifts be reciprocated with interest, being territorial signs of desire and
power (puissance), and principles of abundance and the fructification of
wealth. Far from being a pathological consequence, the disequilibrium is
functional and fundamental. Far from being the extension of a system
that is at first closed, the opening is primary, founded in the heterogeneity of the elements that compose the prestations and that compensate for
the disequilibrium by displacing it. In short, the detachments from the
signifying chain, in accordance with the relations of alliance, engender
surplus values of code at the level of the flows, whence are derived
differences in status between the filiative lines (for example, the superior
or inferior ranks of the givers and receivers of wives). The surplus value
of code carries out the diverse operations of the primitive territorial
machine: detaching segments from the chain, organizing selections from
the flows, and allocating the portions due each person.
The idea that primitive societies have no history, that they are
dominated by archetypes and their repetition, is especially weak and
inadequate. This idea was not conceived by ethnologists, but by
ideologists in the service of a tragic Judaeo-Christian consciousness that
they wished to credit with the "invention" of history. If what is called
history is a dynamic and open social reality, in a state of functional
disequilibrium, or an oscillating equilibrium, unstable and always compensated, comprising not only institutionlized conflicts but conflicts that
"Leach, Rethinking Anthropology, p. 89. Also the criticism Leach addresses to Levi-Strauss:
"Levi-Strauss rightly argues that the structural implications of a marriage can only be understood if we
think of it as one item in a whole series of transactions between kin groups. So far, so good. But in none
of the examples which he provides in his book does he carry this principle far enough....
Fundamentally he is not really interested in the nature and significance of the counter-prestations that
serve as equivalents for women in the systems he is discussing.... We cannot predict from first
principles how the different categories of prestaticn will be evaluated in any particular society.... It is
very important to distinguish between consumable and non-consumable materials; it is also very
important to appreciate that quite intangible elements such as 'rights' and 'prestige' form part of the
total inventory of 'things' exchanged" (pp. 90, 1(0).

1!IO

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

generate changes, revolts, ruptures, and scissions, then primitive societies are fully inside history, and far distant from the stability, or even
from the harmony, attributed to them in the name of a primacy of a
unanimous group. The presence of history in every social machine
plainly appears in the disharmonies that, as Levi-Strauss says, "bear the
unmistakable stamp of time elapsed."* It is true that there are several
ways to interpret such disharmonies: ideally, by the gap between the real
institution and the assumed ideal model; morally, by invoking a structural bond between law and transgression; physically, as though it were a
question of attrition that would cause the social machine to lose its
capacity to wield its materials. But here too it seems that the correct
interpretation would be, above all, actual and functional: it is in order to
function that a social machine must not function well. This has been
shown precisely with regard to the segmentary system, which is always
destined to reconstitute itself on its own ruins; and likewise for the
organization of the political function in these systems, which in effect is
exercised only by indicating its own impotence." Ethnologists are
constantly saying that kinship rules are neither applied nor applicable to
real marriages: not because these rules are ideal but rather because they
determine critical points where the apparatus starts up again-provided
it is blocked, and where it necessarily places itself in a negative relation
to the group. Here it becomes apparent that the social machine is
identical with the desiring-machine. The social machine's limit is not
attrition, but rather its misfirings; it can operate only by fits and starts,
by grinding and breaking down, in spasms of minor explosions. The
dysfunctions are an essential element of its very ability to function,
which is not the least important aspect of the system of cruelty. The
death of a social machine has never been heralded by a disharmony or a
dysfunction; on the contrary, social machines make a habit of feeding on
the contradictions they give rise to, on the crises they provoke, on the
anxieties they engender, and on the infernal operations they regenerate.
Capitalism has learned this, and has ceased doubting itself, while even
socialists have abandoned belief in the possibility of capitalism's natural
death by attrition. No one has ever died from contradictions. And the
more it breaks down, the more it schizophrenizes, the better it works, the
American way.
But this is already the point of view required-given a change of
perspective-for examining the primitive socius, the territorial machine
"Claude Levi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology, trans. Claire Jacobs and Brooke Grundfest Schoepf
(New York: Basic Books, Harper Torchbooks , 1963), p. 117. (Translators' note: The French reads: "la
marque, impossible it rneconnaitre, de 'I'evenement." The above translation misses the impact of
marque [mark} and evenement [event].}

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1151

for declining alliances and filiations. This machine is segmentary because, through its double apparatus of tribe and lineage, it cuts up
segments of varying lengths: genealogical filiative units of major, minor,
and minimal lineages, with their hierarchy, their respective chiefs, their
elders who guard the stocks and organize marriages; territorial tribal
units of primary, secondary, and tertiary sections, also having their
dominant roles and their alliances. "The point of separation between the
tribal sections becomes the point of divergence in the clan structure of
the lineages associated with each section. For, as we have seen, clans
and their lineages are not distinct corporate groups, but are embodied in
local communities, through which they function structurally. "10 The two
systems intersect, each segment being associated with the flows and the
chains, with the stocked flows and the passing flows, with selections
from the flows and detachments from the chains (certain production
projects are executed in the framework of the tribal system, others in
the framework of the lineage system). The variability and relativity of
the segments are responsible for all sorts of penetrations between the
inalienable elements of filiation and the mobile elements of alliance. This
is explained by the fact that the length of each segment-or even its
existence as such-is determined only by its opposition to other
segments in a series of interrelated stages. The segmentary machine
mixes rivalries, conflicts, and ruptures throughout the variations of
filiation and the fluctuations of alliance. The whole system evolves
between two poles: that of fusion through opposition to other groups,
and that of scission through the constant formation of new lineages
aspiring to independence, with capitalization of alliances and filiation.
From one pole to the other, all the misfirings and failures in a system that
is constantly reborn of its own disharmonies. What does Jeanne Favret
mean when she shows, along with other ethnologists, that "the persistence of a segmentary organization requires paradoxically that its
mechanisms be ineffectual enough so that fear remains the motor of the
whole"? And what is this fear'? It would appear that social formations
experienced a morbid and mournful foreboding of things to come,
although what comes to them always comes from without, rushing in
through their opening. Perhaps it is even for this reason that it arrives
from without; they suffocate its inner potentiality, at the cost of the
dysfunctions that constitute an integral part of the functioning of their
system.
The segmentary territorial machine makes use of scission to
exorcise fusion, and impedes the concentration of power by maintaining
the organs of chieftainry in a relationship of impotence with the group:

Hill

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

as though the savages themselves sensed the rise of the imperial
Barbarian, who will come nonetheless from without and will overcode
all their codes. But the greatest danger would be yet another dispersion,
a scission such that all the possibilities of coding would be suppressed:
decoded flows, flowing on a blind, mute, deterritorialized socius-such
is the nightmare that the primitive social machine exorcises with all its
forces and all its segmentary articulations. The primitive machine is not
ignorant of exchange, commerce, and industry; it exorcises them,
localizes them, cordons them off, encastes them, and maintains the
merchant and the blacksmith in a subordinate position, so that the flows
of exchange and the flows of production do not manage to break the
codes in favor of their abstract or fictional quantities. And isn't that also
what Oedipus, the fear of incest, is about: the fear of a decoded flow? If
capitalism is the universal truth, it is so in the sense that makes
capitalism the negative of all social formations. It is the thing, t~e
unnamable, the generalized decoding of flows that reveals a contra:1O
the secret of all these formations, coding the flows, and even overcoding
them rather than letting anything escape coding. Primitive societies are
not outside history; rather, it is capitalism that is at the end of history, it
is capitalism that results from a long history of .contingencies .and
accidents, and that brings on this end. It cannot be said that the .prevlOus
formations did not foresee this Thing that only came from Without by
rising from within, and that at all costs had to be prevent~d fro~ rising.
Whence the possibility of a retrospective reading of all history III terms
of capitalism. It is already possible to see signs of classes in precapitalist
societies. But ethnologists observe how difficult it is to distinguish those
protoclasses from the castes organized by the il~p~~ial mach.ine and
from the rankings distributed by the segmentary prmutrve machine. The
criteria that distinguish classes, castes, and ranks must not be sought in a
fixity or a permeability, nor in a relative closing or opening; these criteria
always reveal themselves to be deceptive, eminently misleading. But the
ranks are inseparable from the primitive territorial coding process, just
as castes are inseparable from the overcoding practiced by the imperial
State, while classes are relative to the process of an industrial and
commodity production decoded under the conditions of capitalism. All
history can therefore be read under the sign of classes, but by observing
the rules set forth by Marx, and bearing in mind that classes are the
"negative" of castes and ranks. For it is certain that the regime of
decoding does not signify the absence of organization, but rather the
most somber organization, the harshest compatibility, with the axiomatic replacing the codes and incorporating them, always a contrario.

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1153

3

I The Problem of Oedipus

The full body of the earth is not without distinguishing
characteristics. Suffering and dangerous, unique, universal, it falls back
on production, on the agents and connections of production. But on it,
too, everything is attached and inscribed, everything is attracted,
miraculated. It is the basis of the disjunctive synthesis and its reproduction: a pure force of filiation or genealogy, Numen. The full body is the
unengendered, but filiation is the first character of inscription marked on
this body. And we know the nature of this intensive filiation, this
inclusive disjunction where everything divides, but into itself, and where
the same being is everywhere, on every side, at every level, differing
only in intensity. The same included being traverses indivisible distances
on the full body, and passes through all the singularities, all the
intensities of a synthesis that shifts and reproduces itself. It serves no
purpose to recall that genealogical filiation is social rather than biological, for it is necessarily biosocial inasmuch as it is inscribed on the
cosmic egg of the full body of the earth. It has a mythical origin that is
the One, or rather the primitive one-two. Should one say the twins or the
twin? Which divides and unites into itself-the Nommo, or the Nommos? The disjunctive synthesis distributes the primordial ancestors, but
each member of the primitive community is himself a complete full
body, male and female, binding to itself all the partial objects, with
variations that are solely intensive, and that correspond to the internal
zigzag of the Dogon egg. Each one intensively repeats the entire
genealogy for himself. And everywhere it is the same, at both ends of
the indivisible distance and on every side, a litany of twins, an intense
filiation. At the beginning of Le renard pale, Marcel Griaule and
Germaine Dieterlen sketch out a splendid theory of the sign: the signs of
filiation, guide-signs and master-signs, signs of desire, intensive at first,
which fall in a spiral and traverse a series of explosions before extending
into images, figures, and drawings.
If the full body falls back on the productive connections and
inscribes them in a network of intensive and inclusive disjunctions, it
still has to find again and reanimate lateral connections in the network
itself, and it must attribute them to itself as though it were their cause.
These are the two aspects of the full body: an enchanted surface of
inscription, the fantastic law, or the apparent objective movement; but
also a magical agent or fetish, the quasi cause. It is not content to
inscribe all things, it must act as if it produced them. It is necessary that
the connections reappear in a form compatible with the inscribed
disjunctions, even if they react in turn on the form of these disjunctions.
154

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

Such is alliance, the second characteristic of inscription: alliance
imposes on the productive connections the extensive form of a pairing
of persons, compatible with the disjunctions of inscription, but inversely
reacts on inscription by determining an exclusive and restrictive use of
these same disjunctions. It is therefore inevitable that alliance be
mythically represented as supervening at a certain moment in the
filiative lines (although in another sense it is already there from time
immemorial). Marcel Griaule describes how, among the Dogons, something is produced at a certain moment, at the level and on the side of the
eighth ancestor: a derailment of the disjunctions, which cease to be
inclusive and become exclusive. Once this occurs, there is a dismembering of the full body, a canceling of twinness (la gemelleite), a separation
of the sexes marked by circumcision, but also a recomposition of the
body according to a new model of connection or conjugation, an
articulation of bodies for and between themselves, a lateral inscription
with articulatory stones of alliance, in short, a whole ark of alliance."!
Alliances never derive from filiations, nor can they be deduced from
them. But, this principle once established, we must distinguish between
two points of view: the one economic and political, where alliance is
there from time immemorial, combining and declining itself with the
extended filiative lineages that do not exist prior to alliances in a system
assumed to be given in extended form; the other mythical, which shows
how the extension of a system takes form and delimits itself, proceeding
from intense and primordial filiative lineages that necessarily lose their
inclusive or nonrestrictive use. From this viewpoint the extended
system is like a memory of alliance and of words, implying an active
repression of the intense memory of filiation. For if genealogy and
filiations are the object of an ever vigilant memory, it is to the degree
that they are already apprehended in an extensive sense that they
certainly did not possess before the determinations of alliances conferred it on them. On the contrary, as intensive filiations they become
the object of a separate memory, nocturnal and biocosmic-the memory
that indeed must suffer repression in order for the new extended
memory to be established.
We can better understand why the problem does not in the least
consist of going from filiations to alliances, or of deducing the latter
from the former. The problem is one of passing from an intensive
energetic order to an extensive system, which comprises both qualitative alliances and extended filiations. Nothing is changed by the fact that
the primary energy of the intensive order-the Numen-is an energy of
filiation, for this intense filiation is not yet extended, and does not as yet
comprise any distinction of persons, nor even a distinction of sexes, but
SAVAGES,

Bft,RB,~RIANS, CIVll.IZED MEN 11115

only prepersonal variations in intensity, taking on the same twinness or
bisexuality in differing degrees. The signs belonging to this order are
therefore fundamentally neuter or ambiguous (according to an expression employed by Leibnitz to designate a sign that can be + as well as
-). It is a question of knowing how, starting from this primary intensity,
it will be possible to pass to a system in extension where (I) the filiations
will be filiations extended in the form of lineages, comprising distinctions of persons and of parental appellations; (2) the alliances will be at
the same time qualitative relations, which the filiations presuppose as
much as vice versa; (3) in short, the ambiguous intense signs will cease
to be ambiguous and will become positive or negative.
This may be seen clearly in a passage from Levi-Strauss, explaining
for the simple forms of marriage the prohibition of parallel cousins and
the approbation of cross-cousins: each marriage between two lines A
and B bears a (+) or (-) sign, according to whether this couple results
from a woman being lost to or acquired by line A or B. In this regard it is
not important whether the regime of filiation is patrilineal or matrilineal.
In a patrilineal or patrilocal regime, for example, "related women are
women lost; women brought in by marriage are women gained. Each
family descended from these marriages thus bears a sign, which is
determined, for the initial group, by whether the children's mother is a
daughter or a daughter-in-law .... The sign changes in passing from the
brother to the sister, since the brother gains a wife, while the sister is lost
to her own family." But, as Levi-Strauss remarks, one also changes
signs in passing from one generation to the next: "It depends upon
whether, from the initial group's point of view, the father has received a
wife, or the mother has been transferred outside, whether the sons have
the right to a woman or owe a sister. Certainly, in real life this difference
does not mean that half the male cousins are destined to remain
bachelors. However, at all events, it does express the law that a man
cannot receive a wife except from the group from which a woman can be
claimed, because in the previous generation a sister or a daughter was
lost, while a brother owes a sister (or a father, a daughter) to the outside
world if a woman was gained in the previous generation.... The
pivot-couple, formed by an A man married to a B woman, obviously has
two signs, according to whether it is envisaged from the viewpoint of A,
or that of B, and the same is true for children. It is now only necessary to
look at the cousins' generation to establish that all those in the
relationship (+ +) or (- -) are parallel to one another, while all those in
the relationship (+ -) or (- +) are cross."12
But once the problem is put in this way, it is less a question of
applying a logical combinative apparatus governing an interplay of
156

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

exchanges, as Levi-Strauss would have it, than one of establishing a
physical system that will express itself naturally in terms of debts. It
seems to us very significant that Levi-Strauss himself invokes the
co-ordinates of a physical system, although he sees this as nothing more
than a metaphor. In the physical system in extension, something passes
through that is of the nature of an energy flow (+ - or - +), something
does not pass or remains blocked (+ + or - -), and something blocks, or
on the contrary causes, passage. Something or someone. In this system
in extension there is no primary filiation, nor is there a first generation or
an initial exchange, but there are always and already alliances, at the
same time as the filiations are extended, expressing both what must
remain blocked in the filiation and what must pass through in the
alliance.
The essential is not that the signs change according to the sexes and
the generations, but that one passes from the intensive to the extensive,
that is to say, from an order of ambiguous signs to an order of signs that
are changing but determined. It is here that resorting to myth is
indispensable, not because the myth would be a transposed or even an
inverse representation of real relations in extension, but because only
the myth can determine the intensive conditions of the system (the
system of production included) in conformity with indigenous thought
and practice. That is why a text of Marcel Griaule's, which looks to myth
for a principle that would explain the avunculate, seems decisive to us,
and seems to avoid the reproach of idealism that usually greets this kind
of attempt. We have a similar view of the recent article in which Adler
and Cartry return to the qucstion!'' These authors are right in remarking
that Levi-Strauss's kinship atom-with its four relationships: brothersister, husband-wife, father-son, maternal uncle-sister's son-presents
itself as a ready-made whole from which the mother as such is strangely
excluded, although, depending on the circumstances, she can be more or
less a "kinswoman" or more or less an "affine" in relation to her
children. Now this is indeed where the myth takes root, the myth that
does not express but conditions. As Griaule relates it, the Yourougou,
breaking into the piece of placenta he has stolen, is like the brother of his
mother, with whom he is united by that fact: "This individual went away
into the distance carrying with him a part of the nourishing placenta,
which is to say a part of his own mother. He saw this organ as his own
and as forming a part of his own person, in such a way that he identified
himself with the one who gave birth to him. She was the matrix of the
world, and he considered himself to be placed on the same plane as she
from the viewpoint of the generations . . . . He senses unconsciously his
symbolic membership in his mother's generation and his detachment
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1151

from the real generation of which he is a member. ... Being, according
to him, of the same substance and generation as his mother, he likens
himself to a male twin of his genetrix, and the mythical rule of the union
of two paired members proposes him as the ideal husband. Hence, in his
capacity as pseudo brother to his genetrix, he should be in the position
of his maternal uncle, the designated husband of this woman. "14
Doubtless all the dramatis personae will be found to come into play
from this point on: mother, father, son, mother's brother, son's sister.
But it is evident and striking that these are not persons. Their names do
not designate persons, but rather the intensive variations of a "vibratory
spiraling movement," inclusive disjunctions, necessarily twin states
through which a subject passes on the cosmic egg. Everything must be
interpreted in intensity. The egg and the placenta itself, swept by an
unconscious life energy "susceptible to augmentation and diminution."
The father is in no way absent. But Amma, the father and genitor, is
himself a high intensive part, immanent to the placenta, inseparable
from the twinness, which relates him to his feminine part. And if the
Yourougou son carries away a part of the placenta in his turn, it is in an
intensive relationship with another part that contains his own sister or
twin sister. But, aiming too high, the part he carries away makes him the
sister of his mother, who eminently replaces the sister, and to whom he
becomes united by replacing Amma. In short, a whole world of
ambiguous signs, included divisions and bisexual states. I am the son,
and also my mother's brother and my sister's husband and my own
father. Everything rests on the placenta, which has become the earth,
the unengendered, the full body of antiproduction where the organspartial objects of a sacrificed Nommo are attached. It is because the
placenta, as a substance common to the mother and the child, a common
part of their bodies, makes it such that these bodies are not like cause
and effect, but are both products derived from this same substance, in
relation to which the son is his mother's twin: such is indeed the axis of
the Dogan myth related by Griaule. Yes, I have been my mother and I
have been my son. It is rare that one sees myth and science saying the
same thing from such a great distance: the Dogan narrative develops a
mythical Weismannism, where the germinative plasma forms an immortal and continuous lineage that does not depend on bodies; on the
contrary, the bodies of the parents as well as the children depend on it.
Whence the distinction between two lines, the one continuous and
germinal, but the other discontinuous and somatic, it alone being
subjected to a succession of generations. (T. D. Lysenko employed a
naturally Dogan tone, turning it back against Weismann, to reproach him
for making the son the genetic or germinal brother of the mother: "The
1!18

I

Morganists-Mendelians, following Weismann, start from the idea that
the parents are not genetically the parents of their children; if we are to
believe their doctrine, parents and children are brothers and sisters ."!")
But the son is not somatically his mother's brother and twin. That is
why he cannot marry her (bearing in mind what we said earlier to be the
meaning of "that is why"). The one who should have married the mother
was therefore the maternal uncle. The first consequence of this is that
incest with the sister is not a substitute for incest with the mother, but on
the contrary the intensive model of incest as a manifestation of the
germinal lineage. Then again, Hamlet is not an extension of Oedipus, an
Oedipus to the second degree; on the contrary, a negative or inverse
Hamlet is primary in relation to Oedipus. The subject does not reproach
the uncle for having done what he himself wanted to do; he reproaches
him for not having done what he the son could not do. And why didn't
the uncle marry the mother, his somatic sister? Because he must not,
except in the name of this germinal filiation, marked by ambiguous signs
of twinness and bisexuality, according to which the son could have done
it as well, and could have been himself this uncle in an intense
relationship with the mother-twin. The vicious circle of the germinal
lineage closes (the primitive double bind): neither can the uncle marry
his sister, the mother, nor from that moment can the son marry his own
sister-the Yourougou female twin will be delivered over to the
Nommos as a potential affine. The somatic order causes the whole
intensive scale to collapse again. Actually, if the son cannot marry his
mother, it is not because he is somatically from a different generation.
Arguing against Malinowski, Levi-Strauss has demonstrated convincingly that the mixing of generations was not in the least feared as such,
and that the incest prohibition could not be explained in this manner.!"
This is because the mixing of the generations in the son-mother case has
the same effect as their correspondence in the case of the uncle-sister,
that is, it testifies to one and the same intensive germinal filiation that
must be repressed in both cases. In short, a somatic system in extension
can constitute itself only insofar as the filiations become extended,
correlatively to lateral alliances that become established. It is through
the prohibition of incest with the sister that the lateral alliance is sealed;
it is through the prohibition of incest with the mother that the filiation
becomes extended. There we find no repression of the father, no
foreclosure of the name of the father. The respective position of the
mother or father as kin or affine, the patrilineal or matrilineal character
of the filiation, and the' patrilateral or matrilateral character of the
marriage, are active elements of the repression, and not objects at which
the repression is directed. It is not even the memory of filiation in

ANTI·OEDIPUS
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1159

IIlIlIllIllUIlIllIlIlWmIIlIlWllllllIlUUlIWIII~IIIIlIlIIUlIllIIIllIlIllIlIII~~IIU~~m~lIIJIlllIWIlllUlIIlWIlIlillIIlIIJIlIIIIWlJllIOOIIJIlUllI~llI~lIIJIlWIIIWlWIlIllIIlIIlUllUlll'llm

1'11"11111111111111111111 1'1"11111'1'111'11'11'11" IIlIlUlI1lIIlIIJIIUIlllWllllllllllllllUllllllllUlllIlllUIlIIlIlIIIUUIllIIJIIIIIlUIIlIlUIIlIIlIlIllIlIlIllllllllllllllWlllllllUllllllllUlllllllUlllW!IlIIlIlBlIlIWIIlllUIIlIlIlIIlIlUIIlIIllIlIlOOIlIlllUIIIII''I'II''I''II'I''II'II'II'llIIJIllIIIlUlIlIIIIIIIIlIlllIIIJIlIlIlllWllUWIIIllIlIIJIIlUIlIlWIIlIlIOOIWIlWlIlIIIllUIIlaIIlIWlIlIlIWll~!lIIJII!IllIlIIIlUlIlIWIlIIlIIIlIllUllIlWlIIJIlIWlIlllUl1lIllIlIIIlIII1l11l1UlIIJIIlOOIIIII1lIIIWlIlIllIWUlII

general that is repressed by a memory of alliance. It is the great
nocturnal memory of the intensive germinal filiation that is repressed for
the sake of an extensive somatic memory, created from filiations that
have become extended (patrilineal or matrilineal) and from the alliances
that they imply. The entire Dogon mythology is a patrilineal version of
the opposition between the two genealogies and the two filiations: in
intensity and in extension, the intense germinal order and the extensive
regime of the somatic generations.
The system in extension is born of the intensive conditions that
make it possible, but it reacts on them, cancels them, represses them,
and allows them no more than a mythical expression. The signs cease to
be ambiguous at the same time as they are determined in relation to the
extended filiations and the lateral alliances: the disjunctions become
exclusive, restrictive (the "either/or else" replaces the intense
"either ... or ... or ..."); the names, the appellations no longer designate intensive states, but discernible persons. Discernibility settles on
the sister and the mother as prohibited spouses. The reason is that
persons, with the names that now designate them, do not exist prior to
the prohibitions that constitute them as such. Mother and sister do not
exist prior to their prohibition as spouses. Robert Jaulin says it well:
"The mythical discourse has as its theme the passage from indifference
to incest to its prohibition. Implicit or explicit, this theme underlies all
the myths; it is therefore a formal property of this language."!" We must
conclude that, strictly speaking, incest does not and cannot exist. We are
always on this side of incest, in a series of intensities that is ignorant of
discernible persons; or else beyond incest, in an extension that recognizes them, that constitutes them, but that does not constitute them without
rendering them impossible as sexual partners. One can commit incest
only after a series of substitutions that always moves us away from it,
that is to say, with a person who is equivalent to the mother or the sister
only by virtue of not being either: she who is discernible as a possible
spouse. Such is the meaning of preferential marriage: the first incest that
is permitted. But it is not by chance that this kind of marriage rarely
occurs, as though it were still too close to the nonexistent impossible
(for example, the preferential Dogon marriage with the uncle's daughter,
she being equivalent to the aunt, who is herself equivalent to the
mother).
Griaules article is without doubt the text most profoundly inspired
by psychoanalysis in the whole of anthropology. Yet it leads to
conclusions that cause the whole of Oedipus to shatter, because it is not
content to pose the problem in extension, thereby assuming its solution.
These are the conclusions drawn by Adler and Cartry: "It is customary
160

I

to consider incestuous relations in myth either as the expression of the
desire or the nostalgia for a world where such relations would be
possible or would meet with indifference, or as the expression of a
structural function of the inversion of the social rule, a function destined
to found the prohibition and its transgression .... In both instances, one
takes as something already constituted what is in fact the emergence of
an order that the myth narrates and explains. In other words, one reasons
as if the myth placed on the stage persons defined as father, mother,
brother, and sister, whereas these roles belong to the order constituted
by the prohibition ... : incest does not exist."* Incest is a pure limit.
Provided that two false beliefs concerning the limit are avoided: one that
makes the limit a matrix or an origin, as though the prohibition proved
that the thing was "first" desired as such; another that makes the limit a
structural function, as though the supposedly "fundamental" relationship between desire and law were manifested in transgression. It is
necessary to recall once more that the law proves nothing about an
original reality of desire because it essentially disfigures the desired; and
that the trangression proves nothing about a functional reality of the law
because, far from being a mockery of the law, it is itself derisory in
relation to what the law prohibits in reality (the reason why revolutions
have nothing to do with transgressions). In short, the limit is neither a
this-side-of nor a beyond: it is the boundary line between the twoIncest, that slandered shallow stream-always crossed already or not
yet crossed. For incest is like this motion, it is impossible. And it is not
impossible in the same sense that the Real would be impossible, but
quite the contrary, in the sense that the Symbolic is.
But what does it mean to say that incest is impossible? Isn't it
possible to go to bed with one's sister or mother? And how do we
dispense with the old argument: it must be possible since it is prohibited? The problem lies elsewhere. The possibility of incest would require
both persons and names-son, sister, mother, brother, father. Now in
the incestuous act we can have persons at our disposal, but they lose
their names inasmuch as these names are inseparable from the prohibition that proscribes them as partners; or else the names subsist, and
designate nothing more than prepersonal intensive states that could just
as well "extend" to other persons, as when one calls his legitimate wife
"mama," or one's sister his wife. It is in this sense that we said we are
always on this side of it or beyond. Our mothers and our sisters melt in
*Adler

and Cartry (see reference note 13). Jacques Der rida wrote, in a commentary of Rousseau:
"Before the feast there was no incest because there was no prohibition of incest. After the feast there is
no longer any incest because it is prohibited.
. The feast itself would be the incest itself if any' such
thing-itself-couJd take place" (De fa grammotologie [see reference note 53], pp. 372-77).

SAVAGES,
ANTI·OEDIPUS

B,~RBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1 16 1

--_._-------~

our arms; their names slide on their persons like a stamp that is too wet.
This is because one can never enjoy the person and the name at the same
time-yet this would be the condition for incest. Granted, incest is a
lure, it is impossible. But the problem is only deferred. Is that not the
nature of desire, that one desires the impossible? At least in this
instance, the platitude is not even true. We are reminded how illegitimate it is to conclude from the prohibition anything regarding the nature
of what is prohibited; for the prohibition proceeds by dishonoring the
guilty, that is to say, by inducing a disfigured or displaced image of the
thing that is really prohibited or desired. Indeed, this is how social
repression prolongs itself by means of a psychic repression without
which it would have no grip on desire. What is desired is the intense
germinal or germinative flow, where one would look in vain for persons
or even functions discernible as father, mother, son, sister, etc., since
these names only designate intensive variations on the full body of the
earth determined as the gerrnen. It is always possible to use the term
incest, as well as indifference to incest, for this regime composed of one
and the same being or flow, varying in intensity according to inclusive
disjunctions. But that is precisely the problem; one cannot confound
incest as it would be in this intensive nonpersonal regime that would
institute it, with incest as represented in extension in the state that
prohibits it, and that defines it as a transgression against persons. lung is
therefore entirely correct in saying that the Oedipus complex signifies
something altogether different from itself, and that in the Oedipal
relation the mother is also the earth, and incest is an infinite renaissance.
(He is wrong only in thinking that he has thus "transcended" sexuality.)
The somatic complex refers to a germinal implex, Incest refers to a
this-side-of that cannot be represented as such in the complex, since the
complex is an element derived from this this-side-of. Incest as it is
prohibited (the form of discernible persons) is employed to repress
incest as it is desired (the substance of the intense earth). The intensive
germinal flow is the representative of desire; it is against this flow that
the repression is directed. The extensive Oedipal figure is its displaced
represented (Ie represente dep/ace), the lure or fake image, born of
repression, that comes to conceal desire. It matters little that this image
is "impossible": it does its work from the moment that desire lets itself
be caught as though by the impossible itself. You see, that is what you
wanted! However it is this conclusion, going directly from the repression to the repressed, and from the prohibition to the prohibited, that
already implies the whole paralogism of social repression.
But why is the germinal imp lex or influx repressed, since it is
nevertheless the territorial representative of desire? Because the thing it
162

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

refers to, in its capacity as representative, is a flow that would not be
codable, that would not let itself be coded-specifically, the terror of the
primitive socius. No chain could be detached, nothing could be selected;
nothing would pass from filiation to descent, but descent would be
perpetually reduced to filiation in the act of re-engendering oneself; the
signifying chain would not form any code, it would only emit ambiguous
signs and be perpetually eroded by its own energetic support; what
would flow on the full body of the earth would be as unfettered as the
noncoded flows that shift and slide on the desert of a body without
organs. For it is less a question of abundance or scarcity, of a spring or
the exhaustion of a spring (even the drying up of a spring is a flow), than
of what is codable or noncodable. The germinal flow is such that it
amounts to the same to say that everything would pass or flow with it, or
on the contrary, that everything would be blocked. For the flows to be
codable, their energy must allow itself to be quantified and qualified; it is
necessary that selections from the flows be made in relation to detachments from the chain: something must pass through but something must
also be blocked, and something must block and cause to pass through.
Now this is possible only in the system in extension that renders persons
discernible, that makes a determinate use of signs, an exclusive use of
the disjunctive syntheses, and a conjugal use of the connective syntheses. Such is indeed the meaning of the incest prohibition conceived
as the establishment of a physical system in extension: one must
look in each case for the part of the flow of intensity that passes through,
for what does not pass, and for what causes passage or prevents it,
according to the patrilateral or matrilateral nature of the marriages,
according to the patrilineal or matrilineal nature of the lineages, according to the general regime of the extended filiations and the lateral
alliances.
Let us return to the Dogon preferential marriage as analyzed by
Griaule: what is blocked is the relationship with the aunt as a substitute
for the mother, in the form of a make-believe parent; what passes
through is the relationship with the aunt's daughter as a substitute for
the aunt, as the first possible or permitted incest; what does the blocking
or causes passage is the maternal uncle. What passes through leads
to-as compensation for what is blocked-a veritable surplus value of
code, which falls to the uncle insofar as he causes passage, while he
suffers a kind of "minus value" insofar as he does the blocking (thus the
ritual thefts perpetrated by the nephews in the uncle's house, but also, as
Griaule says, "the augmentation and fructification" of the uncle's
possessions when the oldest of the nephews comes to live with him).
The fundamental problem-who has the right to the matrimonial prestaSAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN 1163

-

-

--~

tions in a given system?-cannot be resolved independently of the lines
of passage and the lines of blockage, as if what was blocked or
prohibited reappeared "in marriages in spectral form,"!" coming to
demand its due. Leffler writes of a specific case: "Among the Mru, the
patrilineal model predominates over the matrilineal tradition: the
brother-sister relationship, which is transmitted from father to son and
from mother to daughter, can be transmitted indefinitely through the
father-son relationship, but not through the mother-daughter relationship, which terminates with the daughter's marriage. A married daughter
transmits to her own daughter a new relationship, namely that which
joins her to her own brother. At the same time, a daughter who marries
becomes detached not from her brother's line, but solely from that of
her mother's brother. The significance of the payments to the mother's
brother upon the marriage of his niece can be understood only in the
following way: the girl leaves the previous family group, to which her
mother belongs. The niece becomes herself a mother and the point of
departure for a new brother-sister relationship, on which a new alliance
is founded."19 What is prolonged, what comes to a halt, what is
detached, and the different relationships according to which these
actions and passions are distributed, help us to understand the formation
mechanism of the surplus value of code as an indispensable element of
any coding of flows.
We are now able to outline the various instances of territorial
representation in the primitive socius. In the first place, the germinal
influx of intensity conditions all representation: it is the representative of
desire. But if it is termed representative, this is because it is equivalent
to the noncodable, noncoded, or decoded flows. In this sense it implies,
in its own way, the socius's limit, the limit or the negative of every
socius; the repression of this limit is possible only to the extent that the
representative itself undergoes a repression. This repression determines
what part of the influx will pass through and what will not in the system
in extension, what will remain blocked or stocked in the extended
filiations, and on the contrary, what will move and flow following the
relations of alliance, in such a way that the systematic coding of the
flows will be carried out. We call this second instance-the repressing
representation itself-alliance, since the filiations become extended only
in terms of lateral alliances that measure their variable segments.
Whence the importance of these "local lines" that Leach has
identified-and which, two by two, organize the alliances and arrange
(machine) the marriages. When we ascribed to them a perverse-normal
activity, we meant that these local groups were the agents of repression,
the great coders. Wherever men meet and assemble to take wives for
164

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

themselves, to negotiate for them, to share them, etc., one recognizes
the perverse tie of a primary homosexuality between local groups,
between brothers-in-law, co-husbands, childhood partners.
Underlining the universal fact that marriage is not an alliance
between a man and a woman, but "an alliance between two families," "a
transaction between men concerning women," Georges Devereux drew
the correct conclusion of a basic homosexual motivation of a group
character.w Through women, men establish their own connections;
through the man-woman disjunction, which is always the outcome of
filiation, alliance places in connection men from different filiations. The
question why a female homosexuality hasn't given rise to Amazon
groups capable of negotiating for men perhaps finds its reply in
women's affinity with the germinal influx, resulting in the enclosed
position of women in the midst of extended filiations (filiation hysteria as
opposed to alliance paranoia). Male homosexuality is therefore the
representation of alliance that represses the ambiguous signs of intense
bisexual filiation. However, Devereux seems to us to be wrong on two
occasions. First, when he admits having recoiled too long before
this-so serious (he says)-discovery of a homosexual representation
(there we merely see a primitive version of the formula "All men are
homosexuals," and to be sure, they are never more so than when they
arrange marriages). Then again-and this is his most serious errorwhen he wants to make of this homosexuality of alliance a product of
the Oedipus complex as something repressed. Alliance can never be
deduced from the lines of filiation through the intermediary of Oedipus;
on the contrary, alliance articulates them, impelled by the action of the
local lines and their non-oedipal primary homosexuality. And if it is true
that there exists an Oedipal or filiative homosexuality, this should be
understood merely as a secondary reaction to this group homosexuality,
non-oedipal at first.
As for Oedipus in general, it is not the repressed-that is, the
representative of desire, which is on this side of and completely ignorant
of daddy-mommy. Nor is it the repressing representation, which is
beyond, and which renders the persons discernible only by subjecting
them to the homosexual rules of alliance. Incest is only the retroactive
effect of the repressing representation on the repressed representative:
the representation disfigures or displaces this representative against
which it is directed; it projects onto the representative, categories,
rendered discernible, that it has itself established; it applies to the
representative terms that did not exist before the alliance organized the
positive and the negative into a system in extension-the representation
reduces the representative to what is blocked in this system. Hence
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

t85

Oedipus is indeed the limit, but the displaced limit that now passes into
the interior of the socius. Oedipus is the baited image with which desire
allows itself to be caught (That's what you wanted! The decoded flows
were incest!). Then a long story begins, the story of oedipalization. But
to be exact, everything begins in the mind of Laius, the old group
homosexual, the pervert, who sets a trap for desire. For desire is that,
too: a trap. Territorial representation comprises these three instances:
the repressed representative, the repressing representation, and the
displaced represented.

4

I

Psychoanalysis and Ethnology

We are moving too fast, acting as if Oedipus were already
installed within the savage territorial machine. However, as Nietzsche
says with regard to bad conscience, such a plant does not grow on that
kind of terrain. This is explained by the fact that the necessary
conditions for Oedipus as a "familial complex," existing in the framework of the familialism suited to psychiatry and psychoanalysis, are
obviously not present. Primitive families constitute a praxis, a politics, a
strategy of alliances and filiations; formally, they are the driving
elements of social reproduction; they have nothing to do with an
expressive microcosm; in these families the father, the mother, and the
sister always also function as something other than father, mother, or
sister. And in addition to the father, the mother, etc., there is the affine,
who constitutes the active, concrete reality and makes the relations
between families coextensive with the social field. It would not even be
exact to say that the family determinations burst apart at every corner of
this field and remain attached to strictly social determinations, since
both kinds of determinations form one and the same component in the
territorial machine. Since familial reproduction is not yet a simple
means, or a material at the service of a social reproduction of another
nature, there is no possibility of reducing (rabattre sur) social reproduction to familial reproduction, nor is it possible to establish one-to-one
relations between the two that would confer on any familial complex
whatever an expressive value and an apparent autonomous form. On the
contrary, it is evident that the individual in the family, however young,
directly invests a social, historical, economic, and political field that is
not reducible to any mental structure or affective constellation. That is
why, when one considers pathological cases and processes of cure in
primitive societies, it seems to us entirely insufficient to compare them
with psychoanalytic procedure by relating them to criteria borrowed
from the latter: for example, a familial complex, even if it differs from
1"

I

our own, or cultural material (des contenus culturels), even if it is
brought into relation with an ethnic unconscious-as seen in attempted
parallelisms between the psychoanalytic cure and the shamanistic cure
(Devereux, Levi-Strauss). Our definition of schizoanalysis focused on
two aspects: the destruction of the expressive pseudo forms of the
unconscious, and the discovery of desire's unconscious investments of
the social field. It is from this point of view that we must consider many
primitive cures; they are schizoanalysis in action.
Victor Turner gives a remarkable example of such a cure among the
Ndembu.>' The example is the more striking-to our perverted eyesfor the fact that, at first glance, everything appears Oedipal. Effeminate,
insufferable, vain, failing at everything he tries, the sick K is preyed
upon by the ghost of his maternal grandfather, who cruelly reproaches
him. Although the Ndembu are matrilineal and must live with their
maternal kin, K has stayed an exceptionally long time in the matrilineage
of his father, whose favorite he was, and has entered into marriage with
paternal cousins. But with the death of his father he is driven away, and
returns to the maternal village. There his house expresses his situation
well, being wedged between two sectors, the houses of the members of
the paternal group and those belonging to his own matrilineage. How
does the divination, responsible for indicating the cause of the illness,
proceed, and the medical cure responsible for treating it? The teeth are
the cause, the two top incisors of the ancestor hunter, contained in a
sacred pouch, but which can escape from the pouch and penetrate the
body of the sick man. In order to diagnose and ward off the effects of the
incisor, the soothsayer and the medicine man launch into a social
analysis concerning the territory and its environs, the chieftainship and
its subchieftainships, the lineages and their segments, the alliances and
the filiations: they constantly bring to light desire in its relations with
political and economic units-the very point on which, moreover, the
witnesses try to mislead them. "Divination becomes a form of social
analysis in the course of which hidden struggles between individuals and
factions are brought to light, in such a way that they can be treated by
traditional ritual methods ... , the vague nature of mystical beliefs
allowing them to be manipulated in relation to a great number of social
situations." It seems that the pathological incisor is indeed mainly that
of the maternal grandfather. But the latter was a great chief; his
successor, the "real chief," had had to relinquish the throne for fear of
being bewitched, and his would-be heir, intelligent and ambitious, does
not exercise the power; the actual chief is not the real chief; as for the
sick K, he has not been able to assume the role of mediator that could
have made him a candidate for chief. Everything becomes complicated

ANTI-OEDIPUS
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1167

because of the colonizer-colonized relations: the English have not
recognized the chieftainship; the impoverished village is falling into
decrepitude (the two sectors of the village result from a fusion of two
groups that have fled the English; the elders bemoan the current
decadence). The medicine man does not organize a sociodrama, but a

veritable group analysis centering on the sick individual. Giving him
potions, attaching horns to his body for drawing up the incisor, making
the drums beat, the medicine man proceeds with a ceremony interrupted
by halts and fresh departures, flows of all sorts, flows of words and
breaks: the members of the village come to talk, the sick subject talks,
the ghost is invoked, the medicine man explains, everything recommences, drums, chants, trances. It is not only a question of discovering
the preconscious investments of a social field by interests, but-more
profoundly-its unconscious investments by desire, such as they pass
by way of the sick person's marriages, his position in the village, and all
the positions of a chief lived in intensity within the group.
We said that the point of departure seemed Oedipal. It was only the
point of departure for us, conditioned to say Oedipus every time
someone speaks to us of father, mother, grandfather. In fact, the
Ndembu analysis was never Oedipal: it was directly plugged into social
organization and disorganization; sexuality itself, through the women
and the marriages, was just such an investment of desire; the parents
played the role of stimuli in it, and not the role of group organizers (or
disorganizers)-the role held by the chief and his personages. Rather
than everything being reduced to the name of the father, or that of the
maternal grandfather, the latter opened onto all the names of history.
Instead of everything being projected onto a grotesque hiatus of
castration, everything was scattered in the thousand breaks-flows of the
chieftainships, the lineages, the relations of colonization. The whole
interplay of races, clans, alliances, and filiations, this entire historical
and collective drift: exactly the opposite of the Oedipal analysis, when it
stubbornly crushes the content of a delirium, when it stuffs it with all its
might into "the symbolic void of the father." Or rather, if it is true that
the analysis doesn't even begin as Oedipal, except to our way of seeing,
doesn't it become Oedipal nevertheless, in a certain way-and in what
way? Yes, it becomes Oedipal in part, under the effect of colonization.
The colonizer, for example, abolishes the chieftainship, or uses it to
further his own ends (and he uses many other things besides: the
chieftainship is only a beginning). The colonizer says: your father is
your father and nothing else, or your maternal grandfather-don't
mistake them for chiefs; you can go have yourself triangulated in your
corner, and place your house between those of your paternal and
168

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

maternal kin; your family is your family and nothing else; sexual
reproduction no longer passes through those points, although we rightly
need your family to furnish a material that will be subjected to a new
order of reproduction. Yes, then, an Oedipal framework is outlined for
the dispossessed primitives: a shantytown Oedipus. We have seen,
however, that the colonized remained a typical example of resistance to
Oedipus: in fact, that's where the Oedipal structure does not manage to
close itself, and where the terms of the structure remained stuck to the
agents of oppressive social reproduction, either in a struggle or in a
complicity: the White Man, the missionary, the tax collector, the
exporter of goods, the person with standing in the village who becomes
the agent of the administration, the elders who curse the White Man, the
young people who enter into a political struggle, etc. Both are true: the
colonized resists oedipalization, and oedipalization tends to close
around him again. To the degree that there is oedipalization, it is due to
colonization, and it is necessary to add oedipalization to all the methods
that Jaulin was able to describe in La paix blanche. "The condition of
the colonized can lead to a reduction in the humanization of the
universe, so that any solution that is sought will be a solution on the
scale of the individual and the restricted family, with, by way of
consequence, an extreme anarchy or disorder at the level of the
collective: an anarchy whose victim will always be the individual-with
the exception of those who occupy the key positions in such a system,
namely the colonizers, who, during this same period when the colonized
reduce the universe, will tend to extend it."* Oedipus is something like
euthanasia within ethnocide. The more social reproduction escapes the
members of the group, in nature and in extension, the more it falls back
on them, or reduces them to a restricted and neuroticized familial
reproduction whose agent is Oedipus.
After all, how are we to understand those who claim to have
discovered an Indian Oedipus or an African Oedipus? They are the first
to admit that they re-encounter none of the mechanisms or attitudes that
constitute our own Oedipus (our own presumed Oedipus). No matter,
they say that the structure is there, although it has no existence
whatever that is "accessible to clinical practice"; or that the problem,
*Robert Jaulin, La paix blanche: introduction a {'ethnocide (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1970), p. 309.
Jaulin analyzes the situation of those Indians whom the Capucines "persuaded" to abandon the
collective house in favor of "small personal houses" (pp. 391-400). In the collective house the familial

apartment and personal intimacy were based on a relationship with the neighbor defined as an ally, so
that interfarnilial relations were coextensive with the social field. In the new situation, on the contrary,
"there occurred an excessive ferment of the elements of the couple affecting the couple itself" and the
children, so that the restrictive family closes into an expressive microcosm where each person reflects
his own lineage, while the social and productive destiny (devenir} escapes him more and more. For
Oedipus is not only an ideological process, but the result of a destruction of the environment, the
habitat, etc.

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

j1l19

the point of departure, is indeed Oedipal, although the developments and
the solutions are completely different from ours (Parin , Ortigues). They
say that "there is no end to the existence of this Oedipus," when in fact
it does not even have (apart from colonization) the necessary conditions
to begin to exist. If it is true that thought can be evaluated in terms of the
degree of oedipalization, then yes, whites think too much. The competence, the honesty, and the talent of these authors-psychoanalysts
specializing in Africa-are beyond question. But the same applies to
them as to certain psychotherapists here: it would seem that they don't
know what they are doing. We have psychotherapists who sincerely
believe they are engaged in progressive work when they apply new
methods for triangulating the child: but watch out-a structural Oedipus, and this time it isn't imaginary! The same is true of the psychoanalysts in Africa who apply the yoke of a structural or "problematical"
Oedipus, in the service of their progressive intentions. There or here, it's
the same thing: Oedipus is always colonization pursued by other means,
it is the interior colony, and we shall see that even here at home, where
we Europeans are concerned, it is our intimate colonial education.
How are we to understand the phrases with which M. C. and
Edmond Ortigues conclude their book? "Illness is considered as a sign
of an election, of a special attention coming from supernatural powers,
or as a sign of an aggression of a magical nature, an idea that is difficult
to express in profane terms. Analytic psychotherapy can intervene only
starting from the moment a demand can be formulated by the subject.
Our entire research was therefore conditioned by the possibility of
establishing a psychoanalytic domain. When a subject adhered fully to
the traditional norms and had nothing to say in his own name, he allowed
himself to be taken into the care of the traditional therapists and the
familial group, or into that of the medical practice of 'medicines.' At
times, the fact that he wanted to speak to us about traditional treatments
corresponded to a beginning of psychotherapy and became for him a
means of situating himself personally in his own society.... At other
times, the analytic dialogue was able to unfold to a greater extent, and in
this case the Oedipal problem tended to assume its diachronic dimension, causing the generation gap to appear."22 Why think that supernatural powers and magical aggressions constitute a myth that is inferior to
Oedipus? On the contrary, is it not true that they move desire in the
direction of more intense and more adequate investments of the social
field, in its organization as well as its disorganizations? Meyer Fortes at
least showed Job's place beside Oedipus. And what entitles one to
determine that the subject has nothing to say in his own name so long as
he adheres to the traditional norms? Doesn't the Ndembu cure demon170

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

strate just the opposite? Could it not be said that Oedipus is also a
traditional norm-our own, to be exact? How can one say that Oedipus
makes us speak in our own name, when one also goes on to say that its
resolution teaches us "the incurable inadequacy of being" and universal
castration? And what is this "demand" that is invoked to justify
Oedipus? It goes without saying, the subject demands and redemands
daddy-mommy: but which subject, and in what state? Is that the means
"to situate oneself personally in one's own society"? And which
society? The neocolonized society that is constructed for the subject,
and that finally succeeds in what colonization was only able to outline:
an effective reduction of the forces of desire to Oedipus, to a father's
name, in the grotesque triangle?
Let us return to the well-known and inexhaustible debate between
culturalists and orthodox psychoanalysts: Is Oedipus universal? Is
Oedipus the great paternal catholic symbol, the meeting place of all the
churches? The debate began between Malinowski and Jones, it continued between Kardiner and Fromm on one side, and Roheim on the
other. It is still pursued between certain ethnologists and certain
disciples of Lacan-those who offered not only an oedipalizing interpretation of Lacan's doctrine, but also an ethnographic extension to this
interpretation. On the side of the universal there are two poles:
one-outdated, it would seem-that makes of Oedipus an original
affective constellation, and that constitutes an extreme position arguing
that Oedipus was a real event whose effects were transmitted through
phylogenetic heredity. And the other pole, which makes Oedipus into a
structure, a pole whose extreme position argues the possibility of
discovering the structure in fantasy, in relation to biological prematuration and neoteny. Two very different conceptions of the limit, one as
original matrix, the other as structural function. But in both these senses
of the universal, we are invited to "interpret," since the latent presence
of Oedipus appears only through its patent absence, understood as an
effect of psychic repression-or, better still, since the structural constant is discovered only through its imaginary variations, attesting to the
need for a symbolic foreclosure (the father as an empty position).
Oedipus-as-universal recommences the old metaphysical operation that
consists in interpreting negation as a deprivation, as a lack: the symbolic
lack of the dead father, or the Great Signifier. Interpretation is our
modern way of believing and of being pious. Already Geza Roheim
proposed organizing primitives into a series of variables converging
toward the structural neotenic constant." It was he who said in all
seriousness that the Oedipus complex was not to be found if it wasn't
looked for. And that one wasn't looking if one hadn't had oneself
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN \171

analyzed. And that is why your daughter is mute, which is to say: the
tribes, daughters of the ethnologist, do not say Oedipus, although it is
Oedipus who makes them speak. Roheim added that it was ridiculous to
think that the Freudian theory of censorship depended on the repressive
regime in the empire of Franz Joseph. He did not seem to see that Franz
Joseph was not a pertinent historical break (coupure), but that perhaps
the oral, the written, or even the "capitalist" civilizations were such
breaks with which the nature of social repression (repression), and the
meaning and scope of psychic repression irejoulementi, would vary.
This story of psychic repression is quite complicated. Things would
be simpler if the libido or the affect were repressed, in the most general
sense of the word (suppressed, inhibited, or transformed)-at the same
time as the supposed Oedipal representation. But such is not the case:
most ethnologists have clearly noted the sexual nature of affects in the
public symbols of primitive societies, and this nature remains integrally
lived by the members of these societies, even though they have not been
psychoanalyzed, and in spite of the displacement of the representation.
As Leach says apropos of the sex/hair relationship, "displaced phallic
symbolism is very common, but the phallic origin of the symbolism is
not repressed".24 Must it be said that primitives repress the representation and keep the affect intact? And would the contrary be true in our
case, in the patriarchal organization where the representation would
remain clear, but with the affects suppressed, inhibited, or transformed?
No, in fact: psychoanalysis tells us that we too repress the representation. And everything tells us that we too often keep the full sexuality of
the affect; we know perfectly well what it is about, without having been
psychoanalyzed. But what enables one to speak of an Oedipal representation that would be the object of repression? Is it because incest is
prohibited? We always fall back on this pale rationale: incest is desired
because it is prohibited. The prohibition of incest would therefore imply
an Oedipal representation, and it would be born of the repression of this
representation and of the latter's return. Now the opposite is clearly the
case; not only does the Oedipal representation presuppose the prohibition of incest, but it is not even possible to say that the representation is
born of the prohibition or results from it.
Adopting Malinowski's arguments, Reich added a profound remark:
desire is all the more Oedipal as the prohibitions are aimed, not simply at
incest, but "at all other types of sexual relations," blocking the other
paths. 25 In a word, the repression of incest is notborn of a repressed
Oedipal representation any more than it provokes this repression.
But-and this is something altogether different-the general social
repression-psychic repression system gives rise to an Oedipal image as a
112

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

disfiguration of the repressed. The fact that this image in turn finally
suffers a repression, that it comes to take the place of the repressed or of
the thing that is effectively desired, insofar as sexual repression is
directed at something other than incest-such is the long history of our
society. But the repressed is not first of all the Oedipal representation.
What is repressed is desiring-production. It is the part of this production
that does not enter into social production or reproduction. It is what
would introduce disorder and revolution into the socius, the noncoded
flows of desire. The part that passes, on the contrary, from desiringproduction to social production forms a direct sexual investment of this
social production, without any repression of a sexual nature of the
symbolism and the corresponding affects, and above all, without any
reference to an Oedipal representation that could be held to be originally
repressed or structurally foreclosed. The animal in us is not merely the
object of a preconscious investment determined by interest, but the
object of a libidinal investment of desire that only secondarily derives an
image of the father from desiring-production. The same holds true for
the libidinal investment of food, wherever a fear of going hungry is
evident, or a pleasure at not being hungry, and this investment refers
only secondarily to an image of the mother.* We have already seen how
the 'prohibition of incest referred, not to Oedipus, but to the noncoded
flows that constitute desire, and to their representative, the intense
prepersonal flow. As for Oedipus, it is another way of coding the
uncodable, of codifying what eludes the codes, or of displacing desire
and its object, a way of entrapping them.
Culturalists and ethnologists have demonstrated that institutions
are primary in relation to affects and structures. For structures are not
mental, they are present in things (elies sont dans Ies chases), in the
forms of social production and reproduction. Even an author like
Marcuse , whom one would not suspect of complaisance in this regard,
acknowledges that culturalism started on the right track: introducing
desire into production, strengthening the link "between instinctual and
economic structure; and at the same time [indicating] the possibility of
progress beyond the 'patricentric-acquisitive' culture."26 Then what
caused culturalism to go wrong? And here again there is no contradiction in the fact that it started on the right track, and that it went wrong
from the start. Perhaps the answer lies in the postulate common to
Oedipal relativism and Oedipal absolutism-i.e., the stubborn mainte*10 his study of the Marquesa Islands, Abram Kardiner has convincingly demonstrated the role of a
collective or economic alimentary anxiety that. even from the viewpoint of the unconscious. does not

allow itself to be reduced to the familial relationship with the mother: TI,e Individual and His Society
(See reference note 28), pp. 22Jff.

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS. CIVILIZED MEN

1173

nance of a familialist perspective, which wreaks havoc everywhere. For
if the institution is first understood as a familial institution, it matters
little to say that the familial complex varies with the institutions, or that
Oedipus is to the contrary a nuclear constant around which families and
institutions turn. The culturalists invoke other triangles-maternal
uncle-aunt-nephew, for example; but the oedipalists have no difficulty
in demonstrating that these are imaginary variations of one and the same
structural constant, different figures of one and the same symbolic
triangulation, which are not identical either with the personages who
come to realize the triangulation, or with the attitudes that come to place
these personages in relation to each other. But inversely, the invocation
of such a transcendent symbolism does not rescue the structuralists
from the narrowest familial point of view. The same holds for the
endless debates on "Is it daddy? Is it mommy?" (You are neglecting the
mother! No, you're the one who fails to see the father off to the side, as
the empty position!)
The conflict between culturalists and orthodox psychoanalysts has
often been reduced to these evaluations of the respective roles of the
mother and the father, or of the pre-oedipal and the Oedipal, without
allowing either side to leave the family or even Oedipus, always
oscillating between the famous two poles, the pre-oedipal maternal pole
of the Imaginary, and the Oedipal paternal pole of the structural, both on
the same axis, both speaking the same language of a familialized social
realm, where one pole designates the customary maternal dialects, while
the other designates the imperative law of the language of the father.
The ambiguity of what Kardiner called the "primary institution" has
been clearly shown. In certain cases it can be a question of the way
desire invests the social field from childhood, and under the familial
stimuli coming from the adult: all the conditions would then be given for
an adequate (extrafamilial) understanding of the libido. But more often it
is solely a question of the familial organization in itself, which is thought
to be lived first by the child as a microcosm, then projected into the adult
and social development (devenir).* From this point of view, the discussion can only go round in circles between the holders of a cultural
interpretation and the holders of a symbolic or structural interpretation
of this same organization.
A second postulate common to the culturalists and the symbolists
should be added. They all agree that, in our patriarchal and capitalist
"Mikel Dufrenne, analyzing the concepts of Kardiner, raises these essential questions: Is it the family
that is "primary," while the political, the economic, and the social are merely secondary? Which comes
first from the viewpoint of the libido, the familial investment or the social investment? And
methodologically is it necessary to go from the child to the adult, or from the adult to the child? (Mikel
Dufrenne , La personnalite de base [Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1953], pp. 287ff.)

174

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

society at least, Oedipus is a sure thing (even if they underline, as does
Fromm, the elements of a new matriarchy). They all agree. that our
society is the stronghold of Oedipus: the starting point for reencountering an Oedipal structure everywhere; or on the contrary, they
hold that the terms and the relations should be made to vary within
non-oedipal complexes that are no less "familial" on that account. That
is why our preceding criticism was directed at Oedipus as it is meant to
command our respect and to function for us: it is not at the weakest
point-the primitives-that Oedipus must be attacked, but at the
strongest point, at the level of the strongest link, by revealing the degree
of disfiguration it implies and brings to bear on desiring-production, on
the syntheses of the unconscious, and on libidinal investments in our
cultural and social milieu. Not that Oedipus counts for nothing in our
society: we have said repeatedly that Oedipus is demanded, and
demanded again and again; and even an attempt as profound as Lacan's
at shaking loose from the yoke of Oedipus has been interpreted as an
unhoped-Ior means of making it heavier still and of resecuring it on the
baby and the schizo. To be sure, it is not only legitimate but indispensable that the ethnological or historical explanation not be in contradiction
with our social organization, or that this organization contain in its own
way the basic elements of the ethnological hypothesis. This is what
Marx was saying as he recalled the requirements of a universal
history-but, as he went on to say, provided that the current organization be capable of conducting its own criticism. And yet Oedipus's
autocritique is something rarely seen in our organization, of which
psychoanalysis forms a part. In certain respects it is correct to question
all social formations starting from Oedipus. But not because Oedipus
might be a truth of the unconscious that is especially visible where we
are concerned; on the contrary, because it is a mystification of the
unconscious that has only succeeded with us by assembling the parts
and wheels of its apparatus from elements of the previous social
formations. It is universal in that sense. Thus it is indeed within
capitalist society that the critique of Oedipus must always resume its
point of departure and find again its point of arrival.
Oedipus is a limit. But "limit" has many different meanings, since it
can be at the beginning as an inaugural event, in the role of a matrix; or
in the middle as a structural function ensuring the mediation of
personages and the ground of their relations; or at the end as an
eschatological determination. Now we have seen that it is only in this
last sense that Oedipus is a limit. This is also the case for desiringproduction. But in fact this last sense itself can be understood in many
different ways. In the first place, desiring-production is situated at the
SAVAGES, BARBARLANS, CIVILIZED MEN

/175

limits of social production; the decoded flows, at the limits of the codes
and the territorialities; the body without organs, at the limits of the
socius. We shall speak of an absolute limit every time the schizo-flows
pass through the wall, scramble all the codes, and deterritorialize the
socius: the body without organs is the deterritorialized socius, the
wilderness where the decoded flows run free, the end of the world, the
apocalypse. Secondly, however, the relative limit is no more nor less
than the capitalist social formation, because the latter engineers (machine) and mobilizes flows that are effectively decoded, but does so by
substituting for the codes a quantifying axiomatic (une axiomatique
comptable) that is even more oppressive. With the result that
capitalism-in conformity with the movement by which it counteracts
its own tendency-is continually drawing near the wall, while at the
same time pushing the wall further way. Schizophrenia is the absolute
limit, but capitalism is the relative limit. Thirdly, there is no social
formation that does not foresee, or experience a foreboding of, the real
form in which the limit threatens to arrive, and which it wards off with
all the strength it can command. Whence the obstinacy with which the
formations preceding capitalism encaste the merchant and the technician, preventing flows of money and flows of production from assuming
an autonomy that would destroy their codes. Such is the real limit.
When such societies are confronted with this real limit, repressed
from within, but which returns to them from without, they regard this
event with melancholy as the sign of their approaching death. For
example, the Bohannans describe the Tiv economy, which codes three
kinds of flows: consumer goods, prestige goods, and women and
children. When money supervenes, it can only be coded as an object of
prestige, yet merchants use it to lay hold of sectors of consumer goods
traditionally held by the women: all the codes vacillate. Doubtless, to
begin with money and to finish with money is an operation that cannot
be expressed in terms of a code; seeing the trucks that leave loaded with
export goods, "the Tiv elders deplore this situation, and know what is
happening, but do not know where to place their blame "27_a harsh
reality. But, fourthly, this limit inhibited from the interior was already
projected onto a primordial beginning, a mythical matrix as the imaginary limit. How can this nightmare be imagined: the invasion of the
socius by noncoded flows that move like lava? An irrepressible wave of
shit, as in the Fourbe myth; or the intense germinal influx, the this-sideof incest, as in the Yourougou myth, which introduces disorder into the
world by acting as the representative of desire. Whence, in the fifth and
last instance, the importance of the task of displacing the limit: causing it
to pass into the interior of the socius, in the middle, between a beyond of
17S

I ANTI·OEDIPUS

alliance and a filiative this-side-of, between a representation of alliance
and the representative of filiation, as one attempts to tame the dreaded
forces of a river by digging an artificial river bed, or by diverting it into a
thousand shallow little streams. Oedipus is this displaced limit. Yes,
Oedipus is universal. But the error lies in having believed in the
following alternative: either Oedipus is the product of the social
repression-psychic repression system, in which case it is not universal;
or it is universal, and a position of desire. In reality, it is universal
because it is the displacement of the limit that haunts all societies, the
displaced represented (Ie represente deplacei that disfigures what all
societies dread absolutely as their most profound negative: namely, the
decoded flows of desire.
This is not to say that the universal Oedipal limit is "occupied,"
strategically occupied in all social formations. We must take Kardiner's
remark seriously: a Hindu or an Eskimo can dream of Oedipus, without
however being subjected to the complex, without "having the complex."28 For Oedipus to be occupied, a certain number of conditions are
indispensable: the field of social production and reproduction must
become independent of familial reproduction, that is, independent of the
territorial machine that declines alliances and filiations; the detachable
fragments of the chain must be converted, by virtue of this independence, into a transcendent detached object that crushes their polyvocal
character; the detached object (phallus) must perform a kind of folding
operation-a kind of application or reduction (rabattement): a reduction
of the social field, defined as the aggregate of departure, to the familial
field, now defined as the aggregate of destination-and it must establish
a network of one-to-one relations between the two. For Oedipus to be
occupied, it is not enough that it be a limit or a displaced represented in
the system of representation; it must migrate to the heart of this system
and itself come to occupy the position of the representative of desire.
These conditions, inseparable from the paralogisms of the unconscious,
are realized in the capitalist formation; furthermore, they imply certain
archaisms borrowed from the imperial barbarian formations-in particular, the position of the transcendent object. The capitalist style has
been described by D. H. Lawrence: "our democratic, industrial order
of things whose style is my-dear-little-lamb-I-want-to-see-mommy."
Now on the one hand, it is evident that the primitive formations do
not come close to fulfilling these conditions. Precisely because the
family, when opened to alliances, is coextensive with and adequate to
the social historical field; because it animates social reproduction itself;
because it mobilizes or causes passage of the detachable fragments
without ever converting them into a detached object-no reduction
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1171

whatever, no application is possible that would answer to the formula
3+ I (the four corners of the field folded into three, like a tablecloth, plus
the transcendent term that performs the folding operation). "Speaking,
dancing, exchanging, and allowing to flow, and even urinating, in the
midst of the community of men," as Parin himself puts it, to express the
ftuidity of the ftows and the primitive codes.* At the heart of primitive
production one always finds oneself at 4+ n, in the system of ancestors
and affines. Far from being able to claim that here there is no end to
Oedipus, one sees that it never manages to begin; one is always brought
to a halt well before 3+ I, and if there is a primitive Oedipus, it is a
neg-Oedipus, in the sense of a neg-entropy. Oedipus is indeed a limit or a
displaced represented, but precisely in such a way that each member of
the group is always on this side of or beyond, without ever occupying
the position (Kardiner has understood this very well in the formula we
cited). It is colonization that causes Oedipus to exist, but an Oedipus
that is taken for what it is, a pure oppression, inasmuch as it assumes
that these Savages are deprived of the control over their own social
production, that they are ripe for being reduced to the only thing they
have left, the familial reproduction imposed on them being no less
oedipalized by force than it is alcoholic or sickly.
On the other hand, when the requisite conditions are realized in
capitalist society, it should not be thought on that account that Oedipus
ceases to be what it is, the simple displaced represented that comes to
usurp the place of the representative of desire, snaring the unconscious
in the trap of its paralogisms, crushing the whole of desiring-production,
replacing it with a system of beliefs. Oedipus is never a cause: it depends
on a previous social investment of a certain type, capable of falling back
on (se rabattre sur) family determinations. It will be objected that such a
principle is perhaps valid for the adult, but surely not for the child. But
in effect, Oedipus begins in the mind of the father. And the beginning is
not absolute: it is only constituted starting from investments of the
social historical field that are effected by the father. And if it passes over
to the son, this is not by virtue of a familial heredity, but by virtue of a
much more complex relationship that depends on the communication of
the unconsciouses. With the result that, even in the child, what is
"Paul Parin et al., Les blancs pensent trap, p. 432. Regarding the coe xtenslvity of marriages with the
primitive social field, see Jaulin's remarks, La paix blanche, p. 256: "Marriages are not governed by
kinship laws, they obey a dynamic that is infinitely more complex, less rigid, whose invention at each
moment utilizes a number of co-ordinates of another order of importance .... Marriages are more apt
to be a speculation on the future than on the past, and in any case these marriages and their speculation
derive from what is complex, not from what is elementary, and never from what is rigidly fixed. The
reason for this is not by any means that man knows laws only so that he may violate them .... "
Whence the stupidity of the concept of transgression.

1711

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

invested through the familial stimuli is still the social field, and a whole
system of breaks and extrafamilial flows. The fact that the father is first
in relation to the child can only be understood analytically in terms of
another primacy, that of social investments and counterinvestments in
relation to familial investments: this will be seen later, at the level of an
analysis of deliriums. But already, if it appears that Oedipus is an effect,
this is because it forms an aggregate of destination (the family become
microcosm) on which capitalist production and reproduction fall back.
The organs and the agents of the latter no longer pass through a coding
of flows of alliance and filiation, but through an axiomatic of decoded
ftows. Consequently, the capitalist formation of sovereignty will need an
intimate colonial formation that corresponds to it, to which it will be
applied, and without which it would have no hold on the productions of
the unconscious.
Given these conditions, what is there to say about the relationship
between ethnology and psychoanalysis? Must we be content with an
uncertain parallelism where each contemplates the other with perplexity, placing in opposition two irreducible sectors of symbolism? A social
sector of symbols, and a sexual sector that would constitute a kind of
private universal, a kind of individual-universal? (Transversals between
the two, since social symbolism can become a sexual material, and
sexuality, a ritual of social aggregation.) But the problem is too
theoretical when posed this way. Practically speaking, the psychoanalyst often claims to explain to the ethnologist the meaning of the symbol:
it means phallus, castration, Oedipus. But the ethnologist asks other
questions, and sincerely asks himself of what use can psychoanalytic
interpretations be to me? Hence the duality is displaced, it is no longer
between two sectors, but between two kinds of questions, "What does it
mean?" and "What purpose does it serve?" Of what use is it not only to
the ethnologist, but what purpose does it serve and how does it work in
the very formation that makes use of the symbol?* Whatever may be the
meaning of a thing, it is not certain that the thing serves any useful
purpose whatever. It is possible, for example, that Oedipus serves no
useful purpose, either for psychoanalysts or for the unconscious. And to
what use could the phallus be put, since it is inseparable from the
castration that deprives us of its use? Of course we are told not to
confuse the signified with the signifier. But does the signifier take us
*Roger Bastide has systematically developed the theory of the two symbolic sectors, in Sociologie et
ps ych analvse (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 1950). But, starting from a viewpoint that is

analogous at first, E. R. Leach is Jed to displace the duality, causing it to pass between the question of
meaning and that of use, thereby changing the scope of the problem: see "Magical Hair" (reference
note 24).

SAVAGES, BARB.ARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1179

beyond the question, "What does it mean?" Is it anything other than this
same question, only this time barred? This is still the domain of
representation.
The true misunderstandings, the misunderstandings between ethnologists (or Hellenists) and psychoanalysts, do not come from a faulty
knowledge or recognition of the unconscious, of sexuality, of the phallic
nature of symbolism. In theory, everyone could reach an agreement on
this point: everything is sexual or sex-influenced (sexue) from one end to
the other. Everyone knows this, beginning with the users. The practical
misunderstandings come rather from the profound difference between
the two sorts of questions. Without always formulating it clearly, the
ethnologists and the Hellenists think that a symbol is not defined by
what it means, but by what it does and by what is done with it. It always
means the phallus or something similar, except that what it means does
not tell what purpose it serves. In a word, there is no ethnological
interpretation for the simple reason that there is no ethnographic
material: there are only uses and functionings (des fonctionnements). On
this point, it could be that psychoanalysts have much to learn from
ethnologists: about the unimportance of "What does it mean?" When
Hellenists place themselves in opposition to the Freudian Oedipus, it
should not be thought that they put forward other interpretations to
replace the psychoanalytic interpretation. It could be that ethnologists
and Hellenists will compel psychoanalysts for their part to make a
similar discovery: namely, that there is no unconscious material either,
nor is there a psychoanalytic interpretation, but only uses, analytic uses
of the syntheses of the unconscious, which do not allow themselves to
be defined by an assignment of a signifier any more than by the
determination of signifieds. How it works is the sole question. Schizoanalysis foregoes all interpretation because it foregoes discovering an
unconscious material: the unconscious does not mean anything. On the
other hand the unconscious constructs machines, which are machines of
desire, whose use and functioning schizoanalysis discovers in their
immanent relationship with social machines. The unconscious does not
speak, it engineers. It is not expressive or representative, but productive. A symbol is nothing other than a social machine that functions as a
desiring-machine, a desiring-machine that functions within the social
machine, an investment of the social machine by desire.
It has often been said and demonstrated that an institution cannot
be explained by its use, any more than an organ can. Biological
formations and social formations are not formed in the same way in
which they function. Nor is there a biological, sociological, linguistic,

180 , ANTI-OEDIPUS

etc., functionalism at the level of large determinate aggregates (des
grands ensembLes specifies). But the same does not hold true in the case
of desiring-machines as molecular elements: there, use, functioning,
production, and formation are one and the same process. And it is this
synthesis of desire that, under certain determinate conditions, explains
the molar aggregates (les ensembLes moLaires) with their specific use in a
biological, social, or linguistic field. This is because the large molar
machines presuppose pre-established connections that are not explained
by their functioning, since the latter results from them. Only desiringmachines produce connections according to which they function, and
function by improvising and forming the connections. A molar functionalism is therefore a functionalism that did not go far enough, that did not
reach those regions where desire engineers, independently of the
macroscopic nature of what it is engineering: organic, social, linguistic,
etc., elements, all tossed into the same pot to stew. The only unitiesmultiplicities that functionalism must know are the desiring-machines
themselves and the configurations they form in all the sectors of a field
of production (the "total fact"). A magical chain brings together plant
life, pieces of organs, a shred of clothing, an image of daddy, formulas
and words: we shall not ask what it means, but what kind of machine is
assembled in this manner-what kind of flows and breaks in the flows, in
relation to other breaks and other flows.
Analyzing the symbolism of the forked branch among the Ndembu,
Victor Turner shows that the names given to them form a part of a chain
that mobilizes the species and the properties of the trees from which the
branches are taken, as well as the names of these species in turn, and the
technical procedures with which they are treated. Selections are made
from signifying chains no less than from material flows. The exegetical
meaning (what is said about the thing) is only one element among others,
and is less important than the operative use (what is done with the thing)
or the positional functioning (the relationship with other things in one
and the same complex), according to which the symbol is never in a
one-to-one relationship with what it means, but always has a multiplicity
of referents, being "always multivocal and polysemous."29 Analyzing
the magical object buti among the Kukuya of the Congo, Pierre Bonnafe
shows how it is inseparable from the practical syntheses that produce,
record, and consume it: the partial and nonspecific connection that
combines fragments from the body of the subject with those of an
animal; the inclusive disjunction that inscribes the object in the body of
the subject, and transforms the latter into a man-animal; the residual
conjunction that causes the "residue" to submit to a long voyage before

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

11111

burying or immersing it.* If present-day ethnologists are again evincing
a lively interest in the hypothetical concept of the fetish, this is
unquestionably due to the influence of psychoanalysis. But it would
seem that psychoanalysis offers them just as many reasons for doubting
the notion as it offers for attracting their interest. For psychoanalysis
has never said Phallus-Oedipus-Castration more often than apropos of
the fetish. While for his part, the ethnologist senses that there is a
problem of political power and economic and religious force inseparable
from the fetish, even when its use is individual and private. Hair, for
example-the rituals of hair-cutting and coiffure: is there any interest in
referring these rituals to the phallus entity as signifying the "separate
thing," and in everywhere re-encountering the father as the symbolic
representative of the separation? Wouldn't this be tantamount to
remaining at the level of what it means? The ethnologist finds himself
before a flow of hair, with the breaks in such a flow, and with what
passes from one state into another through the break. As Leach says,
hair as a partial object or as a separable part of the body does not
represent an aggressive and separate phallus; hair is a thing in its own
right, a material part in an aggressing apparatus, in a separating machine.
Once again, it is not a question of knowing if the essence of a ritual
is sexual, or if it is necessary to take into account political, economic,
and religious dimensions that would go beyond sexuality. So long as the
problem is put in this manner, so long as a choice is imposed between
libido and numen, the misunderstanding between ethnologists and
psychoanalysts can only be aggravated-just as it continues to grow
between Hellenists and psychoanalysts apropos of Oedipus. Oedipus,
the clubfooted despot, who clearly invokes an entire political history
that brings into conflict the despotic machine and the old primitive
territorial machine-whence derive both the negation and the persistence of autochthony, brought into clear relief by Levi-Strauss. But this
is not enough to desexualize the drama. On the contrary. In reality, it is a
question of knowing how one conceives of sexuality and libidinal
investment. Must they be referred to an event or to something that is
"Pierre Bonnafe, "Objet magique , scrcellerie et fetichisme?", Nouvelle revue de psychanalyse, no. 2
(1970): "The Kukuya affirm that the nature of the object matters little: the essential thing is that it acts."
See also Alfred Adler, "L'ethnologue et les fetiches.v Tbe interest of this issue of the N.R.P., devoted
to "objects of fetishism," is that in its pages ethnologists do not place one theory in opposition to

another, but reflect on the bearing of psychoanalytic interpretations on their own ethnological prac~ice,
and on the social practices they study. In a paper entitled "Les interpretations de Turner" (Faculte de
Nanterre), Eric Laurent was able to make explicit in a profound way the problems of method in this
regard: the necessity for performing a series of reversals, for privileging use over exegesis or
justification; productivity over expressivity ; the actual state of the social field over the cosmological
myths; the exact ritual over structural models; the "social drama," the political tactic, and strategy over
kinship diagrams.

ill:!

I

"felt," which remains familial and intimate in spite of everything, an
intimate Oedipal feeling, even when it is interpreted structurally, on
behalf of the pure signifier? Or rather is it necessary to open sexuality
and libidinal investment onto the determinations of a sociohistorical
field, where the economic, the political, and the religious are things that
are invested by the libido for themselves, and not the derivatives of a
daddy-mommy? In the first instance one studies large molar aggregates,
large social machines-the economic, the political, etc.-and this entails
searching for what they mean by applying them to an abstract familial
whole that is thought to contain the secret of the libido: in this way, one
remains in the framework of representation.
In the second instance one goes beyond these large aggregates,
including the family, toward the molecular elements that form the parts
and wheels of desiring-machines. One searches for the way in which
these machines function, for how they invest and underdetermine
(subdeterminent) the social machines that they constitute on a large
scale. One then reaches the regions of a productive, molecular, micrological, or microphysical unconscious that no longer means or represents anything. Sexuality is no longer regarded as a specific energy that
unites persons derived from the large aggregates, but as the molecular
energy that places molecules-partial objects (libido) in connection, that
organizes inclusive disjunctions on the giant molecule of the body
without organs (numen), and that distributes states of being and
becoming according to domains of presence or zones of intensity
(voluptas). For desiring-machines are precisely that: the microphysics of
the unconscious, the elements of the microunconscious. But as such
they never exist independently of the historical molar aggregates, of the
macroscopic social formations that they constitute statistically. In this
sense, there is only desire and the social. Beneath the conscious
investments of economic, political, religious, etc., formations, there are
unconscious sexual investments, micro investments that attest to the
way in which desire is present in a social field, and joins this field to itself
as the statistically determined domain that is bound to it. Desiringmachines function within social machines, as though they maintained
their own regime in the molar aggregates that they form at the level of
large numbers. Symbols and fetishes are manifestations of desiringmachines. Sexuality is by no means a molar determination that is
representable in a familial whole; it is the molecular underdetermination
functioning within social and secondarily familial aggregates that trace
desire's field of presence and its field of production: an entire nonOedipal unconscious that will only produce Oedipus as one of its

ANTI·OEbIPUS
SAVAGES, BARBARIA.NS, CIVILIZED MEN

1183

secondary statistical formations ("complexes"), at the end of a history
bringing into play the destiny of social machines, their regime compared
to that of desiring-machines.

5

I

Territorial Representation

While representation is always a social and psychic
repression of desiring-production, it should be borne in mind that this
repression is exercised in very diverse ways, according to the social
formation considered. The system of representation comprises three
elements that vary in depth: the repressed representative, the repressing
representation, and the displaced represented. But the agents (les
instances) that come to carry them into effect are themselves variable'
there are migrations in the system. We see no reason for believing in the
universality of one and the same apparatus of sociocultural repression
(refoulement). One can speak instead of a coefficient of affinity that
varies in degree between social machines and desiring-machines, according to whether their respective regimes are more or less similar'
according to whether the desiring-machines have a greater or lesser
chance of causing their connections and interactions to pass into the
regime of the social machines; according to whether the social machines
execute more or less of a movement of detachment (decollement) in
relation to the desiring-machines; and whether the death-carrying elements remain caught in the machinery of desire, encasted in the social
machine, or on the contrary join together to form a death instinct that
extends throughout the social machine, crushing desire.
The principal factor in each of these respects is the type or genus of
social inscription, its alphabet, its characteristics: the inscription on the
socius is in fact the agent of a secondary psychic repression, or
repression "in the proper sense of the term," that is necessarily situated
in relation to the desiring-inscription of the body without organs, and in
relation to the primary repression that the latter already performs in the
domain of desire-a relation that is essentially variable. There is always
social repression (refoulement), but the apparatus of repression varies,
depending in particular on what plays the role of the representative on
which the repression is brought to bear. In this sense it is possible that
the primitive codes, at the moment they are acting on the flows of desire
with a maximum of vigilance and extension, binding them in a system of
cruelty, maintain an infinitely greater affinity with desiring-machines
than does the capitalist axiomatic, which nonetheless liberates the
decoded flows. This is because in the primitive socius desire is not yet
trapped, not yet introduced into a set of impasses, the flows have lost
111-1

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

none of their polyvocity, and the simple represented in representation
has not yet taken the place of the representative. In order to evaluate in
every instance the nature of the apparatus and its effects on desiringproduction, it is therefore necessary to take into account not only the
elements of representation as they are organized in depth, but the
manner in which representation itself is organized at the surface, on
the inscription surface of the socius.
Society is not exchangist, the socius is inscriptive: not exchanging
but marking bodies, which are part of the earth. We have seen that the
regime of debt directly resulted from this savage inscription. For debt is
the unit of alliance, and alliance is representation itself. It is alliance that
codes the flows of desire and that, by means of debt, creates for man a
memory of words (paroles). It is alliance that represses the great,
intense, mute filiative memory, the germinal influx as the representative
of the noncoded flows of desire capable of submerging everything. It is
debt that articulates the alliances with the filiations that have become
extended, in order to form and to forge a system in extension (representation) based on the repression of nocturnal intensities. The alliancedebt answers to what Nietzsche described as humanity's prehistoric
labor: the use of the cruelist mnemotechnics, in naked flesh, to impose a
memory of words founded on the ancient biocosmic memory. That is
why it is so important to see debt as a direct consequence of the
primitive inscription process, instead of making it-and the inscriptions
themselves-into an indirect means of universal exchange.
There is a question that Marcel Mauss at least left open: is debt
primary in relation to exchange, or is it merely a mode of exchange, a
means in the service of exchange? But Levi-Strauss seems to have
closed the question again with a categorical reply: debt is no more than a
superstructure, a conscious form whereby the unconscious social reality
of exchange is converted into cash. * What is involved is not a theoretical
discussion of the first principles of anthropology: the whole notion of
social practice, and the postulates conveyed by this practice, are at issue
here-and the whole problem of the unconscious. For if exchange
underlies everything, why is it that what takes place looks like anything
but an exchange? Why must it be a gift, or a countergift, and not an
exchange? And why is it necessary that the giver also be in the position
*Claude Levi-Strauss, "Introduction

a I'oeuvre

de Marcel Mauss," in Marcel Mauss, Sociologie et

unthropologie (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France), pp. 38-39. And Levi-Strauss, The Elementary
Structures of Kinship, p. 181: " ... to explain why the system of generalized exchange has remained
subjacent and why the explicit system is formulated in very different terms." To see how, starting from
this principle, Levi-Strauss arrives at a conception of the unconscious as an empty form, indifferent to
the drives of desire, see his Structural Anthropology, p. 203. It is true that Levi-Strauss 's Mvthologiques
series elaborates a theory of primitive codes, and of codings of flows and of organs, that goes beyond
the exchangist conception on all sides.

SAVP.GES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1185

of someone who has been robbed, so as to demonstrate clearly that he
does not expect an exchange, not even a deferred exchange? It is theft
that prevents the gift and the countergift from entering into an exchangist relation. Desire knows nothing of exchange, it knows only theft and
gift, at times the one within the other under the effect of a primary
homosexuality. Thus the antiexchangist amorous machine encountered
by Joyce in Exiles, and by Klossowski in Roberte. "In Gourma ideology,
it is as though a wife could only be given (the lityuatieli), or carried
away, kidnapped, hence in a certain sense stolen (the lipwotali); every
union that could too manifestly appear to be the result of a direct
exchange between two lineages or lineage segments is, in this society, if
not prohibited, at least widely disapproved of."30
Will it be said that, if desire knows nothing of exchange, it is
because exchange is desire's unconscious? Will this be explained by the
exigencies of generalized exchange? But what entitles one to declare
that shares of debt are secondary compared with a totality that is "more
real"? Yet exchange is known, well known in the primitive socius-but
as that which must be exorcised, encasted, severely restricted, so that no
corresponding value can develop as an exchange value that would
introduce the nightmare of a commodity economy. The primitive market
operates through bargaining rather than by fixing an equivalent that
would lead to a decoding of flows and a collapse of the mode of
inscription on the socius. We are brought back to our point of departure:
the fact that exchange is inhibited and exorcised by no means attests to
its primary reality, but demonstrates on the contrary that the essential
process is not exchanging, but inscribing or marking. And when exchange is made into an unconscious reality, structural rights are invoked
in vain-along with the necessary inadequation of attitudes and ideologies in relation to this structure-for one does nothing more than
hypostatize the principles of an exchangist psychology to account for
insti tutions that on the other hand are recognized to be nonexchangist.
And above all, what is made of the unconscious itself, if not its explicit
reduction to an empty form, from which desire itself is absent and
expelled? Such a form can serve to define a preconscious, but certainly
not the unconscious. For if it is true that the unconscious has no material
or content, this is assuredly not because it is an empty form, but rather
because it is always and already a functioning machine, a desiringmachine and not an anorexic structure.
The difference between machine and structure appears in the
postulates that implicitly animate the structural and exchangist conception of the socius, with the correctives that must be introduced into this

1811

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

conception so that the structure is able to function. First of all, when
considering kinship structures, it is difficult not to proceed as though the
alliances derived from the lines of filiation and their relationships,
although the lateral alliances and the blocks of debt condition the
extended filiations in the system in extension, and not the opposite.
Secondly, there is a tendency to make the system in extension into a
logical combinative arrangement, instead of taking it for what it is: a
physical system where intensities are distributed, where some cancel out
and block a current, where others cause the current to circulate, etc. The
objection according to which the qualities developed in the system are
not only physical objects, "but also honors, responsibilities, privileges,"
seems to indicate a misunderstanding of the role of the incommensurable elements and the inequalities in the conditions of the system. More
precisely, in the third place, the structural exchangist conception tends
to postulate a kind of primary equilibrium of prices, a primary equivalence or equality in the underlying principles, which allows it to explain
that the inequalities are necessarily introduced in the consequences.
Nothing is more significant in this regard than the controversy
between Levi-Strauss and Leach concerning the Kachin marriage
system. Invoking a "conflict between the egalitarian conditions of
generalized exchange, and its aristocratic consequences," Levi-Strauss
acts as though he thought the system were in a state of equilibrium.
However, the problem is altogether different: it is a question of knowing
if the disequilibrium is pathological and a manifestation of consequences, as Levi-Strauss maintains, or functional and fundamental, as
Leach argues."! Is the instability derived in relation to an ideal of
exchange, or is it already given in the preconditions, included in the
heterogeneity of the terms that compose the prestations and counterprestations? The more one directs one's attention to the economic and
political compromises conveyed by the alliances, to the nature of the
counterprestations that come to compensate the disequilibrium of the
prestations of wives, and generally the original manner in which
the aggregate of prestations is evaluated in a particular society, the more
clearly the necessarily open nature of the system in extension appears,
as in the case of the primitive mechanism of surplus value as a surplus
value of code. But-and this is the fourth point-the exchangist
conception finds it necessary to postulate a closed system, statistically
closed, and to shore up the structure with a psychological conviction
("confidence that the cycle will reclose "). Thus not only the essential
opening of the blocks of debts according to the lateral alliances and the
successive generations, but above all the relationship of the statistical

SAVAGES, BARBARIMJS, CIVILIZED MEN

1187

formations to their molecular elements, find themselves brought back to
the simple empirical reality, insofar as it is not adequate to the structural
model. 3 2
All this depends, finally, on a postulate that burdens ethnology to
the same extent that it has determined bourgeois political economy: the
reduction of social reproduction to the sphere of circulation. One retains
the apparent objective movement as it is described on the socius,
without taking into account the real instance that inscribes it, and the
forces-economic and political-with which it is inscribed; one fails to
see that alliance is the form in which the socius appropriates the
connections of labor in the disjunctive order of its inscriptions. "From
the viewpoint of the relations of production, in fact, the circulation of
women appears as a distribution of labor capacity, but in the ideological
representation that the society gives itself of its economic base, this
aspect fades before the relations of exchange, which are, however,
merely the form this distribution takes within the sphere of circulation:
by isolating the moment of circulation in the reproduction process,
ethnology ratifies this representation," and grants bourgeois economy its
whole colonial extension.w In this sense the essential thing seemed to us
to be, not exchange and circulation, which closely depend on the
requirements of inscription, but inscription itself, with its imprint of fire,
its alphabet inscribed in bodies, and its blocks of debts. The soft
structure would never function, would never cause a circulation,
without the hard machinic element that presides over inscriptions.
Savage formations are oral, are vocal, but not because they lack a
graphic system: a dance on the earth, a drawing on a wall, a mark on the
body are a graphic system, a geo-graphism, a geography. These formations are oral precisely because they possess a graphic system that is
independent of the voice, a system that is not aligned on the voice and
not subordinate to it, but connected to it, co-ordinated "in an organization that is radiating, as it were," and multidimensional. (And it must be
said that this graphic system is linear' writing's contrary: civilizations
cease being oral only through losing the independence and the particular
dimensions of the graphic system; by aligning itself on the voice,
graphism supplants the voice and induces a fictitious voice.) Andre
Leroi-Gourhan has admirably described these two heterogeneous poles
of the savage inscription process or territorial representation: the couple
voice-audition and hand-graphics.v- How does such a machine work?
For it does work: the voice is like a voice of alliance to which, on the
side of the extended filiation, a graphics is co-ordinated that bears no
resemblance. The calabash of the excision is placed on the body of the
young woman. Furnished by the husband's lineage, the calabash serves
lilt!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

as a conductor for the voice of alliance; but the graphism must be traced
by a member of the young woman's clan. The articulation of the two
elements takes place on the body itself, and constitutes the sign, which is
not a resemblance or imitation, nor an effect of a signifier, but rather a
position and a production of desire: "In order for the young woman's
transformation to be fully effective, a direct contact must take place
between her stomach, on the one hand, and the calabash and the signs
inscribed on her, on the other hand. The young woman must become
physically saturated with the signs of procreation and she must incorporate them. The young women are never taught the meaning of the
ideograms during their initiation. The sign acts through its inscription in
the body.... The inscription of a mark on the body does not merely
possess a message value here, but is an instrument of action that acts on
the body itself. ... The signs command the things they signify, and far
from being a mere imitator, the artisan of the signs accomplishes a work
that calls to mind the divine creation."35
But how does one explain the role played by sight, indicated by
Leroi-Gourhan, in the contemplation of the face that is speaking, as well
as in the reading of the manual graphism? Or more precisely, what
enables the eye to grasp a terrible equivalence between the voice of
alliance that inflicts and constrains, and the body afflicted by the sign
that a hand is carving in it? Isn't it necessary to add a third element of
the sign: eye-pain, in addition to voice-audition and hand-graphics? In
the rituals of affliction the patient does not speak, but receives the
spoken word. He does not act, but is passive under the graphic action; he
receives the stamp of the sign. And what is his pain if not a pleasure for
the eye that regards it, the collective or divine eye that is not motivated
by any idea of revenge, but is alone capable of grasping the subtle
relationship between the sign engraved in the body and the voice issuing
from a face-between the mark and the mask. Between these two
elements of the code, pain is like the surplus value that the eye extracts,
taking hold of the effect of active speech on the body, but also of the
reaction of the body insofar as it is acted upon. This is indeed what must
be called a debt system or territorial representation: a voice that speaks
or intones, a sign marked in bare flesh, an eye that extracts enjoyment
from the pain; these are the three sides of a savage triangle forming a
territory of resonance and retention, a theater of cruelty that implies the
triple independence of the articulated voice, the graphic hand, and the
appreciative eye. Such is the manner in which territorial representation
organizes itself at the surface, still quite close to a desiring-machine of
eye-hand-voice. A magic triangle. Everything in this system is active,
acted upon, or reacted to: the action of the voice of alliance, the passion

S.~VAGES. BARBARIANS. CIVILIZED MEN 11119

of the body of filiation, the reaction of the eye evaluating the declension
of the two. To choose the stone that will make a man of the young
Guayaki, with enough pain and suffering, by cleaving the length of his
back: "It must have a good cutting edge"-says Clastres in an admirable
text-"but not like a sliver of bamboo, which cuts too easily. Choosing
the right stone therefore requires a practiced eye. The whole apparatus
of this new ceremony is reduced to that: a rock.... Furrowed skin,
scarified earth, one and the same mark. "36
The great book of modern ethnology is not so much Mauss's The
Gift as Nietzsche's On the Genealogy of Morals. At least it should be.
For the Genealogy, the second essay, is an attempt-and a success
without equal-at interpretating primitive economy in terms of debt, in
the debtor-creditor relationship, by eliminating every consideration of
exchange or interest ":'I l'anglaise." And if they are eliminated from
psychology, it is not in order to place them in structure. Nietzsche has
only a meager set of tools at his disposal-some ancient Germanic law, a
little Hindu law. But he does not hesitate, as does Mauss, between
exchange and debt. (Georges Bataille, motivated by a Nietzschean
inspiration, will not hesitate either.) The fundamental problem of the
primitive socius, which is the problem of inscription, of coding, of
marking, has never been raised in such an incisive fashion. Man must
constitute himself through the repression of the intense germinal influx,
the great biocosmic memory that threatens to deluge every attempt at
collectivity. But at the same time, how is a new memory to be created
for man-a collective memory of the spoken word and of alliances that
declines the alliances with the extended filiations, that endows him with
faculties of resonance and retention, of selection (preLevement) and
detachment, and that effects in this way the coding of the flows of desire
as a condition of the socius? The answer is simple, it is debt-open,
mobile, and finite blocks of debt: this extraordinary composite of the
speaking voice, the marked body, and the enjoying eye. All the stupidity
and the arbitrariness of the laws, all the pain of the initiations, the whole
perverse apparatus of repression and education, the red-hot irons, and
the atrocious procedures have only this meaning: to breed man," to mark
him in his flesh, to render him capable of alliance, to form him within the
debtor-creditor relation, which on both sides turns out to be a matter of
memory-a memory straining toward the future.
Far from being an appearance assumed by exchange, debt is the
immediate effect or the direct means of the territorial and corporal
inscription process. Debt is the direct result of inscription. Once again
*"dresser I'homme" in the French. See Friedrich Nietzsche, WiIUo Power, Book IV, for his discussion
of this notion. (Translators' note.)

190

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

no revenge, no ressentiment will be invoked here-that is not the ground
they grow on, any more than does Oedipus. The fact that innocent men
suffer all the marks on their bodies derives from the respective
autonomy of the voice and the graphic action, and also from the
autonomous eye that extracts pleasure from the event. It is not because
everyone is suspected, in advance, of being a future bad debtor; the
contrary would be closer to the truth. It is the bad debtor who must be
understood as if the marks had not sufficiently "taken" on him, as if he
were or had been unmarked. He has merely widened, beyond the limits
allowed, the gap that separated the voice of alliance and the body of
filiation, to such a degree that it is necessary to re-establish the
equilibrium through an increase in pain. Nietzsche doesn't say this, but
what does it matter? For it is indeed here that he encounters the terrible
equation of debt: injury done = pain to be suffered. How does one
explain, he asks, that the criminal's pain can serve as an "equivalent" of
the harm he has done? How can one "pay back" with suffering? An eye
must be invoked that extracts pleasure from the event (this has nothing
to do with vengeance): something that Nietzsche himself calls the
evaluating eye, or the eye of the gods who enjoy cruel spectacles, "and
in punishment there is so much that is festive! "37 So much is pain part of
an active life and an obliging gaze. The equation injury = pain has
nothing exchangist about it, and it shows in this extreme case that the
debt itself had nothing to do with exchange. Simply stated, the eye
extracts from the pain it is contemplating a surplus value of code that
compensates the broken relationship between the voice of alliance that
the criminal has wronged, and the mark that had not sufficiently
penetrated his body. The crime, a rupture of the phonographic connection, re-established by the spectacle of the punishment: as primitive
justice, territorial representation has foreseen everything.
Coding pain and death, it has foreseen everything-except for the
way its own death would come to it from without. "They come like fate,
without reason, consideration, or pretext; they appear as lightning
appears, too terrible, too convincing, too sudden, too different even to be
hated. Their work is an instinctive creation and imposition of forms;
they are the most involuntary, unconscious artists there are-wherever
they appear something new arises, a ruling structure that lives, in which
parts and functions are delimited and coordinated, in which nothing
whatever finds a place that has not first been assigned a 'meaning' in
relation to the whole. They do not know what guilt, responsibility, or
consideration are, these born organizers; they exemplify that terrible
artist's egoism that has the look of bronze and knows itself justified to all
eternity in its 'work,' like a mother in her child. It is not in them that the
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

l19t

'bad conscience' developed, that goes without saying-but it would not
have developed if a tremendous quantity of freedom had not been
expelled from the world, or at least from the visible world, and made as
it were latent under their hammer blows and artist's violence."38 It is
here that Nietzsche speaks of a break, a rupture, a leap. Who are these
beings, they who come like fate? ("Some pack of blond beasts of prey, a
conqueror and master race which, organized for war and with the ability
to organize, unhesitatingly lays its terrible claws upon a populace
perhaps tremendously superior in numbers but still formless ...."39)
Even the most ancient African myths speak to us of these blond men.
They are the founders of the State. Nietzsche will come to establish the
existence of other breaks: those of the Greek city-state, Christianity,
democratic and bourgeois humanism, industrial society, capitalism, and
socialism. But it could be that all these-in various ways-presuppose
this first great hiatus, although they all claim to repel and to fill it. It
could be that, spiritual or temporal, tyrannical or democratic, capitalist
or socialist, there has never been but a single State, the State-as-dog that
"speaks with flaming roars."40 And Nietzsche suggests how this new
socius proceeds: a terror without precedent, in comparison with which
the ancient system of cruelty, the forms of primitive regimentation and
punishment, are nothing. A concerted destruction of all the primitive
codings, or worse yet, their derisory preservation, their reduction to the
condition of secondary parts in the new machine, and the new apparatus
of repression (refoulement). All that constituted the essential element of
the primitive inscription machine-the blocks of mobile, open, finite
debts, "the parcels of destiny"-finds itself taken into an immense
machinery that renders the debt infinite and no longer forms anything but
one and the same crushing fate: "the aim now is to preclude pessimistically, once and for all, the prospect of a final discharge; the aim now is to
make the glance recoil disconsolately from an iron impossibility."41 The
earth becomes a madhouse.

6

I The Barbarian Despotic Machine

The founding of the despotic machine or the barbarian
socius can be summarized in the following way: a new alliance and
direct filiation. The despot challenges the lateral alliances and the
extended filiations of the old community. He imposes a new alliance
system and places himself in direct filiation with the deity: the people
must follow. A leap into a new alliance, a break with the ancient
filiation-this is expressed in a strange machine, or rather a machine of
the strange whose locus is the desert, imposing the harshest and the
HI2

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

most barren of ordeals, and attesting to the resistance of an old order as
well as to the validation of the new order. The machine of the strange is
both a great paranoiac machine, since it expresses the struggle with the
old system, and already a glorious celibate machine, insofar as it exalts
the triumph of the new alliance. The despot is the paranoiac: there is no
longer any reason to forego such a statement, once one has freed oneself
from the characteristic familial ism of the concept of paranoia in
psychoanalysis and psychiatry, and provided one sees in paranoia a type
of investment of a social formation. And new perverse groups spread
the despot's invention (perhaps they even fabricated it for him),
broadcast his fame, and impose his power in the towns they found or
conquer. Wherever a despot and his army pass, doctors, priests, scribes,
and officials are part of the procession. It might be said that the ancient
complementarity has shifted to form a new socius: no longer the bush
paranoiac and the encampment or village perverts, but the desert
paranoiac and the town perverts.
In theory the despotic barbarian formation has to be conceived of in
terms of an opposition between it and the primitive territorial machine:
the birth of an empire. But in reality one can perceive the movement of
this formation just as well when one empire breaks away from a
preceding empire; or even when there arises the dream of a spiritual
empire, wherever temporal empires fall into decadence. It may be that
the enterprise is primarily military and motivated by conquest, or that it
is primarily religious, the military discipline being converted into
internal asceticism and cohesion. It may be that the paranoiac himself is
either a gentle creature or a raging beast. But we always rediscover the
figures of this paranoiac and his perverts, the conqueror and his elite
troops, the despot and his bureaucrats, the holy man and his disciples,
the anchorite and his monks, Christ and his Saint Paul. Moses flees from
the Egyptian machine into the wilderness and installs his new machine
there, a holy ark and a portable temple, and gives his people a new
religious-military organization. In order to summarize Saint John the
Baptist's enterprise, one author declares: "John attacks at its foundation the central doctrine of Judaeism, the doctrine of the alliance with
God through a filiation that goes back to Abraham."42 There is the
essential: every time the categories of new alliance and direct filiation
are mobilized, we are talking about the imperial barbarian formation or
the despotic machine. And this holds true whatever the context of this
mobilization, whether in a relationship with preceding empires or not,
since throughout these vicissitudes the imperial formation is always
defined by a certain type of code and inscription that is in direct
opposition to the primitive territorial codings. The number of elements
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1193

in the alliance makes little difference: new alliance and direct filiation are
specific categories that testify to the existence of a new socius,
irreducible to the lateral alliances and the extended filiations that
declined the primitive machine. It is this force of projection that defines
paranoia, this strength to start again from zero, to objectify a complete
transformation: the subject leaps outside the intersections of alliancefiliation, installs himself at the limit, at the horizon, in the desert, the
subject of a deterritorialized knowledge that links him directly to
God and connects him to the people. For the first time, something has
been withdrawn from life and from the earth that will make it possible to
judge life and to survey the earth from above: a first principle of
paranoiac knowledge. The whole relative play of alliances and filiations
is carried to the absolute in this new alliance and this direct filiation.
It remains to be said that, in order to understand the barbarian
formation, it is necessary to relate it not to other formations in
competition with it temporally and spiritually, according to relationships
that obscure the essential, but to the savage primitive formation that it
supplants by imposing its own rule of law, but that continues to haunt it.
It is exactly in this way that Marx defines Asiatic production: a higher
unity of the State establishes itself on the foundations of the primitive
rural communities, which keep their ownership of the soil, while the
State becomes the true owner in conformity with the apparent objective
movement that attributes the surplus product to the State, assigns the
productive forces to it in the great projects undertaken, and makes it
appear as the cause of the collective conditions of appropriation.:" The
full body as socius has ceased to be the earth, it has become the body of
the despot, the despot himself or his god. The prescriptions and
prohibitions that often render him almost incapable of acting make of
him a body without organs. He is the sole quasi cause, the source and
fountainhead and estuary of the apparent objective movement. In place
of mobile detachments from the signifying chain, a detached object has
jumped outside the chain; in place of flow selections, all the flows
converge into a great river that constitutes the sovereign's consumption:
a radical change of regimes in the fetish or the symbol. What counts is
not the person of the sovereign, nor even his function, which can be
limited. It is the social machine that has profoundly changed: in place of
the territorial machine, there is the "megamachine" of the State, a
functional pyramid that has the despot at its apex, an immobile motor,
with the bureaucratic apparatus as its lateral surface and its transmission
gear, and the villagers at its base, serving as its working parts. The
stocks form the object of an accumulation, the blocks of debt become an
infinite relation in the form of the tribute. The entire surplus value of
194

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

code is an object of appropriation. This conversion crosses through all
the syntheses: the synthesis of production, with the hydraulic machine
and the mining machine; the synthesis of inscription, with the accounting machine, the writing machine, and the monument machine; and
finally the synthesis of consumption, with the upkeep of the despot, his
court, and the bureaucratic caste. Far from seeing in the State the
principle of a territorialization that would inscribe people according to
their residence, we should see in the principle of residence the effect of a
movement of deterritorialization that divides the earth as an object and
subjects men to the new imperial inscription, to the new full body, to the
new socius. 'They come like fate, ... they appear as lightning appears,
too terrible, too sudden.""
The death of the primitive system always comes from without;
history is the history of contingencies and encounters. Like a cloud
blown in from the desert, the conquerors are there: "In some way that is
incomprehensible to me they have pushed right into the capital, although
it is a long way from the frontier. At any rate, here they are; it seems that
every morning there are more of them .... Speech with the nomads is
impossible. They do not know our own Ianguagc."?' But this death that
comes from without is also that which was rising from within: the
general irreducibility of alliance to filiation, the independence of the
alliance groups, the way in which they serve as a conducting element for
the political and economic relations, the system of primitive rankings,
the mechanism of surplus value-all this already prefigured despotic
formations and caste hierarchies. And how does one distinguish the way
in which the primitive community remains on its guard with respect to
its own institutions of chieftainship, and exorcises or strait-jackets the
image of the possible despot whom it threatens to secrete from within,
from the way in which it binds up the symbol-a symbol that has
become derisory-of a former despot who thrust himself upon the
community from the outside long ago? It is not always easy to know if
one is considering a primitive community that is repressing an endogenous tendency, or one that is regaining its cohesion as best it can after a
terrible exogenous adventure. The game of alliances is ambiguous: are
we still on this side of the new alliance, or already beyond it, having
fallen back, as it were, into a this-side-of that is residual and transformed? (Related question: what is the feudal system?) We are only able
to fix the precise moment of the imperial formation as that of the new
exogenous alliance, not only in the place of former alliances, but in
relation to them.
This new alliance is something altogether different from a treaty or
a contract. What is suppressed is not the former regime of lateral
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZEO MEN

1195

alliances and extended filiations, but merely their determining character.
They subsist, more or less modified, more or less harnessed by the great
paranoiac, since they furnish the material of surplus value. In point of
fact, that is what forms the specific character of Asiatic production: the
autochthonous rural communities subsist, and continue to produce,
inscribe, and consume; in effect, they are the State's sole concern. The
wheels of the territorial lineage machine subsist, but are no longer
anything more than the working parts of the State machine. The objects,
the organs, the persons, and the groups retain at least a part of their
intrinsic coding, but these coded flows of the former regime find
themselves overcoded by the transcendent unity that appropriates
surplus value. The old inscription remains, but is bricked over by and in
the inscription of the State. The blocks subsist, but have become
encasted and embedded bricks, having only a controlled mobility. The
territorial alliances are not replaced, but are merely allied with the new
alliance; the territorial filiations are not replaced, but are merely
affiliated with the direct filiation. It is like an immense right of the
first-born over all filiations, an immense right of the wedding night over
all alliances. The filiative stock becomes the object of an accumulation
in the other filiation, while the alliance debt becomes an infinite relation
in the other alliance. It is the entire primitive system that finds itself
mobilized, requisitioned by a superior power, subjugated by new
exterior forces, put in the service of other ends; so true is it, said
Nietzsche, that what is called the evolution of a thing is "a succession of
more or less profound, more or less mutually independent processes of
subduing, plus the resistances they encounter, the attempts at transformation for the purpose of defense and reaction, and the results of
successful counteractions. "46
It has often been remarked that the State commences (or recommences) with two fundamental acts, one of which is said to be an act of
territoriality through the fixing of residence, and the other, an act of
liberation through the abolition of small debts. But the State operates by
means of euphemisms. The pseudo territoriality is the product of an
effective deterritorialization that substitutes abstract signs for the signs
of the earth, and that makes the earth itself into the object of a State
ownership of property, or an ownership held by the State's richest
servants and officials. (There is no great change,from this point of view,
when the State no longer does anything more than guarantee the private
property of a ruling class that becomes distinct from the State.) The
abolition of debts, when it takes place, is a means of maintaining the
distribution of land, and a means of preventing the entry on stage of a
new territorial machine, possibly revolutionary and capable of raising

1961

ANTI-OEDIPUS

and dealing with the agrarian problem in a comprehensive way. In other
cases where a redistribution occurs, the cycle of credits is maintained, in
the new form established by the State-money. For without question,
money does not begin by serving the needs of commerce, or at least it
has no autonomous mercantile model. The despotic machine holds the
following in common with the primitive machine, it confirms the latter in
this respect: the dread of decoded flows-flows of production, but also
mercantile flows (flux marchands) of exchange and commerce that
might escape the State monopoly, with its tight restrictions and its
plugging of flows. When Etienne Balazs asks why capitalism wasn't born
in China in the thirteenth century, when all the necessary scientific and
technical conditions nevertheless seemed to be present, the answer lies
in the State, which closed the mines as soon as the reserves of metal
were judged sufficient, and which retained a monopoly or a narrow
control over commerce (the merchant as functionary)."?
The role of money in commerce hinges less on commerce itself than
on its control by the State. Commerce's relationship with money is
synthetic, not analytical. And money is fundamentally inseparable, not
from commerce, but from taxes as the maintenance of the apparatus of
the State. Even where dominant classes set themselves apart from this
apparatus and make use of it for the benefit of private property, the
despotic tie between money and taxes remains visible. Basing himself on
the research of Edouard Will, Michel Foucault shows how, in certain
Greek tyrannies, the tax on aristocrats and the distribution of money to
the poor are a means of bringing the money back to the rich and a means
of remarkably widening the regime of debts, making it even stronger, by
anticipating and repressing any reterritorialization that might be produced by the economic givens of the agrarian problem.:" (As if the
Greeks had discovered in their own way what the Americans rediscovered after the New Deal: that heavy taxes are good for business.) In a
word, money-the circulation of money-is the means for rendering the
debt infinite. And that is what is concealed in the two acts of the State:
the residence or territoriality of the State inaugurates the great movement of deterritorialization that subordinates all the primitive filiations
to the despotic machine (the agrarian problem); the abolition of debts or
their accountable transformation initiates the duty of an interminable
service to the State that subordinates all the primitive alliances to itself
(the problem of debts). The infinite creditor and infinite credit have
replaced the blocks of mobile and finite debts. There is always a
monotheism on the horizon of despotism: the debt becomes a debt of
existence, a debt of the existence of the subjects themselves. A time will
come when the creditor has not yet lent while the debtor never quits
SAVAGES, BARBARIAI'JS, CIVILIZED MEN

1197

repaying, for repaying is a duty but lending is an option-as in Lewis
Carroll's song, the long song about the infinite debt:
A man may surely claim his dues:
But, when there's money to be lent,
A man must be allowed to choose
Such times as are convcnicnt.s?
The despotic State, such as it appears in the purest conditions of
"Asiatic" production, has two correlative aspects: on the one hand it
replaces the territorial machine, it forms a new de territorialized full
body; on the other hand it maintains the old territorialities, integrates
them as parts or organs of production in the new machine. It is perfected
all at once because it functions on the basis of dispersed rural communities, which are like pre-existing autonomous or semiautonomous machines from the viewpoint of production; but from this same viewpoint,
it reacts on them in producing the conditions for major work projects
that exceed the capacities of the separate communities. What is produced on the body of the despot is a connective synthesis of the old
alliances with the new, and a disjunctive synthesis that entails an
overflowing of the old filiations into the direct filiation, gathering all the
subjects into the new machine. The essential action of the State,
therefore, is the creation of a second inscription by which the new full
body-immobile, monumental, immutable-appropriates all the forces
and agents of production; but this inscription of the State allows the old
territorial inscriptions to subsist, as "bricks" on the new surface. And
finally, from this appropriation there results the way in which the
conjunction of the two parts is implemented and the respective portions
are distributed to the higher proprietary unity and to the propertied
communities, to the overcoding process and to the intrinsic codes, to the
appropriated surplus value and to the usufruct put into use, to the State
machine and to the territorial machines. As in Kafka's "The Great Wall
of China," the State is the transcendent higher unity that integrates
relatively isolated subaggregates, functioning separately, to which it
assigns a development in bricks and a labor of construction by fragments. Scattered partial objects hanging on the body without organs. No
one has equaled Kafka in demonstrating that the law had nothing to do
with a natural, harmonious, and immanent totality, but that it acted as an
eminent formal unity, and reigned accordingly over pieces and fragments
(the wall and the tower). Hence the State is not primeval, it is an origin
or an abstraction, it is the original abstract essence that is not to be
confused with a beginning. "We think only about the Emperor. But not

198

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

about the present one; or rather we would think about the present one if
we knew who he was or knew anything definite about him .... [The
people] do not know what emperor is reigning, and there exist doubts
regarding even the name of the dynasty .... Long-dead emperors are
set on the throne in our villages, and one that only lives in song recently
had a proclamation of his read out by the priest before the altar."50
As for the subaggregates themselves, the primitive territorial machines, they are the concrete itself, the concrete base and beginning, but
their segments here enter into relationships corresponding to the essence, they assume precisely this form of bricks that ensures their
integration into the higher unity, and their distributive operation,
consonant with the great collective designs of this same unity: major
work projects, extortion of surplus value, tributes, generalized servitude. Two inscriptions coexist in the imperial formation, and mutually
adjust insofar as the one is imbricated into the other, but the new
inscription cements the whole and brings producers and products into
relations with itself (they do not need to speak the same language). The
imperial inscription countersects all the alliances and filiations, prolongs
them, makes them converge into the direct filiation of the despot with
the deity, and the new alliance of the despot with the people. All the
coded flows of the primitive machine are now forced into a bottleneck,
where the despotic machine overcodes them. Overcoding is the operation that constitutes the essence of the State, and that measures both its
continuity and its break with the previous formations: the dread of flows
of desire that would resist coding, but also the establishment of a new
inscription that overcodes, and that makes desire into the property of
the sovereign, even though he be the death instinct itself. The castes are
inseparable from this overcoding, and imply the existence of dominant
"classes" that do not yet manifest themselves as classes, but are merged
with a State apparatus. Who is able to touch the full body of the
sovereign? Here we have a problem of castes. It is overcoding that
impoverishes the earth for the benefit of the de territorialized full body,
and that on this full body renders the movement of debt infinite. It is a
measure of Nietzsche's force to have stressed the importance of such a
movement that begins with the founders of States, these artists with
a look of bronze, creating "an oppressive and remorseless machine,"51
erecting before any perspective of liberation an ironclad impossibility.
This "infinitivatiori" (infinitivation) cannot be understood exactly as
Nietzsche would have it-that is, as a consequence of the interplay of
ancestors, profound genealogies, and extended filiations; rather, when
these are short-circuited, abducted by the new alliance and direct

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

/199

filiation, then the ancestor-the master of the mobile and finite blocksfinds himself dismissed by the deity, the immobile organizer of the
bricks and of their infinite circuit.

7

I Barbarian or Imperial Representation

Incest with the sister and incest with the mother are very
different things. The sister is not a substitute for the mother: the one
belongs to the connective category of alliance, the other to the disjunctive category of filiation. Incest with the sister is prohibited insofar as
the conditions of territorial coding require that alliance not be confounded with filiation; and incest with the mother, insofar as descent within
filiation must not be allowed to interfere with ascending lines. That is
why the despot's incest is twofold, by virtue of the new alliance and
direct filiation. He begins by marrying the sister. But he enters into this
forbidden endogamous marriage outside the tribe, inasmuch as he is
himself outside his tribe, on the outside or at the outer limits of the
territory. This is what Pierre Gordon showed in his strange book: the
same rule that proscribes incest must prescribe it for certain persons.
Exogamy must result in the position of men outside the tribe who for
their part are entitled to an endogamous marriage and are able, by virtue
of this formidable right, to serve as initiators to exogamous subjects of
both sexes: the "sacred deflowerer," the "ritual initiator" on the
mountain or across the waters.* The wilderness, land of betrothal. All
the flows converge on a man such as this, all the alliances find
themselves countersected by this new alliance that overcodes them.
Endogamous marriage outside the tribe places the hero in a position to
overcode all the endogamous marriages in the tribe.
It is clear that incest with the mother has a completely different
meaning: this time it is a question of the mother of the tribe, as she exists
in the tribe, as the hero finds her in penetrating into the tribe, or finds her
again in returning to the tribe after his first marriage. He countersects
the extended filiations with a direct filiation. The initiated or initiating
hero becomes king. The second marriage develops the consequences of
the first, it draws out the effects of the first. The hero begins by marrying
the sister, than he marries the mother. The fact that the two acts can, to
varying degrees, be bound together, assimilated, does not rule out the
*Pierre Gordon, L'initiation sexuelle et l'e~Jolutuion religieuse (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1946), p. ] 64: "The sacred personage ... did not live in the little agricultural village, but in the woods,
like the hero Enkidu of the Chaldean epic, or on the mountain, in the sacred enclosure. His occupations
were those of a herdsman or a hunter. not those of a cultivator. The obligation to resort to him for
sacred marriages, the only kind of marriage that enhanced the woman's position, therefore entailed ipso
facto an exogamy. Under these conditions only the young women belonging to the same group as the
ritual deflowerer could be endogamous."

200

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

existence of two sequences in the phenomenon: the union with the
princess-sister and the union with the mother-queen. Incest goes by
twos. The hero is always sitting astride two groups, the one where he
leaves to find his sister, the other where he returns to find his mother
again. The purpose of this double incest is not to produce a flow, not
even a magic flow, but to overcode all the existing flows, and to ensure
that no intrinsic code, no underlying flow escapes the overcoding of the
despotic machine; hence it is by virtue of his sterility that he guarantees
the general Iecundity.P'' The marriage with the sister is on the outside, it
is the wilderness ordeal, it expresses the spatial divergence from the
primitive machine; it provides the old alliances with an outcome; it
founds the new alliance by effecting a generalized appropriation of all
the alliance debts. The marriage with the mother is the return to the
tribe; it expresses the temporal divergence from the primitive machine
(the difference between the generations); it constitutes the direct
filiation that results from the new alliance, by effecting a generalized
accumulation of filiative stock. Both marriages are essential to the
overcoding, as the two ends of a tie for the despotic knot.
A pause seems in order here while we ask how such a thing is
possible. How is it that incest has become "possible," and not only
possible, but the manifest property and seal of the despot? Who is this
sister, this mother? The sister and mother of the despot himself? Or
should the question be framed in a different way? For it concerns the
whole system of representation when it ceases to be territorial and
becomes imperial. First of all, we have the impression that the elements
of the in-depth system of representation have begun to move: the
cellular migration has begun that will carry the Oedipal cell from one
locus of representation to another. In the imperial formation, incest has
ceased being the displaced represented of desire to become the repressing
representation itself. For there can be no doubt: this way the despot has
of committing incest, and of making it possible, in no way involves
removing the apparatus of social and psychic repression (l'appareil
repression-refoutementt, On the contrary, the despot's intervention
forms part of the apparatus, it changes only the parts of the machine; yet
it is still as the displaced represented that incest now comes to occupy
the position of the repressing representation. Another gain in the sum of
repression, a new economy in the repressive, repressing apparatus
(l'appareii rejaulant repressiiv, a new mark, a new severity. It would be
easy, too easy, if it were enough to make incest possible, and to
implement this in sovereign fashion, so that the exercise of psychic
repression and the service of social repression would be made to end.
The royal barbarian incest is merely the means to overcode the flows of
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1201

desire, certainly not a means to liberate them. 0 Caligula, 0 Heliogabalus,.O mad memory of vanished emperors! Incest never having been the
desire, .but me~ely its displaced represented as it results from psychic
repression, social repression has everything to gain when incest comes
to take the place of the representation itself, and in this capacity take
charge of the repressing function (fa [onction refoulante). (That is what
~e have a~ready seen in psychosis, where the intrusion of the complex
mto consciousness, according to the traditional criterion, did not, to be
~ure, ~lleviate t?e repression of desire.) With incest's new position in the
~mpenal formation, we are therefore speaking only of a migration in the
In-depth elements of representation, which will render the latter more
foreig~,.more ruthless, more definitive, or more "infinite" with respect
to deslr.mg-production. But this migration would never be possible if
there did not occur correlatively a considerable change in the other
elements of representation, those elements that operate on the surface
of the inscribing socius.
hat changes singularly in the surface organization of representa-

. :V

non IS the :elationship between the voice and graphism: it is the despot
who establishes the practice of writing (the most ancient authors saw
this clearly); it is the imperial formation that makes graphism into a
system of writing in the proper sense of the term. Legislation, bureauc:ac~, accounting, the collection of taxes, the State monopoly, imperial
!ustIce, the functionaries' activity, historiography: everything is written
In the despot's procession. Let us return to the paradox that emerges
from the analyses of Leroi-Gourhan: primitive societies are oral not
becau.se they lack a graphic system but because, on the contrary, the
srachic system in these societies is independent of the voice; it marks
signs on the body that respond to the voice, react to the voice, but that
are autonomous and do not align themselves on it. In return barbarian
civilizations are written, not because the voice has been lost, but
b~caus~ the graphic system has lost its independence and its particular
dimensions, has aligned itself on the voice and has become subordinated
to the voice, enabling it to extract from the voice a deterritorialized
ab~t~act flux that it retains and makes reverberate in the linear code of
writmg. In short, graphisrn in one and the same movement begins to
depend on the voice, and induces a mute voice from on high or from the
?ey~nd, a voice that begins to depend on graphism. It is by subordinating Itself to the voice that writing supplants it.
Jacques Derrida is correct in saying that every language presupposes. a wntmg system from which it originates, if by that he means the
existence and the connection of some sort of graphism-writing in the
largest sense of the term. He is also right in saying that, within writing in
202

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

the narrow sense, hardly any breaks can be established between
pictographic, ideogrammic, and phonetic procedures: there is always
and already an alignment on the voice, at the same time as a substitution
for the voice (supplernentarity), and "phonetism is never all-powerful,
but has also always-already begun to labor and elaborate the mute
signifier." He is again correct in linking writing to incest in a mysterious
fashion. But we see nothing in this link that would lead us to conclude in
favor of the constancy of an apparatus of psychic repression, operating
in the manner of a graphic machine capable of performing as well by
means of hieroglyphs as by phonemes. 53 For there is indeed a break that
changes everything in the world of representation, between this writing
in the narrow sense and writing in the broad sense-that is, between two
completely different orders of inscription: a graphisrn that leaves the
voice dominant by being independent of the voice while connecting with
it, and a graphism that dominates or supplants the voice by depending on
it in various ways and by subordinating itself to the voice. The primitive
territorial sign is self-validating; it is a position of desire in a state of
multiple connections. It is not a sign of a sign nor a desire of a desire. It
knows nothing of linear subordination and its reciprocity: neither
pictogram nor ideogram, it is rhythm and not form, zigzag and not line,
artifact and not idea, production and not expression. Let us try to
summarize the differences between these two forms of representation,
territorial and imperial.
In the first place, territorial representation is made up of two
heterogeneous elements, voice and graphism: the former is like the
representation of words constituted in lateral alliance, while the latter is
like the representation of things-of bodies-established in extended
filiation. The former acts on the latter, while the latter reacts on the
former, each element having its own particular force that is connoted
along with that of the other, so as to perform the great task of germinal
intense repression. What is repressed, in fact, is the full body as the
foundation of the intense earth, which must yield its place to the socius
in extension, into which the intensities in question pass or fail to pass.
The full body of the earth must assume an extension in the socius and as
the socius. The primitive socius covers itself in this manner with a
network wherein one is continually jumping from words to things, and
from bodies to appellations, according to the extensive requirements of
the system in its length and its width. What we call the order of
connotation is an order in which the word (ie mot) as a vocal sign
designates something, but where the thing designated is no less a sign,
because it is furrowed by a graphisrn that is connoted in conjunction
with the voice. The heterogeneity, the divergence, the disequilibrium of
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

203

the two elements-vocal and graphic-is resolved by a third element:
the visual, the eye. It might be said of this eye that it sees the word-it
sees it, it does not read it-insofar as it evaluates the suffering caused by
the graphism. Jean-Francois Lyotard has attempted to describe such a
system in another context, where the word has only a designating
function but does not of itself constitute the sign; what becomes a sign is
rather the thing or body designated as such, insofar as it reveals an
unknown facet described on it, traced by the graphism that responds to
the word. The gap between the two elements is bridged by the eye,
which "sees" the word without reading it, inasmuch as it appraises the
pain emanating from the graphism applied to the flesh itself: the eye
jumps.*
The magic triangle with its three sides-voice-audition, graphismbody, eye-pain-thus seems to us to be an order of connotation, a
system of cruelty where the word has an essentially designating
function, but where the graphism itself constitutes a sign in conjunction
with the thing designated, and where the eye goes from one to the other,
extracting and measuring the visibility of the one against the pain of the
other. Everything in the system is active, en-acted (agi), or reacting;
everything is a matter of use and function. So that when one considers
the whole of territorial representation, one is struck by the complexity
of the networks with which it covers the socius: the chain of territorial
signs is continually jumping from one element to another; radiating in all
directions; emitting detachments wherever there are flows to be selected; including disjunctions; consuming remains; extracting surplus values; connecting words, bodies, and sufferings, and formulas, things, and
affects; connoting voices, graphic traces, and eyes, always in a polyvocal usage-a way of jumping that cannot be contained within an order
of meaning, still less within a signifier. And if incest seemed impossible
to us from this point of view, it is because incest is nothing other than a
jump that necessarily fails, this jump that goes from appellations to
persons, from names to bodies: on the one hand, the repressed thisside-of of appellations that do not yet designate persons, but only
intensive germinal states; on the other hand, the repressing beyond that
only applies appellations to persons by prohibiting persons who answer
"Lyotard re-establishes the overly neglected rights of a theory of pure designation. He shows the
irreducible gap between the word and the thing in the relationship of designation that connotes them.
By virtue of this gap, it is the thing designated that becomes the sign by revealing an unknown facet as a
hidden content. (Words are not themselves signs, but they transform into signs the things or bodies they
designate.) At the same time it is the designating word that becomes visible, independently of any
writing-reading, by revealing a strange ability to be seen, not read. See Lyotard, Discours, figure (see
reference note 85), pp. 41-82: "Words are not things, but as soon as there is a word, the object
designated becomes a sign, which means precisely that it conceals a hidden content within its manifest
identity, and that it reserves another face for another view focused on it, ... which perhaps will never
be seen'L-but which in return will be viewed in the word itself.

204

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

to the names of sister, mother, father, Between the two, the shallow
stream where nothing passes, where the appellations do not adhere to the
persons, where the persons elude the graphic action, and where the eye
no longer has anything to see or evaluate: incest, the simple displaced
limit, neither repressed nor repressing, but merely the displaced represented of desire. From this moment on it appears indeed that the two
dimensions of representation-its surface organization with the elements voice-graphy-eye, and its in-depth organization with the representing instances of desire-repressing representation/displaced represented-share the same fate, like a system of correspondences in the
heart of a given social machine.
All this finds itself overwhelmed in a new destiny, with the despotic
machine and imperial representation. In the first place, graphism aligns
itself on the voice, falls back on the voice, and becomes writing. At the
same time it induces the voice no longer as the voice of alliance, but as
that of the new alliance, a fictitious voice from beyond that expresses
itself in the flow of writing as direct filiation. These two fundamental
despotic categories are also the movement of graphism that, at one and
the same time, subordinates itself to the voice in order to subordinate
the voice and supplant it. Then there occurs a crushing of the magic
triangle: the voice no longer sings but dictates, decrees; the graphy no
longer dances, it ceases to animate bodies, but is set into writing on
tablets, stones, and books; the eye sets itself to reading. (Writing does
not entail but implies a kind of blindness, a loss of vision and of the
ability to appraise; it is now the eye that suffers, although it also acquires
other functions.) Or rather, we are unable to say that the magic triangle
is completely crushed: it subsists as a base and as a brick, insofar as the
territorial machine continues to function in the framework of the new
machine. The triangle has become the base for a pyramid, all of whose
sides cause the vocal, the graphic, and the visual to converge toward the
eminent unity of the despot. If we call the order of representation in a
social system a plane of consistency (plan de consistance), it is evident
that this plane has changed, that it has become a plane of subordination
and no longer one of connotation. And here, in the second place, is the
essential: the flattening of the graphy onto the voice has made a
transcendent object jump outside the chain-a mute voice on which the
whole chain now seems to depend, and in relation to which it becomes
linearized. The subordination of graphism to the voice induces a
fictitious voice from on high which, inversely, no longer expresses itself
except through the writing signs that it emits (revelation). This is
perhaps the first assembling of formal operations that will lead to
Oedipus (the paralogism of extrapolation): a flattening out or a set of
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

205

biunivocal relations that leads to the breakaway and elevation of a
detached object, and the linearization of the chain that derives from this
object.
It is perhaps at this juncture that the question "What does it mean?"
begins to be heard, and that problems of exegesis prevail over problems
of use and efficacy. The emperor, the god-what did he mean? In place
of segments of the chain that are always detachable, a detached partial
object on which the whole chain depends; in place of a polyvocal
graphism flush with the real, a biunivocalization forming the transcendent dimension that gives rise to a linearity; in place of nonsignifying
signs that compose the networks of a territorial chain, a despotic
signifier from which all the signs uniformly flow in a deterritorialized
flow of writing. Men have even been seen drinking this flow. Andras
Zempleni shows how, in certain regions of Senegal, Islam superimposes
a plane of subordination on the old plane of coimotation of animist
values: "The divine or prophetic word, written or recited, is the
foundation of this universe; the transparence of the animist prayer
yields to the opacity of the rigid Arab verse; speech (Ie verbe) rigidifies
into formulas whose power is ensured by the truth of the Revelation and
not by a symbolic or incantatory efficacy .... The Moslem holy man's
learning refers to a hierarchy of names, verses, numbers, and corresponding beings-and if necessary, the verse will be placed in a bottle
filled with pure water, the verse water will be drunk, one's body will be
rubbed with it, and one's hands will be washed with it."54 Writing-the
first deterritorialized flow, drinkable on this account: it flows from the
despotic signifier. For what is the signifier in the first instance? What is it
in relation to the nonsignifying territorial signs, when it jumps outside
their chains and imposes-superimposes-a plane of subordination on
their plane of immanent connotation? The signifier is the sign that has
become a sign of the sign, the despotic sign having replaced the
territorial sign, having crossed the threshold of deterritorialization; the
signifier is merely the deterritorialized sign itself. The sign made letter.
Desire no longer dares to desire, having become a desire of desire, a
desire of the despot's desire. The mouth no longer speaks, it drinks the
letter. The eye no longer sees, it reads. The body no longer allows itself
to be engraved like the earth, but prostrates itself before the engravings
of the despot, the region beyond the earth, the new full body.
No water will ever cleanse the signifier of its imperial origin: the
signifying master or "the master signifier." In vain will the signifier be
immersed in the immanent system of language (la langue), or be used to
clear away problems of meaning and signification, or be resolved into
the coexistence of phonematic elements, where the signified is no more
2M ,

ANTI-OEDIPUS

than the summary of the respective differential values of these elements
in the relationships among themselves. In vain will the comparison of
language (langage) to exchange and money be pushed to its furthest
point, subjecting language to the paradigms of an active capitalism, for
one will never prevent the signifier from reintroducing its transcendence, and from bearing witness for a vanished despot who still functions
in modern imperialism. Even when it speaks Swiss or American,
linguistics manipulates the shadow of Oriental despotism. Ferdinand de
Saussure does not merely emphasize the following: that the arbitrariness
of language establishes its sovereignty, as a servitude or a generalized
slavery visited upon the "masses." It has also been shown that two
dimensions exist side by side in Saussure: the one horizontal, where the
signified is reduced to the value of coexisting minimal terms into which
the signifier decomposes; but the other vertical, where the signifier is
elevated to the concept corresponding to the acoustic image-that is, to
the voice, taken in its maximum extension, which recomposes the
signifier ("value" as the opposite of the coexisting terms, but also the
"concept" as the opposite of the acoustic image). In short, the signifier
appears twice, once in the chain of elements in relation to which the
signified is always a signifier for another signifier, and a second time in
the detached object on which the whole of the chain depends, and that
spreads over the chain the effects of signification. There is no phonologicalor even phonetic code operating on the signifier in the first sense,
without an overcoding effected by the signifier itself in the second sense.
There is no linguistic field without biunivocal relations-whether
between ideographic and phonetic values, or between articulations of
different levels, monemes and phonemes-that finally ensure the independence and the linearity of the deterritorialized signs. But such a field
remains defined by a transcendence, even when one considers this
transcendence as an absence or an empty locus, performing the necessary foldings, levelings (rabattements), and subordinations-a transcendence whence issues throughout the system the inarticulate material flux in which this transcendence operates, opposes, selects, and
combines: the signifier. It is curious, therefore, that one can show so well
the servitude of the masses with respect to the minimal elements of
the sign within the immanence of language, without showing how the
domination is exercised through and in the transcendence of the
signifier.* There, however, as elsewhere, an irreducible exteriority of
"'Bernard Pautrat tries to establish a rapprochement between Nietzsche and Saussure, starting from
problems of domination and servitude: Versions du sotetl: figures et svsteme de Nietzsche (Paris:
Editions du Seuil, 1971),pp. 207ff. He does well to remark that Nietzsche, in contrast to Hegel, causes
the master-slave relationship to go by way of language and not by way of labor. But when he proceeds

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

207

conquest asserts itself. For if language itself does not presuppose
conquest, the leveling operations (les operations de rabattement) that
constitute written language indeed presuppose two inscriptions that do
not speak the same language: two languages (langages), one of masters,
the other of slaves. Jean Nougayrol describes just such a situation: "For
the Sumerians, [a given sign] is water; the Sumerians read this sign a,
which signifies water in Sumerian. An Akkadian comes along and asks
his Sumerian master: what is this sign? The Sumerian replies: that's a.
The Akkadian takes this sign for a, and on this point there is no longer
any relationship between the sign and water, which in Akkadian is called
mil. ... I believe that the presence of the Akkadians determined the
phoneticization of the writing system ... and that the contact of two
peoples is almost necessary before the spark of a new writing can spring
forth."55
One cannot better show how an operation of biunivocalization
organizes itself around a despotic signifier, so that a phonetic and
alphabetical chain flows from it. Alphabetical writing is not for illiterates, but by illiterates. It goes by way of illiterates, those unconscious
workers. The signifier implies a language that overcodes another language, while the other language is completely coded into phonetic
elements. And if the unconscious in fact includes the topical order of a
double inscription, it is not structured like one language, but like two.
The signifier does not appear to keep its promise, which is to give us
access to a modern and functional understanding of language. The
imperialism of the signifier does not take us beyond the question, "What
does it mean T"; it is content to bar the question in advance, to render all
the answers insufficient by relegating them to the status of a simple
signified. It challenges exegesis in the name of recitation, pure textuality,
and superior "scientificity" (scientificite). Like the young palace dogs
too quick to drink the verse water, and who never tire of crying: The
signifier, you have not reached the signifier, you are still at the level of
the signifieds! The signifier is the only thing that gladdens their hearts.
But this master signifier remains what it was in ages past, a transcendent
stock that distributes lack to all the elements of the chain, something in
common for a common absence, the authority that channels all the
breaks-flows into one and the same locus of one and the same cleavage:
the detached object, the phallus-and-castration, the bar that delivers
over all the depressive subjects to the great paranoiac king. 0 signifier,
terrible archaism of the despot where they still look for the empty tomb,
to the comparison with Saussure, he retains language as a system to which the masses are enslaved, and
consigns to fiction the Nietzschean idea of a language of masters through which this enslavement is
accomplished.

2011

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

the dead father, and the mystery of the name! And perhaps that is what
incites the anger of certain linguists against Lacan, no less than the
enthusiasm of his followers: the vigor and the serenity with which Lacan
accompanies the signifier back to its source, to its veritable origin, the
despotic age, and erects an infernal machine that welds desire to the
Law, because, everything considered-so Lacan thinks-this is indeed
the form in which the signifier is in agreement with the unconscious, and
the form in which it produces effects of the signified in the unconscious.* The signifier as the repressing representation, and the new
displaced represented that it induces, the famous metaphors and
metonymy-all of that constitutes the overcoding and de territorialized
despotic machine.
The despotic signifier has the effect of overcoding the territorial
chain. The signified is precisely the effect of the signifier, and not what it
represents or what it designates. The signified is the sister of the borders
and the mother of the interior. Sister and mother are the concepts that
correspond to the great acoustic image, to the voice of the new alliance
and direct filiation. Incest is the very operation of overcoding at the two
ends of the chain in all the territory ruled by the despot, from the
borders to the center: all the debts of alliance are converted into the
infinite debt of the new alliance, and all the extended filiations are
subsumed by direct filiation. Incest or the royal trinity is therefore the
whole of the repressing representation insofar as it initiates the overcoding. The system of subordination or signification has replaced
the system of connotation. To the extent that graphism is flattened onto
the voice-the graphism that, not so long ago, was inscribed flush with
the body-body representation subordinates itself to word representation: sister and mother are the voice's signifieds. But to the extent that
this flattening induces a fictitious voice from on high that no longer
expresses itself except in the linear flux, the despot himself is the
signifier of the voice that, along with the two signifieds, effects the
overcoding of the whole chain. What made incest impossible-namely,
that at times we had the appellations (mother, sister) but not the persons
or the bodies, while at other times we had the bodies, but the appellations disappeared from view as soon as we broke through the prohibitions they bore-has ceased to exist. Incest has become possible in the
wedding of the kinship bodies and family appellations, in the union of
the signifier with its signifieds.
*See Elisabeth Roudinesco's excellent article on Lacan, where she analyzes the twofold aspect of the
analytic signifying chain and the transcendent signifier on which the chain depends. She shows that, in
this sense, Lacan's theory should be interpreted less as a linguistic conception of the unconscious than
as a critique of linguistics in the name of the unconscious. (Elisabeth Roudinesco, "L'action d'une
metaphore," La Penvee, February 1972.)

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

\ 2011

Hence it is by no means a question of knowing if the despot marries
his "true" sister and his true mother. For in any case his true sister is the
sister of the wilderness, just as his true mother is the mother of the tribe.
Once incest is possible, it matters little whether it is simulated or not,
since in any case something else again is simulated through incest. And
in accordance with the complementarity of simulation and identity that
we encountered earlier, if the identification is that of the object on high,
the simulation is indeed the writing that corresponds to it, the flux that
flows from this object, the graphic flux that flows from the voice.
Simulation does not replace reality, it is not an equivalent that stands for
reality, but rather it appropriates reality in the operation of despotic
overcoding, it produces reality on the new full body that replaces the
earth. It expresses the appropriation and production of the real by a
quasi cause. In incest it is the signifier that makes love with its signifieds.
System of simulation is the other name for signification and subordination. And what is simulated and therefore produced, through the incest
that is itself simulated and therefore produced-all the more real for
being simulated, and vice versa-is something very much like the
extreme states of a reconstituted, re-created intensity. With his sister the
despot simulates "a zero state from which the phallic force will arise,"
like a promise "whose hidden presence in the very interior of the body
must be situated at the extreme limit"; and with his mother the despot
simulates a superforce where the two sexes would be "at the maximum
[degree of externalization] of their specific natures"; the B-A Ba of the
phallus as voice.>"
Hence something else is always at issue in royal incest: bisexuality,
homosexuality, castration, transvestism, as so many gradients and
passages in the cycle of intensities. This is because the despotic signifier
aims at the reconstitution of the full body of the intense earth that the
primitive machine had repressed, but on new foundations or under new
conditions present in the deterritorialized full body of the despot
himself. This is the reason that incest changes its meaning or locus, and
becomes the repressing representation. For what is at stake in the
overcoding effected by incest is the folJowing; that all the organs of all
the subjects, all the eyes, all the mouths, all the penises, all the vaginas,
all the ears, and all the anuses become attached to the full body of the
despot, as though to the peacock's tail of a royal train, and that they
have in this body their own intensive representatives. Royal incest is
inseparable from the intense multiplication of organs and their inscription on the new full body. (Sade saw clearly this always royal role of
incest.) The apparatus of social repression-psychic repression-i.e., the
repressing representation-now finds itself defined in terms of a su210

I ANTI~OEDIPUS

preme danger that expresses the representative on which it bears: the
danger that a single organ might flow outside the despotic body, that it
might break away or escape. Suddenly the despot sees rising up before
him, against him, the enemy who brings death-an eye with too steady a
look, a mouth with too unfamiliar a smile; each organ is a possible
protest. It is at one and the same time that a half-deaf Caesar complains
of an ear that no longer hears, and sees weighing on him the look of
Cassius, "lean and hungry," and the smile of Cassius, who "smiles in
such a sort as if he mock'd himself." A long chronicle that will carry the
assassinated, dismembered, dis-organ-ized, filed-down body of the
despot into the latrines of the city. Wasn't it already the anus that
detached the object on high and produced the eminent voice? Didn't the
transcendence of the phallus depend on the anus? But the latter is
revealed only at the end, as the last vestige of the vanished despot, the
underside of his voice: the despot is nothing more than this "dead rat's
ass suspended from the ceiling of the sky." The organs begin by
detaching themselves from the despotic body, the organs of the citizen
risen up against the tyrant. Then they will become those of private man,
they will become privatized after the model and memory of the
disgraced anus, ejected from the social field-the obsessive fear of
smelling bad. The entire history of primitive coding, of despotic
overcoding, and of the decoding of private man turns on these movements of flows: the intense germinal influx, the surflux of royal incest,
and the reflux of excrement that conducts the dead despot to the
latrines, and conducts us all to today's "private man"-the history
sketched out by Artaud in his masterpiece Hetiogabale. The entire
history of the graphic flux goes from the flood of sperm in the tyrant's
cradle, to the wave of shit in his sewer tomb-"all writing is so much pig
shit," all writing is this simulation, sperm and excrement.
One might think that the system of imperial representation was, in
spite of everything, milder than that of territorial representation. The
signs are no longer inscribed in the flesh itself but on stones, parchments, pieces of currency, and lists. According to Wittfogel's law of
"diminishing administrative returns," wide sectors are left semiautonomous insofar as they do not compromise the power of the State. The eye
no longer extracts a surplus value from the spectacle of suffering, it has
ceased to evaluate; it has begun rather to "forewarn" and keep watch, to
see that no surplus value escapes the over coding of the despotic
machine. For all the organs and their functions experience a detachment
and elevation that relates them to, and makes them converge on, the full
body of the despot. In point of fact the regime is not milder; the system
of terror has replaced the system of cruelty. The old cruelty persists,
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

211

especially in the autonomous or quasi-autonomous sectors; but it is now
bricked into the State apparatus, which at times organizes it and at other
times tolerates or limits it, in order to make it serve the ends of the State,
and to subsume it under the higher superimposed unity of a Law that is
more terrible. As a matter of fact, the law's opposition or apparent
opposition to despotism comes late-when the State presents itself as an
apparent peacemaker between classes that become distinct from the
State, making it necessary for the latter to reshape its form of sovereignty.*
The law does not begin by being what it will become or seek to
become later: a guarantee against despotism, an immanent principle that
unites the parts into a whole, that makes of this whole the object of a
general knowledge and wiIl whose sanctions are merely derivative of a
judgment and an application directed at the rebellious parts. The
imperial barbarian law possesses instead two features that are in
opposition to those just mentioned-the two features that Kafka so
forcefully developed: first, the paranoiac-schizoid trait of the law
(metonymy) according to which the law governs nontotalizable and
nontotalized parts, partitioning them off, organizing them as bricks,
measuring their distance and forbidding their communication, henceforth acting in the name of a formidable but formal and empty Unity,
eminent, distributive, and not colIective; and second, the maniacal
depressive trait (metaphor) according to which the law reveals nothing
and has no knowable object, the verdict having no existence prior to the
penalty, and the statement of the law having no existence prior to the
verdict. The trial by ordeal presents these two traits in a raw state. As in
the machine of "In the Penal Colony," it is the penalty that writes both
the verdict and the rule that has been broken. In vain did the body
liberate itself from its characteristic graphism in the system of connotation, for it now becomes the stone and the paper, the tablet and the
currency on which the new writing is able to mark its figures, its
phonetism, and its alphabet. Overcoding is the essence of the law, and
the origin of the new sufferings of the body. Punishment has ceased to
be a festive occasion, from which the eye extracts a surplus value in the
magic triangle of alliance and filiations. Punishment becomes a vengeance, the vengeance of the voice, the hand, and the eye now joined
together on the despot-the vengeance of the new alliance, whose public
character does not spoil the secret: "I will bring down upon you the
"Regarding the transition from a royal system of justice based on rnagico-religious speech to a city-state
system of justice based on a speech-as-dialogue, and regarding the change in "sovereignty" that
corresponds to this transition, see L. Gernet, "Droit et predroit en Grece ancienne," L 'anmie
sociologique 1948-49; M. Detienne, Les maitres de verite dans fa Grece archai"que (Paris: Maspero,
1967); and Michel Foucault, "La volonte de savoir" (see reference note 48).

212

I .~NTI-OEDIPUS

avenging sword of the vengeance of alliance." For once again, before it
becomes a feigned guarantee against despotism, the law is the invention
of the despot himself: it is the juridical form assumed by the infinite debt.
The jurist will be seen in the despot's procession up to the time of the
late Roman emperors, and the juridical form will accompany the
imperial formation, the legislator alongside the monster, Gaius and
Commodus, Papinian and Caracalla, Ulpian and Heliogabalus, "the
delirium of the twelve Caesars and the Golden Age of Roman Law"taking the debtor's side against the creditor when necessary, so as to
consolidate the infinite debt.
As vengeance, and a vengeance exercised in advance, the imperial
barbarian law crushes the whole primitive interplay of action, the
en-acted (/'agi), and reaction. Passivity must now become the virtue of
the subjects attached to the despotic body. As Nietzsche says when he
shows precisely how punishment becomes a vengeance in the imperial
formations, a "tremendous quantity of freedom" must have "been
expelled from the world, or at least from the visible world, and made as it
were latent under their hammer blows and artists' violence."57 There
occurs a detachment and elevation of the death instinct, which ceases to
be coded in the interplay of savage actions and reactions where fatalism
was still something en-acted, in order to become the somber agent of
overcoding, the detached object that hovers over each subject, as
though the social machine had come unstuck from its desiring-machines:
death, the desire of desire, the desire of the despot's desire, a latency
inscribed in the bowels of the State apparatus. Better not a sole survivor
than for a single organ to flow outside this apparatus or slip away from
the body of the despot. This is because there is no other necessity (no
other fatum) than that of the signifier in its relationships with its
signifieds: such is the regime of terror. What the law is supposed to
signify will only be revealed later, when it has evolved and assumed the
new figure that appears to place it in opposition to despotism. But from
the beginning it expresses the imperialism of the signifier that produces
its signifieds as effects that are the more effective and necessary as they
escape knowing, and as they owe all to their eminent cause. Occasionally it still happens that the young dogs will call for a return to the despotic
signifier, without exegesis or interpretation, while the law, however,
wants to explain what it signifies, to assert an independence of its
signified-against the despot, says the law. For the dogs, according to
Kafka's observations, want desire to be firmly wedded to the law in the
pure detachment and elevation of the death instinct, rather than to hear,
it is true, hypocritical doctors explain what it all means. But all that-the
development of the democratic signified or the wrapping of the despotic
SAVAGES. BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1213

signifier-nevertheless forms part of the same question, sometimes open
and sometimes barred, the same extended abstraction, a repressive
machinery that always moves us away from the desiring-machines. For
there has never been but one State. The question "What is the use of
that?" fades more and more, and disappears in the fog of pessimism, of
nihilism, Nada, Nada!
The order of law as it appears in the imperial formation, and as it
will evolve later, indeed have something in common: the indifference to
designation. It is in the nature of the law to signify without designating
anything. The law does not designate anything or anybody (the democratic conception of law will make this into a criterion). The complex
relationship of designation, as we have seen it elaborated in the system
of primitive connotation with its interplay of voice, graphism, and eye,
here disappears in the new relationship of barbarian subordination. How
could designation subsist when the sign has ceased to be a position of
desire, in order to become this imperial sign, a universal castration that
welds desire to the law? It is the crushing of the old code, it is the new
relationship of signification, it is the necessity of this new relationship
established in the overcoding process, that refers designations to the
arbitrary (or that lets them subsist in the form of bricks held over from
the old system). Why is it that linguists are constantly rediscovering the
truths of the despotic age? And finally, could it be that this arbitrariness
of designations, as the reverse side of a necessity of signification, does
not bear only on the despot's subjects, nor even on his servants, but on
the despot himself, his dynasty, and his name ("[The people] do not
know what emperor is reigning, and there exist doubts regarding even
the name of the dynasty"58)? This would mean that the death instinct is
even more deeply rooted in the State than thought, and that latency not
only befalls the subjects of the State, but is also at work in the highest
machinery of the apparatus. The revenge becomes that of the subjects
against the despot. In the latency system of terror, what is no longer
active, en-acted, or reacted to, "this instinct for freedom forcibly made
latent ( ... ) pushed back and repressed, incarcerated within and finally
able to discharge and vent itself only on itself,"59-that very thing is
now ressenti:" The eternal ressentiment of the subjects answers to the
"ressentiie} is the past participle of the French verb, ressentir, and ressentiment is the noun form.
Nietzsche makes use of ressentiment constantly, in his own singular fashion, to describe the
phenomenon whereby an active force is deprived of its normal conditions of existence, where it directs
itself inward and turns against itself. "Pushed back and repressed, incarcerated within and finally able
to discharge and vent itself only on itself" is a perfect definition of what is meant for something to be
ressenti according to Nietzsche's concept of ressentiment, In his Nietzsche et La philosophic (Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 1970),Deleuze defines ressentiment as the becoming-reactive of force
in general: "separated from what it is capable of, the active force does not however cease to exist.
Turning against itself, it produces suffering" (p. 147). Hence, Deleuze concludes, with ressentiment a
new meaning and depth is created for suffering, an intimate. internal meaning. (Translators' note.)

2141

ANTI-OEDIPUS

eternal vengeance of the despots. The inscription is "ressentie" when it
is no longer en-acted or reacted to. When the deterritorialized sign
becomes a signifier, a formidable quantity of reaction passes into a latent
state; all the resonance and all the retention change in volume and time
(the "after-the-event"). Vengeance and ressentiment: not the beginning
of justice, to be sure, but its becoming and its destiny in the imperial
formation as Nietzsche analyzes it. And according to his prophecy,
wouldn't the State itself be that dog which wants to die? But that is also
reborn from its ashes. For it is this whole constellation of the new
alliance-the imperialism of the signifier, the metaphoric or metonymic
necessity of the signifieds, with the arbitrary of the designations-that
ensures the maintenance of the system, and sees to it that the name is
succeeded by another name, one dynasty by another, without changing
the signifieds , and without a collapse of the wall of the signifier. This is
why the order of latency in the African, Chinese, Egyptian, and other
empires was that of rebellions and constant secessions, and not that of
revolution. Here again, death will have to be felt from within, but it will
have to come from without.
The founders of empires caused everything to pass into a latent
state; they invented vengeance and incited ressentiment, that countervengeance. And yet Nietzsche says about them what he has already said
about the primitive system: it was not in their midst that "bad conscience," this ugly growth-i.e., Oedipus-took root and began to grow.
It is simply that one more step has been taken in that direction: Oedipus,
bad conscience, interiority, they made it possible.v? What does Nietzsche mean, this man who dragged Caesar along with him as a despotic
signifier, along with its two signifieds , his sister and his mother, and who
felt their weight grow heavier as he drew nearer to madness? It is true
that Oedipus begins its cellular, ovular migration in the system of
imperial representation: from being at first the displaced represented of
desire, it becomes the repressing representation itself. The impossible
has become possible; the unoccupied limit now finds itself occupied by
the despot. Oedipus has received its name, the clubfooted despot
committing double incest through overcoding, with his sister and his
mother as body representations subjected to verbal representation.
Moreover, Oedipus is in the process of establishing each of the formal
operations that wiII make it all possible: the extrapolation of a detached
object; the double bind of overcoding or royal incest; the biunivocalization, application, and linearization of the chain between masters
and slaves; the introduction of the law into desire, and of desire into the
law; the terrible latency withits afterward or its after-the-event. All the
parts of the five paralogisms thus seem to be ready.
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1215

But we are still very far from the psychoanalytic Oedipus, and the
Hellenists are right to not grasp clearly the story that psychoanalysis is
trying at all costs to tell them. It is indeed the story of desire and its
sexual history (there is no other). But here all the parts figure as cogs and
wheels in the State machine. Desire is by no means an interplay between
a son, a mother, and a father. Desire institutes a libidinal investment of a
State machine that overcodes the territorial machine and, with an
additional turn of the screw, represses the desiring-machines. Incest
derives from this investment and not the reverse. At first it brings into
play only the despot, the sister, and the mother: it is the overcoding and
repressing representation. The father intervenes only as the representative of the old territorial machine, but the sister is the representative of
the new alliance, and the mother is the representative of direct filiation.
Father and son are not yet born. All sexuality functions in terms of the
conjoined operations of machines, their internecine struggle, their
superposition, their interlocking arrangements. Let us marvel once again
at Freud's account of Oedipus. In Moses and Monotheism he indeed
surmises that latency is a State affair. But then latency must not succeed
the "Oedipus complex," marking the complex's repression or even its
suppression. It must result from the repressing action of the incestuous
representation, which is not yet by any means a complex in the sense of
repressed desire, since on the contrary the representation exercises its
repressive action on desire itself. The Oedipus complex, as it is called by
psychoanalysis, will be born of latency, after latency, and it signifies the
return of the repressed under conditions that disfigure, displace, and
even decode desire. The Oedipus complex appears only after latency;
and when Freud recognizes two phases separated by latency, it is only
the second phase that merits the complex's name, while the first
expresses only its parts and wheels functioning from a completely
different viewpoint, in a completely different organization. There we see
the mania of psychoanalysis with all its paralogisms: it presents as a
resolution, or an attempted resolution, of the complex what is rather the
latter's definitive establishment or its interior installation, and it presents
as the complex what is still the complex's opposite. What will be
necessary in order for Oedipus to become the Oedipus, the Oedipus
complex? Many things, in fact-those things that Nietzsche partially
grasped in the evolution of the infinite debt.
The Oedipal cell will have to complete its migration; it must no
longer be content to pass from the state of the displaced represented to
that of repressing representation; rather, from being the repressing
representation, it will have to finally become the representative of desire
itself. And it must become the latter by virtue of being the displaced
216

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

represented. The debt must not only become an infinite debt, it will have
to be internalized and spiritualized as an infinite debt (Christianity and
what follows). The father and the son will have to take form-that is, the
royal triad must "masculinize" itself-and this must occur as a direct
consequence of the infinite debt that is now internalized.* Oedipus-thedespot will have to be replaced by Oedipuses-as-subjects, Oedipusesas-subjugated individuals, Oedipuses-as-fathers, and Oedipuses-assons. All the formal operations will have to be resumed within a decoded
social field, and must reverberate in the pure and private element of
interiority, of interior reproduction. The apparatus of social repressionpsychic repression will have to undergo a complete reorganization.
Hence desire, having completed its migration, will have to experience
this extreme affliction of being turned against itself: the turning back
against itself, bad conscience, the guilt that attaches it to the most
decoded of social fields as well as to the sickest interiority, the trap for
desire, its ugly growth. So long as the history of desire does not
experience this outcome, Oedipus haunts all societies, but as the
nightmare of something that has still not happened to them-its hour has
not come. (And isn't this the strength of Lacan, to have saved psychoanalysis from the frenzied oedipalization to which it was linking its
fate-to have brought about this salvation even at the price of a
regression, and even though it meant the unconscious would be kept
under the weight of the despotic apparatus, that it would be reinterpreted starting from this apparatus, the Law, and the signifier-phallus and
castration, yes! Oedipus, no I-the despotic age of the unconscious.)
8

I The Urstaat

The city of Ur, the point of departure of Abraham or the
new alliance. The State was not formed in progressive stages; it appears
fully armed, a master stroke executed all at once; the primordial
Urstaat, the eternal model of everything the State wants to be and
desires. "Asiatic" production, with the State that expresses or constitutes its objective movement, is not a distinct formation; it is the basic
formation, on the horizon throughout history. There comes back to us
from all quarters the discovery of imperial machines that preceded the
traditional historical forms, machines characterized by State ownership
'Historians of religions and psychoanalysts are very familiar with this problem of the masculinization
of the imperial triad, in terms of the father-son relationship that is brought into it. Nietzsche sees in this
problem an essential moment in the development of the infinite debt: "that stroke of genius on the part
of Christianity: God himself sacrifices himself for the guilt of Mankind. God himself makes payment to
himself, God as the only being who can redeem man from what has become ~nredeemable for man
himself-the creditor sacrifices himself for his debtor, out of love (can one credit that?), out of love for
his debtor!" (On the Genealogy of Morals, 11.21.)

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

217

of property, with communal possession bricked into it, and collective
dependence. Every form that is more "evolved" is like a palimpsest: it
covers a despotic inscription, a Mycenaean manuscript. Under every
Black and every Jew there is an Egyptian, and a Mycenaean under the
Greeks, an Etruscan under the Romans. And yet their origin sinks into
oblivion, a latency that lays hold of the State itself, and where the
writing system sometimes disappears. It is beneath the blows of private
property, then of commodity production, that the State witnesses its
decline. Land enters into the sphere of private property and into that of
commodities. Classes appear, inasmuch as the dominant classes are no
longer merged with the State apparatus, but are distinct determinations
that make use of this transformed apparatus. At first situated adjacent to
communal property, then entering into the latter's composition or
conditioning it, then becoming more and more a determining force,
private property brings about an internalization of the creditor-debtor
relation in the relations of opposed classes.v'
But how does one explain both this latency into which the despotic
State enters, and this power with which it re-forms itself on modified
foundations, in order to spring back more "mendacious," "colder," and
more "hypocritical" than ever? This oblivion and this return. On the one
hand, the ancient city-state, the Germanic commune, and feudalism
presuppose the great empires, and cannot be understood except in terms
of the Urstaat that serves as their horizon. On the other hand, the
problem confronting these forms is to reconstitute the Urstaat insofar as
possible, given the requirements of their new distinct determinations.
For what do private property, wealth, commodities, and classes signify?
The breakdown of codes. The appearance, the surging forth of now
decoded flows that pour over the socius, crossing it from one end to the
other. The State can no longer be content to overcode territorial
elements that are already coded, it must invent specific codes for flows
that are increasingly deterritorialized, which means: putting despotism
in the service of the new class relations; integrating the relations of
wealth and poverty, of commodity and labor; reconciling market money
and money from revenues; everywhere stamping the mark of the
Urstaat on the new state of things. And everywhere, the presence of the
latent model that can no longer be equaled, but that one cannot help but
imitate. The Egyptian's melancholy warning to the Greeks echoes
through history: "You Greeks will never be anything but children!"
This special situation of the State as a category-oblivion and
return-has to be explained. To begin with, it should be said that the
primordial despotic state is not a historical break like any other. Of all
the institutions, it is perhaps the only one to appear fully armed in the
218

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

brain of those who institute it, "the artists with a look of bronze." That is
why Marxism didn't quite know what to make of it: it has no place in the
famous five stages: primitive communism, ancient city-states, feudalism, capitalism, and socialism." It is not one formation among others,
nor is it the transition from one formation to another. It appears to be set
back at a remove from what it transects and from what it resects, as
though it were giving evidence of another dimension, a cerebral ideality
that is added to, superimposed on the material evolution of societies, a
regulating idea or principle of reflection (terror) that organizes the parts
and the flows into a whole. What is transected, supersected, or overcoded by the despotic State is what comes before-the territorial
machine, which it reduces to the state of bricks, of working parts
henceforth subjected to the cerebral idea. In this sense the despotic
State is indeed the origin, but the origin as an abstraction that must
include its differences with respect to the concrete beginning. We know
that myth always expresses a passage and a divergence (un fcart). The
primitive territorial myth of the beginning expressed the divergence of a
characteristically intense energy-what Marcel Griaule called "the
metaphysical part of mythology," the vibratory spiral-in relation to the
social system in extension that it conditioned, passing back and forth
between alliance and filiation. But the imperial myth of the origin
expresses something else: the divergence of this beginning from the
origin itself, the divergence of the extension from the idea, of the genesis
from the order and the power (the new alliance), and also what repasses
from filiation to alliance, what is taken up again by filiation. Jean-Pierre
Vernant shows in this way that the imperial myths are not able to
conceive a law of organization that is immanent in the universe: they
need to posit and internalize this difference between the origin and the
beginnings, between the sovereign power and the genesis of the world;
"the myth constitutes itself within this distance, it makes it into the very
object of its narrative, retracing the avatars of sovereignty down
thro~gh the succession of generations to the moment when a supremacy,
this time definitive, puts an end to the dramatic elaboration of the
dunesteia. "62 So that in the end one no longer really knows what comes
first, and whether the territorial machine does not in fact presuppose a
despotic machine from which it extracts the bricks or that it segments in
its turn.
«Regarding whether it is possible to bring "A~ia~ic" prod~ction into a?reer~e?t with the ~ve .stages, and
regarding the reasons behind Engel's renunciation of this category In.Ongms of the Family, and ~he
Russian and Chinese Marxists' resistance to this category, see Godelier , Sur le mode ~e pr~ductlO:r
asiatique (reference note 47). One may recall the insults addressed to Wittfogel for having ra!sed this

simple question: wasn't the category of the Oriental despotic Sta~e ~hallenged for reasons having to do
with its special paradigmatic status as a horizon for modern socialist States?

SAVAGES, BARB,ARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

219

In a certain sense it is necessary to say as much in regard to what
comes after the primal State, in regard to what is resected by this State.
It supersects what comes before, but resects the formations that follow.
There too it is like an abstraction that belongs to another dimension,
always at a remove and struck by latency, but that springs back and
returns stronger than before in the later forms that lend it a concrete
existence. A protean State, yet there has never been but one State.
Whence the variations, all the variants of the new alliance, falling
nevertheless under the same category. For example, feudalism not only
presupposes an abstract despotic State that it divides into segments
according to the regime of its private property and the rise of its
commodity production, but the latter induce in return the concrete
existence of a feudal state in the proper sense of the term, where the
despot returns as the absolute monarch. For it is a double error to think
that the development of commodity production is enough to bring about
feudalism's collapse-on the contrary, this development reinforces
feudalism in many respects, offering the latter new conditions of
existence and survival-and that feudalism of itself is in opposition to
the State, which on the contrary, as the feudal State, is capable of
preventing commodities from introducing the decoding of flows that
alone would be ruinous to the system under consideration.* And in more
recent examples, we have to go along with Wittfogel when he shows the
degree to which modern capitalist and socialist States take on the
characteristic features of the primordial despotic State. As for democracies, how could one fail to recognize in them the despot who has become
colder and more hypocritical, more calculating, since he must himself
count and code instead of overcoding the accounts? It is useless to
compose the list of differences after the manner of conscientious
historians: village communes here, industrial societies there, and so on.
The differences could be determining only if the despotic State were one
concrete formation among others, to be treated comparatively. But the
despotic State is the abstraction that is realized-in imperial formations,
to be sure-only as an abstraction (the overcoding eminent unity). It
assumes its immanent concrete existence only in the subsequent forms
that cause it to return under other guises and conditions. Being the common horizon for what comes before and what comes after, it conditions
universal history only provided it is not on the outside, but always
"Maurice Dobb has shown how the development of commerce, of the market, and of money had very
diverse effects on feudalism, at times reinforcing serfdom and the whole array of feudal structures:
Studies in the Development of Capitalism (reference note 70), pp. 33-83. Francois Hincker has

elaborated the concept of "State feudalism" to show how the French absolute monarchy, in particular.
maintained the productive forces and commodity production in the framework of a feudalism that did

not end until the eighteenth century (Sur Ie [eodaiisme [Paris: Editions Soclales, 1971], pp. 61-66).

220

I ANTI~OEOIPUS

off to the side, the cold monster that represents the way in which history
is in the "head," in the "brain"-the Urstaat.
Marx recognized that there was indeed a way in which history
proceeded from the abstract to the concrete: "the simple categories are
the expression of relations within which the less developed concrete
may have already realized itself before having posited the more manysided connection or relation which is mentally expressed in the more
concrete category; while the more developed concrete preserves the
same category as a subordinate relation."63 The State was first this
abstract unity that integrated subaggregates functioning separately; it is
now subordinated to a field of forces whose flows it co-ordinates and
whose autonomous relations of domination and subordination it expresses. It is no longer content to overcode maintained and imbricated
territorialities; it must constitute, invent codes for the decoded flows of
money, commodities, and private property. It no longer of itself forms a
ruling class or classes; it is itself formed by these classes, which have
become independent and delegate it to serve their power and their
contradictions, their struggles and their compromises with the dominated classes. It is no longer the transcendent law that governs fragments; it
must fashion as best it can a whole to which it will render its law
immanent. It is no longer the pure signifier that regulates its signifieds: it
now appears behind them, depending on the things it signifies. It no
longer produces an overcoding unity; it is itself produced inside the field
of decoded flows. As a machine it no longer determines a social system;
it is itself determined by the social system into which it is incorporated
in the exercise of its functions. In brief, it does not cease being artificial,
but it becomes concrete, it "tends to concretization" while subordinating itself to the dominant forces. The existence of an analogous
evolution has been demonstrated for the technical machine, when it
ceases to be an abstract unity or intellectual system reigning over
separate subaggregates to become a relation that is subordinated to a
field of forces operating as a concrete physical system.sBut isn't this tendency to concretization in the social or technical
machine precisely the movement of desi~e? Again and again we come
upon the monstrous paradox: the State is desire that passes from the
head of the despot to the hearts of his subjects, and from the intellectual
law to the entire physical system that disengages or liberates itself from
the law. A State desire, the most fantastic machine for repression, is still
desire-the subject that desires and the object of desire. Desire-such is
the operation that consists in always stamping the mark of the primordial Urstaat on the new state of things, rendering it immanent to the new

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

221

system insofar as possible, making it interior to this system. As for the
rest, it will be a question of starting again from zero: the founding of a
spiritual empire there where forms exist under which the State can no
longer function as such in the physical system. When the Christians took
possession of the Empire, this complementary duality reappeared
between those who wanted to do everything possible to reconstruct the
Urstaat from the elements they found in the immanence of the objective
Roman world, and the purists, who wanted a fresh start in the wilderness, a new beginning for a new alliance, a rediscovery of the Egyptian
and Syriac inspiration that would provide the impetus for a transcendent
Urstaat. What strange machines those were that cropped up on columns
and in tree trunks! In this sense, Christianity was able to develop a
whole set of paranoiac and celibate machines, a whole string of
paranoiacs and perverts who also form part of our history's horizon and
people our calendar.* These are the two aspects of a becoming of the
State: its internalization in a field of increasingly decoded social forces
forming a physical system; its spiritualization in a supraterrestrial field
that increasingly overcodes, forming a metaphysical system. The infinite
debt must become internalized at the same time as it becomes spiritualized. The hour of bad conscience draws nigh; it will also be the hour of
the greatest cynicism, "that repressed cruelty of the animal-man made
inward and scared back into himself, the creature imprisoned in the
'state' so as to be tamed .... "65
9

I

The Civilized Capitalist Machine

The first great movement of deterritorialization appears
with the overcoding performed by the despotic State. But it is nothing
compared to the other great movement, the one that will be brought
about by the decoding of flows. The action of decoded flows is not
enough, however, to cause the new break to traverse and transform the
socius-not enough, that is, to induce the birth of capitalism. Decoded
flows strike the despotic State with latency; they submerge the tyrant,
*In this regard Jacques Lacarriere has called attention to the figures and the moments of Christian
asceticism Egypt, Palestine, and Syria, starting with the third century: Les hommes ivres de Dieu
(Grenoble: Arthaud, 1961). First come gentle paranoiacs who install themselves close to a village, then
withdraw into the desert where they invent astonishing ascetic machines expressing their struggle
against the old alliances and filiations (the Saint Anthony stage); next, communities of disciples are
formed, monasteries where one of the main activities is to write the life of the founding saint: celibate
machines with a military discipline where the monk "reconstructs around him, in the form of ascetic
and collective constraints, the aggressive universe of the old persecutions" (the Saint Pachomius stage);
and finally, the return to the city or the village; armed groups of perverts who assign themselves t,hetask

of struggling against the dying paganism (the Schnoudi stage). More generally. concerning the
monastery's relationship with the city, see Lewis Mumford, who talks about an "elaboration of a new
form of urban structuration" in terms of monasteries (The City in History [New York: Harcourt, Brace,
and World, 1961). pp. 246f1., 258-59).

222

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

but they also cause him to return in unexpected forms; they democratize
him, oligarchize him, segmentalize him, monarchize him, and always
internalize and spiritualize him, while on the horizon there is the latent
Urstaat, for the loss of which there is no consolation. It is now up to the
State to recode as best it can, by means of regular or exceptional
operations, the product of the decoded flows. Let us take the example of
Rome: the decoding of the landed flows (des flux fanciers) through the
privatization of property, the decoding of the monetary flows through
the formation of great fortunes, the decoding of the commercial flows
through the development of commodity production, the decoding of the
producers through expropriation and proletarization-all the preconditions are present, everything is given, without producing a capitalism
properly spreaking, but rather a regime based on slavery.v" Or the
example of feudalism: there again private property, commodity production, the monetary afflux, the extension of the market, the development
of towns, and the appearance of manorial ground rent in money form, or
of the contractual hiring of labor, do not by any means produce a
capitalist economy, but rather a reinforcing of feudal offices and
relations, at times a return to more primitive stages of feudalism, and
occasionally even the re-establishment of a kind of slavery (esclavagisme). And it is well known that the monopolistic action favoring the
guilds and the companies promotes, not the rise of capitalist production,
but the insertion of the bourgeoisie into a town and State feudalism that
consists in devising codes for flows that are decoded as such, and in
keeping the merchants, according to Marx's formula, "in the very
pores" of the old full body of the social machine. Hence capitalism does
not lead to the dissolution of feudalism, but rather the contrary, and that
is why so much time was required between the two. There is a great
difference in this respect between the despotic age and the capitalist age.
For the founders of the State come like lightning; the despotic machine
is synchronic while the capitalist machine's time is diachronic. The
capitalists appear in succession in a series that institutes a kind of
creativity of history, a strange menagerie: the schizoid time of the new
creative break.
The dissolutions are defined by a simple decoding of flows, and they
are always compensated by residual forces or transformations of the
State. Death is felt rising from within and desire itself becomes the death
instinct, latency, but it also passes over into these flows that carry the
seeds of a new life. Decoded flows-but who will give a name to this
new desire? Flows of property that is sold, flows of money that
circulates, flows of production and means of production making ready in
the shadows, flows of workers becoming deterritorialized: the encounter
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

223

of all these flows will be necessary, their conjunction, and their reaction
on one another-and the contingent nature of this encounter, this
conjunction, and this reaction, which occur one time-in order for
capitalism to be born, and for the old system to die this time from
without, at the same time as the new life begins and desire receives its
name. The only universal history is the history of contingency. Let us
return to this eminently contingent question that modern historians
know how to ask: why Europe, why not China? Apropos of ocean
navigation, Fernand Braudel asks: why not Chinese, Japanese, or even
Moslem ships? Why not Sinbad the Sailor? It is not the technique, the
technical machine, that is lacking. Isn't it rather that desire remains
caught in the nets of the despotic State, entirely invested in the despot's
machine? "Perhaps then the merit of the West, confined as it was on its
narrow 'Cape of Asia,' was to have needed the world, to have needed to
venture outside its own front door."67 The schizophrenic voyage is the
only kind there is. (Later this will be the American meaning of frontiers:
something to go beyond, limits to cross over, flows to set in motion,
noncoded spaces to enter.)
Decoded desires and desires for decoding have always existed;
history is full of them. But we have just seen that only through their
encounter in a place, and their conjunction in a space that takes time, do
decoded flows constitute a desire-a desire that, instead of just dreaming or lacking it, actually produces a desiring-machine that is at the same
time social and technical. That is why capitalism and its break are
defined not solely by decoded flows, but by the generalized decoding of
flows, the new massive deterritorialization, the conjunction of deterritorialized flows. It is the singular nature of this conjunction that ensured
the universality of capitalism. By simplifying a lot, we can say that the
savage territorial machine operated on the basis of connections of
production, and that the barbarian despotic machine was based on
disjunctions of inscription derived from the eminent unity. But the
capitalist machine, the civilized machine, will first establish itself on the
conjunction. When this occurs, the conjunction no longer merely
designates remnants that have escaped coding, or consummationsconsumptions as in the primitive feasts, or even the "maximum consumption" in the extravagance of the despot and his agents. When the
conjunction moves to the fore in the social machine, it seems on the
contrary that it ceases to be tied to enjoyment or to the excess
consumption of a class, that it makes luxury itself into a means of
investment, and reduces all the decoded flows to production, in a
"production for production's sake" that rediscovers the primitive connections of labor, on condition-on the sole condition-that they be
224

I ANTI·OEDIPUS

linked to capital and to the new de territorialized full body, the true
consumer from whence they seem to emanate (as in the pact with the
devil that Marx describes-the "industrial eunuch": so it's your fault
if ... )68
At the heart of Capital, Marx points to the encounter of two
"principal" elements: on one side, the de territorialized worker who has
become free and naked, having to sell his labor capacity; and on the
other, decoded money that has become capital and is capable of buying
it. The fact that these two elements result from the segmentation of the
despotic State in feudalism, and from the decomposition of the feudal
system itself and that of its State, still does not give us the extrinsic
conjunction of these two flows: flows of producers and flows of money.
The encounter might not have taken place, with the free workers and the
money-capital existing "virtually" side by side. One of the elements
depends on a transformation of the agrarian structures that constitute
the old social body, while the other depends on a completely different
series going by way of the merchant and the usurer, as they exist
marginally in the pores of this old social body.:" What is more, each of
these elements brings into play several processes of decoding and
deterritorialization having very different origins. For the free worker:
the deterritorialization of the soil through privatization; the decoding of
the instruments of production through appropriation; the loss of the
means of consumption through the dissolution of the family and the
corporation; and finally, the decoding of the worker in favor of the work
itself or of the machine. And for capital: the deterritorialization of
wealth through monetary abstraction; the decoding of the flows of
production through merchant capital; the decoding of States through
financial capital and public debts; the decoding of the means of
production through the formation of industrial capital; and so on.
Let us consider more in detail how the elements come together,
with the conjunction of all their processes. It is no longer the age of
cruelty or the age of terror, but the age of cynicism, accompanied by a
strange piety. (The two taken together constitute humanism: cynicism is
the physical immanence of the social field, and piety is the maintenance
of a spiritualized Urstaat; cynicism is capital as the means of extorting
surplus labor, but piety is this same capital as God-capital, whence all
the forces of labor seem to emanate.) This age of cynicism is that of the
accumulation of capital-an age that implies a period of time, precisely
for the conjunction of all the decoded and deterritorialized flows. As
Maurice Dobb has shown, an accumulation of property title deeds-in
land, for example-will be necessary in a first period of time, in a
favorable conjuncture, at a time when this property costs little (the
SAVAGES. BARBARIANS. CIVILIZED MEN

I

225

disintegration of the feudal system); and a second period is required
when the property is sold during a rise in prices and under conditions
that make industrial investment especially advantageous (the "pricerevolution," an abundant reserve supply of labor, the formation of a
proletariat, an easy access to sources of raw materials, favorable
conditions for the production of tools and rnachineryj.?" All sorts of
contingent factors favor these conjunctions. So many encounters for the
formation of the thing, the unnamable! But the effect of the conjunction
is indeed capital's tighter and tighter control over production: capitalism
or its break, the conjunction of all the decoded and deterritorialized
flows, cannot be defined by commercial capital or by financial capitalthese being merely flows among other flows and elements among other
elements-but rather by industrial capital. Doubtless the merchant was
very early an active factor in production, either by turning into an
industrialist himself in occupations based on commerce, or by making
artisans into his own intermediaries or employees (the struggles against
the guilds and the monopolies). But capitalism doesn't begin, the
capitalist machine is not assembled, until capital directly appropriates
production, and until financial capital and merchant capital are no longer
anything but specific functions corresponding to a division of labor in
the capitalist mode of production in general. One then re-encounters the
production of productions, the production of recordings, and the
production of consumptions-but precisely in this conjunction of decoded flows that makes of capital the new social full body, whereas
commercial and financial capitalism in its primitive forms merely
installed itself in the pores of the old socius without changing the old
mode of production.
Even before the capitalist production-machine is assembled, commodities and money effect a decoding of flows through abstraction. But
this does not occur in the same way for both instances. First, simple
exchange inscribes commercial products as particular quanta of a unit
of abstract labor. It is abstract labor, posited in the exchange relation,
that forms the disjunctive synthesis of the apparent movement of
commodities, since the abstract labor is divided into qualified pieces of
labor to which a given determinate quantum corresponds. But it is only
when a "general equivalent" appears as money that one enters into the
reign of the quantitas, which can have all sorts of particular values or be
worth all sorts of quanta. This abstract quantity nonetheless must have
some particular value, so that it still appears only as a relation of
magnitude between quanta. It is in this sense that the exchange relation
formally unites partial objects that are produced and even inscribed

226

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

independently of it. The commercial and monetary inscription remains
overcoded and even repressed by the previous characteristics and
modes of inscription of a socius considered in its specific mode of
production, which knows nothing of and does not recognize abstract
labor. As Marx says, the latter is indeed the simplest and most ancient
relation of productive activity, but it does not appear as such and only
becomes a true practical relation in the modern capitalist machine."!
That is why, before, the monetary and commercial inscription does not
have a body of its own at its disposal, and why it is inserted into the
interstices of the pre-existing social body. The merchant is continually
speculating with the maintained territorialities, so as to buy where prices
are low and sell where they are high. Before the capitalist machine,
merchant or financial capital is merely in a relationship of alliance with
noncapitaJist production; it enters into the new alliance that characterizes precapitalist States-whence the alliance of the merchant and
banking bourgeoisie with feudalism. In brief, the capitalist machine
begins when capital ceases to be a capital of alliance to become a
filiative capital. Capital becomes filiative when money begets money, or
value a surplus value-"value in process, money in process, and, as
such, capital. ... Value ... suddenly presents itself as an independent
substance, endowed with a motion of its own, in which money and
commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts off in turn. Nay
more: instead of simply representing the relations of commodities, it
enters now, so to say, into relations with itself. It differentiates itself as
original value from itself as surplus-value; as the father differentiates
himself qua the son, yet both are one and of one age: for only by the
surplus-value of £10 does the £100 originally advanced become
capital."72
It is solely under these conditions that capital becomes the full
body, the new socius or the quasi cause that appropriates all the
productive forces. We are no longer in the domain of the quantum or of
the quantitas, but in that of the differential relation as a conjunction that
defines the immanent social field particular to capitalism, and confers on
the abstraction as such its effectively concrete value, its tendency to
concretization. The abstraction has not ceased to be what it is, but it no
longer appears in the simple quantity as a variable relation between
independent terms; it has taken upon itself the independence, the quality
of the terms and the quantity of the relations. The abstract itself posits
the more complex relation within which it will develop "like" something
concrete. This is the differential relation ~~, where Dy derives from
labor power and constitutes the fluctuation of variable capital, and

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

227

where Dx derives from capital itself and constitutes the fluctuation of
constant capital ("the definition of constant capital by no means
excludes the possibility of a change in the value of its constituent
parts"). It is from the fluxion of decoded flows, from their conjunction,
that the filiative form of capital, x+dx, results. The differential relation
expresses the fundamental capitalist phenomenon of the transformation
of the surplus value of code into a surplus value of flux. The fact that a
mathematical appearance here replaces the old code simply signifies that
one is witnessing a breakdown of the subsisting codes and territorialities
for the benefit of a machine of another species, functioning in an entirely
different way. This is no longer the cruelty of life, the terror of one life
brought to bear against another life, but a post-mortem despotism, the
despot become anus and vampire: "Capital is dead labour, that
vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the
more labour it sucks." Industrial capital thus offers a new new filiation
that is a constituent part of the capitalist machine, in relation to which
commercial capital and financial capital will now take the form of a
new alliance by assuming specific functions.
The celebrated problem of the tendency to a falling rate of profit,
that is, of surplus value in relation to total capital, can be understood
only from the viewpoint of capitalism's entire field of immanence, and
by taking into account the conditions under which a surplus value of
code is transformed into a surplus value of flux. First of all, it appears
that-in keeping with Balibar's remarks-this tendency to a falling rate
of profit has no end, but reproduces itself while reproducing the factors
that counteract it. But why does it have no end? Doubtless for the same
reasons that provoke the laughter of the capitalists and their economists
when they ascertain that surplus value cannot be determined mathematically. Yet they have little cause to rejoice. They would be better off
concluding in favor of the very thing they are bent on hiding: that it is
not the same money that goes into the pocket of the wage earner and is
entered on the balance sheet of a commercial enterprise. In the one case,
there are impotent money signs of exchange value, a flow of means of
payment relative to consumer goods and use values, and a one-to-one
relation between money and an imposed range of products ("which I
have a right to, which are my due, so they're mine "); in the other case,
signs of the power of capital, flows of financing, a system of differential
quotients of production that bear witness to a prospective force or to a
long-term evaluation, not realizable hie et nunc, and' functioning as an
axiomatic of abstract quantities. In the one case, money represents a
potential break-deduction in a flow of consumption; in the other case, it

228

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

represents a break-detachment and a rearticulation of economic chains
directed toward the adaptation of flows of production to the disjunctions
of capital. The extreme importance in the capitalist system of the
dualism that exists in banking has been demonstrated, the dualism
between the formation of means of payment and the structure of
financing, between the management of money and the financing of
capitalist accumulation, between exchange money and credit money.?"
The fact that banks participate in both, that they are situated at the
pivotal point between financing and payment, merely shows the multiple
interactions of these two operations. Thus in credit money, which
comprises all the commercial and bank credits, purely commercial credit
has its roots in simple circulation where money develops as means of
payment (bills of exchange falling due on a fixed date, which constitute a
monetary form of finite debt). Inversely, bank credit effects a demonetization or dematerialization of money, and is based on the circulation of
drafts instead of the circulation of money. This credit money traverses a
particular circuit where it assumes, then loses, its value as an instrument
of exchange, and where the conditions of flux imply conditions of reflux,
giving to the infinite debt its capitalist form; but the State as a regulator
ensures a principle of convertibility of this credit money, either directly
by tying it to gold, or indirectly through a mode of centralization that
comprises a guarantor of the credit, a uniform interest rate, a unity of
capital markets, etc.
Hence one is correct in speaking of a profound dissimulation of the
dualism of these two forms of money, payment and financing-the two
aspects of banking practice. But this dissimulation does not depend on a
faulty understanding so much as it expresses the capitalist field of
immanence, the apparent objective movement where the lower or
subordinate form is no less necessary than the other (it is necessary for
money to play on both boards), and where no integration of the
dominated classes could occur without the shadow of this unapplied
principle of convertibility-which is enough, however, to ensure that the
Desire of the most disadvantaged creature will invest with all its
strength, irrespective of any economic understanding or lack of it, the
capitalist social field as a whole. Flows, who doesn't desire flows, and
relationships between flows, and breaks in flows?-all of which capitalism was able to mobilize and break under these hitherto unknown
conditions of money. While it is true that capitalism is industrial in its
essence or mode of production, it functions only as merchant capitalism.
While it is true that it is filiative industrial capital in its essence, it
functions only through its alliance with commercial and financial capital.

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

229

In a sense, it is the bank that controls the whole system and the
investment of desire.* One of Keynes's contributions was the reintroduction of desire into the problem of money; it is this that must be
subjected to the requirements of Marxist analysis. That is why it is
unfortunate that Marxist economists too often dwell on considerations
concerning the mode of production, and on the theory of money as the
general equivalent as found in the first section of Capital, without
attaching enough importance to banking practice, to financial operations, and to the specific circulation of credit money-which would be
the meaning of a return to Marx, to the Marxist theory of money.
Let us return to the dualism of money, to the two boards, the two
inscriptions, the one going into the account of the wage earner, the other
into the balance sheet of the enterprise. Measuring the two orders of
magnitude in terms of the same analytical unit is a pure fiction, a cosmic
swindle, as if one were to measure intergalactic or intra-atomic distances
in meters and centimeters. There is no common measure between the
value of the enterprises and that of the labor capacity of wage earners.
That is why the falling tendency has no conclusion. A quotient of
differentials is indeed calculable if it is a matter of the limit of variation
of the production flows from the viewpoint of a full output, but it is not
calculable if it is a matter of the production flow and the labor flow on
which surplus value depends. Thus the difference is not canceled in the
relationship that constitutes it as a difference in nature; the "tendency"
has no end, it has no exterior limit that it could reach or even
approximate. The tendency's only limit is internal, and it is continually
going beyond it, but by displacing this limit-that is, by reconstituting it,
by rediscovering it as an internal limit to be surpassed again by means of
a displacement; thus the continuity of the capitalist process engenders
itself in this break of a break that is always displaced, in this unity of the
schiz and the flow. In this respect already the field of social irnmanence..
as revealed under the withdrawal and the transformation of the Urstaat,
is continually expanding, and acquires a consistency entirely its own,
which shows the manner in which capitalism for its part was able to
interpret the general principle according to which things work well only
providing they break down, crises being "the means immanent to the
capitalist mode of production." If capitalism is the exterior limit of all
societies, this is because capitalism for its part has no exterior limit, but
*Brunhoff, L 'offre de monnaie (reference note 73), p. 124:"The very notion of a monetary mass can
have a meaning only relative to the workings of a system of credit where the different kinds of money
combine. Without such a system, one would have only a sum of means of payment that would have ,no
access to the social nature of the general equivalent and that could serve only in local private circ~lts.
There would be no general monetary circulation. Only in the centralized system can the different kinds
of money become homogeneous and appear as the components of an articulated whole." And with
regard to the objective dissimulation in the system, see pp. 110,114.

230

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

only an interior limit that is capital itself and that it does not encounter,
but reproduces by always displacing it.* Jean-Joseph Goux rigorously
analyzes the mathematical phenomenon of the curve without a tangent,
and the direction it is apt to take in economy as well as linguistics: "If
the movement does not tend toward any limit, if the quotient of
differentials is not calculable, the present no longer has any meaning.
... The quotient of differentials is not resolved, the differences no
longer cancel one another in their relationship. No limit opposes the
break (fa brisure), or the breaking of this break. The tendency finds no
end, the thing in motion never quite reaches what the immediate future
has in store for it; it is endlessly delayed by accidents and deviations.
... Such is the complex notion of a continuity within the absolute
break."74 In the expanded immanence of the system, the limit tends to
reconstitute in its displacement the thing it tended to diminish in its
primitive emplacement.
Now this movement of displacement belongs essentially to the
deterritorialization of capitalism. As Samir Amin has shown, the process
of deterritorialization here goes from the center to the periphery, that is,
from the developed countries to the undereveloped countries, which do
not constitute a separate world, but rather an essential component of the
world-wide capitalist machine. It must be added, however, that the
center itself has its organized enclaves of underdevelopment, its reservations and its ghettos as interior peripheries. (Pierre Moussa has
defined the United States as a fragment of the Third World that has
succeeded and has preserved its immense zones of underdevelopment.)
And if it is true that the tendency to a falling rate of profit or to its
equalization asserts itself at least partially at the center, carrying the
economy toward the most progressive and the most automated sectors,
a veritable "development of underdevelopment" on the periphery
ensures a rise in the rate of surplus value, in the form of an increasing
exploitation of the peripheral proletariat in relation to that of the center.
For it would be a great error to think that exports from the periphery
originate primarily in traditional sectors or archaic territorialities: on the
contrary, they come from modern industries and plantations that
generate an immense surplus value, to a point where it is no longer the
developed countries that supply the underdeveloped countries with
capital, but quite the opposite. So true is it that primitive accumulation is
not produced just once at the dawn of capitalism, but is continually
reproducing itself. Capitalism exports filiative capital. At the same time
*Marx, Capital (see reference note 72), Vol. 3. p. 250: "Capitalist production seeks continually to
overcome these immanent barriers, but overcomes them only by means which again place these
barriers in its way and on a more formidable scale. The real barrier of capitalist production is capital
itself."

SAVAGES. BARBA.RLANS. CIVILIZED MEN

I

231

as capitalist deterritorialization is developing from the center to the
periphery, the decoding of flows on the periphery develops by means of
a "disarticulation" that ensures the ruin of traditional sectors, the
development of extraverted economic circuits, a specific hypertrophy of
the tertiary sector, and an extreme inequality in the different areas of
productivity and in incomes." Each passage of a flux is a deterritorialization, and each displaced limit, a decoding. Capitalism schizophrenizes
more and more on the periphery. It will be said that, even so, at the
center the falling tendency retains its restricted sense, i.e., the relative
diminution of surplus value in relation to total capital-a diminution that
is ensured by the development of productivity, automation, and constant
capital.
This problem was raised again recently by Maurice Clavel in a
series of decisive and willfully incompetent questions-that is, questions addressed to Marxist economists by someone who doesn't quite
understand how one can maintain human surplus value as the basis for
capitalist production, while recognizing that machines too "work" or
produce value, that they have always worked, and that they work more
and more in proportion to man, who thus ceases to be a constituent part
of the production process, in order to become adjacent to this process.?"
Hence there is a machinic surplus value produced by constant capital,
which develops along with automation and productivity, and which
cannot be explained by factors that counteract the falling tendency-the
increasing intensity of the exploitation of human labor, the diminution of
the price of the elements of constant capital, etc.-since, on the
contrary, these factors depend on it. It seems to us, with the same
indispensable incompetence, that these problems can only be viewed
under the conditions of the transformation of the surplus value of code
into a surplus value of flux. In defining precapitalist regimes by a surplus
value of code, and capitalism by a generalized decoding that converted
this surplus value of code into a surplus value of flux, we were
presenting things in a summary fashion, we were still acting as though
the matter were settled once and for all, at the dawn of a capitalism that
had lost all code value. This is not the case, however. On the one hand,
codes continue to exist-even as an archaism-but they assume a
function that is perfectly contemporary and adapted to the situation
within personified capital (the capitalist, the worker, the merchant, the
banker). But on the other hand, and more profoundly, every technical
machine presupposes flows of a particular type: flows of code that are
both interior and exterior to the machine, forming the elements of a
technology and even a science. It is these flows of code that find
themselves encasted, coded, or overcoded in the precapitalist societies
232

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

in such a way that they never achieve any independence (the blacksmith,
the astronomer). But the decoding of flows in capitalism has freed,
de territorialized , and decoded the flows of code just as it has the
others-to such a degree that the automatic machine has always
increasingly internalized them in its body or its structure as a field of
forces, while depending on a science and a technology, on a so-called
intellectual labor distinct from the manual labor of the worker (the
evolution of the technical object). In this sense, it is not machines that
have created capitalism, but capitalism that creates machines, and that is
constantly introducing breaks and cleavages through which it revolutionizes its technical modes of production.
But several correctives must be introduced in this regard. These
breaks and cleavages take time, and their extension is very wideranging. By no means does the diachronic capitalist machine allow itself
to be revolutionized by one or more of its synchronous technical
machines, and by no means does it confer on its scientists and its
technicians an independence that was unknown in the previousregimes.
Doubtless it can let a certain number of scientists-mathematicians, for
example- "schizophrenize" in their corner, and it can allow the passage
of socially decoded flows of code that these scientists organize into
axiomatics of research that is said to be basic. But the true axiomatic is
elsewhere. (Leave the scientists alone to a certain point, let them create
their own axiomatic, but when the time comes for serious things ... For
example, nondeterminist physics, with its corpuscular flows, will have to
be brought into line with "determinism.") The true axiomatic is that of
the social machine itself, which takes the place of the old codings and
organizes all the decoded flows, including the flows of scientific and
technical code, for the benefit of the capitalist system and in the service
of its ends. That is why it has often been remarked that the Industrial
Revolution combined an elevated rate of technical progress with the
maintenance of a great quantity of "obsolescent" equipment, along with
a great suspicion concerning machines and science. An innovation is
adopted only from the perspective of the rate of profit its investment will
offer by the lowering of production costs; without this prospect, the
capitalist will keep the existing equipment, and stand ready to make a
parallel investment in equipment in another area."?
Thus the importance of human surplus value remains decisive, even
at the center and in highly industrialized sectors. What determines the
lowering of costs and the elevation of the rate of profit through machinic
surplus value is not innovation itself, whose value is no more measurable than that of human surplus value. It is not even the profitability of
the new technique considered in isolation, but its effect on the over-all
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

233

profitability of the firm in its relationships with the market and with
commercial and financial capital. This implies diachronic encounters and
countersectings such as one already sees for example in the early part of
the nineteenth century, between the steam engine and textile machines
or techniques for the production of iron. In general, the introduction of
innovations always tends to be delayed beyond the time scientifically
necessary, until the moment when the market forecasts justify their
exploitation on a large scale. Here again, alliance capital exerts a strong
selective pressure on machinic innovations within industrial capital. In
brief, there where the flows are decoded, the specific flows of code that
have taken a technical and scientific form are subjected to a properly
social axiomatic that is much severer than all the scientific axiomatics,
much severer too than all the old codes and overcodes that have
disappeared: the axiomatic of the world capitalist market. In brief, the
flows of code that are "liberated" in science and technics by the
capitalist regime engender a machinic surplus value that does not
directly depend on science and technics themselves, but on capital-a
surplus value that is added to human surplus value and that comes to
correct the relative diminution of the latter, both of them constituting the
whole of the surplus value of flux that characterizes the system. Knowledge, information, and specialized education are just as much parts of
capital ("knowledge capital") as is the most elementary labor of the
worker. And just as we found, on the side of human surplus value
insofar as it resulted from decoded flows, an incommensurability or a
fundamental asymmetry (no assignable exterior limit) between manual
labor and capital, or between two forms of money, here too, on the side
of the machinic surplus value resulting from scientific and technical
flows of code, we find no commensurability or exterior limit between
scientific or technical labor-even when highly remunerated-and the
profit of capital that inscribes itself with another sort of writing. In this
respect the knowledge flow and the labor flow find themselves in the
same situation, determined by capitalist decoding or deterritorialization.
But if it is true that innovations are adopted only insofar as they
entail a rise in profits through a lowering of costs of production, and if
there exists a sufficiently high volume of production to justify them, the
corollary that derives from this proposition is that investment in
innovations is never sufficient to realize or absorb the surplus value of
flux that is produced on the one side as on the other. 78 Marx has clearly
demonstrated the importance of the problem: the ever widening circle of
capitalism is completed, while reproducing its immanent limits on an
ever larger scale, only if the surplus value is not merely produced or
extorted, but absorbed or realized.?" If the capitalist is not defined in
234

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

terms of enjoyment, the reason is not merely that his aim is the
"production for production's sake" that generates surplus value, it also
includes the realization of this surplus value: an unrealized surplus value
of flux is as if not produced, and becomes embodied in unemployment
and stagnation. It is easy to list the principal modes of absorption of
surplus value outside the spheres of consumption and investment:
advertising, civil government, militarism, and imperialism. The role of
the State in this regard, within the capitalist axiomatic, is the more
manifest in that what it absorbs is not sliced from the surplus value of
the firms, but added to their surplus value by bringing the capitalist
economy closer to full output within the given limits, and by widening
these limits in turn-especially within an order of military expenditures
that are in no way competitive with private enterprise, quite the contrary
(it took a war to accomplish what the New Deal had failed to accomplish). The role of a politico-military-economic complex is the more
manifest in that it guarantees the extraction of human surplus value on
the periphery and in the appropriated zones of the center, but also
because it engenders for its own part an enormous machinic surplus
value by mobilizing the resources of knowledge and information capital,
and finally because it absorbs the greater part of the surplus value
produced.
The State, its police, and its army form a gigantic enterprise of
antiproduction, but at the heart of production itself, and conditioning
this production. Here we discover a new determination of the properly
capitalist field of immanence: not only the interplay of the relations and
differential coefficients of decoded flows, not only the nature of the
limits that capitalism reproduces on an ever wider scale as interior
limits, but the presence of antiproduction within production itself. The
apparatus of anti production is no longer a transcendent instance that
opposes production, limits it, or checks it; on the contrary, it insinuates
itself everywhere in the productive machine and becomes firmly wedded
to it in order to regulate its productivity and realize surplus valuewhich explains, for example, the difference between the despotic
bureaucracy and the capitalist bureaucracy. This effusion from the
apparatus of antiproduction is characteristic of the entire capitalist
system; the capitalist effusion is that of antiproduction within production at all levels of the process. On the one hand, it alone is capable of
realizing capitalism's supreme goal, which is to produce lack in the large
aggregates, to introduce lack where there is always too much, by
effecting the absorption of overabundant resources. On the other hand,
it alone doubles the capital and the flow of knowledge with a capital and
an equivalent flow of stupidity that also effects an absorption and a

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

235

realization, and that ensures the integration of groups and individuals
into the system. Not only lack amid overabundance, but stupidity in the
midst of knowledge and science; it will be seen in particular how it is at
the level of the State and the military that the most progressive sectors
of scientific or technical knowledge combine with those feeble archaisms bearing the greatest burden of current functions.
Here Andre Gorzs double portrait of the "scientific and technical
worker" takes on its full meaning. Although he has mastered a flow of
knowledge, information, and training, he is so absorbed in capital that
the reflux of organized, axiomatized stupidity coincides with him, so
that, when he goes home in the evening, he rediscovers his little
desiring-machines by tinkering with a television set-O despair.P? Of
course the scientist as such has no revolutionary potential; he is the first
integrated agent of integration, a refuge for bad conscience, and the
forced destroyer of his own creativity. Let us consider the more striking
example of a career a l'americaine, with abrupt mutations, just as we
imagine such a career to be: Gregory Bateson begins by fleeing the
civilized world, by becoming an ethnologist and following the primitive
codes and the savage flows; then he turns in the direction of flows that
are more and more decoded, those of schizophrenia, from which he
extracts an interesting psychoanalytic theory; then, still in search of a
beyond, of another wall to break through, he turns to dolphins, to the
language of dolphins, to flows that are even stranger and more deterritorialized. But where does the dolphin flux end, if not with the basic
research projects of the American army, which brings us back to
preparations for war and to the absorption of surplus value.
In comparison to the capitalist State, the socialist States are
children-but children who learned something from their father concerning the axiomatizing role of the State. But the socialist States have
more trouble stopping unexpected flow leakage except by direct violence. What on the contrary is called the co-opting power of capitalism
can be explained by the fact that its axiomatic is not more flexible, but
wider and more englobing. In such a system no one escapes participation
in the activity of antiproduction that drives the entire productive system.
"But it is not only those who man and supply the military machine who
are engaged in an anti-human enterprise. The same can be said in
varying degrees of many millions of other workers who produce, and
create wants for, goods and services which no one needs. And so
interdependent are the various sectors and branches of the economy
that nearly everyone is involved in one way or another in these
anti-human activities: the farmer supplying food to troops fighting in

g311

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

Vietnam, the tool and die makers turning out the intricate machinery
needed for a new automobile model, the manufacturers of paper and ink
and TV sets whose products are used to control the minds of the people,
and so on and so on."81 Thus the three segments of the ever widening
capitalist reproduction process are joined, three segments that also
define the three aspects of its immanence: (1) the one that extracts
human surplus value on the basis of the differential relation between
decoded flows of labor and production, and that moves from the center
to the periphery while nevertheless maintaining vast residual zones at
the center; (2) the one that extracts machinic surplus value, on the basis
of an axiomatic of the flows of scientific and technical code, in the
"core" areas of the center; (3) and the one that absorbs or realizes these
two forms of surplus value of flux by guaranteeing the emission of both,
and by constantly injecting antiproduction into the producing apparatus.
Schizophrenization occurs on the-periphery, but it occurs at the center
and at the core as well.
The definition of surplus value must be modified in terms of the
machinic surplus value of constant capital, which distinguishes itself
from the human surplus value of variable capital and from the nonmeasurable nature of this aggregate of surplus value of flux. It cannot be
defined by the difference between the value of labor capacity and the
value created by labor capacity, but by the incommensurability between
two flows that are nonetheless immanent to each other, by the disparity
between the two aspects of money that express them, and by the
absence of a limit exterior to their relationship-the one measuring the
true economic force, the other measuring a purchasing power determined as "income." The first is the immense de territorialized flow that
constitutes the full body of capital. An economist of the caliber of
Bernard Schmitt finds strange lyrical words to characterize this flow of
infinite debt: an instantaneous creative flow that the banks create
spontaneously as a debt owing to themselves, a creation ex nihilo that,
instead of transferring a pre-existing currency as means of payment,
hollows out at one extreme of the full body a negative money (a debt
entered as a liability of the banks), and projects at the other extreme a
positive money (a credit granted the productive economy by the
banks)-"a flow possessing a power of mutation" that does not enter
into income and is not assigned to purchases, a pure availability,
nonpossession and nonwealth.s" The other aspect of money represents
the reflux, that is, the relationship that it assumes with goods as soon as
it acquires a purchasing power through its distribution to workers or
production factors, through its allotment in the form of incomes-a

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1237

relationship that it loses as soon as the latter are converted into real
goods (at which point everything recommences by means of a new
production that will first come under the sway of the first aspect). The
incommensurability of the two aspects-the flux and the reflux-shows
that nominal wages fail to embrace the totality of the national income,
since the wage earners allow a great quantity of revenues to escape.
These revenues are tapped by the firms and in turn form an afflux by
means of a conjunction; a flow-this time uninterrupted-of raw profit,
constituting "at one go" an undivided quantity flowing over the full
body, however diverse the uses for which it is allocated (interest,
dividends, management salaries, purchase of production goods, etc.).83
The incompetent observer has the impression that this whole
economic schema, this whole story is profoundly schizo. The aim of the
theory is cIear-a theory that refrains, however, from employing any
moral reference. "Who is robbed?" is the serious implied question that
echoes Clavel's ironic question, "Who is alienated?" Yet no one is or
can be robbed-just as, according to Clavel, one no longer knows who is
alienated or who does the alienating. Who steals? Certainly not the
finance capitalist as the representative of the great instantaneous
creative flow, which is not even a possession and has no purchasing
power. Who is robbed? Certainly not the worker who is not even bought,
since the reflux or salary distribution creates the purchasing power,
instead of presupposing it. Who would be capable of stealing? Certainly
not the industrial capitalist as the representative of the afflux of profit,
since "profits do not flow in the reflux, but side by side with, deviating
from rather than penalizing the flow that creates incomes." How much
flexibility there is in the axiomatic of capitalism, always ready to widen
its own limits so as to add a new axiom to a previously saturated system!
You say you want an axiom for wage earners, for the working class and
the unions? Well then, let's see what we can do-and thereafter profit
will flow alongside wages, side by side, reflux and afflux. An axiom will
be found even for the language of dolphins. Marx often alluded to the
Golden Age of the capitalist, when the latter didn't hide his own
cynicism: in the beginning, at least, he could not be unaware of what he
was doing, extorting surplus value. But how this cynicism has grown-to
the point where he is able to declare: no, nobody is being robbed! For
everything is then based on the disparity between two kinds of flows, as
in the fathomless abyss where profit and surplus value are engendered:
the flow of merchant capital's economic force and the flow that is
derisively named "purchasing power"-a flow made truly impotent that
represents the absolute impotence of the wage earner as well as the

238 ,

ANTI-OEDIPUS

relative dependence of the industrial capitalist. This is money and the
market, capitalism's true police.
In a certain sense, capitalist economists are not mistaken when they
present the economy as being perpetually "in need of monetarization,"
as if it were always necessary to inject money into the economy from
the outside according to a supply and a demand. In this manner the
system indeed holds together and functions, and perpetually fulfills its
own immanence. In this manner it is indeed the global object of an
investment of desire. The wage earner's desire, the capitalist's desire,
everything moves to the rhythm of one and the same desire, founded on
the differential relation of flows having no assignable exterior limit, and
where capitalism reproduces its immanent limits on an ever widening and
more comprehensive scale. Hence it is at the level of a generalized
theory of flows that one is able to reply to the question: how does one
come to desire strength while also desiring one's own impotence? How
was such a social field able to be invested by desire? And how far does
desire go beyond so-called objective interests, when it is a question of
flows to set in motion and to break? Doubtless Marxists will remind us
that the formation of money as a specific relation within capitalism
depends on the mode of production that makes the economy a monetary
economy. The fact remains that the apparent objective movement of
capital-which is by no means a failure to recognize or an illusion of
consciousness-shows that the productive essence of capitalism can
itself function only in this necessarily monetary or commodity form that
con.rols it, and whose flows and relations between flows contain the
secret of the investment of desire. It is at the level of flows, the
monetary flows included, and not at the level of ideology, that the
integration of desire is achieved.
So what is the solution? Which is the revolutionary path? Psychoanalysis is of little help, entertaining as it does the most intimate of
relations with money, and recording-while refusing to recognize it-an
entire system of economic-monetary dependences at the heart of the
desire of every subject it treats. Psychoanalysis constitutes for its part a
gigantic enterprise of absorption of surplus value. But which is the
revolutionary path? Is there one?-To withdraw from the world market,
as Samir Amin advises Third World countries to do, in a curious revival
of the fascist "economic solution"? Or might it be to go in the opposite
direction? To go still further, that is, in the movement of the market, of
decoding and deterritorialization? For perhaps the flows are not yet
de territorialized enough, not decoded enough, from the viewpoint of a
theory and a practice of a highly schizophrenic character. Not to

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

239

withdraw from the process, but to go further, to "accelerate the
process," as Nietzsche put it: in this matter, the truth is that we haven't
seen anything yet.

10

I Capitalist Representation

Writing has never been capitalism's thing. Capitalism is
profoundly illiterate. The death of writing is like the death of God or the
death of the father: the thing was settled a long time ago, although the
news of the event is slow to reach us, and there survives in us the
memory of extinct signs with which we still write. The reason for this is
simple: writing implies a use of language in general according to which
graphism becomes aligned on the voice, but also overcodes it and
induces a fictitious voice from on high that functions as a signifier. The
arbitrary nature of the thing designated, the subordination of the
signified, the transcendence of the despotic signifier, and finally, its
consecutive decomposition into minimal elements within a field of
immanence uncovered by the withdrawal of the despot-all this is
evidence that writing belongs to imperial despotic representation. Once
this is said, what exactly is meant when someone announces the collapse
of the "Gutenberg galaxy"? Of course capitalism has made and continues to make use of writing; not only is writing adapted to money as the
general equivalent, but the specific functions of money in capitalism
went by way of writing and printing, and in some measure continue to do
so. The fact nonetheless remains that writing typically plays the role of
an archaism in capitalism, the Gutenberg press being the element that
confers on the archaism a current function. But the capitalist use of
language is different in nature; it is realized or becomes concrete within
the field of immanence peculiar to capitalism itself, with the appearance
of the technical means of expression that correspond to the generalized
decoding of flows, instead of still referring, in a direct or indirect form,
to despotic overcoding.
This seems to us to be the significance of McLuhan's analyses: to
have shown what a language of decoded flows is, as opposed to a
signifier that strangles and overcodes the flows. In the first place, for
nonsignifying language anything will do: whether it be phonic, graphic,
gestural, etc., no flow is privileged in this language, which remains
indifferent to its substance or its support, inasmuch as the latter is an
amorphous continuum. The electric flow can be considered as the
realization of such a flow that is indeterminate as such. But a substance
is said to be formed when a flow enters into a relationship with another

2'10

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

flow, such that the first defines a content and the second, an expression.*
The de territorialized flows of content and expression are in a state of
conjunction or reciprocal precondition that constitutes figures as the
ultimate units of both content and expression. These figures do not
derive from a signifier nor are they even signs as minimal elements of the
signifier; they are nonsigns, or rather nonsignifying signs, points-signs
having several dimensions, flows-breaks or schizzes that form images
through their coming together in a whole, but that do not maintain any
identity when they pass from one whole to another. Hence the figures,
that is, the schizzes or breaks-flows are in no way "figurative"; they
become figurative only in a particular constellation that dissolves in
order to be replaced by another one. Three million points per second
transmitted by television, only a few of which are retained. Electric
language does not go by way of the voice or writing; data processing
does without them both, as does that discipline appropriately named
fluidics, which operates by means of streams of gas; the computer is a
machine for instantaneous and generalized decoding. Michel Serres
defines in this sense the correlation of the break and the flow in the signs
of the new technical language machines, where production is narrowly
determined by information: "Take for example a cloverleaf highway
interchange.... It is a quasi point that analyses, through multiple
overlappings, along a dimension that is normal to the network space, the
lines of flow for which it serves as a receiver. On it one can go from any
afferent direction to any efferent direction, and in whatever order,
without ever encountering any of the other directions .... If I like, I will
never come back to the same point, although it will be the same .... A
topological knot where everything is connected without confusion,
where everything flows together and is distributed .... Thus a knot may
be seen as a point having several dimensions "-which, far from
cancelling the flows, contains them and sets them in motion.w This
cordoning off of production through information shows once again that
the productive essence of capitalism functions or "speaks" only in the
language of signs imposed on it by merchant capital or the axiomatic of
the market.
There are great differences between such a linguistics of flows and
linguistics of the signifier. Saussurian linguistics, for example, in effect
discovers a field of immanence constituted by "value"-i.e., by the
*Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media (New York: McGraw-Hill, Signet, 1964), p. 23: "The
electric light is pure information. It is a medium without a message, as it were, unless it is used to spell

out some verbal ad or name. This fact, characteristic of all media, means that the content of any
medium is always another medium. The content of writing is speech, just as the written word is the
content of print, and print is the content of the telegraph."

SAVAGES. BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

241

system of relations among ultimate elements of the signifier; but apart
from the fact that this field of immanence still presupposes the transcendence of the signifier, which uncovers the field if only through the
signifier's own withdrawal, the elements populating this field have for a
criterion a minimal identity that they owe to their relations of opposition, and that they keep throughout all the types of variations affecting
them. The elements of the signifier as distinguishing units are regulated
by "coded gaps" that the signifier overcodes in its turn. There result
diverse but always convergent consequences: the comparison of language to a game; the signified-signifier relationship, where the signified
finds itself by nature subordinated to the signifier; figures defined as
effects of the signifier itself; the formal elements of the signifier
determined in relation to a phonic substance on which writing even
confers a secret privilege. We believe that, from all points of view and
despite certain appearances, Louis Hjelmslev's linguistics stands in
profound opposition to the Saussurian and post-Saussurian undertaking.
Because it abandons all privileged reference. Because it describes a pure
field of algebraic immanence that no longer allows any surveillance on
the part of a transcendent instance, even one that has withdrawn.
Because within this field it sets in motion its flows of form and
substance, content and expression. Because it substitutes the relationship of reciprocal precondition between expression and content for the
relationship of subordination between signifier and signified. Because
there no longer occurs a double articulation between two hierarchized
levels of language, but between two convertible de territorialized planes,
constituted by the relation between the form of content and the form of
expression. Because in this relation one reaches figures that are no
longer effects of a signifier, but schizzes, points-signs, or flows-breaks that
collapse the wall of the signifier, pass through, and continue on beyond.
Because these signs have crossed a new threshold of deterritorialization.
Because these figures have definitively lost the minimum conditions of
identity that defined the elements of the signifier itself. Because in
Hjelrnslev's linguistics the order of the elements is secondary in relation
to the axiomatic of flows and figures. Because the money model in the
point-sign, or in the figure-break stripped of its identity, having now only
a floating identity, tends to replace the model of the game. In short,
Hjelmslev's very special position in linguistics, and the reactions he
provokes, seem to be explained by the following: that he tends to
fashion a purely immanent theory of language that shatters the double
game of the voice-graphism domination; that causes form and substance, content and expression to flow according to the flows of desire;
and that breaks these flows according to points-signs and figureslM:!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

schizzes.* Far from being an overdeterrnination of structuralism and of
its fondness for the signifier, Hjelmslev's linguistics implies the concerted destruction of the signifier, and constitutes a decoded theory of
language about which one can also say-an ambiguous tribute-that it is
the only linguistics adapted to the nature of both the capitalist and the
schizophrenic flows: until now, the only modern-and not archaictheory of language.
The extreme importance of I.-F. Lyotards recent book is due to its
position as the first generalized critique of the signifier. In his most
general proposition, in fact, he shows that the signifier is overtaken
toward the outside by figurative images, just as it is ovvertaken toward
the inside by the pure figures that compose it-or, more decisively, by
"the figural" that comes to short-circuit the signifier's coded gaps,
inserting itself between them, and working under the conditions of
identity of their elements. In language and in writing itself, sometimes
the letters as breaks, as shattered partial objects-and sometimes the
words as undivided flows, as nondecomposable blocks, or full bodies
having a tonic value-constitute as signifying signs that deliver themselves over to the order of desire: rushes of breath and cries. (In
particular, formal investigations concerning manual or printed writing
change their meaning according to whether the characteristics of the
letters and the qualities of the words are in the service of a signifier,
whose effects they express following exegetical rules; Or whether, on the
contrary, they break through this wall so as to set flows in motion, and
establish breaks that overflow or rupture the sign's conditions of
identity, and that cause books within "the book" to flow and to
disintegrate, entering into multiple configurations whose possibilities
were already the object of the typographical exercises of Mallarme-ialways passing underneath the signifier, filing through the wall: which
again shows that the death of writing is infinite, so long as it arises and
arrives from within.)
Similarly, in the plastic arts there is the pure figural dimension
formed by the active line and the multidimensional point, and on the
other hand, the multiple configurations formed by the passive line and
the surface it engenders, so as to reveal-as in Paul Klee-those
"interrnundia that perhaps are visible only to children, madmen, and
primitives."85 Or in dreams: in some very beautiful pages, Lyotard
shows that what is at work in dreams is not the signifier but a figural
"Nicolas Ruwet , for example, takes Hjelmslev to task for having elaborated a theory whose
applications are on the order of Jabberwocky or Finnegans Wake: Introduction
fa grammaire
generative (Paris: PIon, 1967), p. 54. (Regarding Hjelmslev's indifference to the "order of the elements,"
see p. 345.)Andre Martinet stresses the loss of the conditions of identity in Hjelmslev's theory: Au suiet
des [ondements de fa theorie Ilnguistique de Louis Hjelms!ev, 2nd ed. (paris: Paulet, 1946).

a

SAVAGES,

BARBARL~NS, CIVILIZED MEN I 243

dimension underneath, which gives rise to configurations of images that
make use of words, making them flow and cutting them according to
flows and points that are not linguistic and do not depend on the signifier
or its regulated elements. Thus Lyotard everywhere reverses the order
of the signifier and the figure. It is not the figures that depend on the
signifier and its effects, but the signifying chain that depends on the
figural effects-this chain itself being composed of asignifying signscrushing the signifiers as well as the signifieds, treating words as things,
fabricating new unities, creating from nonfigurative figures configurations of images that form and then disintegrate. And these constellations
are like flows that imply the breaks effected by points, just as the points
imply the fluxion of the material they cause to flow or leak: the sole unity
without identity is that of the flux-schiz or the break-flow. The pure
figural element-the "figure-matrix"-Lyotard correctly names desire,
which carries us to the gates of schizophrenia as a process.w
But what explains the reader's impression that Lyotard is continually arresting the process, and steering the schizzes toward shores he has
so recently left behind: toward coded or overcoded territories, spaces,
and structures, to which they bring only "transgressions," disorders, and
deformations that are secondary in spite of everything, instead of
forming and transporting further the desiring-machines that are in
opposition to the structures, and the intensities that are in opposition to
the spaces? The explanation is that, despite his attempt at linking desire
to a fundamental yes, Lyotard reintroduces lack and absence into desire;
maintains desire under the law of castration, at the risk of restoring the
entire signifier along with the law; and discovers the matrix of the figure
in fantasy, the simple fantasy that comes to veil desiring-production, the
whole of desire as effective production. But at least for an instant the
mortgage of the signifier was raised: that enormous archaism that causes
so many of us to groan and bow under its weight, and that others use to
establish a new terrorism, diverting Lacan's imperial discourse into a
university discourse characterized by a pure scientificity, that "scientificity" perfectly suited for resupplying our neuroses, for strangling the
process once again, and for overcoding Oedipus with castration, while
chaining us to the current structural functions of a vanished archaic
despot. For it is certain that, even and especially in their manifestations
of extreme force, neither capitalism nor revolution nor schizophrenia
follows the paths of the signifier.
Civilization is defined by the decoding and the deterritorialization of
flows in capitalist production. Any method will do for ensuring this
universal decoding: the privatization brought to bear on property, goods,
and the means of production, but also on the organs of "private man"

24,,1

ANTI-OEDIPUS

himself; the abstraction of monetary quantities, but also the abstraction
of the quantity of labor; the limitless nature of the relationship between
capital and labor capacity, and between the flows of financing and the
flows of incomes or means of payment; the scientific and technical form
assumed by flows of code themselves; the formation of floating configurations starting from lines and points without a discernible identity. The
route taken by the decoded flows is traced by recent monetary history:
the role of the dollar, short-term migrating capital, the floating of
currencies, the new means of financing and credit, the special drawing
rights, and the new form of crises and speculations. Our societies exhibit
a marked taste for all codes-codes foreign or exotic-but this taste is
destructive and morbid. While decoding doubtless means understanding
and translating a code, it also means destroying the code as such,
assigning it an archaic, folkloric, or residual function, which makes of
psychoanalysis and ethnology two disciplines highly regarded in our
modern societies. Yet it would be a serious error to consider the
capitalist flows and the schizophrenic flows as identical, under the
general theme of a decoding of the flows of desire. Their affinity is great,
to be sure: everywhere capitalism sets in motion schizo-flows that
animate "our" arts and "our" sciences, just as they congeal into the
production of "our own" sick, the schizophrenics. We have seen that the
relationship of schizophrenia to capitalism went far beyond problems of
modes of living, environment, ideology, etc., and that it should be
examined at the deepest level of one and the same economy, one and the
same production process. Our society produces schizos the same way it
produces Prell shampoo or Ford cars, the only difference being that the
schizos are not salable. How then does one explain the fact that
capitalist production is constantly arresting the schizophrenic process
and transforming the subject of the process into a confined clinical
entity, as though it saw in this process the image of its own death coming
from within? Why does it make the schizophrenic into a sick personnot only nominally but in reality? Why does it confine its madmen and
madwomen instead of seeing in them its own heros and heroines, its own
fulfillment? And where it can no longer recognize the figure of a simple
illness, why does it keep its artists and even its scientists under such
close surveillance-as though they risked unleashing flows that would
be dangerous for capitalist production and charged with a revolutionary
potential, so long as these flows are not co-opted or absorbed by the laws
of the market? Why does it form in turn a gigantic machine for social
repression-psychic repression, aimed at what nevertheless constitutes
its own reality-the decoded flows?
The answer-as we have seen-is that capitalism is indeed the limit
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

245

of all societies, insofar as it brings about the decoding of the flows that
the other social formations coded and overcoded. But it is the relative
limit of every society; it effects relative breaks, because it substitutes for
the codes an extremely rigorous axiomatic that maintains the energy of
the flows in a bound state on the body of capital as a socius that is
deterritorialized, but also a socius that is even more pitiless than any
other. Schizophrenia, on the contrary, is indeed the absolute limit that
causes the flows to travel in a free state on a de socialized body without
organs. Hence one can say that schizophrenia is the exterior limit of
capitalism itself or the conclusion of its deepest tendency, but that
capitalism only functions on condition that it inhibit this tendency, or
that it push back or displace this limit, by substituting for it its own
immanent relative limits, which it continually reproduces on a widened
scale. It axiomatizes with one hand what it decodes with the other. Such
is the way one must reinterpret the Marxist law of the counteracting
tendency. With the result that schizophrenia pervades the entire capitalist field from one end to the other. But for capitalism it is a question of
binding the schizophrenic charges and energies into a world axiomatic
that always opposes the revolutionary potential of decoded flows with
new interior limits. And it is impossible in such a regime to distinguish,
even in two phases, between decoding and the axiomatization that
comes to replace the vanished codes. The flows are decoded and
axiomatized by capitalism at the same time. Hence schizophrenia is not
the identity of capitalism, but on the contrary its difference, its divergence, and its death. Monetary flows are perfectly schizophrenic
realities, but they exist and function only within the immanent axiomatic
that exorcises and repels this reality. The language of a banker, a
general, an industrialist, a middle or high-level manager, or a government minister is a perfectly schizophrenic language, but that functions
only statistically within the flattening axiomatic of connections that puts
it in the service of the capitalist order.'? (At the highest level of
linguistics as a science, Hjelmslev is able to effect a vast decoding of
language only by setting in motion from the start an axiomatic machine
based on the supposed finite number of the figures considered.) Then
what becomes of the "truly" schizophrenic language and the "truly"
decoded and unbound flows that manage to break through the wall or
absolute limit? The capitalist axiomatic is so rich that one more axiom is
added-for the books of a great writer whose lexical and stylistic
characteristics can always be computed by means of an electronic
machine, or for the discourse of madmen that can always be heard
within the framework of a hospital, administrative, and psychiatric
axiomatic. In brief, the notion of break-flow has seemed to us to define
246

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

both capitalism and schizophrenia. But not in the same way; they are not
at all the same thing, depending on whether the decodings are caught up
in an axiomatic or not; on whether one remains at the level of the large
aggregates functioning statistically, or crosses the barrier that separates
them from the unbound molecular positions; on whether the flows of
desire reach this absolute limit or are content to displace a relative
immanent limit that will reconstitute itself further along; on whether
controlling reterritorializations are added to the processes of deterritorialization; and on whether money burns or bursts into flames.
Why not merely say that capitalism replaces one code with another,
that it carries into effect a new type of coding? For two reasons, one of
which represents a kind of moral impossibility, the other a logical
impossibility. All the cruelties and terrors meet in the precapitalist
formations; some fragments of the signifying chain are struck by
secrecy-secret societies or initiation groups- but there is never anything in these societies that is, strictly speaking, unavowable. It is with
the thing, capitalism, that the unavowable begins: there is not a single
economic or financial operation that, assuming it is translated in terms of
a code, would not lay bare its own unavowable nature, that is, its
intrinsic perversion or essential cynicism (the age of bad conscience is
also the age of pure cynicism). But in point of fact it is impossible to
code such operations: in the first place, a code determines the respective
qualities of the flows passing through the socius (for example, the three
circuits of consumer goods, prestige goods, and women and children);
the characteristic object of codes is therefore to establish necessarily
indirect relations among these qualified and therefore incommensurable
codes. Such relations indeed imply a quantitative siphoning off of
portions of the different sorts of flows, but these quantities do not enter
into equivalences that would presuppose an unlimited "something";
they simply form composites that are themselves qualitative, essentially
mobile and limited, where differences between the elements compensate
the disequilibrium (whence the relationship of prestige and consumption
in the block of finite debt).
All these code characteristics-indirect, qualitative, and limitedare sufficient to show that a code is not, and can never be, economic: on
the contrary, it expresses the apparent objective movement according to
which the economic forces or productive connections are attributed to
an extraeconomic instance as though they emanated from it, an instance
that serves as a support and an agent of inscription. That is what
Althusser and Balibar show so well: how juridical and political relations
are determined as dominant-in the case of feudalism, for examplebecause surplus labor as a form of surplus value constitutes a flux that is
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

247

qualitatively and temporally distinct from that of labor, and consequently must enter into a composite that is itself qualitative and implies
noneconomic factors.* Or the way the autochthonous relations of
alliance and filiation are determined as dominant in the so-called
primitive societies, where the economic forces and flows are inscribed
on the full body of the earth and are attributed to it. In short, there is a
code where a full body as an instance of anti production falls back on the
economy that it appropriates. That is why the sign of desire, as an
economic sign that consists in producing and breaking flows, is accompanied by a sign of necessarily extraeconomic power, although its
causes and effects lie within the economy (for example, the sign of
alliance in relation to the power of the creditor). Or-what amounts to
the same thing-surplus value here is determined as a surplus value of
code. Hence the code relation is not only indirect, qualitative, and
limited; because of these very characteristics, it is also extraeconomic,
and by virtue of this fact engineers the couplings between qualified
flows. Consequently it implies a system of collective appraisal and
evaluation, and a setof organs of perception, or more precisely of belief,
as a condition of existence and survival of the society in question-thus
the collective investment of organs that causes men to be directly coded,
and the appraising eye as we have analyzed it in the primitive system. It
should be noted that these general traits characterizing a code are
rediscovered precisely in what today is called a genetic code; not
because it depends on an effect of a signifier, but on the contrary
because the chain it constitutes is only signifying in a secondary way,
insofar as it calls into play couplings between qualified flows, interactions that are exclusively indirect, qualitative composites that are
essentially limited, and organs of perception and extrachemical factors
that select and appropriate the cellular connections.
So many reasons for defining capitalism by a social axiomatic that
stands opposed to codes in every respect. First of all, money as a general
equivalent represents an abstract quantity that is indifferent to the
qualified nature of the flows. But the equivalence itself points to the
position of a relation without limitation: in the formula M-C-M, "the
circulation of money as capital has therefore no limits. "88 The studies of
Bohannan concerning the Tiv of the Niger River, or those of Salisbury
concerning the Siane of New Guinea, have shown how the introduction
of money as an equivalent-which makes it possible to begin and end
with money, therefore never to end at all-is enough to disturb the
"See Marx, Capital, Vol. 3, p. 791:. "Under such conditions the surplus-labour for the nominal owner of
the land can only be extorted from them by other than economic pressure, whatever the form assumed
may be."

2411

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

circuits of qualified flows, to decompose the finite blocks of debt, and to
destroy the very basis of codes. Secondly, the fact remains that money
as an unlimited abstract quantity cannot be divorced from a becomingconcrete without which it would not become capital and would not
appropriate production. We have seen that this becoming-concrete
appeared in the differential relation; but it must be borne in mind that the
differential relation is not an indirect relation between qualified or coded
flows, it is a direct relation between decoded flows whose respective
qualities have no existence prior to the differential relation itself. The
quality of the flows results solely from their conjunction as decoded
flows; outside this conjunction they would remain purely virtual; this
conjunction is also the disjunction of the abstract quantity through
which it becomes something concrete. Dx and dv are nothing independent of their relation, which determines the one as a pure quality of the
flow of labor and the other as a pure quality of the flow of capital. The
progression is therefore the opposite of that of a code; it expresses the
capitalist transformation of the surplus value of code into a surplus
value of flux. Whence the fundamental change in the order of powers.
For if one of the flows finds Itself subordinated and enslaved to the
other, the reason is precisely that they are not to the same power (x and
y2 for example), and that the relation is established between a power and
a given magnitude. This is something that became evident as we pursued
the analysis of capital and labor at the level of the differential relation
between flows of financing, and flows of means of payment or income.
Such an extension merely signifies that capital has no industrial essence
functioning other than as merchant, financial, and commercial capital,
where money would take on functions other than those deriving from its
form as the equivalent. But in this way the signs of power completely
cease being what they were from the viewpoint of a code: they become
coefficients that are directly economic, instead of being doubles to the
economic signs of desire and expressing for their part noneconomic
factors determined as dominant. That the flow of financing is raised to an
entirely different power from the flow of means of payment signifies
that the power has become directly economic. And yet, as regards paid
labor, it is evident that there is no longer any need for a code in order to
ensure surplus labor, when the latter is merged qualitatively and
temporally with labor itself into one and the same simple magnitude (the
condition characterized by surplus value of flux).
Hence capital differentiates itself from any other socius or full
body, inasmuch as capital itself figures as a directly economic instance,
and falls back on production without interposing extraeconomic factors
that would be inscribed in the form of a code. With the advent of

S~.VAGES. BARBARIANS. CIVILIZED

MEN

I

2411

capitalism the full body becomes truly naked, as does the worker
himself who is attached to this full body. In this sense the antiproduction
apparatus ceases to be transcendent, and pervades all production and
becomes coextensive with it. Thirdly, as a result of these developed
conditions involving the destruction of all codes within a becomingconcrete, the absence of limits takes on a new meaning. This absence no
longer simply designates the unlimited abstract quantity, but the effective absence of any limit or end for the differential relation where the
abstract becomes something concrete. Concerning capitalism, we maintain that it both does and does not have an exterior limit: it has an
exterior limit that is schizophrenia, that is, the absolute decoding of
flows, but it functions only by pushing back and exorcising this limit.
And it also has, yet does not have, interior limits: it has interior limits
under the specific conditions of capitalist production and circulation,
that is, in capital itself, but it functions only by reproducing and
widening these limits on an always vaster scale. The strength of
capitalism indeed resides in the fact that its axiomatic is never saturated,
that it is always capable of adding a new axiom to the previous ones.
Capitalism defines a field of immanence and never ceases to fully
occupy this field. But this deterritorialized field finds itself determined
by an axiomatic, in contrast to the territorial field determined by
primitive codes. Differential relations of such a nature as to be filled by
surplus value; an absence of exterior limits that it is "filled" by the
widening of internal limits; and the effusion of antiproduction within
production so as to be filled by the absorption of surplus value-these
constitute the three aspects of capitalism's immanent axiomatic. And
monetarization everywhere comes to fill the abyss of capitalist immanence, introducing there, as Schmitt says, "a deformation, a convulsion,
an explosion-in a word, a movement of extreme violence."!"
There results, finally, a fourth characteristic that places the axiomatic in opposition to codes. The axiomatic does not need to write in
bare flesh, to mark bodies and organs, nor does it need to fashion a
memory for man. In contrast to codes, the axiomatic finds in its different
aspects its own organs of execution, perception, and memorization.
Memory has become a bad thing. Above all, there is no longer any need
of belief, and the capitalist is merely striking a pose when he bemoans
the fact that nowadays no one believes in anything any more. Language
no longer signifies something that must be believed, it indicates rather
what is going to be done, something that the shrewd or the competent
are able to decode, to half understand. Moreover, despite the abundance
of identity cards, files, and other means of control, capitalism does not
even need to write in books to make up for the vanished body markings.
250

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

Those are only relics, archaisms with a current function. The person has
become "private" in reality, insofar as he derives from abstract quantities and becomes concrete in the becoming-concrete of these same
quantities. It is these quantities that are marked, no longer the persons
themselves: your capital or your labor capacity, the rest is not important, we'll always find a place for you within the expanded limits of the
system, even if an axiom has to be created just for you. There is no
longer any need of a collective investment of organs, as they are
sufficiently filled with the floating images constantly produced by
capitalism. To pursue a remark of Henri Lefebvre's, these images do not
initiate a making public of the private so much as a privatization of the
public: the whole world unfolds right at horne, without one's having to
leave the TV screen. This gives private persons a very special role in the
system: a role of application, and no longer of implication, in a code.
The hour of Oedipus draws nigh.
While capitalism thus proceeds by means of an axiomatic and not
by means of a code, one must not think that it replaces the socius, the
social machine, with an aggregate of technical machines. The difference
in nature between the two types of machines persists, although they are
both machines in the strict sense, without metaphor. Capitalism's
originality resides rather in the fact that the social machine has for its
parts technical machines as constant capital attached to the full body of
the socius, and no longer men, the latter having become adjacent to the
technical machines-whence the fact that inscription no longer bears
directly, or at least in theory has no need of bearing directly, on men.
But an axiomatic of itself is by no means a simple technical machine, not
even an automatic or cybernetic machine. Bourbaki* says as much
concerning scientific axiomatics: they do not form a Taylor system, nor
a mechanical game of isolated formulas, but rather imply "intuitions"
that are linked to resonances and conjunctions of structures, and that
are merely aided by the "powerful levers" of technique. This holds even
truer of the social axiomatic: the way in which this axiomatic fulfills its
own immanence; pushes back or enlarges its limits; adds still more
axioms while preventing the system from becoming saturated; and
functions well only by grinding, sputtering, and starting up again-all
this implies social organs of decision, administration, reaction, inscrip"Nicolas Bourbaki is the pseudonym of a group of French mathematicians who are known for their
work in the theory of sets and for their advocacy of an "axiomatic method" which "aI10\\'5us, when we
are concerned with complex mathematical objects, to separate their properties and regroup them
around a small number of concepts: that is to say, using a word which will receive a precise definition
later, to cl~ssify them according to the structures to which they belong" (Nicolas Bourbaki, Elements of
Mathematics Vol. 3: Theory of Sets [Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1968], p. 9). In this way they
propose to elaborate a language of mathematical formalization capable of integrating the different
branches of mathematics. (Translators' note.y

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

251

tion; a technocracy and a bureaucracy that cannot be reduced to the
operation of technical machines. In short, the conjunction of the
decoded flows, their differential relations, and their multiple schizzes or
breaks require a whole apparatus of regulation whose principal organ is
the State. The capitalist State is the regulator of decoded flows as such,
insofar as they are caught up in the axiomatic of capital. In this sense it
indeed completes the becoming-concrete that seemed to us to preside
over the evolution of the abstract despotic Urstaat: from being at first
the transcendent unity, it becomes immanent to the field of social forces,
enters into their service, and serves as a regulator of the decoded and
axiomatized flows. The capitalist State completes the becomingconcrete so fully that, in another sense, it alone represents a veritable
rupture with this becoming, a break with it, in contrast to the other forms
that were established on the ruins of the Urstaat. For the Urstaat was
defined by overcoding, and its derivatives, from the ancient City-State to
the monarchic State, already found themselves in the presence of flows
that were decoded or in the process of being decoded. These flows
doubtless had the effect of making the State more and more immanent
and subordinate to the actual field of forces; but precisely because the
circumstances were not right for these flows to enter into a conjunction,
the State could be content to save fragments of overcoding and of codes,
to invent others, and by marshaling all its forces, was even able to
prevent the conjunction from taking place (as for the rest, its project
was to resuscitate the Urstaat insofar as possible).
The capitalist State is in a different situation: it is produced by the
conjunction of the decoded or deterritorialized flows, and is able to
carry the becoming-immanent to its highest point only to the extent that
it is party to the generalized breakdown of codes and overcodings, and
evolves entirely within this new axiomatic that results from a hitherto
unknown conjunction. Once again, this axiomatic is not the invention of
capitalism, since it is identical with capital itself. On the contrary,
capitalism is its offspring, its result. Capitalism merely ensures the
regulation of the axiomatic; it regulates or even organizes the failures of
the axiomatic as conditions of the latter's operation; it watches over or
directs progress toward a saturation of the axiomatic and the corresponding widenings of the limits. Never before has a State lost so much
of its power in order to enter with so much force into the service of the
signs of economic power. And capitalism, despite what is said to the
contrary, assumed this role very early, in fact from the start, from its
gestation in forms still semifeudal or monarchic-from the standpoint of
the flow of "free" workers: the control of manual labor and of wages;
from the standpoint of the flow of industrial and commercial production:
252

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

the granting of monopolies, favorable conditions for accumulation, and
the struggle against overproduction. There has never been a liberal
capitalism: action against monopolies goes back first of all to a time
when commercial and financial capital is still allied with the old system
of production, and when nascent industrial capitalism can secure its
production and its market only by obtaining the abolition of such
privileges. That the struggle against monopolistic privileges does not
imply any struggle against the very principle of State control-providing
the State sees fit-can be seen clearly in mercantilism, inasmuch as it
expresses the new commercial functions of a capital that has secured for
itself direct interests in production. As a general rule, State controls and
regulations tend to disappear or diminish only in situations where there
is an abundant labor supply and an unusual expansion of markets.sv That
is, when capitalism functions with a very small number of axioms within
relative limits that are sufficiently wide. This situation ceased to exist
long ago, and one must regard as a decisive factor in this evolution the
organization of a powerful working class that required a high and stable
level of employment, and forced capitalism to multiply its axioms while
having at the same time to reproduce its limits on an ever expanding
scale (the axiom of displacement from the center to the periphery).
Capitalism was able to digest the Russian Revolution only by continually
adding new axioms to the old ones: an axiom for the working class, for
the unions, and so on. But it is always prepared to add more axioms, it
adds axioms for many other things besides, things that are much smaller,
tiny even, absurdly insignificant; it has a peculiar passion for such things
that leaves the essential unchanged. The State is thus induced to play an
increasingly important role in the regulation of the axiomatized flows,
with regard to production and its planning, the economy and its
"monetarization," and surplus value and its absorption (by the State
apparatus itself).
The regulative functions of the State do not imply any sort of
arbitration between social classes. That the State is entirely in the
service of the so-called ruling class is an obvious practical fact, but a
fact that does not reveal its theoretical foundation. The latter is simple to
explain: from the viewpoint of the capitalist axiomatic there is only one
class, a class with a universalist vocation, the bourgeosie. Plekhanov
notes that the French School of the nineteenth century, under the
influence of Saint-Simon, should be credited with the discovery of class
struggle and its role in history-precisely the same men who praise the
struggle of the bourgeois class against the nobility and feudalism, and
who come to a halt before the proletariat and deny that there can be any
difference in class between the industrialist or banker and the worker,
SAV.AGES. BARBARIANS. CIVILIZED MEN

I

253

but only a fusion into one and the same flow as with profits and wages.P'
This proposition contains something other than an ideological blindness
or denial. Classes are the negative of castes and statuses; classes are
orders, castes, and statuses that have been decoded. To reread history
through the class struggle is to read it in terms of the bourgeoisie as the
decoding and decoded class. It is the only class as such, inasmuch as it
leads the struggle against codes, and merges with the generalized
decoding of flows. In this capacity it is sufficient to fill the capitalist field
of immanence. And in point of fact, something new occurs with the rise
of the bourgeoisie: the disappearance of enjoyment as an end, the new
conception of the conjunction according to which the sole end is
abstract wealth and its realization in forms other than consumption. The
generalized slavery of the despotic State at least implied the existence of
masters, and an apparatus of antiproduction distinct from the sphere of
production. But the bourgeois field of immanence-as delimited by the
conjunction of the decoded flows, the negation of any transcendence or
exterior limit, and the effusion of antiproduction inside production
itself-institutes an unrivaled slavery, an unprecedented subjugation:
there are no longer even any masters, but only slaves commanding other
slaves; there is no longer any need to burden the animal from the
outside, it shoulders its own burden. Not that man is ever the slave of
technical machines; he is rather the slave of the social machine. The
bourgeois sets the example, he absorbs surplus value for ends that,
taken as a whole, have nothing to do with his own enjoyment: more
utterly enslaved than the lowest of slaves, he is the first servant of the
ravenous machine, the beast of the reproduction of capital, internalization of the infinite debt. "I too am a slave"-these are the new words
spoken by the master. "Only as personified capital is the capitalist
respectable. As such, he shares with the miser the passion for wealth as
wealth. But that which in the miser is a mere idiosyncrasy, is, in the
capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of
the wheels."s2
It will be said that there is nonetheless a class that rules and a class
that is ruled, both defined by surplus value, the distinction between the
flow of financing and the flow of income in wages. But this is only
partially true, since capitalism is born of the conjunction of the two in
the differential relations, and integrates them both in the continually
expanded reproduction of its limits. So that the bourgeois is justified in
saying, not in terms of ideology, but in the very organization of his
axiomatic: there is only one machine, that of the great mutant decoded
flow-cut off from goods-and one class of servants, the decoding
bourgeosie, the class that decodes the castes and the statuses, and that

:!$~

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

draws from the machine an undivided flow of income convertible into
consumer and production goods, a flow on which profits and wages are
based. In short, the theoretical opposition is not between two classes,
for it is the very notion of class, insofar as it designates the "negative"
of codes, that implies there is only one class. The theoretical opposition
lies elsewhere: it is between, on the one hand, the decoded flows that
enter into a class axiomatic on the full body of capital, and on the other
hand, the decoded flows that free themselves from this axiomatic just as
they free themselves from the despotic signifier, that break through this
wall, and this wall of a wall, and begin flowing on the full body without
organs. The opposition is between the class and those who are outside
the class.* Between the servants of the machine, and those who
sabotage it or its cogs and wheels. Between the social machine's regime
and that of the desiring-machines. Between the relative interior limits
and the absolute exterior limit. If you will: between the capitalists and
the schizos in their basic intimacy at the level of decoding, in their basic
antagonism at the level of the axiomatic-whence the resemblance, in
the nineteenth-century socialists' portrait of the proletariat, between the
latter and a perfect schizo.
That is why the problem of a proletarian class belongs first of all to
praxis. The task of the revolutionary socialist movement was to organize
a bipolarity of the social field, a bipolarity of classes. Of course it is
possible to conceive a theoretical determination of the proletarian class
at the level of production (those from whom surplus value is extorted),
or at the level of money (income in wages). But not only are these
determinations sometimes too narrow and sometimes too wide, but the
objective being they define as class interest remains purely virtual so
long as it is not embodied in a consciousness that, to be sure, does not
create it, but actualizes it in an organized party suited to the task of
conquering the State apparatus. If the movement of capitalism, in the
interplay of its differential relations, is to dodge any assignable fixed
limit, to exceed and displace its interior limits, and to always effect
breaks of breaks, then the socialist movement seems necessarily led to
fix or assign a limit that differentiates the proletariat from the
bourgeoisie-a great cleavage that will animate a struggle not only
economic and financial, but political as well. Now the meaning of just
such a conquest of the State apparatus has always been and remains
problematical. A supposedly socialist State implies a transformation of
production, of the units of production and the economic rationale. But
this transformation can only take place starting from an already
*Ies hors-classe: This term shares an affinity with hers-caste (outcaste) and nors-ta-loi (outlaw).
(Translators' note.)

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

2115

Others are enclaves whose archaism is just as capable of nourishing a
modern fascism as of freeing a revolutionary charge (the ethnic minorities, the Basque problem, the Irish Catholics, the Indian reservations).
Some of these archaisms take form as if spontaneously, in the very
current of the movement of deterritorialization (neighborhood territorialities, territorialities of the large aggregates, "gangs"). Others are
organized or promoted by the State, even though they might turn against
the State and cause it serious problems (regionalism, nationalism). The
fascist State has been without doubt capitalism's most fantastic attempt
at economic and political reterritorialization. But the socialist State also
has its own minorities, its own territorialities, which re-form themselves
against the State, or which the State instigates and organizes. (Russian
nationalism, the territoriality of the party: the proletariat was only able
to constitute itself as a class on the basis of artificial neoterritorialities;
in parallel fashion, the bourgeoisie reterritorializes itself in forms that
are at times the most archaic.)
The famous personalization of power is like a territoriality that
accompanies the deterritorialization of the machine, as its other side. If
it is true that the function of the modern State is the regulation of the
decoded, deterritorialized flows, one of the principal aspects of this
function consists in reterritorializing, so as to prevent the decoded flows
from breaking loose at all the edges of the social axiomatic. One
sometimes has the impression that the flows of capital would willingly
dispatch themselves to the moon if the capitalist State were not there to
bring them back to earth. For example: deterritorialization of the flows
of financing, but reterritorialization of purchasing power and the means
of payment (the role of the central banks). Or the movement of
deterritorialization that goes from the center to the periphery is accompanied by a peripheral reterritorialization, a kind of economic and
political self-centering of the periphery, either in the modernistic forms
of a State socialism or capitalism, or in the archaic form of local despots.
It may be all but impossible to distinguish de territorialization from
reterritorialization, since they are mutually enmeshed, or like opposite
faces of one and the same process.
This essential aspect of the regulation performed by the State is
even more readily understood if one sees that it is directly based on the
social and economic axiomatic of capitalism as such. It is the very
conjunction of the de territorialized flows that delineates archaic or
artificial neoterritorialities. Marx has shown what was the foundation of
political economy properly speaking: the discovery of an abstract
subjective essence of wealth, in labor or production-and in desire as
well, it would seem. ("It was an immense step forward for Adam Smith
258

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

to throw out every limiting specification of wealth-creating activity-not
only manufacturing, or commercial, or agricultural labour; but one as
well as others, labour in general ... the abstract universality of wealthcreating activity."95 Here we have the great movement of decoding or
deterritorialization: the nature of wealth is no longer to be sought on the
side of the object, under exterior conditions, in the territorial or despotic
machine. But Marx is quick to add that this essentially "cynical"
discovery finds itself rectified by a new territorialization, in the form of a
new fetishism or a new "hypocrisy." Production as the abstract subjective essence is discovered only in the forms of property that objectifies it
all over again, that alienates it by reterritorializing it. Although they had
a presentiment of the subjective nature of wealth, the mercantilists had
determined it as a special activity still tied to a "money-creating"
despotic machine; the physiocrats, pushing this presentiment still further, had tied. subjective activity to a territorial or reterritorialized
machine, in the form of agriculture and landed property. And even
Adam Smith discovers the great essence of wealth, abstract and
subjective, industrial and deterritorialized, only by immediately reterritorializing it in the private ownership of the means of production. (Nor
can one say in this regard that so-called common ownership changes the
direction of this movement.) Moreover, if it is not a question of writing
the history of political economy, but the real history of the corresponding society, one is better able to understand why capitalism is continually reterritorializing with one hand what it was deterritorializing with the
other.
In Capital Marx analyzes the true reason for the double movement:
on the one hand, capitalism can proceed only by continually developing
the subjective essence of abstract wealth or production for the sake of
production, that is, "production as an end in itself, the absolute
development of the social productivity of labor"; but on the other hand
and at the same time, it can do so only in the framework of its own
limited purpose, as a determinate mode of production, "production of
capital," "the self -e xpansion of existing capital." 96 Under the first
aspect capitalism is continually surpassing its own limits, always deterritorializing further, "displaying a cosmopolitan, universal energy which
overthrows every restriction and bond"; but under the second, strictly
complementary, aspect, capitalism is continually confronting limits and
barriers that are interior and immanent to itself, and that, precisely
because they are immanent, let themselves be overcome only provided they are reproduced on a wider scale (always more
reterritorialization-Iocal, world-wide, planetary). That is why the law
of the falling tendency-that is, limits never reached because they are
SAVAGES, BARBARIMIS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

259

always surpassed and always reproduced-has seemed to us to have as a
corollary and even as a direct manifestation, the simultaneity of the two
movements of deterritorialization and reterritorialization.
An important consequence emerges from the above considerations.
The social axiomatic of modern societies is caught between two poles,
and is constantly oscillating from one pole to the other. Born of
decoding and deterritorialization, on the ruins of the despotic machine,
these societies are caught between the Urstaat that they would like to
resuscitate as an overcoding and reterritorializing unity, and the unfettered flows that carry them toward an absolute threshold. They recode
with all their might, with world-wide dictatorship, local dictators, and an
all-powerful police, while decoding-or allowing the decoding of-the
fluent quantities of their capital and their populations. They are torn in
two directions: archaism and futurism, neoarchaism and ex-futurism,
paranoia and schizophrenia. They vacillate between two poles: the
paranoiac despotic sign, the sign-signifier of the despot that they try to
revive as a unit of code; and the sign-figure of the schizo as a unit of
decoded flux, a schiz, a point-sign or flow-break. They try to hold on to
the one, but they pour or flow out through the other. They are
continually behind or ahead of themselves.*
How can the nostalgia for, and the necessity of, the Urstaat be
reconciled with the insistence and the inevitability of the fluxion of the
flows? What can be done so that the decoding and the deterritorialization constitutive of the system do not make it flee through one end or
another that would escape the axiomatic and throw the machine into a
panic (a Chinese on the horizon, a Cuban missile-launcher, an Arab
highjacker, a consul kidnapper, a Black Panther, a May '68, or even
stoned hippies, angry gays, etc.)? There is an oscillation between the
reactionary paranoiac overcharges and the subterranean, schizophrenic,
and revolutionary charges. Moreover, one no longer quite knows how it
goes on one side or the other: the two ambiguous poles of delirium, their
transformations, the way in which an archaism or folklore in a given set
of circumstances can suddenly become charged with a dangerous
progressive value. How things turn fascist or revolutionary is the
problem of the universal delirium about which everyone is silent, first of
all and especially the psychiatrists (they have no ideas on the subjectwhy would they?). Capitalism, and socialism as well, are as though torn
between the despotic signifier that they adore, and the schizophrenic
"Suzanne de Brunhoff, La monnaie chez Marx (reference note 73), p. 147: "That is why in capitalism
even credit, formed into a system, brings together composite elements that are both ante-capitalist
(money, money commerce) and post-capitalist (the credit circuit being a higher circulation ... ).
Adapted to the needs of capitalism, credit is never really contemporary with capital. The system of
financing born of the capitalist mode of production remains a bastard:'

260

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

figure that sweeps them along. We are thus entitled to maintain two
conclusions that we have already put forward and that seemed to stand
mutually opposed. On the one hand, the modern State forms a break that
represents a genuine advance in comparison with the despotic State, in
terms of its fulfillment of a becoming-immanent, its generalized decoding of flows, and its axiomatic that comes to replace the codes and
overcodings, But on the other hand there has never been but one State,
the Urstaat, the Asiatic despotic formation, which constitutes in its
shadow existence history's only break, since even the modern social
axiomatic can function only by resuscitating it as one of the poles
between which it produces its own break. Democracy, fascism, or
socialism, which of these is not haunted by the Urstaat as a model
without equal? The name of the local dictator Duvalier's chief of police
was Desyr.
But the events that restore a thing to life are not the same as those
that gave rise to it in the first place. We have distinguished among three
social machines corresponding to the savage, the barbarian, and the
civilized societies. The first is the underlying territorial machine, which
consists in coding the flows on the full body of the earth. The second is
the transcendent imperial machine, which consists in overcoding the
flows on the full body of the despot or his apparatus, the Urstaat: it
effects the first great movement of deterritorialization, but does so by
adding its eminent unity to the territorial communes that it conserves by
bringing them together, overcoding them and appropriating their surplus
labor. The third is the modern immanent machine, which consists in
decoding the flows on the full body of capital-money: it has realized the
immanence, it has rendered concrete the abstract as such and has
naturalized the artificial, replacing the territorial codes and the despotic
overcoding with an axiomatic of decoded flows, and a regulation of
these flows; it effects the second great movement of deterritorialization,
but this time because it doesn't allow any part of the codes and
overcodes to subsist. However, what it doesn't allow to subsist it
rediscovers through its own original means; it reterritorializes where it
has lost the territorialities, it creates new archaisms where it has
destroyed the old ones-and the two become as one. The historian says
no, the Modern State, its bureaucracy and its technocracy, do not
resemble the ancient despotic State. Of course not, since it is a matter in
the one case of reterritorializing decoded flows, but in the other case of
overcoding the territorial flows. The paradox is that capitalism makes
use of the Urstaat for effecting its reterritorializations. But the imperturbable modern axiomatic, from the depths of its immanence, reproduces the transcendence of the Urstaat as its internalized limit, or one of
SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

261

the poles between which it is determined to oscillate. And in its
imperturbable and cynical existence, it is prey to great forces that form
the other pole of the axiomatic, its accidents, its breakdowns, its
chances of being blown to pieces, of causing what it decodes to pass
beyond the wall of its immanent regulations and beyond its transcendental resurrections.
Each type of social machine produces a particular kind of representation whose elements are organized at the surface of the socius: the
system of connotation-connection in the savage territorial machine,
corresponding to the coding of the flows; the system of subordinationdisjunction in the barbarian despotic machine, corresponding to overcoding; the system of co-ordination-conjunction in the civilized capitalist machine, corresponding to the decoding of the flows. Deterritorialization, the axiomatic, and reterritorialization are the three surface elements of the representation of desire in the modern socius. So we come
back to the question: in each case what is the relationship between social
production and desiring-production, once it is said that they have
identical natures and differing regimes? Could it be that the identity in
nature is at its highest point in the order of modern capitalist representation, because this identity is "universally" realized in the immanence of
this order and in the fluxion of the decoded flows? But also that the
difference in regime is greatest in the capitalist order of representation,
and that this representation subjects desire to an operation of social
repression-psychic repression that is stronger than any other, because,
by means of the immanence and the decoding, antiproduction has spread
throughout all of production, instead of remaining localized in the
system, and has freed a fantastic death instinct that now permeates and
crushes desire? And what is this death that always rises from within, but
that must arrive from without-and that, in the case of capitalism, rises
with all the more power as one still fails to see exactly what this outside
is that will cause it to arrive? In short, the general theory of society is a
generalized theory of flows; it is in terms of the latter that one must
consider the relationship of social production to desiring-production, the
variations of this relationship in each case, and the limits of this
relationship in the capitalist system.
11

I Oedipus at Last

In the territorial or even the despotic machine, social
economic reproduction is never independent of human reproduction, of
the social form of this reproduction. The family is therefore an open
praxis, a strategy that is coextensive with the social field; the relations of
262

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

filiation and alliance are determinant, or rather "determined as dominant." As a matter of fact, what is marked or inscribed on the
socius-s-directly-c-is the producers (or nonproducers) according to the
standing of their family or their standing inside the family. The
reproduction process is not directly economic, but passes by way of the
noneconomic factors of kinship. This is true not only with respect to the
territorial machine, and to local groups that determine the place of each
member in social economic reproduction, according to one's status from
the standpoint of the alliances and the filiations, but also with respect to
the despotic machine, which adds the relations of the new alliance and
direct filiation to the old alliance and filiations (whence the role of the
sovereign's family in despotic overcoding, and that of the "dynasty"whatever its mutations, its indecisions-which are inscribed under the
same category of new alliance). The process by no means remains the
same in the capitalist system."? Representation no longer relates to a
distinct object, but to productive activity itself. The socius as full body
has become directly economic as capital-money; it does not tolerate any
other preconditions. What is inscribed or marked is no longer the
producers or nonproducers, but the forces and means of production as
abstract quantities that become effectively concrete in their becoming
related or their conjunction: labor capacity or capital, constant capital or
variable capital, capital of filiation or capital of alliance. Capital has
taken upon itself the relations of alliance and filiation. There ensues a
privatization of the family according to which the family ceases to give
its social form to economic reproduction: it is as though disinvested,
placed outside the field; in the language of Aristotle, the family is now
simply the form of human matter or material that finds itself subordinated to the autonomous social form of economic reproduction, and that
comes to take the place assigned it by the latter. That is to say that the
elements of production and antiproduction are not reproduced in the
same way as humans themselves, but find in them a simple material that
the form of economic reproduction pre organizes in a mode that is
entirely distinct from the form this material has as human reproduction.
Precisely because it is privatized, placed outside the field, the form of
the material or the form of human reproduction begets people whom one
can readily assume to be all equal in relation to one another; but inside
the field itself, the form of social economic reproduction has already
preformed the form of the material so as to engender, there where they
are needed, the capitalist as a function derived from capital, and the
worker as a function derived from labor capacity, etc., in such a way
that the family finds itself countersected by the order of classes. (In this
sense, indeed, segregation is the only origin of cqualityP'')
SAVAGES. BARBARIANS. CIVILIZED MEN

1263

This placing of the family outside the social field is also its greatest
social fortune. For it is the condition under which the entire social field
can be applied to the family. Individual persons are social persons first
of all, i.e., functions derived from the abstract quantities; they become
concrete in the becoming-related or the axiomatic of these quantities, in
their conjunction. They are nothing more nor less than configurations or
images produced by the points-signs, the breaks-flows, the pure "figures" of capitalism; the capitalist as personified capital-i.e., as a
function derived from the flow of capital; and the worker as personified
labor capacity-s-i.e., a function derived from the flow of labor. In this
way capitalism fills its field of immanence with images: even destitution,
despair, revolt-and on the other side, the violence and the oppression
of capital-become images of destitution, despair, revolt, violence, or
oppression. But starting from non figurative figures or from the breaksflows that produce them, these images will themselves be capable of
figuring and reproducing only by shaping a human material whose
specific form of reproduction falls outside the social field that nonetheless determines this form. Private persons are therefore images of the
second order, images of images-that is, simulacra that are thus
endowed with an aptitude for representing the first-order images of
social persons. These private persons are formally delimited in the locus
of the restricted family as father, mother, child. But instead of being a
strategy that, through the action of alliances and filiations, opens onto
the entire social field, is coextensive with it, and countersects its
co-ordinates, it would appear that the family is now merely a simple
tactic around which the social field recloses, to which it applies its
autonomous requirements of reproduction, and that it counteracts with
all its dimensions. The alliances and filiations no longer pass through
people but through money; so the family becomes a microcosm, suited
to expressing what it no longer dominates. In a certain sense the
situation has not changed; for what is invested through the family is still
the economic, political, and cultural social field, its breaks and flows.
Private persons are an illusion, images of images or derivatives of
derivatives. But in another sense everything has changed, because the
family, instead of constituting and developing the dominant factors of
social reproduction, is content to apply and envelop these factors in its
own mode of reproduction. Father, mother, and child thus become the
simulacrum of the images of capital ("Mister Capital, Madame Earth,"
and their child the Worker), with the result that these images are no
longer recognized at all in the desire that is determined to invest only
their simulacrum. The familial determinations become the application of
the social axiomatic.
264

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

The family becomes the subaggregate to which the whole of the
social field is applied. Since each person has his own private father and
mother, it is a distributive sub aggregate that simulates for each person
the collective whole of social persons and that closes off his domain and
scrambles his images. Everything is reduced to the father-mother-child
triangle, which reverberates the answer "daddy-mommy" every time it
is stimulated by the images of capital. In short, Oedipus arrives: it is
born in the capitalist system of the application of first-order social
images to the private familial images of the second order. It is the
aggregate of destination that corresponds to an aggregate of departure
that is socially determined. It is our intimate colonial formation that
corresponds to the form of social sovereignty. We are all little colonies
and it is Oedipus that colonizes us. When the family ceases to be a unit
of production and of reproduction, when the conjunction again finds in
the family the meaning of a simple unit of consumption, it is fathermother that we consume. In the aggregate of departure there is the boss,
the foreman, the priest, the tax collector, the cop, the soldier, the
worker, all the machines and territorialities, all the social images of our
society; but in the aggregate of destination, in the end, there is no longer
anyone but daddy, mommy, and me, the despotic sign inherited by
daddy, the residual territoriality assumed by mommy, and the divided,
split, castrated ego. Isn't this operation of flattening, folding, or application what leads Lacan to say, willingly betraying the secret of psychoanalysis as an applied axiomatic: what appears to "come most freely
into play in what is called the analytic dialogue, in fact depends on a
subfoundation that is perfectly reducible to a few essential and Iormalizable articulations."99 Everything is pre-formed, arranged in advance.
The social field, where everyone acts and is acted upon (patit) as a
collective agent of enunciation, an agent of production and antiproduction, is reduced to Oedipus, where everyone now finds himself cornered
and cut along the line that divides him into an individual subject of the
statement and an individual subject of enunciation. The subject of
the statement is the social person, and the subject of enunciation, the
private person. "So" it's your father, so it's your mother, so it's you: the
familial conjunction results from the capitalist conjunctions, insofar as
they are applied to private persons. Daddy-mommy-me-one is sure to
re-encounter them everywhere, since everything has been applied to
them. The reign of images is the new way in which capitalism utilizes the
schizzes and diverts the flows: composite images, images flattened onto
other images, so that when this operation reaches its outcome the little
ego of each person, related to its father-mother, is truly the center of the
world. Much more underhanded than the subterranean reign of the
SAVAGES. BARBARIANS. CIVILIZED MEN

1265

fetishes of the earth, or the celestial reign of the despot's idols, is
the advent of the Oedipal-narcissistic machine: "No more glyphs and
hieroglyphs, we'll have the real objective reality ... our Kodak-vision.
. . . To every man, to every woman, the universe is just a setting to the
absolute little picture of himself, herself. ... A picture! A Kodak snap,
in a universal film of snaps. "100 Each person as a little triangulated
microcosm-the narcissistic ego is identical with the Oedipal subject.
Oedipus at last: in the end it is a very simple operation, one that
indeed readily lends itself to formalization, although it involves universal history. We have seen in what sense schizophrenia was the absolute
limit of every society, inasmuch as it sets in motion decoded and
deterritorialized flows that it restores to desiring-production, "at the
bounds" of all social production. And capitalism, the relative limit of
every society, inasmuch as it axiomatizes the decoded flows and
reterritorializes the deterritorialized flows. We have also seen that
capitalism finds in schizophrenia its own exterior limit, which it is
continually repelling and exorcising, while capitalism itself produces its
immanent limits, which it never ceases to displace and enlarge. But
capitalism still needs a displaced interior limit in another way: precisely
in order to neutralize or repel the absolute exterior limit, the schizophrenic limit; it needs to internalize this limit, this time by restricting it,
by causing it to pass no longer between social production and the
desiring-production that breaks away from social reproduction, but
inside social production, between the form of social reproduction and
the form of a familial reproduction to which social production is
reduced, between the social aggregate and the private subaggregate to
which the social aggregate is applied.
Oedipus is this displaced or internalized limit where desire lets itself
be caught. The Oedipal triangle is the personal and private territoriality
that corresponds to all of capitalism's efforts at social reterritorialization. Oedipus was always the displaced limit for every social formation,
since it is the displaced represented of desire. But in the primitive
formations this limit remains vacant, precisely insofar as the flows are
coded and as the interplay of alliances and filiations keeps families
extended according to the scale of the determinations of the social field,
preventing any secondary reduction of the latter to the former. In the
despotic formations the Oedipal limit is occupied, symbolically occupied
but not lived or inhabited, inasmuch as the imperial incest effects an
overcoding that in turn surveys the entire social field from above (the
repressing representation): the formal operations of flattening, extrapolation, and so on, that later belong to Oedipus, are already sketched out,
but within a symbolic space where the object from on high is formed. It
266

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

is only in the capitalist formation that the Oedipal limit finds itself not
only occupied, but inhabited and lived, in the sense in which the social
images produced by the decoded flows actually fall back on restricted
familial images invested by desire. It is at this point in the Imaginary that
Oedipus is constituted, at the same time as it completes its migration in
the in-depth elements of representation: the displaced represented has
become, as such, the representation of desire. Hence it goes without
saying that this becoming or this constitution does not develop under the
categories imagined in the earlier social formation, since the imaginary
Oedipus results from such a becoming and not the inverse. It is not via a
flow of shit or a wave of incest that Oedipus arrives, but via the decoded
flows of capital-money. The waves of incest and shit are only secondary
derivates of the latter, insofar as they transport the private persons to
which the flows of capital are reduced or applied. (Which explains the
complex origin of the relation that is completely distorted in the
psychoanalytic equation, shit=money; in reality, it is a question of
encounters or conjunctions, of derivatives and resultants between
decoded flows.)
In Oedipus there is a recapitulation of the three states, or the three
machines. For Oedipus makes ready in the territorial machine, as an
empty unoccupied limit. It takes form in the despotic machine as a
symbolically occupied limit. But it is filled and carried to completion
only by becoming the imaginary Oedipus of the capitalist machine. The
despotic machine preserved the primitive territorialities, and the capitalist machine resuscitates the Urstaat as one of the poles of its axiomatic,
it makes the despot into one of its images. That is why Oedipus gathers
up everything, everything is found again in Oedipus, which is indeed the
result of universal history, but in the singular sense in which capital is
already this result. Fetishes, idols, images, and simulacra-here we have
the whole series: territorial fetishes, despotic idols or symbols, then
everything is recapitulated in the images of capitalism, which shapes and
reduces them to the Oedipal simulacrum. The representative of the local
group with Laius, the territoriality with Jocasta, the despot with Oedipus
himself: "a motley painting of everything that has ever been believed."
It comes as no surprise that Freud looks to Sophocles for the central
image of Oedipus-the-despot, the myth become tragedy, in order to
make the image radiate in two contrary directions: the ritual primitive
direction of Totem and Taboo, and the private direction of modern man
the dreamer. (Oedipus can be a myth, a tragedy, or a dream: it always
expresses the displacement of the limit.)
Oedipus would be nothing if the symbolic position of an object from
on high, in the despotic machine, did not first make possible the folding
SAVAGES, BA,RBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1267

and flattening operations that will constitute Oedipus in the modern
social field: the triangulation's cause. Whence the extreme
importance-but also the indeterminate nature, the nondecidability-of
the argument advanced by psychoanalysis's most profound innovator,
which makes the displaced limit pass between the Symbolic and the
Imaginary, between symbolic castration and imaginary Oedipus. For
castration in the order of the despotic signifier, as the law of the despot
or the effect of the object from on high, is in reality the formal condition
of the Oedipal images that will be deployed in the field of immanence left
uncovered by the withdrawal of the signifier. I reach desire when I arrive
at castration! What does the desire-castration equation signify, if not in
fact a prodigious operation that consists in replacing desire under the
law of the despot, in introducing lack there at the deepest levels, and in
rescuing us from Oedipus by means of a fantastic regression. A fantastic
and brilliant regression: someone had to do it, "no one helped me," as
Lacan says, to shake loose the yoke of Oedipus and carry it to the point
of its autocritique. But it is like the story of the Resistance fighters who,
wanting to destroy a pylon, balanced the plastic charges so well that the
pylon blew up and fell back into its hole. From the Symbolic to the
Imaginary, from castration to Oedipus, and from the despotic age to
capitalism, inversely there is the progress leading to the withdrawal of
the overseeing and overcoding object from on high, which gives way to a
social field of immanence where the decoded flows produce images and
level them down. Whence the two aspects of the signifier: a barred
transcendent signifier taken in a maximum that distributes lack, and an
immanent system of relations between minimal elements that come to
fill the uncovered field (somewhat similar, in traditional terms, to the
way one goes from the Parmenidean Being to the atoms of Democritus).
A transcendent object that is more and more spiritualized, for a
field of forces that is more and more immanent, more and more
internalized: this describes the evolution of the infinite debt-through
Catholicism, then the Reformation. The extreme spiritualization of the
despotic State, and the extreme internalization of the capitalist field,
define bad conscience. The latter is not cynicism's contrary; it is, in
private persons, the correlate of the cynicism of social persons. All the
cynical tactics of bad conscience, just as Nietzsche and then Lawrence
and Miller analyzed them to arrive at a definition of civilized European
man: the hypnosis and the reign of images, the torpor they spread; the
hatred of life and of all that is free, of all that passes and flows; the
universal effusion of the death instinct; depression and guilt used as a
means of contagion, the kiss of the Vampire: aren't you ashamed to be
happy? follow my example, I won't let go before you say, "It's my
2511

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

fault," 0 ignoble contagion of the depressives, neurosis as the only
illness consisting in making others ill; the permissive structure: let me
deceive, rob, slaughter, kill! but in the name of the social order, and so
daddy-mommy will be proud of me; the double direction given to
ressentiment, the turning back against oneself, and the projection against
the Other: the father is dead, it's my fault, who killed him? it's your
fault, it's the Jews, the Arabs, the Chinese, all the resources of racism
and segregation; the abject desire to be loved, the whimpering at not
being loved enough, at not being "understood," concurrent with the
reduction of sexuality to the "dirty little secret," this whole priest's
psychology-there is not a single one of these tactics that does not find
in Oedipus its land of milk and honey, its good provider. Nor is there a
single one of these tactics that does not serve and develop in psychoanalysis, with the latter as the new avatar of the "ascetic ideal."
Once again, psychoanalysis does not invent Oedipus; it merely
provides the latter a last territoriality, the couch, and a last Law, the
analyst as despot and money collector. But the mother as the simulacrum of territoriality, and the father as the simulacrum of the despotic
Law, with the slashed, split, castrated ego, are the products of capitalism
insofar as it engineers an operation that has no equivalent in the other
social formations. Everywhere else the familial position is merely a
stimulus to the investment of the social field by desire: the familial
images function only by opening onto social images to which they
become coupled or which they confront in the course of struggles and
compromises; so that what is invested through the breaks and segments
of families is the economic, political, and cultural breaks of the field into
which they are plunged (d. Ndembu schizophrenia). This is the case
even in the peripheral zones of capitalism, where the colonizer's efforts
at oedipalizing the indigenous population-African Oedipus-find
themselves contradicted by the breakup of the family along the lines of
social exploitation and oppression. But it is at the soft center of
capitalism, in the temperate zones of the bourgeoisie, that the colony
becomes intimate and private, interior to each person: it is there that the
flow of the investment of desire, which travels from the familial stimulus
to the social organization (or disorganization), is as it were covered over
by a reflux that flattens the social investment onto the familial investment serving as a pseudo organizer. The family has become the locus of
retention and resonance of all the social determinations. It falls to the
reactionary investment of the capitalist field to apply all the social
images to the simulcra of the restricted family, with the result that,
wherever one turns, one no longer finds anything but father-motherthis Oedipal filth that sticks to our skin. Yes, I desired my mother and
SAVAGES, B,ARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

1269

wanted to kill my father; a single subject of enunciation-Oedipus-for
all the capitalist statements, and between the two, the leveling cleavage
of castration.
Marx said that Luther's merit was to have determined the essence
of religion, no longer on the side of the object, but as an interior
religiosity; that the merit of Adam Smith and Ricardo was to have
determined the essence or nature of wealth no longer as an objective
nature, but as an abstract and deterritorialized subjective essence, the
activity of production in general. But as this determination develops
under the condition of capitalism, they objectify the essence all over
again, they alienate and reterritorialize it, this time in the form of the
private ownership of the means of production. So that capitalism is
without doubt the universal of every society, but only insofar as it is
capable of carrying to a certain point its own critique-that is, the
critique of the processes by which it re-enslaves what within it tends to
free itself or to appear freely. ior The same thing must be said of Freud:
his greatness lies in having determined the essence or nature of desire,
no longer in relation to objects, aims, or even sources (territories), but as
an abstract subjective essence-libido or sexuality. But he still relates
this essence to the family as the last territoriality of private manwhence the position of Oedipus, marginal at first in the Three Essays,
then centering more and more around desire. It is as though Freud were
asking to be forgiven his profound discovery of sexuality by saying to
us: at least it won't go any further than the family! The dirty little secret,
in place of the wide open spaces glimpsed for a moment. The familialist
reduction, in place of the drift of desire. In place of the great decoded
flows, little streams recoded in mommy's bed. Interiority in place of a
new relationship with the outside. Throughout psychoanalysis, the
discourse of bad conscience and guilt always rises up and finds its
nourishment-what is called being cured.
On two points at least, Freud exonerates the real exterior family of
any wrongs, the better to internalize the family and the wrongs in the
person of the family's smallest member, the child. The way in which he
posits an autonomous repression independent of social repression; the
way in which he abandons the theme of the seduction of the child by the
adult, in order to substitute the individual fantasy that makes the real
parents into so many innocents or even victims.* For the family must
appear in two forms: one where doubtless it is guilty, but only in the
manner in which the child lives it intensely, internally, and where it is

confounded with the child's own guilt; the other where it is a tribunal of
responsibility, before which one stands as a guilty child, and in relation
to which one becomes a responsible adult (Oedipus as sickness and
sanity, the family as an alienating factor and as an agent of dealienation,
if only through the way in which it is reconstituted in the transference).
This is what Foucault has shown in his very fine analysis: the familialism
inherent in psychoanalysis doesn't so much destroy classical psychiatry
as shine forth as the latter's crowning achievement. After the madman
of the earth and the madman of the despot comes the madman of the
family; what nineteenth-century psychiatry had wanted to organize in
the asylum-"the imperative fiction of the family," Reason-the-father
and madness-the-child or minor, the parents who are ill only from their
own childhood-s-all this finds its fulfillment outside the asylum, in
psychoanalysis and in the consulting room of the analyst. Freud is the
Luther and the Adam Smith of psychiatry. He mobilizes all the
resources of myth, of tragedy, of dreams, in order to re-enslave desire,
this time from within: an intimate theater. Yes, Oedipus is nevertheless
the universal of desire, the product of universal history-but on one
condition, which is not met by Freud: that Oedipus be capable, at least
to a certain point, of conducting its autocritique. Universal history is
nothing more than a theology if it does not seize control of the
conditions of its contingent, singular existence, its irony, and its own
critique. And what are these conditions, this point where the autocritique is possible and necessary? To discover beneath the familial
reduction the nature of the social investments of the unconscious. To
discover beneath the individual fantasy the nature of group fantasies.
Or, what amounts to the same thing, to push the simulacrum to the point
where it ceases to be the image of an image, so as to discover the
abstract figures, the schizzes-flows that it harbors and conceals. To
substitute, for the private subject of castration, split into a subject of
enunciation and a subject of the statement relating only to the two
orders of personal images, the collective agents of enunciation that for
their part refer to machinic arrangements. To overturn the theater of
representation into the order of desiring-production: this is the whole
task of schizoanalysis.

"Erich Fromm, apropos of the analysis of Little Hans in particular, has pointed to the increasingly clear
evolution of Freud, who comes to posit the child's guilt and exonerate parental authority; The Crisisof
Psychoanalysis (New York: Fawcett. 1970), pp. 55-59, 90-100.

270

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN

I

271

INTRODUCTION TO
SCHIZOANALYSIS
Translated by Robert Hurley and Mark Seem

1

I The Social Field

Which comes first, the chicken or the egg-but also the
father and the mother, or the child? Psychoanalysis acts as if it were the
child (the father is sick only from his own childhood), but at the same
time is forced to postulate a parental pre-existence (the child is sick only
in relation to a father and a mother). This is clearly evident in the primal
position of the father of the horde. Oedipus itself would be nothing
without the identifications of the parents with the children; and the fact
cannot be hidden that everything begins in the mind of the father: isn't
that what you want, to kill me, to sleep with your mother? It is first of all
a father's idea: thus Laius. It is the father who raises hell, and who
brandishes the law (the mother tends to be obliging: we musri't make this
into a scene, it's only a dream, a territoriality). Levi-Strauss puts it very
well: "The initial theme of the key myth is the incest committed by the
273

hero with the mother. Yet the idea that he is 'guilty' seems to exist
mainly in the mind of the father, who desires his son's death and
schemes to bring it about. ... In the long run it is the father who
appears guilty, through having tried to avenge himself, and it is he who is
killed .... This curious indifference toward incest appears in other
myths".' Oedipus is first the idea of an adult paranoiac, before it is the
childhood feeling of a neurotic. So it is that psychoanalysis has much
difficulty extracting itself from an infinite regression: the father must
have been a child, but was able to be a child only in relation to a father,
who was himself a child, in relation to another father.
How does a delirium begin? Perhaps the cinema is able to capture
the movement of madness, precisely because it is not analytical and
regressive, but explores a global field of coexistence. Witness a film by
Nicolas Ray, supposedly representing the formation of a cortisone
delirium: an overworked father, a high-school teacher who works
overtime for a radio-taxi service and is being treated for heart trouble.
He begins to rave about the educational system in general, the need to
restore a pure race, the salvation of the social and moral order, then he
passes to religion, the timeliness of a return to the Bible, Abraham. But
what in fact did Abraham do? Well now, he killed or wanted to kill his
son, and perhaps God's only error lies in having stayed his hand. But
doesn't this man, the film's protagonist, have a son of his own?
Hmm ... What the film shows so well, to the shame of psychiatrists, is
that every delirium is first of all the investment of a field that is social,
economic, political, cultural, racial and racist, pedagogical, and religious: the delirious person applies a delirium to his family and his son
that overreaches them on all sides.
Joseph Gabel, presenting a case of paranoiac delirium with a strong
politico-erotic content replete with suggestions for social reform i believes it possible to say that such a case is rare, and that, moreover, its
origins are not reconstructible." Yet it is evident that there is never a
delirium that does not possess this characteristic to a high degree, and
that is not originally economic, political, and so forth, before being
crushed in the psychiatric and psychoanalytic treadmill. Judge Schreber
would not deny this (nor his father, who invented the Pangymnastikon
and a general pedagogical system). Everything changes, then: the
infinite regression forced us to postulate a primacy of the father, but an
always relative and hypothetical primacy that carried us to infinity,
barring a shift into the position of an absolutely primary father; but it is
clear that the viewpoint of regression is the result of abstraction. When
we say the father is first in relation to the child, this proposition, devoid
of meaning in itself, concretely means the following: the social invest214

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

ments are first in relation to the familial investments, which result solely
from the application or the reduction (rabattement) of the social
investments. To say that the father is first in relation to the child really
amounts to saying that the investment of desire is in the first instance the
investment of a social field into which the father and the child are
plunged, simultaneously immersed.
Let us again consider the example of the Marquesans, as analyzed
by Kardiner: he distinguishes between an adult alimentary anxiety
linked to an endemic famine, and an infantile alimentary anxiety linked
to a deficiency of maternal care." Not only is it impossible to derive the
first anxiety from the second, but one cannot even consider, as Kardiner
does, that the social investment corresponding to the first anxiety comes
after the infantile familial investment of the second. For a determination
of the social field is already invested in the second type of anxiety,
namely, the rarity of women that explains how it is that the adults no
less than the children "are wary of them." In brief, what the child
invests through the infantile experience, the mother's breast, and the
familial structure is already a state of the breaks and the flows of the
social field in its entirety, flows of women and of food, recordings and
distributions. Never is the adult an afterward of the child, but in the
family both relate to the determinations of the field in which both the
family and they are simultaneously immersed.
Hence we are confronted by three unavoidable conclusions. (1)
From the point of view of regression, whose meaning is only hypothetical, it is the father who is first in relation to the child. The paranoiac
father Oedipalizes the son. Guilt is an idea projected by the father
before it is an inner feeling experienced by the son. The first error of
psychoanalysis is in acting as if things began with the child. This leads
psychoanalysis to develop an absurd theory of fantasy, in terms of
which the father, the mother, and their real actions and passions must
first be understood as "fantasies" of the child (the Freudian abandonment of the theme of seduction). (2) If regression taken in an absolute
sense reveals itself to be inadequate, it is because this regression
encloses us in simple reproduction or generation. Furthermore, taking
organic bodies and organized persons as its object, the theory of
regression merely attains the object of reproduction. The point of view
of the cycle alone is categorical and absolute, because it attains
production as the subject of reproduction, which is to say it attains the
process of autoproduction of the unconscious (a unity of history and of
nature, from Homo natura to Homo historia). It is certainly not
sexuality that is in the service of generation, but progressive or
regressive generation that is in the service of sexuality as a cyclical
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

275

movement by which the unconscious, always rernatnmg "subject,"
reproduces itself. There is, then, no longer any call for wondering which
is first, the father or the child, because such a question can be raised only
within the framework of familialism. The father is first in relation to the
child, but only because what is first is the social investment in relation to
the familial investment, the investment of the social field in which the
father, the child, and the family as a subaggregate are at one and the
same time immersed. The primacy of the social field as the terminus of
the investment of desire defines the cycle, and the states through which
a subject passes. The second error of psychoanalysis, made just as it
was completing the separation of sexuality from reproduction, lies in
having remained captive to an unrepentant familialism that condemned
it to evolve solely within the movement of regression or progression.
(Even the psychoanalytic conception of repetition remains captive to
such a movement.")
(3) Finally, the point of view of the community, which is disjunctive
or takes account of the disjunctions in the cycle. Not only is generation
second in relation to the cycle, but transmission is second in relation to
an information or a communication. The genetic revolution occurred
when it was discovered that, strictly speaking, there is no transmission
of flows, but a communication of a code or an axiomatic, of a
combinative apparatus (combinatoire) informing the flows. Such is also
the case for the social field: its coding or its axiomatic first determine
within it a communication of unconsciouses. This phenomenon of
communication, which Freud touched on only marginally in his remarks
on occultism, constitutes in fact the norm, and pushes into the background the problems of hereditary transmission that animated the
Freud-Jung controversy.* It appears that, in the common social field, the
first thing that the son represses, or has to repress, or tries to repress, is
the unconscious of the father and the mother. The failure of that
repression is the basis of neuroses. But this communication of unconsciouses does not by any means take the family as its principle; it takes
as its principle the commonalty of the social field insofar as it is the
object of the investment of desire. In all respects the family is never
determining, but is always determined, first as a stimulus of departure,
then as an aggregate of destination, and finally as an intermediary or an
interception of communication.
If the familial investment is only a dependence or an application of
"It is also within the perspective of marginal phenomena that the problem, nevertheless fundamental. of
the communication of unconsciouses was posed, first by Spinoza in letter 17 to Balling, then by Myers,
James, Bergson, etc.

2761

ANTI·OEDIPUS

the unconscious investments of the social field-and if this is just as true
of the child as of the adult; if it is true that the child, through the
mommy-territoriality and the daddy-law, already aims for the schizzes
and the encoded or axiomated flows of the social field-then we must
transport the essential difference to the heart of this domain. Delirium is
the general matrix of every unconscious social investment. Every
unconscious investment mobilizes a delirious interplay of disinvestments, of counterinvestments, of overinvestments. But we have seen in
this context that there were two major types of social investment,
segregative and nomadic, just as there were two poles of delirium: first,
a paranoiac fascisizing (fascisant) type or pole that invests the formation of central sovereignty; overinvests it by making it the final eternal
cause for all the other social forms of history; counterinvests the
enclaves or the periphery; and disinvests every free "figure" of
desire-yes, I am your kind, and I belong to the superior race and class.
And second, a schizorevolutionary type or pole that follows the lines of
escape of desire; breaches the wall and causes flows to move; assembles
its machines and its groups-in-fusion in the enclaves or at the
periphery-proceeding in an inverse fashion from that of the other pole:
1 am not your kind, 1 belong eternally to the inferior race, I am a beast, a
black. Good people say that we must not flee, that to escape is not good,
that it isn't effective, and that one must work for reforms. But the
revolutionary knows that escape is revolutionary-withdrawal,
freaks-prOVided one sweeps away the social cover on leaving, or
causes a piece of the system to get lost in the shuffle. What matters is to
break through the wall, even if one has to become black like John
Brown. George Jackson. 'I may take flight, but all the while I am fleeing,
1 will be looking for a weapon!"
Doubtless there are astonishing oscillations of the unconscious,
from one pole of delirium to the other: the way in which an expected
revolutionary force (puissance) breaks free, sometimes even in the
midst of the worst archaisms; inversely, the way in which everything
turns fascist or envelops itself in fascism, the way in which it falls back
into archaisms. Or, staying on the level of literary examples: the case of
Celine, the great victim of delirium who evolves while communicating
more and more with the paranoia of his father. The case of Jack
Kerouac, the artist possessing the soberest of means who took revolutionary "flight," but who later finds himself immersed in dreams of a
Great America, and then in search of his Breton ancestors of the
superior race. Isn't the destiny of American literature that of crossing
limits and frontiers, causing deterritorialized flows of desire to circulate,

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

277

but also always making these flows transport fascisizing, moralizing,
Puritan, and familialist territorialities?
These oscillations of the unconscious, these underground passages
from one type of libidinal investment to the other-often the coexistence of the two-form one of the major objects of schizoanalysis. The
two poles united by Artaud in the formula: Heliogabalus-the-anarchist,
"the image of all human contradictions, and of the contradiction in
principle." But no passage impairs or suppresses the difference in nature
between the two, nomadism and segregation. If we are able to define this
difference as that which separates paranoia and schizophrenia, it is
because on the one hand we have distinguished the schizophrenic
process ("the breakthrough") from the accidents and relapses that
hinder or interrupt it ("the breakdown"), and because on the other hand
we have posited paranoia no less than schizophrenia as independent of
all familial pseudo etiologies, so as to make them bear directly upon the
social field: every name in history, and not the name of the father. On
the contrary, the nature of the familial investments depends on the
breaks and the flows of the social field as they are invested in one type or
another, at one pole or the other. And the child does not wait until he is
an adult before grasping-underneath father-mother-the economic,
financial, social, and cultural problems that cross through a family: his
belonging or his desire to belong to a superior or an inferior "race," the
reactionary or the revolutionary tenor of a familial group with which he
is already preparing his ruptures and his conformities.
What a muddle, what an emulsion the family is, agitated by
backwashes, pulled in one direction or another, in such a way that the
Oedipal bacillus takes or doesn't take, imposes its mold or doesn't
succeed in imposing it, pursuing directions of an entirely different nature
that traverse the family from the exterior. What we mean is that Oedipus
is born of an application or a reduction to personalized images, which
presupposes a social investment of a paranoiac type-which explains
why Freud first discovers the familial romance and Oedipus while
reflecting on paranoia. Oedipus is a dependency of the paranoiac
territoriality, whereas the schizophrenic investment commands an entirely different determination, a family gasping for breath and stretched
out over the dimensions of a social field that does not reclose or
withdraw: a family-as-matrix for depersonalized partial objects, which
plunge again and again into the torrential or depleted flux of a historic
cosmos, a historic chaos. The matrical fissure of schizophrenia, as
opposed to paranoiac castration; and the line of escape as opposed to
the "blue line," the blues.

278

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

o mother
farewell
with a long black shoe
farewell
with Communist Party and a broken stocking....
with your sagging belly
with your fear of Hitler
with your mouth of bad short stories ....
with your belly of strikes and smokestacks
with your chin of Trotsky and the Spanish War
with your voice singing for the decaying overbroken workers ....
with your eyes
with your eyes of Russia
.
with your eyes of no money
with your eyes of starving India
.
with your eyes of Czechoslovakia attacked by robots ....
with your eyes being led away by policemen to an ambulance
with your eyes with the pancreas removed
with your eyes of appendix operation
with your eyes of abortion
with your eyes of ovaries removed
with your eyes of shock
with your eyes of lobotomy
with your eyes of divorce .... 6
Why these words, paranoia and schizophrenia, which are like
talking birds and girls' first names? Why do social investments follow
this dividing line that gives them a specifically delirious conten.t (recreating history in delirium)? And what is this line, how can ~e s.ltuate
schizophrenia and paranoia on either side of it? Our a~sumptlOn IS th~t
everything happens on the body without organs; but thiS body has, a~lt
were, two faces. Elias Canetti has clearly shown how the paranoiac
organizes masses and "packs." The paranoiac opposes them t~ one
another, maneuvers them.* The paranoiac engineers m~sses, he IS th~
artist of the large molar aggregates, the statistical formations or greg~n­
ousnesses, the phenomena of organized crowds. He i~vests everything
that falls within the province of large numbers. The mght of the battle,
'Elias Canetti Crowds and Power(New York: Viking Press, 1960),p. 434: "His mind ;"asdomi?ated by
four kinds of 'crowds: his army, his treasure, his co.rp~es and, his court (and. with It, his capital). He
[uggled with them ceaselessly, but only succeeded In mcreasmg one at the expens~ of another.
~hatever he did there was always one. crowd which he managed to pf:serve. I~ no Clr.cu~stances I
he ever cease to kill. ... The heaps of corpses piled up in every province of his empire.

d:ci

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

279

Colonel Lawrence lines up the young naked corpses on the full body of
the desert. Judge Schreber attaches little men by the thousands to his
body. It might be said that, of the two directions in physics-the molar
direction that goes toward the large numbers and the mass phenomena,
and the molecular direction that on the contrary penetrates into singularities, their interactions and connections at a distance or between
different orders-the paranoiac has chosen the first: he practices
macrophysics. And it could be said that by contrast the schizo goes in
the other direction, that of microphysics, of molecules insofar as they no
longer obey the statistical laws: waves and corpuscles, flows and partial
objects that are no longer dependent upon the large numbers; infinitesimal lines of escape, instead of the perspectives of the large aggregates.
Doubtless it would be a mistake to contrast these two dimensions in
terms of the collective and the individual. On the one hand, the
microunconscious presents no fewer arrangements, connections, and
interactions, although these arrangements are of an original type; on the
other hand, the form of individualized persons does not belong to it,
since it knows only partial objects and flows, but belongs instead to the
laws of statistical distribution of the molar unconscious or the macrounconscious. Freud was Darwinian, neo-Darwinian, when he said that in
the unconscious everything was a problem of population (likewise, in
the contemplation of multiplicities he saw a sign of psychosis).* It is
therefore more a matter of the difference between two kinds of
collections or populations: the large aggregates and the micromultiplicities. In both cases the investment is collective, it is an investment of a
collective field; even a lone particle has an associated wave as a flow that
defines the coexisting space of its presences. Every investment is
collective, every fantasy is a group fantasy and in this sense a position of
reality. But the two kinds of investments are radically different, according as the one bears upon the molar structures that subordinate the
molecules, and the other on the contrary bears upon the molecular
multiplicities that subordinate the structured crowd phenomena. One is
a subjugated group investment, as much in its sovereign form as in its
colonial formations of the gregarious aggregate, which socially and
psychically represses the desire of persons; the other, a subject-group
investment in the transverse multiplicities that convey desire as a
molecular phenomenon, that is, as partial objects and flows, as opposed
to aggregates and persons.
It is true that social investments are made on the socius itself as a
*1n the article of 1913on "The Unconscious," Freud shows that psychosis causes small multiplicities to
intervene, as opposed to neurosis, which requires a global object: for example, the multiplicity of holes.
But Freud explains this psychotic phenomenon solely by invoking the power of verbal representation.

2!!1l

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

full body, and that their respective poles necessarily relate to the
character or the "map" of this socius-earth, despot, or capital-money
(for each social machine the two poles, paranoiac and schizophrenic, are
distributed in varying ways). Whereas the paranoiac and the schizophrenic, properly speaking, do not operate on the socius, but on the
body without organs in a pure state. It might then be said that the
paranoiac, in the clinical sense of the term, makes us spectators to the
imaginary birth of the mass phenomenon, and does so at a level that is
still microscopic. The body without organs is like the cosmic egg, the
giant molecule swarming with worms, bacilli, Lilliputian figures, animalcules, and homunculi, with their organization and their machines, minute
strings, ropes, teeth, fingernails, levers and pulleys, catapults: thus in
Schreber the millions of spermatazoids in the sunbeams, or the souls
that lead a brief existence as little men on his body. Artaud says: this
world of microbes, which is nothing more than coagulated nothingness.
The two sides of the body without organs are, therefore, the side on
which the mass phenomenon and the paranoiac investment corresponding to it are organized on a microscopic scale, and the other side on
which, on a submicroscopic scale, the molecular phenomena and their
schizophrenic investment are arranged. It is on the body without organs,
as a pivot, as a frontier between the molar and the molecular, that the
paranoia-schizophrenia division is made. Are we to believe, then, that
social investments are secondary projections, as if a large two-headed
schizonoiac, father of the primitive horde, were at the base of the socius
in general? We have seen that this is not at all the case. The socius is not
a projection of the body without organs; rather, the body without organs
is the limit of the socius, its tangent of deterritorialization, the ultimate
residue of a deterritorialized socius. The socius-the earth, the body of
the despot, capital-money-are clothed full bodies, just as the body
without organs is a naked full body; but the latter exists at the limit, at
the end, not at the origin. And doubtless the body without organs haunts
all forms of socius. But in this very sense, if social investments can be
said to be paranoiac or schizophrenic, it is to the extent that they have
paranoia and schizophrenia as ultimate products under the determinate
conditions of capitalism.
From the standpoint of a universal clinical theory, paranoia and
schizophrenia can be presented as the two extreme oscillaions of a
pendulum oscillating around the position of a socius as a full body and,
at the limit, of a body without organs, one of whose sides is occupied by
the molar aggregates, and the other populated by molecular elements.
But one can also present this as a single line along which the different
forms of socius, their planes and their large aggregates, are arranged; on
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS \ 281

despotic

body

body of

capital

molar aggregates
Full body

each of these planes there is a paranoiac dimension, another that is
perverse, a kind of familial position, and a dotted line of escape or
schizoid breakthrough. The major line ends at the body without organs,
and there it either passes through the wall, opening onto the molecular
elements where it becomes in actual fact what it was from the start: the
schizophrenic process, the pure schizophrenic process of deterritorialization. Or it strikes the wall, rebounds off it, and falls back into the most
miserably arranged territorialities of the modern world as simulacra of
the preceding planes, getting caught up in the asylum aggregate of
paranoia and schizophrenia as clinical entities, in the artificial aggregates
or societies established by perversion, in the familial aggregate of
Oedipal neuroses.

molecular elements

i

without organs

:

\jt

Body of the Earth

Schizophrenia as
a clinical entity
282

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

2

I The Molecular Unconscious

What is the meaning of this distinction between two
regions: one molecular and the other molar; one micropsychic or
micrological, the other statistical and gregarious? Is this anything more
than a metaphor lending the unconscious a distinction grounded in
physics, when we speak of an opposition between intra-atomic phenomena and the mass phenomena that operate through statistical accumulation, obeying the laws of aggregates? But in reality the unconscious
belongs to the realm of physics; the body without organs and its
intensities are not metaphors, but matter itself. Nor is it our intention to
revive the question of an individual psychology and a collective
psychology, and of the priority of the one or the other; this distinction,
as it appears in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, remains
completely stymied by Oedipus. In the unconscious there are only
populations, groups, and machines. When we posit in one case an
involuntariness (un involontaire) of the social and technical machines, in
the other case an unconscious of the desiring-machines, it is a question
of a necessary relationship between inextricably linked forces. Some of
these are elementary forces by means of which the unconscious is
produced; the others, resultants reacting on the first, statistical aggregates through which the unconscious is represented and already suffers
psychic and social repression of its elementary productive forces.
But how can we speak of machines in this microphysical or
micropsychic region, there where there is desire-that is to say, not only
its functioning, but formation and autoproduction? A machine works
according to the previous intercommunications of its structure and the
positioning of its parts, but does not set itself into place any more than it
forms or reproduces itself. This is even the point around which the usual
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOA!'MLYSIS

I

283

polemic between vitalism and mechanism revolves: the machine's
ability to account for the workings of the organism, but its fundamental
inability to account for its formations. From machines, mechanism
abstracts a structural unity in terms of which it explains the functioning
of the organism. Vitalism invokes an individual and specific unity of the
living, which every machine presupposes insofar as it is subordinate to
organic continuance, and insofar as it extends the latter's autonomous
formations on the outside. But it should be noted that, in one way or
another, the machine and desire thus remain in an extrinsic relationship,
either because desire appears as an effect determined by a system of
mechanical causes, or because the machine is itself a system of means in
terms of the aims of desire. The link between the two remains secondary
and indirect, both in the new means appropriated by desire and in the
derived desires produced by the machines.
A profound text by Samuel Butler, "The Book of the Machines,"
nevertheless allows us to go beyond these points of view." It is true that
this text seems at first merely to contrast the two common arguments,
the one according to which the organisms are for the moment only more
perfect machines ("Whether those things which we deem most purely
spiritual are anything but disturbances of equilibrium in an infinite series
of levers, beginning with those levers that are too small for microscopic
detection?"), the other according to which machines are never more
than extensions of the organism ('The lower animals keep all their limbs
at home in their bodies, but many of man's are loose, and lie about
detached, now here and now there.Jn various parts of the world?"). But
there is a Butlerian manner for carrying each of the arguments to an
extreme point where it can no longer be opposed to the other, a point of
nondifference or dispersion. For one thing, Butler is not content to say
that machines extend the organism, but asserts that they are really limbs
and organs lying on the body without organs of a society, which men will
appropriate according to their power and their wealth, and whose
poverty deprives them as if they were mutilated organisms. For another,
he is not content to say that organisms are machines, but asserts that
they contain such an abundance of parts that they must be compared to
very different parts of distinct machines, each relating to the others,
engineered in combination with the others.
What is essential is this double movement whereby Butler drives
both arguments beyond their very limits. He shatters the vitalist
argument by calling in question the specific or personal unity of the
organism, and the mechanist argument even more decisively, by calling in
question the structural unity of the machine. It is said that machines do
not reproduce themselves, or that they only reproduce themselves
aM

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

through the intermediary of man, but "does anyone say that the red
clover has no reproductive system because the bumble bee (and the
bumble bee only) must aid and abet it before it can reproduce? No one.
The bumble bee is a part of the reproductive system of the clover. Each
one of ourselves has sprung from minute animalcules whose entity was
entirely distinct from our own .... These creatures are part of our
reproductive system; then why not we part of that of the machines? ...
We are misled by considering any complicated machine as a single thing;
in truth it is a city or a society, each member of which was bred truly
after its kind. We see a machine as a whole, we call it by a name and
individualize it; we look at our own limbs, and know that the combination forms an individual which springs from a single centre of reproductive action; we therefore assume that there can be no reproductive
action which does not arise from a single center; but this assumption is
unscientific, and the bare fact that no vapour-engine was ever made
entirely by another, or two others, of its own kind, is not sufficient to
warrant us in saying that vapour-engines have no reproductive system.
The truth is that each part of every vapour-engine is bred by its own
special breeders, whose function is to breed that part, and that only,
while the combination of the parts into a whole forms another department of the mechanical reproductive system."!" In passing, Butler
encounters the phenomenon of surplus value of code, when a part of a
machine captures within its own code a code fragment of another
machine, and thus owes its reproduction to a part of another machine:
the red clover and the bumble bee; or the orchid and the male wasp that
it attracts and intercepts by carrying on its flower the image and the odor
of the female wasp.
At this point of dispersion of the two arguments, it becomes
immaterial whether one says that machines are organs, or organs,
machines. The two definitions are exact equivalents: man as a
"vertebro-machinatc mammal," or as an "aphidian parasite of machines." What is essential is not in the passage to infinity itself-the
infinity composed of machine parts or the temporal infinity of the
animalcules-but rather in what this passage blossoms into. Once the
structural unity of the machine has been undone, once the personal and
specific unity of the living has been laid to rest, a direct link is perceived
between the machine and desire, the machine passes to the heart of
desire, the machine is desiring and desire, machined. Desire is not in the
subject, but the machine in desire-with the residual subject off to the
side, alongside the machine, around the entire periphery, a parasite of
machines, an accessory of vertebra-machinate desire. In a word, the real
difference is not between the living and the machine, vitalism and
INTROOUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

285

mechanism, but between two states of the machine that are two states of
the living as well. The machine taken in its structural unity, the living
taken in its specific and even personal unity, are mass phenomena or
molar aggregates; for this reason each points to the extrinsic existence
~f the other. And even if they are differentiated and mutually opposed, it
IS merely as two paths in the same statistical direction. But in the other
more profound or intrinsic direction of multiplicities there is interpenetration, direct communication between the molecular phenomena and
the singularities of the living, that is to say, between the small machines
scattered in every machine, and the small formations dispersed in every
organism: a domain of nondifference between the microphysical and the
biological, there being as many living beings in the machine as there are
machines in the living. Why speak of machines in this domain, when
there would seem to be none, strictly speaking-no structural unity nor
any preformed mechanical interconnections? "But there is the possibility of formation of such machines-in indefinitely superimposed relays,
in working cycles that mesh with each other-which, once assembled,
will obey the laws of thermo-dynamics, but which in the process of
assembly do not depend on these laws, since the chain of assembly
begins in a domain where by definition there are as yet no statistical
laws .... At this level, functioning and formation are still confounded as
in the molecule; and, starting from this level, two diverging paths open
up, of which one will lead to the more or Jess regular accumulations of
individuals, the other to the perfectings of the individual organization
whose simplest schema is the formation of a pipe .""
The real difference is therefore between on the one hand the molar
machines-whether social, technical, or organic-and on the other the
desiring-machines, which are of a molecular order. Desiring-machines
are the following: formative machines, whose very misfirings are
functional, and whose functioning is indiscernible from their formation;
chronogeneous machines engaged in their own assembly (montage),
operating by nonlocalizable intercommunications and dispersed localizations, bringing into play processes of temporalization, fragmented
"'Ray:nond Ruyer, La genese de~. formes vivantes (Paris: Flammarion, 1958), pp. 80-81. Taking up
Bohr, Schrodmger, Jordan, and Lillie, Ruyer shows that the living is directly
certain argume~ts.
coupled. to th~ 1O?IVldual phenomena of the atom, beyond the mass effects that appear in the internal
mec,hamcal clre.mts of ~he organism as well as in the external technical activities: "Classical physics
onl, ,concerns ltse~f "7'l~h mass phenomena. In contrast, mlcro-pbvsics naturally leads to biology.
Sta~tl~g from the m.dlVJdual phenomena of the atom, one can in fact go in two directions. Their
statistical acc~mulatIOn leads to the I~w~ of co~mon physics. But as these individual phenomena
become complicated through systematic mteractions-c-all the while keeping their individuality at the
core ~f the molecule: th:n at the core of the macromolecule, then of the virus, then of the one-celled
organism, by subordinating the mass phenomena-one is led all the way to the organism that no matter
h?w large:.remains. in this sense ~iCIO~C~pic"(p. 54). These themes are developed at length
Ruyer in
Neo-finulisme (Pans: Presses Universitaires de France, 1952).

0:

by

2115

I

ANTI-OEDIFUS

formations, and detached parts, with a surplus value of code, and where
the whole is itself produced alongside the parts, as a part apart or, as
Butler would say, "in another department" that fits the whole over the
other parts; machines in the strict sense, because they proceed by
breaks and flows, associated waves and particles, associative flows and
partial objects, inducing-always at a distance-transverse connections,
inclusive disjunctions, and polyvocal conjunctions, thereby producing
selections, detachments, and remainders, with a transference of individuality, in a generalized schizogenesis whose elements are the schizzesflows.
Subsequently-rather, we should say on the other hand-when the
machines become unified at the structural level of techniques and
institutions that give them an existence as visible as a plate of steel;
when the living, too, become structured by the statistical unities of their
persons and their species, varieties, and locales; when a machine
appears as a single object, and a living organism appears as a single
subject; when the connections become global and specific, the disjunctions exclusive, and the conjunctions biunivocal; then desire does not
need to project itself into these forms that have become opaque. These
forms are immediately molar manifestations, statistical determinations
of desire and of its own machines. They are the same machines (there is
no difference in nature): here, as organic, technical, or social machines
apprehended in their mass phenomenon, to which they become subordinated; there, as desiring-machines apprehended in their submicroscopic
singularities that subordinate the mass phenomena. That is why from the
start we have rejected the idea that desiring-machines belong to the
domain of dreams or the Imaginary, and that they stand in for the other
machines. There is only desire and environments, fields, forms of herd
instinct. Stated differently, the molecular desiring-machines are in
themselves the investment of the large molar machines or of the
configurations that the desiring-machines form according to the laws of
large numbers, * in either or both senses of subordination, in one sense
and the other of subordination. Desiring-machines in one sense, but
organic, technical, or social machines in the other: these are the same
machines under determinate conditions. By "determinate conditions"
we mean those statistical forms into which the machines enter as so
"Alien Wallis and Harry Roberts, in Statistics, a New Approach (New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
1956), define the "law of large numbers" as follows: "the larger the samples, the less ...-jJJ be the
variability in the sample proportions .-.. the basis of the Law of Large Numbers is that for an
improbable event to occur n times is improbable to the lith degree" (p. 123); "the larger the groups
averaged, the less the variation" (p. 159). And the consecutive sequences will be "swamped" by a large
number of subsequent observations (see L. H, C. Tippett, Statistics [New York: Oxford University
Press, 1943]. p. 87)_ (Translators' "OIe_)

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOAi'JALYSIS

I

287

many stable forms, unifying, structuring, and proceeding by means of
large heavy aggregates; the selective pressures that group the parts
retain some of them and exclude others, organizing the crowds. These
are therefore the same machines, but not at all the same regime, the
same relationships of magnitude, or the same uses of syntheses. It is
only at the submicroscopic level of desiring-machines that there exists a
functionalism-machinic arrangements, an engineering of desire; for it
is only there that functioning and formation, use and assembly, product
and production merge. All molar functionalism is false, since the organic
or social machines are not formed in the same way they function, and
the technical machines are not assembled in the same way they are used,
but imply precisely the specific conditions that separate their own
production from their distinct product. Only what is not produced in the
same way it functions has a meaning, and also a purpose, an intention.
The desiring-machines on the contrary represent nothing, signify nothing, mean nothing, and are exactly what one makes of them, what is
made with them, what they make in themselves.
Desiring-machines work according to regimes of syntheses that
have no equivalent in the large aggregates. Jacques Monod has defined
the originality of these syntheses, from the standpoint of a molecular
biology or of a "microscopic cybernetics" without regard to the
traditional opposition between mechanism and vitalism. Here the fundamental traits of synthesis are the indifferent nature of the chemical
signals, the indifference to the substrate, and the indirect character of
the interactions. Such formulas as these are negative only in appearance,
and in relation to the laws of aggregates, but must be understood
positively in terms of force (puissance). "Between the substrate of an
allosteric enzyme and the ligands prompting or inhibiting its activity
there exists no chemically necessary relationship of structure or of
reactivity.... An allosteric protein should be seen as a specialized
product of molecular "engineering," enabling an interaction, positive or
negative, to come about between compounds without chemical affinity,
and thereby eventually subordinating any reaction to the intervention of
compounds that are chemically foreign and indifferent to this reaction.
The way in which allosteric interactions work hence permits a complete
freedom in the "choice" of controls. And these controls, having no
chemical requirements to answer to, will be the more responsive to
physiological requirements, and will accordingly be selected for the
extent to which they confer heightened coherence and efficiency upon
the cell or organism. In a word, the very gratuitousness of these systems,
giving molecular evolution a practically limitless field for exploration

288

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

and experiment, enabled it to elaborate the huge network of cybernetic
inter-connections. "*
How, starting from this domain of chance or of real inorganization,
large configurations are organized that necessarily reproduce a structure
under the action of DNA and its segments, the genes, performing
veritable lottery drawings, creating switching points as lines of selection
or evolution-this, indeed, is what all the stages of the passage from the
molecular to the molar demonstrate, such as this passage appears in the
organic machines, but no less so in the social machines with other laws
and other figures. In this sense it was possible to insist on a common
characteristic of human cultures and of living species, as "Markov
chains": aleatory phenomena that are partially dependent. In the genetic
code as in the social codes, what is termed a signifying chain is more a
jargon than a language (/angage), composed of nonsignifying elements
that have a meaning or an effect of signification only in the large
aggregates that they constitute through a linked drawing of elements, a
partial dependence, and a superposition of relays.'] It is not a matter of
biologizing human history, nor of anthropologizing natural history. It is a
matter of showing the common participation of the social machines and
the organic machines in the desiring-machines. At man's most basic
stratum, the Id: the SChizophrenic cell, the schizo molecules, their chains
and their jargons. There is a whole biology of schizophrenia; molecular
biology is itself schizophrenic-as is microphysics. But inversely
schizophrenia-the theory of schizophrenia-is biological, biocultural,
inasmuch as it examines the machinic connections of a molecular order,
their distribution into maps of intensity on the giant molecule of the
body without organs, and the statistical accumulations that form and
select the large aggregates.
Szondi set out on this molecular path, discovering a genic unconscious that he contrasted with the Freudian individual unconscious as
well as with lung's collective unconsciaus.** He often calls this genic or
*Jacques Monod, Chance and Necessity (see reference note 27), pp. 77-78. And pp. 9tJ..-98: "With the
globular protein we already have. at the molecular level, a veritable machine-a machine in its
functional properties, but not, we now see, in its fundamental structure, where nothing but the play of
blind combinations can be discerned. Randomness caught on the wing, preserved, reproduced by the
machinery of invariance and thus converted into order, rule, necessity."
tOn the Markov chains and their applications to the living species as weJl as to cultural formations, see
Ruyer, La genese des formes vivantes, Ch. 8. The phenomena of surplus value of code are dearly
explained in this perspective of "semifortuitous sequences." Several times Ruyer compares this with
the language of schizophrenia.

·*Upot Szondt, Experimental Diagnostics of Drives (New York: Grune & Stratton, J952). Szondi's
work was the first to establish a fundamental relationship between psychoanalysis and genetics. See
also the recent attempt by Andre Green, in terms of the advances made in molecular biology:
"Repetition et instinct de mort;' Revue[raru; aise de psvchonalyse, May 1970.

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

289

genealogical unconscious familial; and Szondi himself went on to study
schizophrenia using familial aggregates as his units of measure. But the
genic unconscious is familial only to a very small degree, much less so
than Freud's unconscious, since the diagnosis is carried out by comparing desire to the photographs of hermaphrodites, assassins, etc., instead
of reducing it as usual to the images of daddy-mommy. Finally some
relation to the outside! A whole alphabet, an entire axiomatic done with
photos of mad people; this has to be tried, testing "the need for paternal
feeling" against a series of portraits of assassins. It is no use saying this
remains within the bounds of Oedipus, the truth is that it throws them
open in a remarkable way. The hereditary genes of drives therefore play
the role of simple stimuli that enter into variable combinations following
vectors that survey an entire social historical field-an analysis of
destiny.
In point of fact, the truly molecular unconscious cannot confine
itself to genes as its units of reproduction; these units are still expressive, and lead to molar formations. Molecular biology teaches us that it
is only the DNA that is reproduced, and not the proteins. Proteins are
both products and units of production; they are what constitutes the
unconscious as a cycle or as the autoproduction of the unconscious-the
ultimate molecular elements in the arrangement of the desiringmachines and the syntheses of desire. We have seen that, through
reproduction and its objects (defined familially or genetically), it is
always the unCIY scious that produces itself in a cyclical orphan
movement, a cycle of destiny where it always remains a subject. It is
precisely on this point that the statutory independence of sexuality with
regard to generation rests. Szondi senses this direction-according to
which one must go beyond the molar to the molecular-so acutely that
he takes exception to all statistical interpretations of what is wrongly
called his "test." What is more, he calls for going beyond contents
toward the realm of functions. But he makes this advance, follows this
direction, only by going from aggregates or classes toward "categories,"
of which he establishes a systematically closed list-categories that are
still only expressive forms of existence that a subject is meant to choose
and combine freely. For this reason Szondi misses the internal or
molecular elements of desire, the nature of their machinic choices,
arrangements, and combinations. He also misses the real question of
schizoanalysis: What drives your own desiring-machines? What is their
functioning? What are the syntheses into which they enter and operate?
What use do you make of them, in all the transitions that extend from
the molecular to the molar and inversely, and that constitute the cycle

:IS!!

I

ANTi-OEDiPUS

whereby the unconscious, remaining a subject, produces and reproduces
itself?
We use the term Libido to designate the specific energy of
desiring-machines; and the transformations of this energy-Numen and
Voluptas-are never desexualizations or sublimations. This terminology
indeed seems extremely arbitrary. Considering the two ways in which
the desiring-machines must be viewed, what they have to do with a
properly sexual energy is not immediately clear: either they are assigned
to the molecular order that is their own, or they are assigned to the molar
order where they form the organic or social machines, and invest
organic or social surroundings. It is in fact difficult to present sexual
energy as directly cosmic and intra-atomic, and at the same time as
directly sociohistorical. It would be futile to say that love has to do with
proteins and society. This would amount to reviving yet once more the
old attempts at liquidating Freudianism, by substituting for the libido a
vague cosmic energy capable of all of the metamorphoses, or a kind of
socialized energy capable of all the investments. Or would we do better
to review Reich's final attempt, involving a "biogenesis" that not
without justification is qualified as a schizoparanoiac mode of reasoning'? It will be remembered that Reich concluded in favor of an
intra-atomic cosmic energy-the orgone-generative of an electrical
flux and carrying submicroscopic particles, the bions. This energy
produced differences in potential or intensities distributed on the body
considered from a molecular viewpoint, and was associated with a
mechanics of fluids in this same body considered from a molar viewpoint. What defined the libido as sexuality was therefore the association
of the two modes of operation, mechanical and electrical, in a sequence
with two poles, molar and molecular (mechanical tension, electrical
charge, electrical discharge, mechanical relaxation). Reich thought he
had. thus overcome the alternative between mechanism and vitalism,
since these functions, mechanical and electrical, existed in matter in
general, but were combined in a particular sequence within the living.
And above all he upheld the basic psychoanalytic truth, the supreme
disavowal of which he was able to denounce in Freud: the independence
of sexuality with regard to reproduction, the subordination of progressive or regressive reproduction to sexuality as a cycle.*
*AU of Reich's last studies, biocosrnic and biogenetic, are summarized at the end of Wilhelm Reich, The
Function of the Orgasm (reference note 22), Ch. 7> The primacy of sexuality over generation and
reproduction comes to be based on the cycle of sexuality (mechanical tension-electrical charge, etc.),

which leads to a division of the cell: pp. 282-86. But very early in his work Reich reproached Freud for
having abandoned the sexual position. It was not only the dissidents from Freud who abandoned this
position, it was Freud himself, in a certain fashion: a first time when he introduces the death instinct,

iNTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

291

If the details of Reich's final theory are taken into consideration, we
admit that its simultaneously schizophrenic and paranoiac nature is no
obstacle where we are concerned-on the contrary. We admit that any
comparison of sexuality with cosmic phenomena such as "electrical
storms," "the blue color of the sky and the blue-gray of atmospheric
haze," the blue of the orgone, "St. Elmo's fire, and the bluish formations
[of] sunspot activity," fluids and flows, matter and particles, in the end
appear to us more adequate than the reduction of sexuality to the pitiful
little familiaJist secret. We think that Lawrence and Miller have a more
accurate evaluation of sexuality than Freud, even from the viewpoint of
the famous scientificity. It is not the neurotic stretched out on the couch
who speaks to us of love, of its force and its despair, but the mute stroll
of the schizo, Lenzs outing in the mountains and under the stars, the
immobile voyage in intensities on the body without organs. As to the
whole of Reichian theory, it possesses the incomparable advantage of
showing the double pole of the libido, as a molecular formation on the
submicroscopic scale, and as an investment of the molar formations on
the scale of social and organic aggregates. All that is missing is the
confirmations of common sense: why, in what sense is this sexuality?
Cynicism has said, or claimed to have said, everything there is to
say about love: that it is a matter of a copulation of social and organic
machines on a large scale (at bottom, love is in the organs; at bottom,
love is a matter of economic determinations, money). But what is
properly cynical is to claim a scandal where there is none to be found,
and to pass for bold while lacking boldness. Better the delirium of
common sense than its platitude. For the prime evidence points to the
fact that desire does not take as its object persons or things, but the
entire surroundings that it traverses, the vibrations and flows of every
sort to which it is joined, introducing therein breaks and captures-an
always nomadic and migrant desire, characterized first of all by its
"gigantism": no one has shown this more clearly than Charles Fourier.
In a word, the social as well as biological surroundings are the object of
unconscious investments that are necessarily desiring or libidinal, in
contrast with the preconscious investments of need or of interest. The
libido as sexual energy is the direct investment of masses, of large
and begins to speak of Eros instead of sexuality (Reich, PI'. 124-27); next, when he makes anxiety into
the cause of sexual repression, and no longer its result (p. 136); and more generally when he comes back
to a traditional primacy of procreation over sexuality (p. 283: 'Thus; procreation is a function of
sexuality. and not vice versa, as was hitherto believed. Freud had maintained the same thing with
respect to psychosexuality, when he separated the concepts 'sexual' and 'genital.' But for a reason I
was not able to understand, he later stated that 'sexuality in puberty' is 'in the service of procreation.' "I
Here Reich is obviously referring to Freud's Schopenhauerian or Weismannian texts, where sexuality
comes under the sway of the species and the germen: for example. HOn Narcissism: An Introduction;'
in Collected Papers (London: Hogarth Press), Vol. 4, pp. 36-38.

292

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

aggregates, and of social and organic fields. We have difficulty understanding what principles psychoanalysis uses to support its conception
of desire, when it maintains that the libido must be desexualized or even
sublimated in order to proceed to the social investments, and inversely
that the libido only resexualizes these investments during the course of
pathological regression.* Unless the assumption of such a conception is
still familialism-that is, an assumption holding that sexuality operates
only in the family, and must be transformed in order to invest larger
aggregates.
The truth is that sexuality is everywhere: the way a bureaucrat
fondles his records, a judge administers justice, a businessman causes
money to circulate; the way the bourgeoisie fucks the proletariat; and so
on. And there is no need to resort to metaphors, any more than for the
libido to go by way of metamorphoses. Hitler got the fascists sexually
aroused. Flags, nations, armies, banks get a lot of people aroused. A
revolutionary machine is nothing if it does not acquire at least as much
force as these coercive machines have for producing breaks and
mobilizing flows. It is not through a desexualizing extension that the
libido invests the large aggregates. On the contrary, it is through a
restriction, a blockage, and a reduction that the libido is made to repress
its flows in order to contain them in the narrow cells of the type
"couple," "family," "person," "objects." And doubtless such a blockage is necessarily justified: the libido does not come to consciousness
except in relation to a given body, a given person that it takes as object.
But our "object choice" itself refers to a conjunction of flows of life and
of society that this body and this person intercept, receive, and transmit,
always within a biological, social, and historical field where we are
equally immersed or with which we communicate. The persons to whom
our loves are dedicated, including the parental persons, intervene only
as points of connection, of disjunction, of conjunction of flows whose
libidinal tenor of a properly unconscious investment they translate. Thus
no matter how well grounded the love blockage is, it curiously changes
its function, depending on whether it engages desire in the Oedipal
impasses of the couple and the family in the service of the repressive
machines, or whether on the contrary it condenses a free energy capable
of fueling a revolutionary machine. (Here again, everything has already
"Freud, Three Case Histories (reference note 42), p: 164: "Persons who have not freed themselves
completely from the stage of narcissism, who. that is to say, have at that point a fixation which may
operate as a disposing factor for a later illness, are exposed to the danger that some unusually intense
wave of libido, finding no other outlet. may lead to a sexualization of their social instincts and so undo
the work of sublimation which they had achieved in the course of their development. This result may be
produced by anything that causes the libido to flow backwards (i.e .• that causes a 'regression'): ...
paranoiacs endeavour to protect themselves against any such sexualization of their social instinctual
cathexes."

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

293

been said by Fourier, when he shows the two contrary directions of the
"captivation" or the "mechanization" of the passions.) But we always
make love with worlds. And our love addresses itself to this libidinal
property of our lover, to either close himself off or open up to more
spacious worlds, to masses and large aggregates. There is always
something statistical in our loves, and something belonging to the laws
of large numbers. And isn't it in this way that we must understand the
famous formula of Marx?-the relationship between man and woman is
"the direct, natural, and necessary relation of person to person." That is,
the relationship between the two sexes (man and woman) is only the
measure of the relationship of sexuality in general, insofar as it invests
large aggregates (man and man)? Whence what came to be called the
species determination of the sexuality of the two sexes. And must it not
also be said that the phallus is not one sex, but sexuality in its entirety,
which is to say the sign of the large aggregate invested by the libido,
whence the two sexes necessarily derive, both in their separation (the
two homosexual series of man and man, woman and woman) and in their
statistical relations within this aggregate?
But Marx says something even more mysterious: that the true
difference is not the difference between the two sexes, but the difference
between the human sex and the "nonhuman" sex." It is clearly not a
question of animals, nor of animal sexuality. Something quite different is
involved. If sexuality is the unconscious investment of the large molar
aggregates, it is because on its other side sexuality is identical with the
interplay of the molecular elements that constitute these aggregates
under determinate conditions. The dwarfism of desire as a correlate to
its gigantism. Sexuality and the desiring-machines are one and the same
inasmuch as these machines are present and operating in the social
machines, in their field, their formation, their functioning. Desiringmachines are the nonhuman sex, the molecular machinic elements, their
arrangements and their syntheses, without which there would be neither
a human sex specifically determined in the large aggregates, nor a human
sexuality capable of investing these aggregates. In a few sentences
Marx, who is nonetheless so miserly and reticent where sexuality is
concerned, exploded something that will hold Freud and all of psychoanalysis forever captive: the anthropomorphic representation of sex!
What we call anthropomorphic representation is just as much the
idea that there are two sexes as the idea that there is only one. We know
how Freudianism is permeated by this bizarre notion that there is finally
only one sex, the masculine, in relation to which the woman, the
feminine, is defined as a lack, an absence. It could be thought at first thai
such a hypothesis founds the omnipotence of a male homosexuality. Yet
294

I

PNTI-OEDiPUS

this is not at all the case; what is founded here is rather the statistical
aggregate of intersexual loves. For if the woman is defined as a lack in
relation to the man, the man in his turn lacks what is lacking in the
woman, simply in another fashion: the idea of a single sex necessarily
leads to the erection of a phallus as an object on high, which distributes
lack as two nonsuperimposable sides and makes the two sexes communicate in a common absence-castration. Women, as psychoanalysts or
psychoanalyzed, can then rejoice in showing man the way, and in
recuperating equality in difference. Whence the irresistibly comical
nature of the formulas according to which one gains access to desire
through castration. But the idea that there are two sexes, after aI!, is no
better. This time, like Melanie Klein, one attempts to define the female
sex by means of positive characteristics, even if they be terrifying. At
least in this way one avoids phallocentrism, if not anthropomorphism.
But this time, far from founding the communication between the two
sexes, one founds instead their separation into two homosexual series
that remain statistical. And one does not by any means escape castration. It is simply that castration, instead of being the principle of sex
conceived as the masculine sex (the great castrated soaring Phallus),
becomes the result of sex conceived as the feminine sex (the little
hidden absorbed penis). We maintain therefore that castration is the
basis for the anthropomorphic and molar representation of sexuality.
Castration is the universal belief that brings together and disperses both
men and women under the yoke of one and the same illusion of
consciousness, and makes them adore this yoke. Every attempt to
determine the nonhuman nature of sex-for example, "the Great Other"
in Lacan-while conserving myth and castration, is defeated from
the start. And what does Jean-Francois Lyotard mean, in his
commentary-so profound, nevertheless-on Marx's text, when he sees
the opening of the nonhuman as having to be "the entry of the subject
into desire through castration"? 12 Long live castration, so that desire
may be strong? Only fantasies are truly desired? What a perverse,
human, all-too-human idea! An idea originating in bad conscience, and
not in the unconscious. Anthropomorphic molar representation culminates in the very thing that founds it, the ideology of lack. The molecular
unconscious, on the contrary, knows nothing of castration, because
partial objects lack nothing and form free multiplicities as such; because
the multiple breaks never cease producing flows, instead of repressing
them, cutting them at a single stroke-the only break capable of
exhausting them; because the syntheses constitute local and nonspecific
connections, inclusive disjunctions, nomadic conjunctions: everywhere
a microscopic transsexuality, resulting in the woman containing as many
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

295

men as the man, and the man as many women, all capable of enteringmen with women, women with men-into relations of production of
desire that overturn the statistical order of the sexes. Making love is not
just becoming as one, or even two, but becoming as a hundred thousand.
Desiring-machines or the nonhuman sex: not one or even two sexes, but
n sexes. Schizoanalysis is the variable analysis of the n sexes in a
subject, beyond the anthropomorphic representation that society imposes on this subject, and with which it represents its own sexuality. The
schizo analytic slogan of the desiring-revolution will be first of all: to
each its own sexes.

3

I Psychoanalysis and Capitalism

The schizoanalytic argument is simple: desire is a machine, a synthesis of machines, a machinic arrangement-desiringmachines. The order of desire is the order of production; all production
is at once desiring-production and social production. We therefore
reproach psychoanalysis for having stifled this order of production, for
having shunted it into representation. Far from showing the boldness of
psychoanalysis, this idea of unconscious representation marks from the
outset its bankruptcy or its abnegation: an unconscious that no longer
produces, but is content to believe. The unconscious believes in Oedipus,
it believes in castration, in the law. It is doubtless true that the
psychoanalyst would be the first to say that, everything considered,
belief is not an act of the unconscious; it is always the preconscious that
believes. Shouldn't it even be said that it is the psychoanalyst who
believes-the psychoanalyst in each of us? Would belief then be an
effect on the conscious material that the unconscious representation
exerts from a distance? But inversely, who or what reduced the
unconscious to this state of representation, if not first of all a system of
beliefs put in the place of productions? In reality, social production
becomes alienated in allegedly autonomous beliefs at the same time that
desiring-production becomes enticed into allegedly unconscious representations. And as we have seen, it is the same agency-the family-that
performs this double operation, distorting and disfiguring social
desiring-production, leading it into an impasse.
Thus the link between representation-belief and the family is not
accidental; it is of the essence of representation to be a familial
representation. But production is not thereby suppressed, it continues to
rumble, to throb beneath the representative agency (instance representative) that suffocates it, and that it in return can make resonate to the
breaking point. Thus in order to keep an effective grip on the zones of
!If!!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

production, representation must inflate itself with all the power of myth
and tragedy, it must give a mythic and tragic presentation of the
family-and a familial presentation of myth and tragedy. Yet aren't
myth and tragedy, too, productions-forms of production? Certainly
not; they are production only when brought into connection with real
social production, real desiring-production. Otherwise they are ideological forms, which have taken the place of the units of production. Who
believes in all this-Oedipus, castration, etc.? The Greeks? Then the
Greeks did not produce in the same way they believed? The Hellenists?
Do the Hellenists believe that the Greeks produced according to their
beliefs? This is true at least of the nineteenth-century Hellenists, about
whom Engels said: you'd think they really believed in all that-in myth,
in tragedy. Is it the unconscious that represents itself through Oedipus
and castration? Or is it the psychoanalyst-the psychoanalyst in us all,
who represents the unconscious in this way? For never has Engels's
remark regained so much meaning: you'd think the psychoanalysts
really believed in all this-in myth, in tragedy. (They go on believing,
whereas the Hellenists have long since stopped.)
The Schreber case again applies: Schreber's father invented and
fabricated astonishing little machines, sadistico-paranoiac machinesfor example head straps with a metallic shank and leather bands, for
restrictive use on children, for making them straighten up and behave.*
These machines play no role whatever in the Freudian analysis. Perhaps
it would have been more difficult to crush the entire sociopolitical
content of Schreber's delirium jf these desiring-machines of the father
had been taken into account, as well as their obvious participation in a
pedagogical social machine in general. For the real question is this: of
course the father acts on the child's unconscious-but does he act as a
head of a family in an expressive familial transmission, or rather as the
agent of a machine, in a rnachinic information or communication?
Schreber's desiring-machines communicate with those of his father; but
it is in this very way that they are from early childhood the libidinal
investment of a social field. In this field the father has a role only as an
agent of production and antlproduction, Freud, on the contrary, chooses
the first path: it is not the father who indicates the action of machines,
but just the opposite; thereafter there is no longer even any reason for
considering machines, whether as desiring-machines or as social machines. In return, the father will be inflated with all the "forces of myth
*W. G. NiederJand discovered and reproduced Schrebers father's mac~ines: ~ee e.sp~cia!ly, "Schreber,
Father and Son," Psychoanalytic Quarterly, Vol. 28 (I959), pp. 151--69. Quite sIml.lar IOstrume~ts of
pedagogical torture are to be found in the Contessc d~ Segur: th,~s "thc,g?od behavior belt," "WIth an
iron plate for the back and an iron rod to hold the chill In place (Comedies et proverbes, On ne prend

pas tes mooches),

INTROOUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

297

and religion" and with phylogenesis, so as to ensure that the little
familial representation has the appearance of being coextensive with the
field of delirium. The production couple-the desiring-machines and the
social field-gives way to a representative couple of an entirely different
nature: family-myth. Once again, have you ever seen a child at play:
how he already populates the technical social machines with his own
desiring-machines, 0 sexuality-while the father or mother remains in
the background, from whom the child borrows parts and gears according
to his need, and who are there as agents of transmission, reception, and
interception: kindly agents of production or suspicious agents of antiproduction.
Why was mythic and tragic representation accorded such a senseless privilege? Why were expressive forms and a whole theater installed
there where there were fields, workshops, factories, units of production?
The psychoanalyst parks his circus in the dumbfounded unconscious, a
real P. T. Barnum in the fields and in the factory. That is what Miller, and
already Lawrence, have to say against psychoanalysis (the living are not
believers, the seers do not believe in myth and tragedy): "By retracing
the paths to the earlier heroic life ... you defeat the very element and
quality of the heroic, for the hero never looks backward, nor does he
ever doubt his powers. Hamlet was undoubtedly a hero to himself, and
for every Hamlet born the only true course to pursue is the very course
which Shakespeare describes. But the question, it seems to me, is this:
are we born Hamlets? Were you born Hamlet? Or did you not rather
create the type in yourself? Whether this be so or not, what seems
infinitely more important is-why revert to myth? ... This ideational
rubbish out of which our world has erected its cultural edifice is now, by
a critical irony, being given its poetic immolation, its mythos, through a
kind of writing which, because it is of the disease and therefore beyond,
clears the ground for fresh superstructures. (In my own mind the
thought of 'fresh superstructures' is abhorrent, but this is merely the
awareness of a process and not the process itself.) Actually, in process, I
believe with each line I write that I am scouring the womb, giving it the
curette, as it were. Behind this process lies the idea not of 'edifice' and
'superstructure,' which is culture and hence false, but of continuous
In the myth there is no life for us. Only the
birth, renewal. life, life
This ability to produce the myth is born out
myth lives in the myth
of awareness, out of ever-increasing consciousness. That is why, speaking of the schizophrenic nature of our age, I said-'until the process is
completed the belly of the world shall be the Third Eye.' Now, Brother
Ambrose, just what did I mean by that? What could I mean except that
from this intellectual world in which we are swimming there must body
2!lS

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

forth a new world; but this new world can only be bodied forth in so far
as it is conceived. And to conceive there must first be desire, ... Desire
is instinctual and holy: it is only through desire that we bring about the
immaculate conception.v'"
Everything is said in these pages from Miller: Oedipus (or Hamlet)
led to the point of autocritique; the expressive forms-myth and
tragedy--denounced as conscious beliefs or illusions, nothing more than
ideas; the necessity of a scouring of the unconscious, schizoanalysis as a
curettage of the unconscious; the matrical fissure in opposition to the
line of castration; the splendid affirmation of the orphan- and producerunconscious; the exaltation of the process as a schizophrenic process of
de territorialization that must produce a new earth; and even the
functioning of the desiring-machines against tragedy, against "the fatal
drama of the personality," against "the inevitable confusion between
mask and actor." It is obvious that Miller's correspondent, Michael
Fraenkel, does not understand. He talks like a psychoanalyst, or like a
nineteenth-century Hellenist: yes, myth, tragedy, Oedipus, and Hamlet
are good expressions, pregnant forms; they express the true permanent
drama of desire and knowledge. Fraenkel calls to his aid all the
commonplaces, Schopenhauer, and the Nietzsche of The Birth of
Tragedy. He thinks Miller is unaware of these things, and never wonders
for a second why Nietzsche himself broke with The Birth of Tragedy,
why he stopped believing in tragic representation.
Michel Foucault has convincingly shown what break (coupure)
introduced the irruption of production into the world of representation.
Production can be that of labor or that of desire, it can be socia! or
desiring, it calls forth forces that no longer permit themselves to be
contained in representation, and it calls forth flows and breaks that
break through representation, traversing it through and through: "an
immense expanse of shade" extended beneath the level of representation.>' And this collapse or sinking of the classical world of representation is assigned a date by Foucault; the end of the eighteenth and the
beginning of the nineteenth century. So it seems that the situation is far
more complex than we made it out to be, since psychoanalysis participates to the highest degree in this discovery of the units of production,
which subjugate all possible representations rather than being subordinated to them. Just as Ricardo founds political or social economy by
discovering quantitative labor as the principle of every representable
value, Freud founds desiring-economy by discovering the quantitative
libido as the principle of every representation of the objects and aims of
desire. Freud discovers the subjective nature or abstract essence of
desire, just as Ricardo discovers the subjective nature or abstract
INTRODUCTION TO

SCHIZO.~NAL YSIS

I

299

essence of labor, beyond all representations that would bind it to
objects, to aims, or even to particular sources. Freud is thus the first to
disengage desire itself (Ie desir tout court), as Ricardo disengages labor
itself tle travail tout court), and thereby the sphere of production that
effectively eclipses representation. And subjective abstract desire, like
subjective abstract labor, is inseparable from a movement of deterritorialization that discovers the interplay of machines and their agents
underneath all the specific determinations that still linked desire or labor
to a given person, to a given object in the framework of representation.
Desiring-production and machines, psychic apparatuses and machines of desire, desiring-machines and the assembling of an analytic
machine suited to decode them: the domain of free syntheses where
everything is possible; partial connections, included disjunctions, nomadic conjunctions, polyvocal flows and chains, transductive* breaks;
the relation of desiring-machines as formations of the unconscious with
the molar formations that they constitute statistically in organized
crowds; and the apparatus of social and psychic repression resulting
from these formations-such is the composition of the analytic field.
And this subrepresentative field will continue to survive and work, even
through Oedipus, even through myth and tragedy, which nevertheless
mark the reconciliation of psychoanalysis with representation. The fact
remains that a conflict cuts across the whole of psychoanalysis, the
conflict between mythic and tragic familial representation and social and
desiring-production. For myth and tragedy are systems of symbolic
representations that still refer desire to determinate exterior conditions
as well as to particular objective codes-the body of the Earth, the
despotic body-and that in this way confound the discovery of the
abstract or subjective essence. It has been remarked in this context that
each time Freud brings to the fore the study of the psychic apparatuses,
the social and desiring-machines, the mechanisms of the drives, and the
institutional mechanisms, his interest in myth and tragedy tends to
diminish, while at the same time he denounces in Jung, then in Rank, the
re-establishment of an exterior representation of the essence of desire as
an objective desire, alienated in myth or tragedy.f

How can this very complex ambivalence of psychoanalysis be
explained? Several different things must be distinguished. In the first
place, symbolic representation indeed grasps the essence of desire, but
by referring it to large "objectities" iobiectitesv" as to the specific
elements that determine its objects, aims, and sources. It is in this way
that myth ascribes desire to the element of the earth as a full body, and
to the territorial code that distributes prescriptions and prohibitions.
Likewise tragedy ascribes desire to the full body of the despot and to the
corresponding imperial code. Consequently, the understanding of symbolic representations may consist in a systematic phenomenology of
these elements and objectities (as in the old Hellenists or even Jung); or
else these representations may be understood by historical study that
assigns them to their real and objective social conditions (as with recent
Hellenists). Viewed in the latter fashion, representation implies a certain
lag, and expresses less a stable element than the conditioned passage
from one element to another: mythic representation does not express
the element of the earth, but rather the conditions under which this
element fades before the despotic element; and tragic representation
does not express the despotic element properly speaking, but the
conditions under which-in fifth-century Greece, for example-this
element diminishes in favor of the new order of the city-state.V It is
obvious that neither one of these ways of treating myth or tragedy is
suited to the psychoanalytic approach. The psychoanalytic method is
quite different: rather than referring symbolic representation to determinate objectities and to objective social conditions, psychoanalysis refers
them to the subjective and universal essence of desire as libido. Thus the
operation of decoding in psychoanalysis can no longer signify what it
signifies in the sciences of man; the discovery of the secret of such and
such a code. Psychoanalysis must undo the codes so as to attain the
quantitative and qualitative flows of libido that traverse dreams, fantasies, and pathological formations as well as myth, tragedy, and the social
formations. Psychoanalytic interpretation does not consist in competing
with codes, adding a code to the codes already recognized, but in
decoding in an absolute way, in eliciting something that is uncodable by
virtue of its polymorphism and its polyvocity.t It appears then that the

"Fer a definition of transduction with respect to production and representation, see "Interview/Faix
Guattari" in Diacritics: a review of contemporary criticism, Fall 1974, p. 39: "Signs work as much as
matter. Matter exp~esses as much as signs .... Transduction is the idea that, in essence, something is
conducted, something happens between chains of semiotic expression, and material chains." (Translators' note.s

*objectites: This term corresponds 10 the German objektitiit. The following definition appears in
Vocobulaire technique et critique de la philosophie (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1968); "the
form in which the thing-in-itself, the real, appears as an object." (Translators' note.;

'[Didier Anzieu distinguishes between two periods in particular: 1906--1920.which "constitutes the great
period of mythological works in the history of psychoanalysis"; then a period of relative discredit, as
Freud turns tQwar~ the problems of the. second. to~ogr.aphy {Translators' note: the id, ego, and super
ego], and the relationships between desire and msututtons, and takes less and Jess of an interest in a
systematic exploration of myths ("Freud et la mytholcgie," Incidences de fa psychanalvse, no.l [19701,
pp. 126-29).

tIt cannot be said, therefore, that psychoanalysis adds a code-a psychological one-e-tc the social
codes through which histories and mythologists explain myths. Freud pointed this out apropos
dreams: it is not a question of a deciphering process according to a code. In this regard see Jacques
Derrlda's comments in L'ecriture el la difference (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1967), pp. 31Off.: HIt is
doubtless true that [dream writing] works with a mass of elements codified in the course of an individual
or collective history. But in its operations, its lexicon, and its syntax, a purely idiomatic residue remains

300

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

301

interest psychoanalysis has in myth (or in tragedy) is an essentially
critical interest, since the specificity of myth, understood objectively,
must melt under the rays of the subjective libido: it is indeed the world
of representation that crumbles, or tends to crumble.
It follows that, in the second place, the link between psychoanalysis
and capitalism is no less profound than that between political economy
and capitalism. This discovery of the decoded and deterritorialized
flows is the same as that which takes place for political economy and in
social production, in the form of subjective abstract labor, and for
psychoanalysis and in desiring-production, in the form of subjective
abstract libido. As Marx says, in capitalism the essence becomes
subjective-the activity of production in general-and abstract labor
becomes something real from which all the preceding social formations
can be reinterpreted from the point of view of a generalized decoding or
a generalized process of deterritorialization: "The simplest abstraction,
then, which modern economics places at the head of its discussions, and
which expresses an immeasurably ancient relation valid in all forms of
society, nevertheless achieves practical truth as an abstraction only as a
category of the most modern society." This is also the case for desire as
abstract libido and as subjective essence. Not that a simple parallelism
should be drawn between capitalist social production and desiringproduction, or between the flows of money-capital and the shit-flows of
desire. The relationship is much closer: desiring-machines are in social
machines and nowhere else, so that the conjunction of the decoded
flows in the capitalist machine tends to liberate the free figures of a
universal subjective libido. In short, the discovery of an activity of
production in general and without distinction, as it appears in capitalism,
is the identical discovery of both political economy and psychoanalysis,
beyond the determinate systems of representation.
Obviously this does not mean that the capitalist being, or the being
in capitalism, desires to work or that he works according to his desire.
But the identity of desire and labor is not a myth, it is rather the active
utopia par excellence that designates the capitalist limit to be overcome
through desiring-production. But why, precisely, is desiring-production
situated at the always counteracted limit of capitalism? Why, at the
same time as it discovers the subjective essence of desire and labor-a
common essence, inasmuch as it is the activity of production in
general-is capitalism continually realienating this essence, and without
interruption, in a repressive machine that divides the essence in two, and
maintains it divided-abstract labor on the one hand, abstract desire on
irreducible, that must carry the whole weight of the interpretation, in the communication among
unconsciouscs. The dreamer invents his own grammar."

:Ill:!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

the other: political economy and psychoanalysis. political economy and
libidinal economy? Here we are able to appreciate the full extent to
which psychoanalysis belongs to capitalism. For as we have seen,
capitalism indeed has as its limit the decoded flows of desiringproduction, but it never stops repelling them by binding them in an
axiomatic that takes the place of the codes. Capitalism is inseparable
from the movement of deterritorialization, but this movement is exorcised through factitious and artificial reterritorializations. Capitalism is
constructed on the ruins of the territorial and the despotic, the mythic
and the tragic representations, but it re-establishes them in its own
service and in another form, as images of capital.
Marx summarizes the entire matter by saying that the subjective
abstract essence is discovered by capitalism only to be put in chains all
over again, to be subjugated and alienated-no longer, it is true, in an
exterior and independent element as objectity, but in the element, itself
subjective, of private property: "What was previously being external to
oneself-man's externalization in the thing-has merely become the act
of externalizing-the process of alienating." It is, in fact, the form of
private property that conditions the conjunction of the decoded flows,
which is to say their axiomatization in a system where the flows of the
means of production, as the property of the capitalists, is directly related
to the flow of so-called free labor, as the "property" of the workers (so
that the State restrictions on the SUbstance or the content of private
property do not at all affect this form). It is also the form of private
property that constitutes the center of the factitious reterritorializations
of capitalism. And finally, it is this form that produces the images filling
the capitalist field of immanence, "the" capitalist, "the" worker, etc. In
other terms, capitalism indeed implies the collapse of the great objective
determinate representations, for the benefit of production as the universal interior essence, but it does not thereby escape the world of
representation. It merely performs a vast conversion of this world, by
attributing to it the new form of an infinite subjective representation."
We seem to be straying from the main concern of psychoanalysis,
yet never have we been so close. For here again, as we have seen
previously, it is in the interiority of its movement that capitalism
requires and institutes not only a social axiomatic, but an application of
this axiomatic to the privatized family. Representation would never be
able to ensure its own conversion without this application that furrows
deep into it, cleaves it, and forces it back upon itself. Thus subjective
"Michel Foucault shows that "the human sciences" found their principle in production and were
constituted on the collapse of representation, but that they immediately re-establish a new type of
representation, as unconscious representation (The Order o] Things [see reference note 14), pp. 352-67).

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

303

abstract Labor as represented in private property has, as its correlate,
subjective abstract Desire as represented in the privatized family.
Psychoanalysis undertakes the analysis of this second term, as political
economy analyzes the first. Psychoanalysis is the technique of application, for which political economy is the axiomatic. In a word, psychoanalysis disengages the second pole in the very movement of capitalism,
which substitutes the infinite subjective representation for the large
determinate objective representations. It is in fact essential that the limit
of the decoded flows of desiring-production be doubly exorcised, doubly
displaced, once by the position of immanent limits that capitalism does
not cease to reproduce on an ever expanding scale, and again by the
marking out of an interior limit that reduces this social reproduction to
restricted familial reproduction.
Consequently, the ambiguity of psychoanalysis in relation to myth
or tragedy has the following explanation: psychoanalysis undoes them
as objective representations, and discovers in them the figures of a
subjective universal libido; but it reanimates them, and promotes them
as subjective representations that extend the mythic and tragic contents
to infinity. Psychoanalysis does treat myth and tragedy, but it treats
them as the dreams and the fantasies of private man, Homo familiaand in fact dream and fantasy are to myth and tragedy as private
property is to public property. What acts in myth and tragedy at the level
of objective elements is therefore reappropriated and raised to a higher
level by psychoanalysis, but as an unconscious dimension of subjective
representation (myth as humanity's dream). What acts as an objective
and public element-the Earth, the Despot-is now taken up again, but
as the expression of a subjective and private reterritorialization: Oedipus is the fallen despot-banished, deterritorialized-but a reterritorialization is engineered, using the Oedipus complex conceived of as the
daddy-mommy-me of today's everyman. Psychoanalysis and the Oedipus complex gather up all beliefs, all that has ever been believed by
humanity, but only in order to raise it to the condition of a denial that
preserves belief without believing in it (it's only a dream: the strictest
piety today asks for nothing more). Whence this double impression, that
psychoanalysis is opposed to mythology no less than to mythologists,
but at the same time extends myth and tragedy to the dimensions of the
subjective universal: if Oedipus himself "has no complex," the Oedipus
complex has no Oedipus, just as narcissism has no Narcissus.* Such is
"Didier Anzieu, "Freud et la mythologie," pp, 124,128: "Freud grants myth no specificity. This is one
of the points that have most seriously encumbered the subsequent relations between psychoanalysts
and anthropologists .... Freud undertakes a veritable leveling .... The article 'On Narcissism: An
Introduction,' which constitutes an important step toward the revision of the theory of the drives,
contains no aIlusion to the myth of Narcissus."

3M

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

the ambivalence that traverses psychoanalysis, and that extends beyond
the specific problem of myth and tragedy: with one hand psychoanalysis
undoes the system of objective representations (myth, tragedy) for the
benefit of the subjective essence conceived as desiring-production,
while with the other hand it reverses this production in a system of
subjective representations (dream and fantasy, with myth and tragedy
posited as their developments or projections). Images, nothing but
images. What is left in the end is an intimate familial theater, the theater
of private man, which is no longer either desiring-production or objective representation. The unconscious as a stage. A whole theater put in
the place of production, a theater that disfigures this production even
more than could tragedy and myth when reduced to their meager ancient
resources.
Myth, tragedy, dream, and fantasy-and myth and tragedy reinterpreted in terms of dream and fantasy-are the representative series that
psychoanalysis substitutes for the line of production: social and
desiring-production. A theater series, instead of a production series. But
why in fact does representation, having become subjective representation, assume this theatrical form ("There is a mysterious tie between
psychoanalysis and the theater")? We are familiar with the eminently
modern reply of certain recent authors: the theater elicits the finite
structure of the infinite subjective representation. What is meant by
"elicit" is very complex, since the structure can never present more than
its own absence, or represent something not represented in the representation: but it is claimed that the theater's privilege is that of staging this
metaphoric and metonymic causality that marks both the presence and
the absence of the structures in its effects. While Andre Green expresses
reservations about the adequacy of the structure, he does so only in the
name of a theater necessary for the actualization of this structure,
playing the role of revealer, a place by which the structure becomes
visible.* In her fine analysis of the phenomenon of belief, Octave
Mannoni likewise uses the theater model to show how the denial of
belief in fact implies a transformation of belief, under the effect of a
structure that the theater embodies or places on stage."? We should
understand that representation, when it ceases to be objective, when it
becomes subjective infinite-that is to say, imaginary-effectively loses
all consistency, unless it is supported by a structure that determines the
"Andre Green goes very far in the analysis of the representation-theater-structure~unconscious
relations: Un oeil en trop (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1969), Prologue (especially P. 43, concerning "the
representation of the nonrepresented in representation"). However, the criticism that Green makes of
the structure is not conducted in the name of production, but in the name of representation, and invokes
the necessity for extrastructural factors that must do nothing more than reveal the structure, and reveal
it as Oedipal.

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

305

place and the functions of the subject of representation, as well as the
objects represented as images, and the formal relations between them
all. "Symbolic" thus no longer designates the relation of representation
to an objectity as an element; it designates the ultimate elements of
subjective representation, pure signifiers, pure nonrepresented representatives whence the subjects, the objects, and their relationships all
derive. In this way the structure designates the unconscious of subjective representation. The series of this representation now presents
itself: (imaginary) infinite subjective representation-theatrical
representation-structural representation. And precisely because the
theater is thought to stage the latent structure, as well as to embody its
elements and relations, it is in a position to reveal the universality of this
structure, even in the objective representations that it salvages and
reinterprets in terms of hidden representatives, their migrations and
variable relations. All former beliefs are gathered up and revived in the
name of a structure of the unconscious: we are still pious. Everywhere,
the great game of the symbolic signifier that is embodied in the signifieds
of the Imaginary-Oedipus as a universal metaphor.
Why the theater? How bizarre, this theatrical and pasteboard
unconscious: the theater taken as the model of production. Even in
Louis Althusser we are witness to the following operation: the discovery
of social production as "machine" or "machinery," irreducible to the
world of objective representation (Vorstellung); but immediately the
reduction of the machine to structure, the identification of production
with a structural and theatrical representation (Darstellung)P Now the
same is true of both desiring-production and social production: every
time that production, rather than being apprehended in its originality, in
its reality, becomes reduced (rabattue) in this manner to a representational space, it can no longer have value except by its own absence, and
it appears as a lack within this space. In search of the structure in
psychoanalysis, Moustafa Safouan is able to present it as a "contribution to a theory of lack." It is in the structure that the fusion of desire
with the impossible is performed, with lack defined as castration. From
the structure there arises the most austere song in honor of castrationyes, yes, we enter the order of desire through the gates of castrationonce desiring-production has spread out in the space of a representation
that allows it to go on living only as an absence and a lack unto itself. For
a structural unity is imposed on the desiring-machines that joins them
together in a molar aggregate; the partial objects are referred to a totality
that can appear only as that which the partial objects lack, and as that
which is lacking unto itself while being lacking in them (the Great
Signifier "syrnbolizable by the inherency of a -I in the ensemble of
301l

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

signifiers"). Just how far will one go in the development of a lack of lack
traversing the structure? Such is the structural operation: it distributes
lack in the molar aggregate. The limit of desiring-production-the border
line separating the molar aggregates and their molecular elements, the
objective representations and the machines of desire-is now completely displaced. The limit now passes only within the molar aggregate itself,
inasmuch as the latter is furrowed by the line of castration. The formal
operations of the structure are those of extrapolation, application, and
biunivocalization, which reduce the social aggregate of departure to a
familial aggregate of destination, with the familial relation becoming
"metaphorical for all the others" and hindering the molecular productive
elements from following their own line of escape.
When Andre Green looks for the reasons that establish the affinity
of psychoanalysis with the theatrical and structural representation it
makes visible, he offers two that are especially striking: the theater
raises the familial relation to the condition of a universal metaphoric
structural relation, whence the imaginary place and interplay of persons
derives; and inversely, the theater forces the play and the working of
machines into the wings, behind a limit that has become impassible
(exactly as in fantasy the machines are there, but behind the wall). In
short, the displaced limit no longer passes between objective representation and desiring-production, but between the two poles of subjective
representation, as infinite imaginary representation, and as finite structural representation. Thereafter it is possible to oppose these two
aspects to each other, the imaginary variations that tend toward the
night of the indeterminate or the nondifferentiated, and the symbolic
invariant that traces the path of the differentiations: the same thing is
found all over, following a rule of inverse relation, or double bind. All of
production is conducted into the double impasse of subjective representation. Oedipus can always be consigned to the Imaginary, but no
matter, it will be encountered again, stronger and more whole, more
lacking and triumphant by the very fact that it is lacking, it will be
encountered again in its entirety in symbolic castration. And it's a sure
thing that structure affords us no means for escaping familialism; on the
contrary, it adds another turn, it attributes a universal metaphoric value
to the family at the very moment it has lost its objective literal values.
Psychoanalysis makes its ambition clear: to relieve the waning family, to
replace the broken-down familial bed with the psychoanalyst's couch, to
make it so that the "analytic situation" is incestuous in its essence, so
that it is its own proof or voucher, on a par with Reality.!"
In the final analysis that is indeed what is at issue, as Octave
Mannoni shows: how can belief continue after repudiation, how can we
INTRODUCTION TO

SCHIZO,~NAL YSIS I

307

continue to be pious? We have repudiated and lost all our beliefs that
proceeded by way of objective representations. The earth is dead, the
desert is growing: the old father is dead, the territorial father, and the
son too, the despot Oedipus. We are alone with our bad conscience and
our boredom, our life where nothing happens; nothing left but images
that revolve within the infinite subjective representation. We will muster
all our strength so as to believe in these images, from the depths of a
structure that governs our relationships with them and our identifications as so many effects of a symbolic signifier. The "good identification." We are all Archie Bunker at the theater, shouting out before
Oedipus: there's my kind of guy, there's my kind of guy! Everything, the
myth of the earth, the tragedy of the despot, is taken up again as
shadows projected on a stage. The great territorialities have fallen into
ruin, but the structure proceeds with all the subjective and private
reterritorializations. What a perverse operation psychoanalysis is, where
this neoidealism, this rehabilitated cult of castration, this ideology of
lack culminates: the anthropomorphic representation of sex! In truth,
they don't know what they are doing, nor what mechanism of repression
they are fostering, for their intentions are often progressive. But no one
today can enter an analyst's consulting room without at least being
aware that everything has been played out in advance: Oedipus and
castration, the Imaginary and the Symbolic, the great lesson of the
inadequacy of being or of dispossession. Psychoanalysis as a gadget,
Oedipus as a reterritorialization, a retimbering of modern man on the
"rock" of castration.
The path marked out by Lacan led in a completely different
direction. He is not content to turn, like the analytic squirrel, inside the
wheel of the Imaginary and the Symbolic; he refuses to be caught up in
the Oedipal Imaginary and the oedipalizing structure, the imaginary
identity of persons and the structural unity of machines, everywhere
knocking against the impasses of a molar representation that the family
closes round itself. What is the use of going from the imaginary dual
order to the symbolic third (or fourth), if the latter is biunivocalizing
whereas the first is biunivocalized? As partial objects the desiringmachines undergo two totalizations, one when the socius confers on
them a structural unity under a symbolic signifier acting as absence and
lack in an aggregate of departure, the other when the family imposes on
them a personal unity with imaginary signifieds that distribute, that
"vacuolize" lack in an aggregate of destination: a double abduction of
the orphan machines, inasmuch as the structure applies its articulation
to them, inasmuch as the parents lay their fingers on them. To trace back
from images to the structure would have little significance and would not
3M

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

rescue us from representation, if the structure did not have a reverse side
that is like the real production of desire.
This reverse side is the "real inorganization" of the molecular
elements: partial objects that enter into indirect syntheses or interactions, since they are not partial (partiels) in the sense of extensive parts,
but rather partial ("partiaux")* like the intensities under which a unit of
matter always fills space in varying degrees (the eye, the mouth, the anus
as degrees of matter); pure positive multiplicities where everything is
possible, without exclusiveness or negation, syntheses operating without a plan, where the connections are transverse, the disjunctions
included, the conjunctions polyvocal, indifferent to their underlying
support, since this matter that serves them precisely as a support
receives no specificity from any structural or personal unity, but appears
as the body without organs that fills the space each time an intensity fills
it; signs of desire that compose a signifying chain but that are not
themselves signifying, and do not answer to the rules of a linguistic game
of chess, but instead to the lottery drawings that sometimes cause a
word to be chosen, sometimes a design, sometimes a thing or a piece of a
thing, depending on one another only by the order of the random
drawings, and holding together only by the absence of a link (nonlocalizable connections), having no other statutory condition than that of
being dispersed elements of desiring-machines that are themselves
dispersed.r It is this entire reverse side of the structure that Lacan
discovers, with the "0" as machine, and the "0" as nonhuman sex:
schizophrenizing the analytic field, instead of oedipalizing the psychotic
field.
Everything hinges on the way in which the structure is elicited from
the machines, according to planes of consistency or of structuration, and
"partlel: partial, incomplete; partial (pI. partiaux}: partial, biased, as a biased judge. We have chosen to

tran.slat~ obje~s. partiels thr?ugh?ut. as "partial objects" rather than as "part-objects" (as in Melanie
Klein), In ~ntlcl~atlOn of this point III the book where Deleuze and Guattari shift from Klein's concept
of the partial objects ~s "p~rt of," h~nce as an inc~mplete part of a lost unity or totality (molar), toward
a cOll:ept of the partial objects as biased, evaluating intensities that know no lack and are capable of
selecting organs (molecular). (Translators' note.)
Hacan, Ecrits (see reference note 19), pp , 657-59. Serge Leclaire has made a profound attempt to
define within this perspective the reverse side of the structure as the "pure being of desire" ("La realite
~u ?esrr" [reference note 26J,pp. 242-49) '.In desire he sees a multiplicity of prepersonal singularities, or
indifferent elements that are defined precisely by the absence of a link. But this absence of a link-and
of a meaning-is positive, "it constitutes the specific force of coherence of this constellation." Of
course, meani~g and link can always be re-established, if only by inserting fragments assumed to be
forgotten: this IS even the very function of Oedipus. But "if the analysis again discovers the link between
two. elements, this is a sig? that they are not the ultimate, irreducible terms ofthe unconscious. n It will be
nO!Iced here that Leclaire uses the exact criterion of real distinction in Spinoza and Leibniz: the
ultimate elements (the infinite attributes) are attributable to God, because they do not depend on one
another and do not tolerate any relation of opposition or contradiction among themselves. The absence
of all direct links guarantees their common participation in the divine substance. Likewise for the
partial objects and the body without organs: the body without organs is substance itself and the partial
objects, the ultimate attributes or elements of substance.
'

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

3119

lines of selection that correspond to the large statistical aggregates or
molar formations, and that determine the links and reduce production to
representation-that is where the disjunctions become exclusive (and
the connections global, and the conjunctions, biunivocal), at the same
time that the support gains a specificity under a structural unity, and the
signs themselves become signifying under the action of a despotic
symbol that totalizes them in the name of its own absence or withdrawal.
Yes, in fact, there the production of desire can be represented only in
terms of an extrapolated sign that joins together all the elements of
production in a constellation of which it is not itself a part. There the
absence of a tie necessarily appears as an absence, and no longer as a
positive force. There desire is necessarily referred to a missing term,
whose very essence is to be lacking. The signs of desire, being
nonsignifying, become signifying in representation only in terms of a
signifier of absence or lack. The structure is formed and appears only in
terms of the symbolic term defined as a lack. The great Other as the
nonhuman sex gives way, in representation, to a signifier of the great
Other as an always missing term, the all-too-human sex, the phallus of
molar castration."
Here too Lacan's approach appears in all its complexity; for it is
certain that he does not enclose the unconscious in an Oedipal structure.
He shows on the contrary that Oedipus is imaginary, nothing but an
image, a myth; that this or these images are produced by an oedipalizing
structure; that this structure acts only insofar as it reproduces the
element of castration, which itself is not imaginary but symbolic. There
we have the three major planes of structuration, which correspond to
the molar aggregates: Oedipus as the imaginary reterritorialization of
private man, produced under the structural conditions of capitalism,
inasmuch as capitalism reproduces and revives the archaism of the
imperial symbol or the vanished despot. All three are necessaryprecisely in order to lead Oedipus to the point of its self-critique. The
task undertaken by Lacan is to lead Oedipus to such a point. (Likewise,
Elisabeth Roudinesco has clearly seen that, in Lacan, the hypothesis of
an unconscious-as-language does not closet the unconscious in a linguistic structure, but leads linguistics to the point of its autocritique, by
showing how the structural organization of signifiers still depends on a
despotic Great Signifier acting as an archaisrn.j'"
"Lacan, Ecrits (see reference note 19), p. 819: "For want of this signifier,aU the others would represent
nothing." Serge Leclaire shows how the structure is organized around a missing ter.ffi, or :at.her a
signifier of lack: "It is the elective signifier of the absence of a link, the ph.a1lus.that we find agam In the

unique privilege of its relation to the essence of lack-an emblem of difference pa.r exceHence-the
irreducible difference, the difference between the sexes .... If man can talk, this )S because at one
point in the languagesystem there is a guarantor of the irreducibility of lack: the phallic signifier"("La
realite du desir" (see reference note 26], p. 25)). How strange all this is!

3111

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

What is this point of self-criticism? It is the point where the
structure, beyond the images that fill it and the Symbolic that conditions
it within representation, reveals its reverse side as a positive principle of
nonconsistency that dissolves it: where desire is shifted into the order of
production, related to its molecular elements, and where it lacks nothing,
because it is defined as the natural and sensuous objective being, at the
same time as the Real is defined as the objective being of desire. For the
unconscious of schizoanalysis is unaware of persons, aggregates, and
laws, and of images, structures, and symbols. It is an orphan, just as it is
an anarchist and an atheist. It is not an orphan in the sense that the
father's name would designate an absence, but in the sense that the
unconscious reproduces itself wherever the names of history designate
present intensities ("the sea of proper names "). The unconscious is not
figurative, since its figural is abstract, the figure-schizo It is not structural, nor is it symbolic, for its reality is that of the Real in its very
production, in its very inorganization. It is not representative, but solely
rnachinic, and productive.
Destroy, destroy. The task of schizoanalysis goes by way of
destruction-a whole scouring of the unconscious, a complete curettage.
Destroy Oedipus, the illusion of the ego, the puppet of the superego,
guilt, the law, castration. It is not a matter of pious destructions, such as
those performed by psychoanalysis under the benevolent neutral eye of
the analyst. For these are Hegel-style destructions, ways of conserving.
How is it that the celebrated neutrality, and what psychoanalysis
calls-dares to call-the disappearance or the dissolution of the Oedipus
complex, do not make us burst into laughter? We are told that Oedipus is
indispensable, that it is the source of every possible differentiation, and
that it saves us from the terrible non differentiated mother. But this
terrible mother, the sphinx, is herself part of Oedipus; her nondifferentiation is merely the reverse of the exclusive differentiations created by
Oedipus, she is herself created by Oedipus: Oedipus necessarily operates in the form of this double impasse. We are told that Oedipus in its
turn must be overcome, and that this is achieved through castration,
latency, desexualization, and sublimation. But what is castration if not
still Oedipus, to the nth power, now symbolic, and therefore all the more
virulent? And what is latency, this pure fable, if not the silence imposed
on desiring-machines so that Oedipus can develop, be fortified in us, so
that it can accumulate its poisonous sperm and gain the time necessary
for propagating itself, and for passing on to our future children? And
what is the elimination of castration anxiety in its turn-desexualization
and sublimation-if not divine acceptance of, and infinite resignation to,
bad conscience, which consists for the woman of "the appeased wish for
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

311

a penis ... destined to be converted into a wish for a baby and for a
husband," and for the man in assuming his passive attitude and in
"[subjecting] himself to a father substitute "?20
We are all the more "extricated" from Oedipus as we become a
living example, an advertisement, a theorem in action, so as to attract
our children to Oedipus: we have evolved in Oedipus, we have been
structured in Oedipus, and under the neutral and benevolent eye of the
substitute, we have learned the song of castration, the lack-of-beingthat-is-life; "yes it is through castration/that we gain access/to
Decceesire." What one calls the disappearance of Oedipus is Oedipus
become an idea. Only the idea can inject the venom. Oedipus has to
become an idea so that it sprouts each time a new set of arms and legs,
lips and mustache: "In tracing back the 'memory deaths' your ego
becomes a sort of mineral theorem which constantly proves the futility
of living.">' We have been triangulated in Oedipus, and will triangulate
in it in turn. From the family to the couple, from the couple to the family.
In actuality, the benevolent neutrality of the analyst is very limited: it
ceases the instant one stops responding daddy-mommy. It ceases the
instant one introduces a little desiring-machine-the tape-recorder-into
the analyst's office; it ceases as soon as a flow is made to circulate that
does not let itself be stopped by Oedipus, the mark of the triangle (they
tell you you have a libido that is too viscous, or too liquid, contraindications for analysis).
When Fromm denounces the existence of a psychoanalytic bureaucracy, he still doesn't go far enough, because he doesn't see what
the stamp of this bureaucracy is, and that an appeal to the pre-oedipal is
not enough to escape this stamp: the pre-oedipal, like the post-oedipal, is
still a way of bringing all of desiring-production-the anoedipal-back
to Oedipus. When Reich denounces the way in which psychoanalysis
joins forces with social repression, he still doesn't go far enough,
because he doesn't see that the tie linking psychoanalysis with capitalism is not merely ideological, that it is infinitely closer, infinitely tighter;
and that psychoanalysis depends directly on an economic mechanism
(whence its relations with money) through which the decoded flows of
desire, as taken up in the axiomatic of capitalism, must necessarily be
reduced to a familial field where the application of this axiomatic is
carried out: Oedipus as the last word of capitalist consumption-sucking
away at daddy-mommy, being blocked and triangulated on the couch;
"So it's .. ." Psychoanalysis, no less than the bureaucratic or military
apparatus, is a mechanism for the absorption of surplus value, nor is this
true from the outside, extrinsically; rather, its very form and its finality
are marked by this social function. It is not the pervert, nor even the

3121

ANTI-OEDIPUS

autistic person, who escapes psychoanalysis; the whole of psychoanalysis is an immense perversion, a drug, a radical break with reality, starting
with the reality of desire; it is a narcissism, a monstrous autism: the
characteristic autism and the intrinsic perversion of the machine of
capital. At its most autistic, psychoanalysis is no longer measured
against any reality, it no longer opens to any outside, but becomes itself
the test of reality and the guarantor of its own test: reality as the lack to
which the inside and the outside, departure and arrival, are reduced.
Psychoanalysis index sui, with no other reference than itself or "the
analytic situation."
Psychoanalysis states clearly that unconscious representation can
never be apprehended independently of the deformations, disguises, or
displacements it undergoes. Unconscious representation therefore comprises essentially, by virtue of its own law, a represented that is
displaced in relation to an agency in a constant state of displacement.
But from this, two unwarranted conclusions are drawn: that this agency
can be discovered by way of the displaced represented; and this,
precisely because this agency itself belongs to representation, as a
nonrepresented representative, or as a lack "that juts out into the
overfull (trop-plein) of a representation." This results from the fact that
displacement refers to very different movements: at times, the movement through which desiring-production is continually overcoming the
limit, becoming deterritorialized, causing its flows to escape, going
beyond the threshold of representation; at times, on the contrary, the
movement through which the limit itself is displaced, and now passes to
the interior of the representation that performs the artificial reterritorializations of desire. If the displacing agency can be concluded from the
displaced, this is only true in the second sense, where molar representation is organized around a representative that displaces the represented.
But this is certainly not true in the first sense, where the molecular
elements are continually passing through the links in the chain. We have
seen in this perspective how the law of representation perverted the
productive forces of the unconscious, and induced in its very structure a
false image that caught desire in its trap (the impossibility of concluding
from the prohibition as to what is actually prohibited). Yes, Oedipus is
indeed the displaced represented; yes, castration is indeed the representative, the displacing agency (le deplacanti, the signifier-but none of
that constitutes an unconscious material, nor does any of it concern the
productions of the unconscious. Oedipus, castration, the signifier, etc.,
exist at the crossroads of two operations of capture: one where
repressive social production becomes replaced by beliefs, the other
where repressed desiring-production finds itself replaced by representaINTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAl YSIS

I

313

tions. To be sure, it is not psychoanalysis that makes us believe: Oedipus
and castration are demanded, then demanded again, and these demands
come from elsewhere and from deeper down. But psychoanalysis did
find the following means, and fills the following function: causing beliefs
to survive even after repudiation; causing those who no longer believe in
anything to continue believing; reconstituting a private territory for
them, a private Urstaat, a private capital (dreams as capital, said Freud).
That is why, inversely, schizoanalysis must devote itself with all its
strength to the necessary destructions. Destroying beliefs and representations, theatrical scenes. And when engaged in this task no activity will
be too malevolent. Causing Oedipus and castration to explode, brutally
intervening each time the subject strikes up the song of myth or intones
tragic lines, carrying him back to the factory. As Charlus says, "A lot we
care about your grandmother, you little shit!" Oedipus and castration
are no more than reactional formations, resistances, blockages, and
armorings whose destruction can't come fast enough. Reich intuits a
fundamental principle of schizoanalysis when he says that the destruction of resistances must not wait upon the discovery of the material."
But the reason for this is even more radical than he thought: there is no
unconscious material, so that schizoanalysis has nothing to interpret.
There are only resistances, and then machines desiring-machines.
Oedipus is a resistance; if we have been able to speak of the intrinsically
perverted nature of psychoanalysis, this is due to the fact that perversion in general is the artificial reterritorialization of the flows of desire,
whose machines on the contrary are indices of de territorialized production. The psychoanalyst reterritorializes on the couch, in the representation of Oedipus and castration. Schizoanalysis on the contrary must
disengage the de territorialized flows of desire, in the molecular elements
of desiring-production. We should again call to mind the practical rule
laid down by Leclaire, following Lacan, the rule of the right to
non-sense as well as to the absence of a link: you will not have reached
the ultimate and irreducible terms of the unconscious so long as you find
or restore a link between two elements. (But how then can one see in this
extreme dispersion-machines dispersed in every machine-nothing
more than a pure "fiction" that must give way to Reality defined as a
lack, with Oedipus and castration back at a gallop, at the same time that
one reduces the absence of a link to a "signifier" of absence charged
with representing the absence, with linking this absence itself, and with
moving us back and forth from one pole of displacement to the other?
One falls back into the molar hole while claiming to unmask the real.)
What complicates everything is that there is indeed a necessity for
desiring-production to be induced from representation, to be discovered
314

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

through its lines of escape. But this is true in a way altogether different
from what psychoanalysis believes it to be. The decoded flows of desire
form the free energy (libido) of the desiring-machines. The desiringmachines take form and train their sights along a tangent of deterritorialization that traverses the representative spheres, and that runs along the
body without organs. Leaving, escaping, but while causing more escapes. The desiring-machines themselves are the flows-schizzes or the
breaks-flows that break and flow at the same time on the body without
organs: not the gaping wound represented in castration, but the myriad
little connections, disjunctions, and conjunctions by which every machine produces a flow in relation to another that breaks it, and breaks a
flow that another produces. But how would these decoded and de territorialized flows of desiring-production keep from being reduced to some
representative territoriality, how would they keep from forming for
themselves yet another such territory, even if on the body without
organs as the indifferent support for a last representation? Even those
who are best at "leaving," those who make leaving into something as
natural as being born or dying, those who set out in search of nonhuman
sex-Lawrence, Miller-stake out a far-off territoriality that still forms
an anthropomorphic and phallic representation: the Orient, Mexico, or
Peru. Even the schizo's stroll or voyage does not effect great deterritorializations without borrowing from territorial circuits: the tottering walk
of Molloy and his bicycle preserves the mother's room as the vestige of
a goal; the vacillating spirals of The Unnamable keep the familial tower
as an uncertain center where it continues to turn while treading its own
underfoot; the infinite series of juxtaposed and unlocalized parks in
Watt still contains a reference to Mr. Knott's house, the only one
capable of "pushing the soul out-of-doors," but also of summoning it
back to its place. We are all little dogs, we need circuits, and we need to
be taken for walks. Even those best able to disconnect, to unplug
themselves, enter into connections of desiring-machines that re-form
little earths. Even Gisela Pankow's great deterritorialized subjects are
led to discover the image of a family castle under the roots of the
uprooted tree that crosses through their body without organs.s"
Previously we distinguished two poles of delirium, one as the
molecular schizophrenic line of escape, and the other as the paranoiac
molar investment. But the perverted pole is equally opposed to the
schizophrenic pole, just as the reconstitution of territorialities is opposed to the movement of deterritorialization. And if perversion in the
narrowest sense of the word performs a certain very specific type of
reterritorialization within the artifice, perversion in the broad sense
comprises all the types of rcterritorializations, not merely artificial, but
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

315

also exotic, archaic, residual, private, etc.: thus Oedipus and psychoanalysis as perversion. Even Raymond Roussel's schizophrenic machines turn into perverse machines in a theater representing Africa. In
short, there is no deterritorialization of the flows of schizophrenic desire
that is not accompanied by global or local reterritorializations, reterritorializations that always reconstitute shores of representation. What is
more, the force and the obstinacy of a deterritorialization can only be
evaluated through the types of reterritorialization that represent it; the
one is the reverse side of the other. Our loves are complexes of
de territorialization and reterritorialization. What we love is always a
certain mulatto-male or female. The movement of deterritorialization
can never be grasped in itself, one can only grasp its indices in relation to
the territorial representations. Take the example of dreams: yes, dreams
are Oedipal, and this comes as no surprise, since dreams are a perverse
reterritorialization in relation to the deterritorialization of sleep and
nightmares. But why return to dreams, why turn them into the royal road
of desire and the unconscious, when they are in fact the manifestation of
a superego, a superpowerful and superarchaized ego (the Urszene of the
Urstaat)? Yet at the heart of dreams themselves-as with fantasy and
delirium-machines function as indices of deterritorialization. In
dreams there are always machines endowed with the strange property of
passing from hand to hand, of escaping and causing circulations, of
carrying and being carried away. The airplane of parental coitus, the
father's car, the grandmother's sewing machine, the little brother's
bicycle, all objects of flight and theft, stealing and stealing away-the
machine is always infernal in the family dream. The machine introduces
breaks and flows that prevent the dream from being reconfined in its
scene and systematized within its representation. It makes the most of
an irreducible factor of non-sense, which will develop elsewhere and
from without, in the conjunctions of the real as such. Psychoanalysis,
with its Oedipal stubbornness, has only a dim understanding of this; for
one reterritorializes on persons and surroundings, but one deterritorializes on machines. Is it Schreber's father who acts through machines, or
on the contrary is it the machines themselves that function through the
father? Psychoanalysis settles on the imaginary and structural representatives of reterritorialitation, while schizoanalysis follows the machinic
indices of deterritorialization. The opposition still holds between the
neurotic on the couch-as an ultimate and sterile land, the last exhausted colony-and the schizo out for a walk in a deterritorialized circuit.
The following excerpt from an article by Michel Cournot on
Chaplin helps us understand what schizophrenic laughter is, as well as
the schizophrenic line of escape or breakthrough, and the process as
316 \

ANTI-OEDIPUS

deterritorialization, with its machinic indices: "The moment Charlie
Chaplin makes the board fall a second time on his head-a psychotic
gesture-he provokes the spectator's laughter. Yes, but what laughter is
this? And what spectator? For example, the question no longer applies
at all, at this point in the film, of knowing whether the spectator must see
the accident coming or be surprised by it. It is as though the spectator, at
that very moment, were no longer in his seat, were no longer in a
position to observe things. A kind of perceptive gymnastics has lead
him, progressively, not to identify with the character of Modern Times,
but to experience so directly the resistance of the events that he
accompanies this character, has the same surprises, the same premonitions, the same habits as he. Thus it is that the famous eating machine,
which in a sense, by its excess, is foreign to the film (Chaplin had
invented it twenty-two years before the film), is merely the formal,
absolute exercise that prepares for the conduct-also psychotic-of the
worker trapped in the machine, with only his upside-down head sticking
out, and who has Chaplin feed him his lunch, since it is lunch time. If
laughter is a reaction that takes certain circuits, it can be said that
Charlie Chaplin, as the film's sequences unfold, progressively displaces
the reactions, causes them to recede, level by level, until the moment
when the spectator is no longer master of his own circuits, and tends to
spontaneously take either a shorter path, which is not passable, which is
barred, or else a path that is very explicitly posted as leading nowhere.
After having suppressed the spectator as such, Chaplin perverts the
laughter, which comes to be like so many short-circuits of a disconnected piece of machinery. Critics have occasionally spoken of the pessimism of Modern Times and of the optimism of the final image. Neither
term suits the film. Charles Chaplin in Modern Times sketches rather, on
a very small scale, with a precise stroke, the finished design of several
oppressive and fundamental manifestations. The leading character,
played by Chaplin, has to be neither active nor passive, neither
consenting nor insubordinate, since he is the pencil point that traces the
design, he is the stroke itself. ... That is why the final image is without
optimism. One does not see what optimism would be doing at the
conclusion of this statement. This man and this woman seen from the
back, all black, whose shadows are not projected by any sun, advance
toward nothing. The wireless telegraph poles that run along the left side
of the road, the barren trees that dot the right side, do not meet at the
horizon. There is no horizon. The bald hills facing the spectator only
form a line that merges with the void hanging over them. Anyone can see
that this man and this woman are no longer alive. There is no pessimism
here either. What had to happen happened. They did not kill each other.
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

317

They were not brought down by the police. And it will not be necessary
to go looking for the alibi of an accident. Charles Chaplin did not dwell
on this. He went quickly, as usual. He traced the finished design."24
In its destructive task, schizoanalysis must proceed as quickly as
possible, but it can also proceed only with great patience, great care, by
successively undoing the representative territorialities and reterritorializations through which a subject passes in his individual history. For
there are several layers, several planes of resistance that come from
within or are imposed from without. Schizophrenia as a process,
de territorialization as a process, is inseparable from the stases that
interrupt it, or aggravate it, or make it turn in circles, and reterritorialize
it into neurosis, perversion, and psychosis. To a point where the process
cannot extricate itself, continue on, and reach fulfillment, except insofar
as it is capable of creating-what exactly?-a new land. In each case we
must go back by way of old lands, study their nature, their density; we
must seek to discover how the machinic indices are grouped on each of
these lands that permit going beyond them. How can we reconquer the
process each time, constantly resuming the journey on these landsOedipal familial lands of neurosis, artificial lands of perversion, clinical
lands of psychosis? In Search of Lost Time as a great enterprise of
schizoanalysis: all the planes are traversed until their molecular line of
escape is reached, their schizophrenic breakthrough; thus in the kiss
where Albertine's face jumps from one plane of consistency to another,
in order to finally come undone in a nebula of molecules. The reader
always risks stopping at a given plane and saying yes, that is where
Proust is explaining himself. But the narrator-spider never ceases
undoing webs and planes, resuming the journey, watching for the signs
or the indices that operate like machines and that will cause him to go on
further. This very movement is humor, black humor. Oh , the narrator
does not homestead in the familial and neurotic lands of Oedipus, there
where the global and personal connections are established; he does not
remain there, he crosses these lands, he desecrates them, he penetrates
them, he liquidates even his grandmother with a machine for tying
shoes. The perverse lands of homosexuality, where the exclusive
disjunctions of women with women, and men with men, are established,
likewise break apart in terms of the machinic indices that undermine
them. The psychotic earths, with their conjunctions in place (Charlus is
therefore surely mad, and Albertine too, perhaps l), are traversed in their
turn to a point where the problem is no longer posed, no longer posed in
this way. The narrator continues his own affair, until he reaches the
unknown country, his own, the unknown land, which alone is created by
his own work in progress, the Search of Lost Time "in progress,"
318

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

functioning as a desiring-machine capable of collecting and dealing with
all the indices. He goes toward these new regions where the connections
are always partial and nonpersonal, the conjunctions nomadic and
polyvocal, the disjunctions included, where homosexuality and heterosexuality cannot be distinguished any longer: the world of transverse
communications, where the finally conquered nonhuman sex mingles
with the flowers, a new earth where desire functions according to its
molecular elements and flows. Such a voyage does not necessarily imply
great movements in extension; it becomes immobile, in a room and on a
body without organs-an intensive voyage that undoes all the lands for
the benefit of the one it is creating.
The patient resumption of the process, or on the contrary its
interruption-the two are so closely interrelated that they can only be
evaluated each within the other. How would the schizo's voyage be
possible independent of certain circuits, how could it exist without a
land? But inversely, how can we be certain that these circuits don't
reconstitute the lands-only too well known-of the asylum, the artifice, or the family? We always return to the same question: from what
does the schizo suffer, he whose sufferings are unspeakable? Does he
suffer from the process itself, or rather from its interruptions, when he is
neuroticized in the family, in the land of Oedipus; when the one who
does not allow himself to be Oedipalized is psychoticized in the land of
the asylum; when the one who escapes the family and the asylum is
perverted in the artificial locales? Perhaps there is only one illness,
neurosis, the Oedipal decay against which all the pathogenic interruptions of the process should be measured. Most of the modern
endeavors-outpatient centers, inpatient hospitals, social clubs for the
sick, family care, institutions, and even antipsychiatry-remain threatened by a common danger, a danger which Jean Oury has been able to
analyze in depth: how does one avoid the institution's re-forming an
asylum structure, or constituting perverse and reformist artificial societies, or residual paternalistic or mothering pseudo families? We do not
have in mind the so-called community psychiatry endeavors, whose
ad~itted purp~se is to triangulate, to Oedipalize everyone-people,
animals, and thmgs-to a point where we will witness a new race of sick
people i~plore by reaction that they be given back an asylum, or a little
BeckettIan land, a garbage can, so they can become catatonic in a
~orner. But in a less openly repressive manner, who says that the family
IS a good place, a good circuit for the deterritorialized schizo? Such a
thing ~~~Id be very surprising, to say the least: "the therapeutic
potentialities of the familial surroundings." The whole town, then, the
whole neighborhood? What molar unit will constitute a sufficiently

INTROOUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

319

nomadic circuit? How does one prevent the unit chosen, even if a
specific institution, from constituting a perverted society of tolerance, a
mutual-aid society that hides the real problems? Will the structure of the
institution save it? But how will the structure break its relationship with
neuroticizing, perverting, psychoticizing castration? How will this structure produce anything but a subjugated group? How will it give free play
to the process, when its entire molar organization has the function of
binding the molecular process? Even antipsychiatry-especially sensitive to the schizophrenic breakthrough and the intense voyage-tires out
and proposes the image of a subject-group that would become immediately reperverted, with former schizos guiding the most recent ones,
and, as relays, little chapels, or better yet, a convent in Ceylon.
The only thing that can save us from these impasses is an effective
politicization of psychiatry. And doubtless, with R. D. Laing and David
Cooper antipsychiatry went very far in this direction. But it seems to us
that they still conceive of this politicization in terms of the structure and
the event, rather than the process itself. Furthermore, they localize
social and mental alienation on a single line, and tend to consider them
as identical by showing how the familial agent extends the one into the
other.* Between the two, however, the relationship is rather that of an
included disjunction. This is because the decoding and the deterritorialization of flows define the very process of capitalism-that is, its
essence, its tendency, and its external limit. But we know that the
process is continually interrupted, or the tendency counteracted, or the
limit displaced, by subjective reterritorializations and representations
that operate as much at the level of capital as a subject (the axiomatic),
as at the level of the persons serving as capital's agents (application of
the axiomatic). But we seek in vain to assign social alienation and mental
alienation to one side or the other, as long as we establish a relation of
exclusion between the two. The de territorialization of flows in general
effectively merges with mental alienation, inasmuch as it includes the
reterritorializations that permit it to subsist only as the state of a
particular flow, a flow of madness that is defined thus because it is
charged with representing whatever escapes the axiornatics and the
applications of reterritorialization in other flows. Inversely, one can find
the form of social alienation in action in all the reterritorializations of
capitalism, inasmuch as they keep the flows from escaping the system,
'David Cooper, "Alienation mentale et alienation sociale ," Recherches, December 1968, pp. 48-49:
"Social alienation comes for the most part to overlap the diverse forms of mental alienation. - . _Those
admitted into a psychiatric hospital are admitt~d not so m~ch because they ~re sick,as.bec.a~se they are
protesting in a more or Jess adequate way against the social order. ~~e social sy.stem ~n which they are
caught thereby tomes to reinforce. the damages wrought by the fa!mhal system l~ W,hlCh they grew up.
This autonomy that they seek to affirm with regard to a mtcrosoctety acts as an indicator of a massive
alienation performed by society as a whole."

3:1:11

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

and maintain labor in the axiomatic framework of property, and desire in
the applied framework of the family; but this social alienation includes
in its turn mental alienation, which finds itself represented or reterritorialized in neurosis, perversion, and psychosis (the mental illnesses).
A true politics of psychiatry, or antipsychiatry, would consist
therefore in the following praxis: (I) undoing all the reterritorializations
that transform madness into mental illness; (2) liberating the schizoid
movement of deterritorialization in all the flows, in such a way that this
characteristic can no longer qualify a particular residue as a flow of
madness, but affects just as well the flows of labor and desire, of
production, knowledge, and creation in their most profound tendency.
Here, madness would no longer exist as madness, not because it would
have been transformed into "mental illness," but on the contrary
because it would receive the support of all the other flows, including
science and art-once it is said that madness is called madness and
appears as such only because it is deprived of this support, and finds
itself reduced to testifying all alone for deterritorialization as a universal
process. It is merely its unwarranted privilege, a privilege beyond its
capacities, that renders it mad. In this perspective Foucault announced
an age when madness would disappear, not because it would be lodged
within the controlled space of mental illness ("great tepid aquariums "),
but on the contrary because the exterior limit designated by madness
would be overcome by means of other flows escaping control on all
sides, and carrying us along."
It should therefore be said that one can never go far enough in the
direction of deterritoriaJization: you haven't seen anything yet-an
irreversible process. And when we consider what there is of a profoundly artificial nature in the perverted reterritorializations, but also in the
psychotic reterritorializations of the hospital, or even the familial
neurotic reterritorializations, we cry out, "More perversion! More
artifice l't-c-to a point where the earth becomes so artificial that the
movement of de territorialization creates of necessity and by itself a new
earth. Psychoanalysis is especially satisfying in this regard: its entire
perverted practice of the cure consists in transforming familial neurosis
into artificial neurosis (of transference), and in exalting the couch, a little
island with its commander, the psychoanalyst, as an autonomous
territoriality of the ultimate artifice. A little additional effort is enough to
overturn everything, and to lead us finally toward other far-off places.
The schizoanalytic flick of the finger, which restarts the movement, links
*Michel Foucault, "La folie, l'absence d'oeuvre:' La Table ronde, May 1964: "Everything that we
experience today in the mode of the limit, or of strangeness, or of the unbearable. willhave joined again
with the serenity of the positive."

INTRODUCTION TO 5CHIZOANALY515

I

321

up again with the tendency, and pushes the simulacra to a point where
they cease being artificial images to become indices of the new world.
That is what the completion of the process is: not a promised and a
pre-existing land, but a world created in the process of its tendency, its
coming undone, its deterritoriaIization. The movement of the theater of
cruelty; for it is the only theater of production, there where the flows
cross the threshold of deterritoriaIization and produce the new landnot at all a hope, but a simple "finding," a "finished design," where the
person who escapes causes other escapes, and marks out the land while
de territorializing himself. An active point of escape where the revolutionary machine, the artistic machine, the scientific machine, and the
(schizo) analytic machine become parts and pieces of one another.

4

I

The First Positive Task
of Schizoanalysis

The negative or destructive task of schizoanalysis is in no
way separable from its positive tasks-all these tasks are necessarily
undertaken at the same time. The first positive task consists of discovering in a subject the nature, the formation, or the functioning of his
desiring-machines, independently of any interpretations. What are your
desiring-machines, what do you put into these machines, what is the
output, how does it work, what are your nonhuman sexes? The
schizoanalyst is a mechanic, and schizoanalysis is solely functional. In
this respect it cannot remain at the level of a still interpretative
examination-interpretative from the point of view of the
unconscious-of the social machines in which the subject is caught as a
cog or as a user; nor of the technical machines that are his prized
possession, or that he perfects or even produces through handiwork; nor
of the subject's use of his machines in his dreams and his fantasies.
These machines are still too representative, and represent units that are
too large-even the perverted machines of the sadist or the masochist,
even the influencing machines of the paranoiac. We have seen in general
that the pseudo analyses of the "object" were really the lowest level of
analytic activity, even and especially when they claim to double the real
object with an imaginary object; and better a how-to-interpret-yourdreams book than a psychoanalysis of the market place.
The consideration of all these machines, however, whether they be
real, symbolic, or imaginary, must indeed intervene in a specific
way-but as functional indices to point us in the direction of the
desiring-machines, to which these indices are more or less close and
affinal. The desiring-machines in fact are only reached starting from a
certain threshold of dispersion that no longer permits either their
322

I ANTI~OEDIPUS

imaginary identity or their structural unity to subsist. (These instances
still belong to the order of interpretation, that is to say the order of the
signified or the signifier.) Partial objects are what make up the parts of
the desiring-machines; partial objects define the working machine or the
working parts, but in a state of dispersion such that one part is
continually referring to a part from an entirely different machine, like
the red clover and the bumble bee, the wasp and the orchid, the bicycle
horn and the dead rat's ass. Let's not rush to introduce a term that would
be like a phallus structuring the whole and personifying the parts,
unifying and totalizing everything. Everywhere there is libido as machine energy, and neither the horn nor the bumble bee have the privilege
of being a phallus: the phallus intervenes only in the structural organization and the personal relations deriving from it, where everyone, like the
worker called to war, abandons his machines and sets to fighting for a
war trophy that is nothing but a great absence, with one and the same
penalty, one and the same ridiculous wound for all-castration. This
entire struggle for the phallus, this poorly understood will to power, this
anthropomorphic representation of sex, this whole conception of sexuality that horrifies Lawrence precisely because it is no more than a
conception, because it is an idea that "reason" imposes on the unconscious and introduces into the passional sphere, and is not by any means
a formation of this sphere-here is where desire finds itself trapped,
specifically limited to human sex, unified and identified in the molar
constellation. But the desiring-machines live on the contrary under the
order of dispersion of the molecular elements. And one fails to
understand the nature and function of partial objects if one does not see
therein such elements, rather than parts of even a fragmented whole. As
Lawrence said, analysis does not have to do with anything that
resembles a concept or a person, "the so-called human relations are not
involved.'?" Analysis should deal solely (except in its negative task)
with the machinic arrangements grasped in the context of their molecular dispersion.
Let us therefore return to the rule so clearly stated by Serge
Leclaire, even if he sees this only as a fiction instead of the real-desire
treel-desiry: the elements or parts of the desiring-machines are recognized by their mutual independence, such that nothing in the one
depends or should depend on something in the other. They must not be
opposed determinations of a same entity, nor the differentiations of a
single being, such as the masculine and the feminine in the human sex,
but different or really-distinct things (des reellement-distincts), distinct
"beings," as found in the dispersion of the nonhuman sex (the clover
and the bee). As long as schizoanalysis has not arrived at these disparate
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAlYSIS

I

323

elements, it has not yet discovered the partial objects as the ultimate
elements of the unconscious. It is in this sense that Leclaire used the
term "erogenous body" not to designate a fragmented organism, but an
emission of preindividual and prepersonal singularities, a pure dispersed
and anarchic multiplicity, without unity or totality, and whose elements
are welded, pasted together by the real distinction or the very absence of
a link. Such is the case in the schizoid sequences of Beckett: stones,
pockets, mouth; a shoe, a pipe bowl, a small limp bundle that is
undefined, a cover for a bicycle bell, half a crutch ("if one indefinitely
runs up against the same set of pure singularities, one can feel confident
that he has drawn near the singularity of the subject's desire ").26 To be
sure, one can always establish or re-establish some sort of link between
these elements: organic links between organs or fragments of organs
that eventually form part of the multiplicity; psychological and axiological links-the good, the bad-that finally refer to the persons or to the
scenes from which these elements are borrowed; structural links
between the ideas or the concepts apt to correspond to them. But it is
not in this respect that the partial objects are elements of the unconscious, and we cannot even go along with the image of the partial objects
that their inventor, Melanie Klein, proposes. This is because, whether
organs or fragments of organs, the partial objects do not refer in the
least to an organism that would function phantasmatically as a lost unity
or a totality to come. Their dispersion has nothing to do with a lack, and
constitutes their mode of presence in the multiplicity they form without
unification or totalization. With every structure dislodged, every memory abolished, every organism set aside, every link undone, they function
as raw partial objects, dispersed working parts of a machine that is itself
dispersed. In short, partial objects are the molecular functions of the
unconscious. That is why, when we insisted earlier on the difference
between desiring-machines and all the figures of molar machines, we
were fully aware that they were both contained in, and did not exist
without, one another, but we had to stress the difference in regime and in
scale between these two machinic species.
It is true that one might instead wonder how these conditions of
dispersion, of real distinction, and of the absence of a link permit any
machinic regime to exist-how the partial objects thus defined are able
to form machines and arrangements of machines. The answer lies in the
passive nature of the syntheses, or-what amounts to the same thing-in
the indirect nature of the interactions under consideration. If it is true
that every partial object emits a flow, it is also the case that this flow is
associated with another partial object and defines the other's potential
field of presence, which is itself multiple (a multiplicity of anuses for the
:l:l4

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

flows of shit). The synthesis of connection of the partial objects is
indirect, since one of the partial objects, in each point of its presence
within the field, always breaks the flow that another object emits or
produces relatively, itself ready to emit a flow that other partial objects
will break. The flows are two-headed, so to speak, and it is by means of
these flows that every productive connection is made, such as we have
tried to account for with the notion of flow-schiz or break-flow. So that
the true activities of the unconscious, causing to flow and breaking
flows, consist of the passive synthesis itself insofar as it ensures the
relative coexistence and displacement of the two different functions.
Now let us assume that the respective flows associated with two
partial objects at least partially overlap: their production remains
distinct in relation to the objects x and y that emit them, but not the
fields of presence in relation to the objects a and b that inhabit and
interrupt them, such that the partial a and the partial b become in this
regard indiscernible (thus the mouth and the anus, the mouth-anus of the
anorexic). And they are not indiscernible solely in the mixed region,
since one can always assume that, having exchanged their function
within this region, they cannot be further distinguished by exclusion
there where the two flows no longer overlap: one then finds oneself
before a new passive synthesis where a and b are in a paradoxical
relationship of included disjunction. Finally there remains the possibility, not of an overlapping of the flows, but of a permutation of the objects
that emit them: one discovers fringes of interference on the edge of each
field of presence, fringes that testify to the remainder of a flow in the
other, and form residual conjunctive syntheses guiding the passage or
the heartfelt becoming from the one to the other. A permutation
involving 2, 3, n organs; deformable abstract polygons that make game
of the figurative Oedipal triangle, and never cease to undo it. Through
binarity, overlapping, or permutation, all these indirect passive syntheses are one and the same engineering of desire. But who will be able to
describe the desiring-machines of each subject, what analysis will be
exacting enough for this? Mozart's desiring-machine? "Raise your ass to
your mouth, ... ah, my ass burns like fire, but what can be the meaning
of that? Perhaps a turd wants to come out. ... Yes, yes, turd, I know
you, I see you, I feel you. What is this-is such a thing possible?"*
These syntheses necessarily imply the position of a body without
organs. This is due to the fact that the body without organs is in no way
the contrary of the organs-partial objects. It is itself produced in the
*From a letter by Mozart, cited by Marcel More, Le Dicu Mozart et Ie monde des oiseaux (Paris:
Gallirnard, 1971), p. 124: "Having come of age, he found the means of concealing his divine essence, by
indulging in scatological amusements." More shows convincingly how the scatological machine wor-ks
underneath and against the Oedipal "cage."

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALY515

!

325

first passive synthesis of connection, as that which is going to
neutralize-or on the contrary put into motion-the two activities, the
two heads of desire. For as we have seen, it can be produced as the
amorphous fluid of antiproduction, just as it can be produced as the
support that appropriates for itself the flow production. It can as well
repel the organs-objects as attract them, and appropriate them for itself.
But in repulsion as in attraction, the body without organs is not in
opposition to these organs-objects; it merely ensures its own opposition,
and their opposition, with regard to an organism. The body without
organs and the organs-partial objects are opposed conjointly to the
organism. The body without organs is in fact produced as a whole, but a
whole alongside the parts-a whole that does not unify or totalize them,
but that is added to them like anew, really distinct part.
When it repels the organs, as in the mounting of the paranoiac
machine, the body without organs marks the external limit of the pure
multiplicity formed by these organs themselves insofar as they constitute a nonorganic and nonorganized multiplicity. And when it attracts
them and fits itself over them, in the process of a rniraculating fetishistic
machine, it still does not totalize them, unify them in the manner of an
organism: the organs-partial objects cling to the body without organs,
and enter into the new syntheses of included disjunction and nomadic
conjunction, of overlapping and permutation, on this body-syntheses
that continue to repudiate the organism and its organization. Desire
indeed passes through the body, and through the organs, but not through
the organism. That is why the partial objects are not the expression of a
fragmented, shattered organism, which would presuppose a destroyed
totality or the freed parts of a whole; nor is the body without organs the
expression of a "de-differentiated" C'de-differencie") organism stuck
back together that would surmount its own parts. The organs-partial
objects and the body without organs are at bottom one and the same
thing, one and the same multiplicity that must be conceived as such by
schizoanalysis. Partial objects are the direct powers of the body without
organs, and the body without organs, the raw material of the partial
objects. * The body without organs is the matter that always fills space to
~In his study on "Objet magique, sorceller!e et fetichisme" in Nouvelle revue de psvchunalyse, no. 2
(1970), Pierre Bonnafe clearly demonstrates in this respect the inadequacy of a notion .like that of a
fragmented body: "There is indeed a fragmenting of the body, but not at all with a feeling of Joss or
degradation. Quite to the contrary, as much for the holder as for the others, the body IS fragmented by
multiplication: the others no longer have to do with a simple person, but with a man to the x+ y+ Z power
whose life has been immeasurably increased, dispersed while being united with other natural
forces .... since its existence no longer rests at the center of its person, but has hidden itself in several
far-off and impregnable locations" (pp. 166--67). Bonnafe recognizes in the magic object the existence
of the three desiring syntheses: the connective synthesis, which combines the fragments of the person
with those of animals or olants: the included disjunctive synthesis, which records the man-animal
composite; the conjunctive synthesis, which implies a veritable migration of the remainder or residue.

3~e

\ P,NTI-OEDIPUS

given degrees of intensity, and the partial objects are these degrees,
these intensive parts that produce the real in space starting from matter
as intensity=O. The body without organs is the immanent substance, in
the most Spinozist sense of the word; and the partial objects are like its
ultimate attributes, which belong to it precisely insofar as they are really
distinct and cannot on this account exclude or oppose one another. The
partial objects and the body without organs are the two material
elements of the schizophrenic desiring-machines: the one as the immobile motor, the others as the working parts; the one as the giant
molecule, the others as the micromolecules-the two together in a
relationship of continuity from one end to the other of the molecular
chain of desire.
The chain is like the apparatus of transmission or of reproduction in
the desiring-machine. Insofar as it brings together-without unifying or
uniting them-the body without organs and the partial objects, the
desiring-machine is inseparable both from the distribution of the partial
objects on the body without organs, and from the leveling effect exerted
on the partial objects by the body without organs, which results in
appropriation. The chain also implies another type of synthesis than the
flows: it is no longer the lines of connection that traverse the productive
parts of the machine, but an entire network of disjunction on the
recording surface of the body without organs. And we have doubtless
been able to present things in a logical order where the disjunctive
synthesis of recording seemed to follow after the connective synthesis
of production, with a part of the energy of production (Libido) being
converted into a recording energy (Numen). But in fact, from the
standpoint of the machine itself, there is no succession that ensures the
strict coexistence of the chains and the flows, as well as of the body
without organs and the partial objects. The conversion of a portion of
the energy does not occur at a given moment, but is a preliminary and
constant condition of the system. The chain is the network of included
disjunctions on the body without organs, inasmuch as these disjunctions
resect the productive connections; the chain causes them to pass over to
the body without organs itself, thereby channeling or "codifying" the
flows. However, the whole question is in knowing whether one can
speak of a code at the level of this molecular chain of desire. We have
seen that a code implied two things-one or the other, or the two
together: on the one hand, the specific determination of the full body as
a territoriality of support; on the other hand, the erection of a despotic
signifier on which the entire chain depends. In this regard, in vain is the
axiomatic in profound opposition to codes; since it works on the
decoded flows, it cannot itself proceed except by effecting reterritorialINTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

327

izations and by reviving the signifying unity. The very notions of code
and axiomatic therefore seem to be valid only for the molar aggregates,
where the signifying chain forms a given determinate configuration on a
support that is itself specifically determined, and in terms of a detached
signifier. These conditions are not fulfilled without exclusions forming
and appearing in the disjunctive network-at the same time as the
connective lines take on a global and specific meaning.
But it is another case altogether with the properly molecular chain:
insofar as the body without organs is a nonspecific and non specified
support that marks the molecular limit of the molar aggregates, the chain
no longer has any other function than that of deterritorializing the flows
and causing them to pass through the signifying wall, thereby undoing
the codes. The function of the chain is no longer that of coding the flows
on a full body of the earth, the despot, or capital, but on the contrary that
of decoding them on the full body without organs. It is a chain of escape,
and no longer a code. The signifying chain has become a chain of
decoding and deterritorialization, which must be apprehended-and can
only be apprehended-as the reverse of the codes and the territorialities.
This molecular chain is still signifying because it is composed of signs of
desire; but these signs are no longer signifying, given the fact that they
are under the order of the included disjunctions where everything is
possible. These signs are points whose nature is a matter of indifference,
abstract machinic figures that play freely on the body without organs
and as yet form no structured configuration-or rather, they form one no
longer. As Jacques Monod says, we must conceive of a machine that is
such by its functional properties but not by its structure, "where nothing
but the play of blind combinations can be discerned.'?" It is precisely
the ambiguity of what the biologists call a genetic code that enables us to
understand this kind of situation: for if the corresponding chain effectively forms codes, inasmuch as it folds into exclusive molar configurations, it undoes the codes by unfolding along a molecular fiber that
includes all the possible figures. Similarly, in Lacan, the symbolic
organization of the structure, with its exclusions that come from the
function of the signifier, has as its reverse side the real inorganization of
desire.
It would seem that the genetic code points to a genic decoding: one
need only grasp the decoding and deterritorialization functions in their
own positivity, inasmuch as they imply a particular chain state that is
metastable and distinct both from any axiomatic and from any code. The
molecular chain is the form in which the genic unconscious, always
remaining subject, reproduces itself. And as we have seen, that is the
primary inspiration of psychoanalysis: it does not add a code to all those
32e

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

that are already known. The signifying chain of the unconscious,
Numen, is not used to discover or decipher codes of desire, but to cause
absolutely decoded flows of desire, Libido, to circulate, and to discover
in desire that which scrambles all the codes and undoes all the
territorialities. It is true that Oedipus will restore psychoanalysis to the
status of a simple code, with the familial territoriality and the signifier of
castration. Worse yet, it will happen that psychoanalysis itself wants to
act as an axiomatic, which is the famous turning point where it no longer
even relates to the familial scene, but solely to the psychoanalytic scene
that supposedly answers for its own truth, and to the psychoanalytic
operation that supposedly answers for its own success-the couch as an
axiomatized earth, the axiomatic of the "cure" as a successful castration! But by recoding or axiomatizing the flows of desire in this way,
psychoanalysis makes a molar use of the signifying chain that results in
a misappreciation of all the syntheses of the unconscious.
The body without organs is the model of death. As the authors of
horror stories have understood so well, it is not death that serves as the
model for catatonia, it is catatonic schizophrenia that gives its model to
death. Zero intensity. The death model appears when the body without
organs repels the organs and lays them aside: no mouth, no tongue, no
teeth-to the point of self-mutilation, to the point of suicide. Yet there is
no real opposition between the body without organs and the organs as
partial objects; the only real opposition is to the molar organism that is
their common enemy. In the desiring-machine, one sees the same
catatonic inspired by the immobile motor that forces him to put aside his
organs, to immobilize them, to silence them, but also, impelled by the
working parts that work in an autonomous or stereotyped fashion, to
reactivate the organs, to reanimate them with local movements. It is a
question of different parts of the machine, different and coexisting,
different in their very coexistence. Hence it is absurd to speak of a death
desire that would presumably be in qualitative opposition to the life
desires. Death is not desired, there is only death that desires, by virtue of
the body without organs or the immobile motor, and there is also life that
desires, by virtue of the working organs. There we do not have two
desires but two parts, two kinds of desiring-machine parts, in the
dispersion of the machine itself. And yet the problem persists: how can
all that function together? For it is not yet a functioning, but solely the
(nonstructural) condition of a molecular functioning. The functioning
appears when the motor, under the preceding conditions-ie., without
ceasing to be immobile and without forming an organism-attracts the
organs to the body without organs, and appropriates them for itself in
the apparent objective movement. Repulsion is the condition of the
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

329

machine's functioning, but attraction is the functioning itself. That the
functioning depends on repulsion is clear to us, inasmuch as it all works
only by breaking down. One is then able to say what this running or this
functioning consists of: in the cycle of the desiring-machine it is a matter
of constantly translating, constantly converting the death model into
something else altogether, which is the experience of death. Converting
the death that rises from within (in the body without organs) into the
death that comes from without (on the body without organs).
But it seems that things are becoming very obscure, for what is this
distinction between the experience of death and the model of death?
Here again, is it a death desire? A being-far-death? Or rather an
investment of death, even if speculative? None of the above. The
experience of death is the most common of occurrences in the unconscious, precisely because it occurs in life and for life, in every passage or
becoming, in every intensity as passage or becoming. It is in the very
nature of every intensity to invest within itself the zero intensity starting
from which it is produced, in one moment, as that which grows or
diminishes according to an infinity of degrees (as Klossowski noted, "an
afflux is necessary merely to signify the absence of intensity"). We have
attempted to show in this respect how the relations of attraction and
repulsion produced such states, sensations, and emotions, which imply a
new energetic conversion and form the third kind of synthesis, the
synthesis of conjunction. One might say that the unconscious as a real
subject has scattered an apparent residual and nomadic subject around
the entire compass of its cycle, a subject that passes by way of all the
becomings corresponding to the included disjunctions: the last part of
the desiring-machine, the adjacent part. These intense becornings and
feelings, these intensive emotions, feed deliriums and hallucinations.
But in themselves, these intensive emotions are closest to the matter
whose zero degree they invest in itself. They control the unconscious
experience of death, insofar as death is what is felt in every feeling, what
never ceases and never finishes happening in every becoming-in the
becoming-another-sex, the becoming-god, the becoming-a-race, etc.,
forming zones of intensity on the body without organs. Every intensity
controls within its own life the experience of death, and envelops it. And
it is doubtless the case that every intensity is extinguished at the end,
that every becoming itself becomes a becoming-death! Death, then, does
actually happen. Maurice Blanchot distinguishes this twofold nature
dearly, these two irreducible aspects of death; the one, according to
which the apparent subject never ceases to live and travel as a
One·-"one never stops and never has done with dying"; and the other,
according to which this same subject, fixed as I, actually dies-which is
33·0

I

ANT I-OEDIPUS

to say it finally ceases to die since it ends up dying, in the reality of a last
instant that fixes it in this way as an I, all the while undoing the intensity,
carrying it back to the zero that envelops it. 28
From one aspect to the other, there is not at all a personal
deepening, but something quite different: there is a return from the
experience of death to the model of death, in the cycle of the
desiring-machines. The cycle is closed. For a new departure, since this I
is another? The experience of death must have given us exactly enough
broadened experience, in order to live and know that the desiringmachines do not die. And that the subject as an adjacent part is always a
"one" who conducts the experience, not an I who receives the model.
For the model itself is not the I either, but the body without organs. And
I does not rejoin the model without the model starting out again in the
direction of another experience. Always going from the model to the
experience, and starting out again, returning from the model to the
experience, is what schizophrenizing death amounts to, the exercise of
the desiring-machines (which is their very secret, well understood by the
terrifying authors). The machines tell us this, and make us live it, feel it,
deeper than delirium and further than hallucination: yes, the return to
repulsion wiII condition other attractions, other functionings, the setting
in motion of other working parts on the body without organs, the putting
to work of other adjacent parts on the periphery that have as much a
right to say One as we ourselves do. "Let him die in his leaping through
unheard-of and unnamable things: other horrible workers will come;
they wiII begin on the horizons where the other collapsed !"29 The
Eternal Return as experience, and as the deterritorialized circuit of all
the cycles of desire.
How odd the psychoanalytic venture is. Psychoanalysis ought to be
a song of life, or else be worth nothing at all. It ought, practically, to
teach us to sing life. And see how the most defeated, sad .song of death
emanates from it: eiapopeia. From the start, and because of his stubborn
dualism of the drives, Freud never stopped trying to limit the discovery
of a subjective or vital essence of desire as libido. But when the dualism
passed into a death instinct against Eros, this was no longer a simple
limitation, it was a liquidation of the libido. Reich did not go wrong here,
and was perhaps the only one to maintain that the product of analysis
should be a free and joyous person, a carrier of the life flows, capable of
carrying them all the way into the desert and decoding them-even if
this idea necessarily took on the appearance of a crazy idea, given what
had become of analysis. He demonstrated that Freud, no less than lung
and Adler, had repudiated the sexual position: the fixing of the death
instinct in fact deprives sexuality of its generative role on at least one
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZO ANAL YSIS

I

331

essential point, which is the genesis of anxiety, since this genesis
becomes the autonomous cause of sexual repression instead of its
result; it follows that sexuality as desire no longer animates a social
critiq~e of civilization, but that civilization on the contrary finds itself
sanctified as the sale agency capable of opposing the death desire. And
how. does. it do this? By in principle turning death against death, by
making this turned-back death (la mort ret aurneev into a force of desire
by putting it in the service of a pseudo life through an entire culture of
guilt feeling.
There is no need to tell all over how psychoanalysis culminates in a
theory of culture that takes up again the age-old task of the ascetic ideal
Nir~ana, the cultural extract, judging life, belittling life, measuring lif:
against death, and only retaining from life what the death of death wants
very much to .leave us ''lith-a sublime resignation. As Reich says, when
psych.oanalysls began to speak of Eros, the whole world breathed a sigh
of relief': one knew what this meant, and that everything was going to
unfold within a mortified life, since Thanatos was now the partner of
Eros, for worse but also for better.w Psychoanalysis becomes the
training ground of a new kind of priest, the director of bad conscience:
bad conscience has made us sick, but that is what will cure us! Freud did
not hide what was really at issue with the introduction of the death
instinct: it is not a question of any fact whatever, but merely of a
principle, a question of principle. The death instinct is pure silence, pure
~ranscendence,~o.t givable and not given in experience. This very point
IS remarkable: It IS because death, according to Freud, has neither a
model nor an experience, that he makes of it a transcendent principle."! So that the psychoanalysts who refused the death instinct did so for
the same reasons as those who accepted it: some said that there was no
death instinct since there was no model or experience in the unconscious; others, that there was a death instinct precisely because there
was no model or experience. We say, to the contrary, that there is no
death instinct because there is both the model and the experience of
death in the unconscious. Death then is a part of the desiring-machine, a
part :hat must itself be judged, evaluated in the functioning of the
machine and the system of its energetic conversions, and not as an
abstract principle.
If Freud needs death as a principle, this is by virtue of the
requirements of the dualism that maintains a qualitative opposition
between the drives (you will not escape the conflict): once the dualism of
the ~ex~al drives and the ego drives has only a topological scope, the
qualitative or dynamic dualism passes between Eros and Thanatos. But
the same enterprise is continued and reinforced-eliminating the

:'!~:<

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

rnachinic element of desire, the desiring-machines. It is a matter of
eliminating the libido, insofar as it implies the possibility of energetic
conversions in the machine (Libido-Nurnen-Voluptas). It is a matter of
imposing the idea of an energetic duality rendering the machinic
transformations impossible, with everything obliged to pass by way of
an indifferent neutral energy, that energy emanating from Oedipus and
capable of being added to either of the two irreducible formsneutralizing, mortifying life.* The purpose of the topological and
dynamic dualities is to thrust aside the point of view of functional
multiplicity that alone is economic. (Szondi situates the problem clearly:
why two kinds of drives qualified as molar, functioning mysteriously,
which is to say oedipally, rather than n genes of drives-eight molecular
genes, for example-functioning machinically")
If one looks in this direction for the ultimate reason why Freud
erects a transcendent death instinct as a principle, the reason will be
found in Freud's practice itself. For if the principle has nothing to do
with the facts, it has a lot to do with the psychoanalyst's conception of
psychoanalytic practice, a conception the psychoanalyst wishes to
impose. Freud made the most profound discovery of the abstract
subjective essence of desire-Libido. But since he realienated this
essence, reinvesting it in a subjective system of representation of the
ego, and since he receded this essence on the residual territoriality of
Oedipus and under the despotic signifier of castration, he could no
longer conceive the essence of life except in a form turned back against
itself, in the form of death itself. And this neutralization, this turning
against life, is also the last way in which a depressive and exhausted
libido can go on surviving, and dream that it is surviving: "The ascetic
ideal is an artifice for the preservation of life ... even when he wounds
himself, this master of destruction, of self-destructing-the very wound
itself compels him to live. . . . "32 It is Oedipus, the marshy earth, that
gives off a powerful odor of decay and death; and it is castration, the
pious ascetic wound, the signifier, that makes of this death a conservatory for the Oedipal life . Desire is in itself not a desire to love, but a force
to love, a virtue that gives and produces, that engineers. (For how could
what is in life still desire life? Who would want to call that a desire?) But
desire must turn back against itself in the name of a horrible Ananke, the
Ananke of the weak and the depressed, the contagious neurotic Ananke;
"On the impossibility of immediate qualitative conversions. and th~ ~ecessity for g~ing by way of
neutral energy, see Sigmund Freud, The Ego and the Id, trans. Joan RIVIere(N~w York. Norto~.196l).
This impossibility, this necessity is no longer underst~ndable:,it s~ems to us, if one, agrees ,WIth Je~~
Laplanche that "the death drive has no energy of Its own (Vie ~t molt ~n ps}cha~al)se [Pans.
Flammarion, 1970], p. 21 1). Therefore the death drive could not enter into a veritable dualism, or would
have to be confused with the neutral energy itself, which Freud denies.

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

333

desire must produce its shadow or its monkey, and find a strange
artificial force for vegetating in the void, at the heart of its own Jack. For
better days to come? It must-but who talks in this way? what
abjectness-become a desire to be loved, and worse, a sniveling desire
to have been loved, a desire that is reborn of its own frustration: no,
daddy-mommy didn't love me enough. Sick desire stretches out on the
couch, an artificial swamp, a little earth, a little mother. "Look at you,
stumbling and staggering with no use in your legs .... And it's nothing
but your wanting to be loved which does it. A maudlin crying to be
loved, which makes your knees go all ricky."33 Just as there are two
stomachs for the ruminant, there must also exist two abortions, two
castrations for sick desire: once in the family, in the familial scene, with
the knitting mother; another time in an asepticized clinic, in the
psychoanalytic scene, with specialist artists who know how to handle
the death instinct and "bring off" castration, "bring off" frustration.
Is this really the right way to bring on better days? And aren't all the
destructions performed by schizoanalysis worth more than this psychoanalytic conservatory, aren't they more a part of an affirmative task?
"Lie down, then, on the soft couch which the analyst provides and try to
think up something different ... if you realize that he is not a god but a
human being like yourself, with worries, defects, ambitions, frailties,
that he is not the repository of an all-encompassing wisdom [=code] but
a wanderer, along the [deterritorialized] path, perhaps you will cease
pouring it out like a sewer, however melodious it may sound to your
ears, and rise up on your own two legs and sing with your own
God-given voice [Numen]. To confess, to whine, to complain, to
commiserate, always demands a toll. To sing it doesn't cost you a penny.
Not only does it cost nothing-you actually enrich others (instead of
infecting them) .... The phantasmal world is the world which has not
been fully conquered over. It is the world of the past, never of the
future. To move forward clinging to the past is like dragging a ball and
chain.... We are all guilty of crime, the great crime of not living life to
the Iull.">' You weren't born Oedipus, you caused it to grow in yourself;
and you aim to get out of it through fantasy, through castration, but this
in turn you have caused to grow in Oedipus-namely, in yourself: the
horrible circle. Shit on your whole mortifying, imaginary, and symbolic
theater. What does schizoanalysis ask? Nothing more than a bit of a
relation to the outside, a little real reality. And we claim the right to a
radical laxity, a radical incompetence-the right to enter the analyst's
office and say it smells bad there. It reeks of the great death and the little
ego.

:l:l4

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

Freud himself indeed spoke of the link between his "discovery" of
the death instinct and World War I, which remains the model of
capitalist war. More generally, the death instinct celebrates the wedding
of psychoanalysis and capitalism; their engagement had been full of
hesitation. What we have tried to show apropos of capitalism is how it
inherited much from a transcendent death-carrying agency, the despotic
signifier, but also how it brought about this agency's effusion in the full
immanence of its own system: the full body, having become that of
capital-money, suppresses the distinction between production and antiproduction; everywhere it mixes antiproduction with the productive
forces in the immanent reproduction of its own always widened limits
(the axiomatic). The death enterprise is one of the principal and specific
forms of the absorption of surplus value in capitalism. It is this itinerary
that psychoanalysis rediscovers and retraces with the death instinct: the
death instinct is now only pure silence in its transcendent distinction
from life, but it effuses all the more, throughout all the immanent
combinations it forms with this same life. Absorbed, diffuse, immanent
death is the condition formed by the signifier in capitalism, the empty
locus that is everywhere displaced in order to block the schizophrenic
escapes and place restraints on the flights.
The only modern myth is the myth of zombies-mortified schizos,
good for work, brought back to reason. In this sense the primitive and
the barbarian, with their ways of coding death, are children in comparison to modern man and his axiomatic (so many unemployed are needed,
so many deaths, the Algerian War doesn't kill more people than
weekend automobile accidents. planned death in Bengal, etc.). Modern
man "raves to a far greater extent. His delirium is a switchboard with
thirteen telephones. He gives his orders to the world. He doesn't care for
the ladies. He is brave, too. He is decorated like crazy. In man's game of
chance the death instinct, the silent instinct is decidedly well placed,
perhaps next to egoism. It takes the place of zero in roulette. The house
always wins. So too does death. The law of large numbers works for
death."35 It is now or never that we must take up a problem we had left
hanging. Once it is said that capitalism works on the basis of decoded
flows as such, how is it that it is infinitely further removed from
desiring-production than were the primitive or even the barbarian
systems, which nonetheless code and overcode the flows? Once it is said
that desiring-production is itself a decoded and deterritorialized production, how do we explain that capitalism, with its axiomatic, its statistics,
performs an infinitely vaster repression of this production than do the
preceding regimes, which nonetheless did not lack the necessary repres-

INTRODUCTiON TO SCHIZOMIALYSIS

I

335

sive means? We have seen that the molar statistical aggregates of social
production were in a variable relationship of affinity with the molecular
formations of desiring-production. What must be explained is that the
capitalist aggregate is the least affinal, at the very moment it decodes and
deterritorializes with all its might.
The answer is the death instinct, if we call instinct in general the
conditions of life that are historically and socially determined by the
relations of production and antiproduction in a system. We know that
molar social production and molecular desiring-production must be
evaluated both from the viewpoint of their identity in nature and from
the viewpoint of their difference in regime. But it could be that these two
aspects, nature and regime, are in a sense potential and are actualized
only in inverse proportion. Which means that where the regimes are the
closest, the identity in nature is on the contrary at its minimum; and
where the identity in nature appears to be at its maximum, the regimes
differ to the highest degree. If we examine the primitive or the barbarian
constellations, we see that the subjective essence of desire as production is referred to large objectities , to the territorial or the despotic body,
which act as natural or divine preconditions that thus ensure the coding
or the overcoding of the flows of desire by introducing them into
systems of representation that are themselves objective. Hence it can be
said that the identity in nature between the two productions is completely hidden there: as much by the difference between the objective socius
and the subjective full body of desiring-production, as by the difference
between the qualified codes and overcodings of social production and
the chains of decoding or of deterritorialization belonging to desiringproduction, and by the entire repressive apparatus represented in the
savage prohibitions, the barbarian law, and the rights of antiproduction.
And yet the difference in regime, far from being accentuated and
deepened, is on the contrary reduced to a minimum, because desiringproduction as an absolute limit remains an exterior limit, or else stays
unoccupied as an internalized and displaced limit, with the result that the
machines of desire operate on this side of their limit within the
framework of the socius and its codes. That is why the primitive codes
and even the despotic overcodings testify to a polyvocity that functionally draws them nearer to a chain of decoding of desire: the parts of the
desiring-machine function in the very workings of the social machine;
the flows of desire enter and exit through the codes that continue,
however, to inform the model and experience of death that are elaborated in the unity of the .sociodesiring-apparatus. And it is even less a
question of the death instinct to the extent that the model and the
experience are better coded in a circuit that never stops grafting the
:136

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

desiring-machines onto the social machine and implanting the social
machine in the desiring-machines. Death comes all the more from
without as it is coded from within. This is especially true of the system
of cruelty, where death is inscribed in the primitive mechanism of
surplus value as well as in the movement of the finite blocks of debt. But
even in the system of despotic terror, where debt becomes infinite and
where death experiences an elevation that tends to make of it a latent
instinct, there nonetheless subsists a model in the overcoding law, and
an experience for the overcoded subjects, at the same time as antiproduction remains separate as the share owing to the overlord.
Things are very different in capitalism. Precisely because the flows
of capital are decoded and deterritorialized flows; precisely because the
subjective essence of production is revealed in capitalism; precisely
because the limit becomes internal to capitalism, which continually
reproduces it, and also continually occupies it as an internalized and
displaced limit; precisely for these reasons, the identity in nature must
appear for itself between social production and desiring-production. But
in its turn, this identity in nature, far from favoring an affinity in regime
between the two modes of production, increases the difference in regime
in a catastrophic fashion, and assembles an apparatus of repression the
mere idea of which neither savagery nor barbarism could provide us.
This is because, on the basis of a general collapse of the large objectities,
the decoded and de territorialized flows of capitalism are not recaptured
or co-opted, but directly apprehended in a codeless axiomatic that
consigns them to the universe of subjective representation. Now this
universe has as its function the splitting of the subjective essence (the
identity in nature) into two functions, that of abstract labor alienated in
private property that reproduces the ever wider interior limits, and that
of abstract desire alienated in the privatized family that displaces the
ever narrower internalized limits. The double alienation-s-labordesire-is constantly increasing and deepening the difference in regime
at the heart of the identity in nature. At the same time that death is
decoded, it loses its relationship with a model and an experience, and
becomes an instinct; that is, it effuses in the immanent system where
each act of production is inextricably linked to the process of anti production as capital. There where the codes are undone, the death instinct
lays hold of the repressive apparatus and begins to direct the circulation
of the libido. A mortuary axiomatic. One might then believe in liberated
desires, but ones that, like cadavers, feed on images. Death is not
desired, but what is desired is dead, already dead: images. Everything
labors in death, everything wishes for death. In truth, capitalism has
nothing to co-opt; or rather, its powers of co-option coexist more often
INTRODUCTlCN TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

331

than not with what is to be co-opted, and even anticipate it. (How many
revolutionary groups as such are already in place for a co-option that
will be carried out only in the future, and form an apparatus for the
absorption of a surplus value not even produced yet-which gives them
precisely an apparent revolutionary position.) In a world such as this,
there is no living desire that could not of itself cause the system to
explode, or that would not make the system dissolve at one end where
everything would end up following behind and being swallowed up-a
question of regime.
Here are the desiring-machines, with their three parts: the working
parts, the immobile motor, the adjacent part; their three forms of
energy: Libido, Numen, and Voluptas; and their three syntheses: the
connective syntheses of partial objects and flows, the disjunctive
syntheses of singularities and chains, and the conjunctive syntheses of
intensities and becomings. The schizoanalyst is not an interpreter, even
less a theater director; he is a mechanic, a micromechanic. There are no
excavations to be undertaken, no archaeology, no statues in the unconscious: there are only stones to be sucked, a la Beckett, and other
machinic elements belonging to deterritorialized constellations. The task
of schizoanalysis is that of learning what a subject's desiring-machines
are, how they work, with what syntheses, what bursts of energy in the
machine, what constituent misfires, with what flows, what chains, and
what becornings in each case. Moreover, this positive task cannot be
separated from indispensable destructions, the destruction of the molar
aggregates, the structures and representations that prevent the machine
from functioning. It is not easy to rediscover the molecules-even the
giant molecule-their paths, their zones of presence, and their own
syntheses, amid the large accumulations that fill the preconscious, and
that delegate their representatives in the unconscious itself, thereby
immobilizing the machines, silencing them, trapping them, sabotaging
them, cornering them, holding them fast. In the unconscious it is not the
lines of pressure that matter, but on the contrary the lines of escape. The
unconscious does not apply pressure to consciousness; rather, consciousness applies pressure and strait-jackets the unconscious, to prevent its escape. As to the unconscious, it is like the Platonic opposite
whose opposite draws near: it flees or it perishes. What we have tried to
show from the outset is how the unconscious productions and formations were not merely repelled by an agency of psychic repression that
would enter into compromises with them, but actually covered over by
antiformations that disfigure the unconscious in itself, and impose on it
causations, comprehensions, and expressions that no longer have any-

thing to do with its real functioning: thus all the statues, the Oedipal
images, the phantasmal mises en scene, the Symbolic of castration, the
effusion of the death instinct, the perverse reterritorializations. So that
one can never, as in an interpretation, read the repressed through and in
the repression, since the latter is constantly inducing a false image of the
thing it represses: illegitimate and transcendent uses of the syntheses
according to which the unconscious can no longer operate in accordance
with its own constituent machines, but merely "represent" what a
repressive apparatus gives it to represent. It is the very form of
interpretation that shows itself to be incapable of attaining the unconscious, since it gives rise to the inevitable illusions (including the
structure and the signifier) by means of which the conscious makes of
the unconscious an image consonant with its wishes: we are still pious,
psychoanalysis remains in the precritical age.
Doubtless these illusions would not take hold if they did not benefit
from a coincidence and a support in the unconscious itself that ensures
the "hold." We have seen what this support was: primal repression, as
exerted by the body without organs at the moment of repulsion, at the
heart of molecular desiring-production. Without this primal repression, a
psychic repression in the proper sense of the word could not be
delegated in the unconscious by the molar forces and thus crush
desiring-production. Repression properly speaking profits from an occasion without which it could not interfere in the machinery of desire.:" In
contrast to psychoanalysis, which itself falls into the trap while causing
the unconscious to fall into its trap, schizoanalysis follows the lines of
escape and the machinic indices all the way to the desiring-machines. If
the essential aspect of the destructive task is to undo the Oedipal trap of
repression properly speaking, and all its dependencies, each time in a
way adapted to the "case" in question, the essential aspect of the first
positive task is to ensure the machinic conversion of primal repression,
there too in an adapted variable manner. Which is to say: undoing the
blockage or the coincidence on which the repression properly speaking
relies; transforming the apparent opposition of repulsion (the body
without organs/the machines-partial objects) into a condition of real
functioning; ensuring this functioning in the forms of attraction and
production of intensities; thereafter integrating the failures in the
attractive functioning, as well as enveloping the zero degree in the
intensities produced; and thereby causing the desiring-machines to start
up again. Such is the delicate and focal point that fills the function of
transference in schizoanalysis-i-dispersing, schizophrenizing the perverse transference of psychoanalysis.

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL1'SIS

I

33!il

5

I The Second Positive Task

We cannot however allow the difference in regime to
make us forget the identity in nature. There are fundamentally two
poles; but we would not be satisfied if we had to present them merely as
the duality of the molar formations and the molecular formations, since
there is not one molecular formation that is not by itself an investment
of a molar formation. There are no desiring-machines that exist outside
the social machines that they form on a large scale; and no social
machines without the desiring-machines that inhabit them on a small
scale. Nor is there any molecular chain that does not intercept and
reproduce whole blocks of molar code or axiomatic, nor any such blocks
that do not contain or seal off fragments of molecular chain. A sequence
of desire is extended by a social series, or a social machine contains
desiring-machine parts within its workings. The desiring micromultiplicities are no less collective than the large social aggregates; they ani
strictly inseparable and constitute one and the same process of production. From this point of view, the duality of the poles passes less
between the molar and the molecular than to the interior of the molar
social investments, since in allY case the molecular formations are such
investments. That is why our terminology concerning the two poles has
necessarily varied. At times we contrasted the molar and the molecular
as the paranoiac, signifying, and structured lines of integration, and the
schizophrenic, machinic, and dispersed lines of escape; or again as the
staking out of the perverse reterritorializations, and as the movement of
the schizophrenic deterritorializations. At other times, on the contrary,
we contrasted them as the two major types of equally social investments: the one sedentary and biunivocalizing, and of a reactionary or
fascist tendency; the other nomadic and polyvocal, and of a revolutionary tendency. In fact, in the schizoid declaration-"I am of a race
inferior for all eternity," "I am a beast, a black," "We are all German
Jews"-the historico-social field is no less invested than in the paranoiac
formula: "I am one of your kind, from the same place as you, I am a pure
Aryan, of a superior race for all time."
From the viewpoint of the unconscious libidinal investment, all the
oscillations from one formula to the other are possible. How can this be?
How can the schizophrenic escape, with its molecular dispersion, form
an investment that is as strong and determined as the other? And why
are there two types of social investment that correspond to the two
poles? The answer is that everywhere there exist the molecular and the
molar: their disjunction is a relation of included disjunction, which
::!4lJ'

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

varies only according to the two directions of subordination, according
as the molecular phenomena are subordinated to the large aggregates, or
on the contrary subordinate them to themselves. At one of the poles the
large aggregates, the large forms of gregariousness, do not prevent the
flight that carries them along, and they oppose to it the paranoiac
investment only as an "escape in advance of the escape." But at the
other pole, the schizophrenic escape itself does not merely consist in
withdrawing from the social, in living on the fringe: it causes the social
to take flight through the multiplicity of holes that eat away at it and
penetrate it, always coupled directly to it, everywhere setting the
molecular charges that will explode what must explode, make fall what
must fall, make escape what must escape, at each point ensuring the
conversion of schizophrenia as a process into an effectively revolutionary force. For what is the schizo, if not first of all the one who can no
longer bear "all that": money, the stock market, the death furces,
Nijinsky said-values, morals, homelands, religions, and private ~arti­
tudes? There is a whole world of difference between the schizo an« the
revolutionary: the difference between the one who escapes, and the one
who knows how to make what he is escaping escape, collapsing a filthy
drainage pipe, causing a deluge to break loose, liberating a flow,
resecting a schizo The schizo is not revolutionary, but the schizophrenic
process-in terms of which the schizo is merely the interruption, or the
continuation in the void-is the potential for revolution. To those who
say that escaping is not courageous, we answer: what is not escape and
social investment at the same time? The choice is between one of two
poles, the paranoiac counterescape that motivates all the conformist,
reactionary, and fascisizing investments, and the schizophrenic escape
convertible into a revolutionary investment. Maurice Blanchot speaks
admirably of this revolutionary escape, this fall that must be thought and
carried out as the most positive of events: "What is this escape? The
word is poorly chosen to please. Courage consists, however, in agreeing
to flee rather than live tranquilly and hypocritically in false refuges.
Values, morals, homelands, religions, and these private certitudes that
our vanity and our complacency bestow generously on us, have as many
deceptive sojourns as the world arranges for those who think they are
standing straight and at ease, among stable things. They know nothing of
this immense flight that transports them, ignorant of themselves, in the
monotonous buzzing of their ever quickening steps that lead them
impersonally in a great immobile movement. An escape in advance of
the escape. [Consider the example of one of these men] who, having had
the revelation of the mysterious drift, is no longer able to stand living in
the false pretences of residence. First he tries to take this movement as
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

341

his own. He would like to personally withdraw. He lives on the
fringe .... [But] perhaps that is what the fall is, that it can no longer be a
personal destiny, but the common 10t."37In this regard, the first thesis of
schizoanalysis is this: every investment is social, and in any case bears
upon a sociohistorical field.
Let us recall the major traits of a molar formation or of a form of
gregariousness (herd instinct). They effect a unification, a totalization of
the molecular forces through a statistical accumulation obeying the laws
of large numbers. This unity can be the biological unity of a species or
the structural unity of a socius: an organism, social or living, is
composed as a whole, as a global or complete object. It is in relation to
this new order that the partial objects of a molecular order appear as a
lack, at the same time that the whole itself is said to be lacked by the
partial objects. In this way desire will be fused to lack. The myriad
breaks-flows that determine the positive dispersion in a molecular
multiplicity are fitted over vacuoles of lack that perform this fusion in a
statistical constellation of a molar order. Freud demonstrated clearly in
this respect how one went from psychotic multiplicities of dispersion,
founded on the breaks or schizzes, to large vacuoles determined
globally, of the neurosis and castration type: the neurotic needs a global
object in relation to which the partial objects can be determined as a
lack, and inversely.:" But on a more general level, the statistical
transformation of molecular multiplicity into a molar constellation is
what organizes lack on a large scale. Such an organization belongs
essentially to the biological or social organism-species or socius. There
is no society that does not arrange lack in its midst, by variable means
peculiar to it. (These means are not the same, for example, in a despotic
type of society, or in a capitalist society where the market economy
raises them to a degree of perfection unknown before capitalisrn.) This
welding of desire to lack is precisely what gives desire collective and
personal ends, goals or intentions-instead of desire taken in the real
order of its production, which behaves as a molecular phenomenon
devoid of any goal or intention.
Nor must it be thought that the statistical accumulation results from
chance, or that it is a random result. This accumulation is on the
contrary the fruit of a selection exerting its force on the elements of
chance. When Nietzsche says that the selection is most often exerted in
favor of the large number, he inaugurates a fundamental intuition that
will inspire modem thought. For what he means is that the large
numbers or the large aggregates do not exist prior to a selective pressure
that might elicit singular Ii nes from them, but that, quite on the contrary,
these large numbers and aggregates are born of this selective pressure

that crushes, eliminates, or regularizes the singularities. Selection does
not presuppose a primary gregariousness; gregariousness presupposes
the selection and is born of it. "Culture" as a selective process of
marking or inscription invents the large numbers in whose favor it is
exerted. That is why statistics is not functional but structural, and
concerns chains of phenomena that selection has already placed in a
state of partial dependence (the Markov chains). This can even be seen
in the genetic code. In other terms, forms of gregariousness are never
indifferent: they refer back to the qualified forms that produce them by
creative selection. The order is not: gregariousness -;> selection, but on
the contrary, molecular multiplicity -> forms of selection performing the
selection -;> molar or gregarious aggregates that result from this selection.
What are these qualified forms-"formations of sovereignty," as
Nietzsche said-that play the role of totalizing, unifying, signifying
objectities, that assign organizations, lacks, and goals? The full bodies
determine the different modes of the socius, veritable heavy aggregates
of the earth, the despot, and capital. Full bodies or clothed substances,
which are distinguished from the full body without organs or the naked
matter of molecular desiring-production.i" If we wonder where these
forms of force come from, it is evident that they are not to be explained
in terms of any goal or end, since they are what determines goals and
ends. The form or quality of a given socius-the body of the earth, the
body of the despot, the body of capital-money-s-depends on a state or
degree of intensive development of the productive forces, insofar as
these forces define a man-nature independent of all the social formations, or rather common to them all (what the Marxists term "the givens
of useful labor"). The form or quality of the socius is therefore itself
produced, but as the unengendered-that is, as the natural or divine
precondition of production corresponding to a given degree to which it
affixes a structural unity and apparent goals, to which it falls back, and
whose forces it appropriates, thereby determining the selections, the
accumulations, and the attractions without which these forces would not
assume a social character. It is indeed in this sense that social production is desiring-production itself under determinate conditions. These
determinate conditions are thus the forms of gregariousness as a socius
or full body, under whose effect the molecular formations constitute
molar aggregates.
Now we can present the second thesis of schizoanalysis: within the
social investments we will distinguish the unconscious libidinal investment of group or desire, and the preconscious investment of class or
interest. The latter passes by way of the large social goals, and concerns

I~ITRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I 343

the organism and the collective organs, including the arranged vacuoles
of lack. A class is defined by a regime of syntheses, a state of global
connections, exclusive disjunctions, and residual conjunctions that
characterize the aggregate being considered. Membership in a class
refers to the role in production or antiproduction, to the place in the
inscription, to the portion that is due the subjects. The preconscious
class interest itself thus refers to the selections of flows, to the
detachments of codes, to the subjective remains or revenues. And from
this viewpoint it is indeed true that an aggregate comprises practically
only a single class, that class which has an interest in a given regime. The
other class can constitute itself only by a counterinvestment that creates
its own interest in terms of new social aims, new organs and means, a
new possible state of social syntheses. Whence the necessity for the
other class to be represented by a party apparatus that assigns these
aims and means, and effects a revolutionary break in the preconscious
domain-the Leninist break, for example. In this domain of preconscious investments of class or interest it is therefore easy to distinguish
what is reactionary or reformist, or what is revolutionary. But those who
have an interest, in this sense, are always of a smaller number than those
whose interest, in some fashion, "is had" or represented: the class from
the standpoint of praxis is infinitely less numerous or less extensive than
the class taken in its theoretical determination. Whence the subsisting
contradictions within the dominant class, i.e., the class pure and simple.
This is obvious in the capitalist regime where, for example, primitive
accumulation can take place only for the benefit of a restricted fraction
of the whole of the dominant class." But it is just as obvious for the
Russian Revolution, with its formation of a party apparatus.
This situation is not at all adequate, however, for resolving the
following problem: why do many of those who have or should have an
objective revolutionary interest maintain a preconscious investment of a
reactionary type? And more rarely, how do certain people whose
interest is objectively reactionary come to effect a preconscious revolutionary investment? Must we invoke in the one case a thirst for justice, a
just ideological position, as well as a correct and just view; and in the
other case a blindness, the result of an ideological deception or
mystification? Revolutionaries often forget, or do not like to recognize,
that one wants and makes revolution out of desire, not duty. Here as
elsewhere, the concept of ideology is an execrable concept that hides the
real problems, which are always of an organizational nature. If Reich, at
"'Maurice Dobb, Studies in the Development of Capitalism (see Ch. 3, reference note 70), p. 178: "There
are reasons why the full flowering of industrial capitalism demands, not only a transfer of titles to

wealth into the hands of the bourgeois class, but a concentration of the ownership of wealth into much
fewer hands."

341

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

the very moment he raised the most profound of questions-"Why did
the masses desire fascism ?"-was content to answer by invoking the
ideological, the subjective, the irrational, the negative, and the inhibited,
it was because he remained the prisoner of derived concepts that made
him fall short of the materialist psychiatry he dreamed of, that prevented
him from seeing how desire was part of the infrastructure, and that
confined him in the duality of the objective and the subjective. (Consequently, psychoanalysis was consigned to the analysis of the subjective,
as defined by ideology.) But everything is objective or subjective, as one
wishes. That is not the distinction: the distinction to be made passes into
the economic infrastructure itself and into its investments. Libidinal
economy is no less objective than political economy, and the political no
less subjective than the libidinal, even though the two correspond to two
modes of different investments of the same reality as social reality.
There is an unconscious libidinal investment of desire that does not
necessarily coincide with the preconscious investments of interest, and
that explains how the latter can be perturbed and perverted in "the most
somber organization," below all ideology.
Libidinal investment does not bear upon the regime of the social
syntheses, but upon the degree of development of the forces or the
energies on which these syntheses depend. It does not bear upon the
selections, detachments, and remainders effected by these syntheses,
but upon the nature of the codes and the flows that condition them. It
does not bear upon the social means and ends, but upon the full body as
socius, the formation of sovereignty, or the form of power for itself,
devoid of meaning and purpose, since the meanings and the purposes
derive from it, and not the contrary. It is doubtless true that interests
predispose us to a given libidinal investment, but they are not identical
with this investment. Moreover, the unconscious libidinal investment is
what causes us to look for our interest in one place rather than another,
to fix our aims on a given path, convinced that this is where our chances
lie-since love drives us on. The manifest syntheses are merely the
preconscious indicators of a degree of development; the apparent
interests and aims are merely the preconscious exponents of a social full
body. As Klossowski says in his profound commentary on Nietzsche, a
form of power is identical with the violence it exerts by its very
absurdity, but it can exert this violence only by assigning itself aims and
meanings in which even the most enslaved elements participate: "The
sovereign formations will have no other purpose than that of masking
the absence of a purpose or a meaning of their sovereignty by means of
the organic purpose of their creation," and the purpose of thereby
converting the absurdity into spirituality. That is why it is so futile to
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

345

attempt to distinguish what is rational and what is irrational in a society.
To be sure, the role, the place, and the part one has in a society, and
from which one inherits in terms of the laws of social reproduction,
impel the libido to invest a given socius as a full body-a given absurd
power in which we participate, or have the chance to participate, under
the cover of aims and interests. The fact remains that there exists a
disinterested love of the social machine, of the form of power, and of the
degree of development in and for themselves. Even in the person who
has an interest-and loves them besides with a form of love other than
that of his interest. This is also the case for the person who has no
interest, and who substitutes the force of a strange love for this
counterinvestment. Flows that run on the porous full body of a
socius-these are the object of desire, higher than all the aims. It will
never flow too much, it will never break or code enough-and in that
very way! Oh how beautiful the machine is! The officer of "In the Penal
Colony" demonstrates what an intense libidinal investment of a machine
can be, a machine that is not only technical but social, and through
which desire desires its own repression.
We have seen how the capitalist machine constituted a system of
immanence bordered by a great mutant flow, nonpossessive and nonpossessed, flowing over the full body of capital and forming an absurd
power. Everyone in his class and his person receives something from
this power, or is excluded from it, insofar as the great flow is converted
into incomes, incomes of wages or of enterprises that define aims or
spheres of interest, selections, detachments, and portions. But the
investment of the flow itself and its axiomatic, which to be sure requires
no precise knowledge of political economy, is the business of the
unconscious libido, inasmuch as it is presupposed by the aims. We see
the most disadvantaged, the most excluded members of society invest
with passion the system that oppresses them, and where they always
find an interest, since it is here that they search for and measure it.
Interest always comes after. Antiproduction effuses in the system:
antiproduction is loved for itself, as is the way in which desire represses
itself in the great capitalist aggregate. Repressing desire, not only for
others but in oneself, being the cop for others and for oneself-that is
what arouses, and it is not ideology, it is economy. Capitalism garners
and possesses the force of the aim and the interest (power), but it feels a
disinterested love for the absurd and nonpossessed force of the machine. Oh, to be sure, it is not for himself or his children that the
capitalist works, but for the immortality of the system. A violence
without purpose, a joy, a pure joy in feeling oneself a wheel in the
machine, traversed by flows, broken by schizzes. Placing oneself in a

3~l;

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

position where one is thus traversed, broken, fucked by the socius,
looking for the right place where, according to the aims and the interests
assigned to us, one feels something moving that has neither an interest
nor a purpose. A sort of art for art's sake in the libido, a taste for a job
well done, each one in his own place, the banker, the cop, the soldier, the
technocrat, the bureaucrat, and why not the worker, the trade-unionist.
Desire is agape.
Not only can the libidinal investment of the social field interfere
with the investment of interest, and constrain the most disadvantaged,
the most exploited, to seek their ends in an oppressive machine, but
what is reactionary or revolutionary in the preconscious investment of
interest does not necessarily coincide with what is reactionary or
revolutionary in the unconscious libidinal investment. A revolutionary
preconscious investment bears upon new aims, new social syntheses, a
new power. But it could be that a part at least of the unconscious libido
continues to invest the former body, the old form of power, its codes,
and its flows. It is all the easier, and the contradiction is all the better
masked, as a state of forces does not prevail over the former state
without preserving or reviving the old full body as a residual and
subordinated territoriality (witness how the capitalist machine revives
the despotic Urstaat, or how the socialist machine preserves a State and
market monopoly capitalism). But there is something more serious: even
when the libido embraces the new body-the new force that corresponds to the effectively revolutionary goals and syntheses from the
viewpoint of the preconscious-it is not certain that the unconscious
libidinal investment is itself revolutionary. For the same breaks do not
pass at the level of the unconscious desires and the preconscious
interests. The preconscious revolutionary break is sufficiently well
defined by the promotion of a socius as a full body carrying new aims, as
a form of power or a formation of sovereignty that subordinates
desiring-production under new conditions. But even though the unconscious libido is charged with investing this socius, its investment is not
necessarily revolutionary in the same sense as the preconscious investment. In fact, the unconscious revolutionary break implies for its part
the body without organs as the limit of the socius that desiringproduction subordinates in its turn, under the condition of an overthrown power, an overthrown subordination.
The preconscious revolution refers to a new regime of social
production that creates, distributes, and satisfies new aims and interests.
But the unconscious revolution does not merely refer to the socius that
conditions this change as a form of power: it refers within this socius to
the regime of desiring-production as an overthrown power on the body
INTRODUCTION TO

SCHIZOAN,~L YSIS

I

347

without organs, It is not the same state of flows and schizzes: in one case
the break is between two forms of socius, the second of which is
measured according to its capacity to introduce the flows of desire into a
new code or a new axiomatic of interest; in the other case the break is
within the socius itself, in that it has the capacity for causing the flows of
desire to circulate following their positive lines of escape, and for
breaking them again following breaks of productive breaks, The most
general principle of schizoanalysis is that desire is always constitutive of
a social field. In any case desire belongs to the infrastructure, not to
ideology: desire is in production as social production, just as production
is in desire as desiring-production. But these forms can be understood in
two ways, depending on whether desire is enslaved to a structured molar
aggregate that it constitutes under a given form of power and gregariousness, or whether it subjugates the large aggregate to the functional
multiplicities that it itself forms on the molecular scale (it is no more a
case of persons or individuals in this instance than in the other). If the
preconscious revolutionary break appears at the first level, and is
defined by the characteristics of a new aggregate, the unconscious or
libidinal break belongs to the second level and is defined by the driving
role of desiring-production and the position of its multiplicities. It is
understandable, therefore, that a group can be revolutionary from the
standpoint of class interest and its preconscious investments, but not be
so-and even remain fascist and police-like-from the standpoint of its
libidinal investments, Truly revolutionary preconscious interests do not
necessarily imply unconscious investments of the same nature; an
apparatus of interest never takes the place of a machine of desire.
A revolutionary group at the preconscious level remains a subjugated group, even in seizing power, as long as this power itself refers to a
form of force that continues to enslave and crush desiring-production.
The moment it is preconsciously revolutionary, such a group already
presents all the unconscious characteristics of a subjugated group: the
subordination to a socius as a fixed support that attributes to itself the
productive forces, extracting and absorbing the surplus value therefrom;
the effusion of antiproduction and death-carrying elements within the
system, which feels and pretends to be all the more immortal; the
phenomena of group "superegoization ," narcissism, and hierarchy-the
mechanisms for the repression of desire, A subject-group, on the
contrary, is a group whose libidinal investments are themselves revolutionary; it causes desire to penetrate into the social field, and subordinates the socius or the form of power to desiring-production; productive
of desire and a desire that produces, the subject-group invents always

~~~

ANTI-CEOIPUS

mortal formations that exorcise the effusion in it of a death instinct; it
opposes real coefficients of transversality to the symbolic determinations of subjugation, coefficients without a hierarchy or a group superego. What complicates everything, it is true, is that the same individuals
can participate in both kinds of groups in diverse ways (Saint-Juste,
Lenin). Or the same group can present both characteristics at the same
time, in diverse situations that are nevertheless coexistent. A revolutionary group can already have reassumed the form of a subjugated group,
yet be determined under certain conditions to continue to play the role
of a subject-group. One is continually passing from one type of group to
the other. Subject-groups are continually deriving from subjugated
groups through a rupture of the latter: they mobilize desire, and always
cut its flows again further on, overcoming the limit, bringing the social
machines back to the elementary forces of desire that form them.*
But inversely, they are also continually closing up again, remodeling
themselves in the image of subjugated groups: re-establishing interior
limits, reforming a great break that the flows will not pass through or
overcome, subordinating the desiring-machines to the repressive aggregate that they constitute on a large scale. There is a speed of subjugation
that is opposed to the coefficients of transversality. And what revolution
is not tempted to turn against its subject-groups, stigmatized as anarchistic or irresponsible, and to liquidate them? How do we combat the
deadly inclination that makes a group pass from its revolutionary
libidinal investments to revolutionary investments that are simply
preconscious investments or investments of interest, then to preconscious investments that are simply reformist? And where do we even
situate such and such a group? Did it ever have revolutionary unconscious investments? The surrealist group, for example, with its fantastic
subjugation, its narcissism, and its superego? (It can happen that one
lone man functions as a flow-schiz , as a subject-group, through a break
with the subjugated group from which he excludes himself or is
excluded: Artaud-the-schizo), And where do we situate the psychoanalytic group within this complexity of social investments? Every time we
wonder when it started going bad, it is always necessary to trace further
back in time. Freud as the group superego, an oedipalizing grandfather,
establishing Oedipus as an interior limit, with all kinds of little Narcissuses around, and Reich-the-marginal, plotting a tangent of deterritorialization, causing the flows of desire to circulate, smashing the limit,
*On the group and its rupture or schiz , see Jean-Pierre Faye, "Eclats," Change, no, 7~ p. 21.1: "What
counts, what is effective in our opinion, is not such and such a group, but rather the dlsp'erslOn or the
Diaspora produced by their splinterings (eclats)." Also pp. 212-13, on the necessarily polyvocaJ
character of subject-groups and their writing.

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

349

breaching the wall. But it is not just a matter of literature or even
psychoanalysis. It is a matter of politics-though not, as we shall see, of

a program.
The task of schizoanalysis is therefore to reach the investments of
unconscious desire of the social field, insofar as they are differentiated
from the preconscious investments of interest, and insofar as they are
not merely capable of counteracting them, but also of coexisting with
them in opposite modes. In the generation-gap conflict we hear old
people reproach the young, in the most malicious way, for putting their
desires (a car, credit, a loan, girl-boy relationships) ahead of their
interests (work, savings, a good marriage). But what appears to other
people as raw desire still contains complexes of desire and interest, and
a mixture of forms of desire and of interest that are specifically
reactionary and vaguely revolutionary. The situation is completely
muddled. It seems that schizoanalysis can make use only of indices-the
rnachinic indices-in order to discern, at the level of groups or individuals, the libidinal investments of the social field. Now in this respect it is
sexuality that constitutes the indices. Not that the revolutionary capacity can be evaluated in terms of the objects, the aims, or the sources of
the sexual drives animating an individual or a group; assuredly perversions, and even sexual emancipation, give no privilege as long as
sexuality remains confined within the framework of the "dirty little
secret." It is in vain that the secret is published, that one demands one's
right to be heard; it can even be disinfected, treated in a psychoanalytic
or scientific manner, yet thereby one stands a greater chance of killing
desire, or of inventing forms of liberation for it drearier than the most
repressive prison-as long as one has not succeeded in rescuing
sexuality from the category of secrets, even if public, even if disinfected: i.e., as long as it has not been rescued from the Oedipal-narcissistic
origin imposed on it as the lie under which it can merely become cynical,
shameful, and mortified. It is a lie to claim to liberate sexuality, and to
demand its rights to objects, aims, and sources, all the while maintaining
the corresponding flows within the limits of an Oedipal code (conflict,
regression, resolution, sublimation of Oedipus), and while continuing to
impose a farnilialist and masturbatory form or motivation on it that
makes any perspective of liberation futile in advance. For example, no
"gay liberation movement" is possible as long as homosexuality is
caught up in a relation of exclusive disjunction with heterosexuality, a
relation that ascribes them both to a common Oedipal and castrating
stock, charged with ensuring only their differentiation in two noncommunicating series, instead of bringing to light their reciprocal inclusion
and their transverse communication in the decoded flows of desire
eso

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

(included disjunctions, local connections, nomadic conjunctions). In
short, sexual repression, more insistent than ever, will survive all the
publications, demonstrations, emancipations, and protests concerning
the liberty of sexual objects, sources, and aims, as long as sexuality is
kept-consciously or not-within narcissistic, Oedipal, and castrating
co-ordinates that are enough to ensure the triumph of the most rigorous
censors, the gray gentlemen mentioned by Lawrence.
Lawrence shows in a profound way that sexuality, including
chastity, is a matter of flows, an infinity of different and even contrary
flows. Everything depends on the way in which these flows-whatever
their object, source, and aim-are coded and broken according to
uniform figures, or on the contrary taken up in chains of decoding that
resect them according to mobile and nonfigurative points (the flowsschizzes). Lawrence attacks the poverty of the immutable identical
images, the figurative roles that are so many tourniquets cutting off the
flows of sexuality: "fiancee, mistress, wife, mother"-one could just as
easily add "homosexuals, heterosexuals," etc.-all these roles are
distributed by the Oedipal triangle, father-mather-me, a representative
ego thought to be defined in terms of the father-mother representations,
by fixation, regression, assumption, sublimation-and all of that according to what rule? The law of the great Phallus that no one possesses, the
despotic signifier prompting the most miserable struggle, a common
absence for all the reciprocal exclusions where the flows dry up, drained
by bad conscience and ressentiment. "... sticking a woman on a
pedestal, or the reverse, sticking her beneath notice; or making a 'model'
housewife of her, or a 'model' mother, or a 'model' help-meet. All mere
devices for avoiding any contact with her. A woman is not a 'model'
anything. She is not even a distinct and definite personality.... A
woman is a strange soft vibration on the air, going forth unknown and
unconscious, and seeking a vibration of response. Or else she is a
discordant, jarring, painful vibration, going forth and hurting everyone
within range. And a man the same."41 Let's not be too quick to make
light of the pantheism of flows present in such texts as this: it is not easy
to de-ocdipalize even nature, even landscapes, to the extent that
Lawrence could. The fundamental difference between psychoanalysis
and schizoanalysis is the following: schizoanalysis attains a non figurative and nonsymbolic unconscious, a pure abstract figural dimension
("abstract" in the sense of abstract painting), flows-schizzes or realdesire, apprehended below the minimum conditions of identity.
What does psychoanalysis do, and first of all what does Freud do, if
not maintain sexuality under the morbid yoke of the little secret, while
finding medical means for rendering it public, for making it into an open
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

351

secret, the analytic Ocdipux? We :11 C fold, co:-;\"(' Ii... ('. 11'·. (II uk BOIIII:".
everybody's like that," but one continues to ClllhLIU' thcxaruc 11I1I1Iill;11
ing and degrading conception of sexuality, the sallie ligmalive COIIl'CP
tion as the censors' . It is certain that psychoanalysis has not made ils
pictorial revolution. There is a hypothesis dear to Freud: the libido docs
not invest the social field as such except on condition that it be
desexualized and sublimated. If he holds so closely to this hypothesis, it
is because he wants above all to keep sexuality in the limited framework
of Narcissus and Oedipus, the ego and the family. Consequently, every
sexual libidinal investment having a social dimension seems to him to
testify to a pathogenic state, a "fixation" in narcissism, or a "regression"
to Oedipus and to the pre-oedipal stages, by means of which homosexuality will be explained as a reinforced drive, and paranoia as a means of
defense.P We have seen on the contrary that what the libido invested,
through its loves and sexuality, was the social field itself in its economic,
political, historical, racial, and cultural determinations: in delirium the
libido is continually re-creating History, continents, kingdoms, races,
and cultures. Not that it is advisable to put historical representations in
the place of the familial representations of the Freudian unconscious, or
even the archetypes of a collective unconscious. It is merely a question
of ascertaining that our choices in matters of love are at the crossroads
of "vibrations," which is to say that they express connections, disjunctions, and conjunctions of flows that cross through a society, entering
and leaving it, linking it up with other societies, ancient or contemporary, remote or vanished, dead or yet to be born. Africas and Orients,
always following the underground thread of the libido. Not geohistorical
figures or statues, although our apprenticeship is more readily accomplished with these figures, with books, histories, and reproductions, than
with our mommy. But flows and codes of socius that do not portray
anything, that merely designate zones of libidinal intensity on the body
without organs, and that are emitted, captured, intercepted by the being
that we are then determined to love, like a point-sign, a singular point in
the entire network of the intensive body that responds to History, that
vibrates with it. Never was Freud more adventurous than in Gradiva. In
short, our libidinal investments of the social field, reactionary or
revolutionary, are so well hidden, so unconscious, so well masked by the
preconscious investments, that they appear only in our sexual choices of
lovers. A love is not reactionary or revolutionary, but it is the index of
the reactionary or revolutionary character of the social investments of
the libido. The desiring sexual relationships of man and woman (or of
man and man, or woman and woman) are the index of social relationships between people. Love and sexuality are the exponents or the
352

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

indic;rlor:>, this time unconscious, or the libidinal investnH.'nls or the
social field. Every loved or desired being serves as a collective agent of
enunciation. And it is certainly not, as Freud believed, the libido that
must be desexualized and sublimated in order to invest society and its
flows; on the contrary, it is love, desire, and their flows that manifest the
directly social character of the nonsublimated libido and its sexual
investments.
For those looking for a thesis topic on psychoanalysis, one should
not suggest vast considerations on analytic epistemology, but modest
and rigorous topics such as the theory of maids or domestic servants in
Freud's thought. There are some real indices in such areas. On the
subject of maids-who are present everywhere in the cases studied by
Freud-there occurs an exemplary hesitation in Freudian thought, a
hesitation too quickly resolved in favor of what was to become a dogma
of psychoanalysis. Philippe Girard, in unpublished remarks that seem to
us to have a wide application, situates the problem at several levels. In
the first place, Freud discovers "his own" Oedipus in a complex social
context that brings into play the older half brother from the rich side of
the family, and the thievish maid as the poor woman. Secondly, the
familial romance and fantasy activity in general will be presented by
Freud as a veritable drift of the social field, where one substitutes
persons of a higher or lower rank for the parents (the son of a princess
kidnapped by gypsies, or the son of a poor man taken in by bourgeois);
Oedipus was already doing this when he claimed a low birth of servant
parents. Thirdly, the Rat Man not only installs his neurosis in a social
field determined from one end to the other as military, he not only makes
it revolve around a form of torture originating in the Orient, but also in
this very field he causes his neurosis to oscillate between two poles
constituted by the rich woman and the poor woman, under the effect of a
strange unconscious communication with the unconscious of the father.
Lacan was the first to emphasize these themes, which were enough to
challenge the whole of Oedipus; and he shows the existence of a "social
complex" where the subject at times attempts to assume his own
role-but at the price of a splitting of the sexual object into a rich
woman and a poor woman-and at other times ensures the unity of the
object, but this time at the price of a splitting of "his own social
function" at the other extremity of the chain. Fourthly, the Wolf Man
demonstrates a marked taste for the poor woman: the peasant girl on all
fours washing some clothes, or the servant scrubbing the floor."
The fundamental problem with regard to these texts is the following: must we see, in all these sexual-social investments of the libido and
these object choices, mere dependences of a familial Oedipus? Must we
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

353

save Oedipus at all costs by interpreting these investments and object
choices as defenses against incest? (Thus the familial romance, or
Oedipus's own wish to have been born of poor parents who would
cleanse him of his crime.) Must these be understood as compromises
and substitutes for incest? (Thus in "The Wolf Man," the peasant girl as
a substitute for the sister, having the same name as she, or the girl on
hands and knees, working, as a substitute for the mother surprised in the
coitus scene; and in The Rat Man, the disguised repetition of the
paternal situation, making it possible to enrich or impregnate Oedipus
with a fourth "symbolic" term charged with accounting for the splittings
through which the libido invests the social field.) Freud makes a firm
choice of this last direction; all the more firm in that, according to his
own confession, he wants to set things straight with lung and Adler. And
after having ascertained in the Wolf Man case the existence of an
"intention of debasing" the woman as love object, he concludes that it is
merely a matter of a "rationalization," and that the "true underlying
determination" almost always leads us back to the sister, to the mommy,
considered as the only "purely erotic motives"! Taking up the eternal
refrain of Oedipus, the eternal lullaby, he writes: "A child pays no
regard to social distinctions, which have little meaning for it as yet; and
it classes people of inferior rank with its parents if they love it as its
parents do. "44
We always fall back into the false alternative where Freud was Ieby Oedipus, and then confirmed in this position by his controversy with
Adler and lung: either, he says, you will abandon the sexual position of
the libido in favor of an individual and social will to power, or in favor of
a prehistoric collective unconscious-or you will recognize Oedipus,
making of it the sexual abode of the libido, and you will make
daddy-mommy into "the purely erotic motive." Oedipus: the touchstone
of the pure psychoanalyst, on which to sharpen the sacred blade of a
successful castration. Yet what was the other direction, glimpsed for a
moment by Freud apropos of the familial romance, before the Oedipal
trapdoor slams shut? It is the direction rediscovered, at least hypothetically, by Philippe Girard: there is no family where vacuoles are not
arranged. and where extrafamilial breaks are not manifest, by means of
which the libido is engulfed in order to sexually invest the nonfamiliali.e., the other class as determined under the empirical rubrics of the
"richest and the poorest," and sometimes both at once. Wouldn't the
Great Other, indispensable to the position of desire, be the Social Other.
social difference apprehended and invested as the nonfamily within the
family itself? The other class is by no means grasped by the libido as a
magnified or impoverished image of the mother, but as the foreign, the

nonmother, the nonfather, the nonfamily, the index of what is nonhuman
in sex, and without which the libido would not assemble its desiringmachines. Class struggle goes to the heart of the ordeal of desire. The
familial romance is not a derivative of Oedipus; Oedipus is a drift of the
familial romance, and thereby of the social field. It is not a question of
denying the importance of parental coitus, and the position of the
mother; but when this position makes the mother resemble a floorwasher, or an animal, what authorizes Freud to say that the animal or the
maid stand for the mother, independently of the social or generic
differences, instead of concluding that the mother also functions as
something other than the mother, and gives rise in the child's libido to an
entire differentiated social investment at the same time as she opens the
way to a relation with the nonhuman sex? For whether the mother works
or not, whether the mother is from a richer or poorer background than
the father, etc., has to do with breaks and flows that traverse the family,
but that overreach it on all sides and are not familial.
From the start we wonder if the libido knows father-mother, or
rather if it makes the parents function as something entirely different, as
agents of production in relation to other agents in sociodesiringproduction. From the point of view of libidinal investment, parents not
only open to the other, they are themselves countersected and divided
by the other who defamilializes them according to the laws of social
production and desiring-production: the mother herself functions as rich
woman or poor woman, maid or princess, pretty girl or old lady, animal
or Blessed Virgin, and all at once. Everything passes into the machine
that causes the properly familial determinations to disintegrate. What
the orphan libido invests is a field of social desire, a field of production
and antiproduction with its breaks and flows, where the parents are
apprehended in nonparental functions and roles confronting other roles
and other functions. Does this amount to saying that the parents have no
unconscious role as such? Of course they have an unconscious role, but
in two quite specific ways that deprive them even more of their
supposed autonomy. In accordance with the distinction made by embryologists with regard to the egg between the stimulus and the organizer,
parents are stimuli having an indifferent value that trigger the allocation
of gradients or zones of intensity on the body without organs: it is in
relation to the parents that in each case wealth or poverty will be
situated, the relative richest or poorest, as empirical forms of social
difference-so that within this difference the parents again appear,
allocated to such and such a zone, but under a different rubric from that
of parents. And the organizer is the social field of desire, which alone
designates the zones of intensity, with all the beings that populate these
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZO ANAL YSIS

I

355

zones and determine their libidinal investment. Secondly, the parents as
parents are terms of application that express the reduction of the social
field invested by the libido to a finite aggregate of destination, where the
destination finds nothing but impasses and blockages consonant with the
mechanisms of psychic and social repression active in this field:
Oedipus, such is Oedipus. In each of these senses, the third thesis of
schizoanalysis posits the primacy of the libidinal investments of the
social field over the familial investment, both in point of fact and by
statute: an indifferent stimulus at the beginning, an extrinsic result at the
point of arrival. The relation to the nonfamilial is always primary: in the
form of sexuality of the field in social production, and the nonhuman sex
in desiring-production (gigantism and dwarfism).
One often has the impression that families have understood the
lesson of psychoanalysis only too well, even from far off or by osmosis,
in the air of the times: they play at Oedipus, a sublime alibi. But behind
all this, there is an economic situation: the mother reduced to housework, or to a difficult and uninteresting job on the outside; children
whose future remains uncertain; the father who has had it with feeding
all those mouths-in short, a fundamental relation to the outside of
which the psychoanalyst washes his hands, too attentive to seeing that
his clients play nice games. Now the economic situation, the relation to
the outside, is what the libido invests and counterinvests as sexual
libido. One gets off on flows and the breaks in these flows. Let us
consider for a moment the motivations that lead someone to be
psychoanalyzed: it involves a situation of economic dependence that
has become unbearable for desire, or full of conflicts for the investment
of desire. The psychoanalyst, who says so many things about the
necessity for money in the cure, remains supremely indifferent to the
question of who is footing the bill. For example, the analysis reveals the
unconscious conflicts of a woman with her husband, but the husband is
paying for his wife's analysis. This isn't the onlv time we encounter the
duality of money, as a structure of external fina'ncing and a's a means of
internal payment, along with the objective "dissimulation" that it
comprises, essential to the capitalist system. But it is interesting to find
this essential concealment, miniaturized, occupying a place of honor in
the analyst's office. The analyst talks about Oedipus, about castration
and the phallus, about the necessity of assuming one's sex, as Freud
says, the human sex, and the necessity for the woman to renounce her
desire for the penis and for the man to renounce his male protest. We
maintain that there is not one woman-more particularly, not one
child-who can as such "assume" her or his situation in a capitalist
society, precisely because this situation has nothing to do with the
:!51!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

phallus and castration, but directly concerns an unbearable economic
dependence. And the woman and the children who succeed in "assuming" do so only by detours and determinations completely distinct from
their being-woman and their being-child. Nothing to do with the phallus,
but much to do with desire, with sexuality as desire. For the phallus has
never been either the object or the cause of desire, but is itself the
castrating apparatus, the machine for putting lack into desire, for drying
up all the flows, and for making all the breaks from the outside and from
the Real into one and the same break with the outside, with the Real.
Too much always penetrates from the outside, where the analyst is
concerned, too much penetrates into his office. Even the closed familial
scene appears to him to be an excessive outside. He promotes the pure
analytic scene, an office Oedipus and an office castration, that should be
its own reality, its own proof, and that, contrary to the movement,
proves itself only by not working, by being interminable. Psychoanalysis
has become quite a stupefying drug, where the strangest personal
dependence allows the clients to forget, during the time spent in sessions
on the couch, the economic dependencies that drive them there in the
first place (a bit like the way the decoding of flows entails a reinforcement of bondage). Do these psychoanalysts who are oedipalizing
women, children, blacks, and animals know what they are doing? We
dream of entering their offices, opening the windows and saying, "It
smells stuffy in here-some relation with the outside, if you please." For
desire does not survive cut off from the outside, cut off from its
economic and social investments and counterinvestments. And if there
is, to use Freud's terms, a "purely erotic motive," it is certainly not
Oedipus that harbors it, nor the phallus that actuates it, nor castration
that transmits it. The erotic, the purely erotic motive pervades the social
field, wherever desiring-machines are agglutinated or dispersed in social
machines, and where love-object choices occur at the meeting place of
the two kinds of machine, following lines of escape or integration. Will
Aaron leave with his flute, which is not a phallus, but a desiring-machine
and a process of deterritorialization?
Let us suppose that we are granted everything: it will only be
granted afterward. It is only afterward that the libido would invest the
social field, and that it would "participate" in the social and the
metaphysical. Which permits the preservation of the fundamental
Freudian position, according to which the libido must be desexualized in
order to perform such investments, but begins with Oedipus, me, father
and mother (the pre-oedipal stages relating structurally or eschatologically to the Oedipal organization). We have seen that this conception of
the afterward implied a radical misunderstanding with regard to the
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

357

nature of the actual factors. For either the libido is caught up in
molecular desiring-production and knows nothing of persons just as it
knows nothing of the ego-even the most undifferentiated ego of
narcissism-since its investments are already differentiated, but differentiated according to the prepersonal regime of partial objects, of
singularities, of intensities, of gears and parts of machines of desire,
where one would have a hard time recognizing mother or father or me
(we have seen how contradictory it was to invoke the partial objects,
and to make of them representatives of parental persons or the supports
of familial relations); or on the other hand the libido invests persons and
an ego, but is already caught up in a social production and social
machines that do not merely differentiate them as familial beings, but as
derivatives of the molar aggregate to which they belong under this other
regime.
It is indeed true that the social and the metaphysical arrive at the
same time, in accordance with the two simultaneous meanings of
process, as the historical process of social production and as the
metaphysical process of desiring-production. But they do not come
afterward. Lindner's painting again asserts its presence, where the
turgid little boy has already plugged a desiring-machine into a social
machine, short-circuiting the parents, who can only intervene as agents
of production and antiproduction in one case as in the other. There is
only the social and the metaphysical. If something crops up afterward, it
is certainly not the social and metaphysical investments of the libido, the
unconscious syntheses; rather, on the contrary, it is Oedipus, narcissism, and the entire series of psychoanalytic concepts. The factors of
production are always "actual," and are so from the tenderest age;
"actual" does not signify recent as opposed to infantile, but rather in
action, as opposed to what is virtual and will come about under certain
conditions. Oedipus is virtual and reactional. Let us consider the
conditions under which Oedipus arrives: an aggregate of departuretransfinite, constituted by all the objects, agents, and relations of
sociodesiring-production-is reduced to a finite familial aggregate as an
aggregate of arrival (a minimum of three terms, which one can and even
must augment, but not to infinity). Such an application in fact presupposes a fourth, extrapolated, mobile term, the symbolic abstract phallus,
charged with performing the folding or the correspondence; but this
application effectively operates on the three persons who constitute the
minimum familial constellation, or on their substitutes-father, mother,
child. One does not stop there, since these three terms tend to be
reduced to two, either in the scene of castration where the father kills
the child, or in the scene of the terrible mother where the mother kills
:li!M!

I

ANTI·OEDIPUS

I
i

the child or the father. Then from two we pass to one in narcissism,
which in no way precedes Oedipus but is its product. That is why we
speak of an Oedipal-narcissistic machine, at the end of which the ego
encounters its own death, as the zero term of a pure abolition that has
haunted oedipalized desire from the start, and that is identified now, at
the end, as Thanatos. 4, 3, 2, I, O-Oedipus is a race for death.
Since the nineteenth century, the study of mental illnesses and
madness has remained the prisoner of the familial postulate and its
correlates, the personological correlate and the egoic postulate (Ie
postulat moitquey. We have seen, following Foucault, how nineteenthcentury psychiatry had conceived of the family as both cause and judge
of the illness, and the closed asylum as an artificial family charged with
internalizing guilt and with instituting responsibility, enveloping madness no less than its cure in a father-child relationship everywhere
present. In this respect, far from breaking with psychiatry, psychoanalysis transported its requirements outside the asylum walls, and first
imposed a certain "free," intensive, phantasmal use of the family that
seemed particularly suited to what was isolated as the neuroses. But the
resistance of the psychoses on the one hand, and the necessity for taking
into account a social etiology on the other hand, has led psychiatrists
and psychoanalysts to redeploy under open conditions the order of an
extended family, which is still believed to possess the secret of the
illness as well as its cure. After the family has been internalized in
Oedipus, Oedipus is externalized in the symbolic order, in the institutiona! order, in the community order, the sectorial order, etc. This
progression contains a constant of all modern attempts at reform. And if
this tendency appears in its most naive form in community psychiatry
aimed at adjustment-"the therapeutic return to the family," to the
identity of persons and the integrity of the ego, the whole works being
blessed by successful castration in a sacred triangular form-the same
tendency in more disguised forms is at work in other trends. It is not by
chance that Lacan's symbolic order has been diverted, utilized for
grounding a structural Oedipus applicable to psychosis, and for extending the familial co-ordinates beyond their real and even imaginary
domain. It is not by chance that institutional analysis has difficulty in
maintaining a position against the reconstitution of artificial families
where the symbolic order, embodied in the institution, re-forms group
Oedipuses, with all the letha! characteristics of the subjugated groups.
What is more, antipsychiatry has sought the secret of a causality at
once social and schizophrenic in the redeployed families. This is perhaps
where the mystification appears most clearly, because antipsychiatry, by
certain of its aspects, was the most suited to break with the traditional
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

359

familial reference. What does one see, in fact, in the American familialist studies pursued by antipsychiatrists? Completely ordinary families
are baptized as schizophrenogenic, as well as completely ordinary
familial mechanisms, and an ordinary familial logic, i.e., neuroticizing at
worst. In so-called schizophrenic familial monographs everyone easily
recognizes his own daddy, his own mommy. For example, Bateson's
"double impasse" or "double bind": where is there a father who doesn't
simultaneously transmit the two contradictory injunctions-"Let's be
friends, son, I'm the best friend you've got," and "Watch out, son, don't
treat me like one of your buddies"? There is nothing there with which to
make a schizophrenic. We have seen in this sense that the double
impasse in no way defined a specific schizophrenogenic mechanism, but
merely characterized Oedipus in the whole of its extension. If there is a
veritable impasse, a veritable contradiction, it is the one into which the
researcher himself is led, when he claims to assign schizophrenogenic
social mechanisms, and at the same time to discover them within the
order of the family, which both social production and the schizophrenic
process escape. This contradiction is perhaps especially perceptible in
Laing, because he is the most revolutionary of the antipsychiatrists. At
the very moment he breaks with psychiatric practice, undertakes
assigning a veritable social genesis to psychosis, and calls for a
continuation of the "voyage" as a process and for a dissolution of the
"normal ego," he falls back into the worst familialist, personological,
and egoic postulates, so that the remedies invoked are no more than a
"sincere corroboration among parents," a "recognition of the real
persons," a discovery of the true ego or self as in Martin Buber.t" Even
more than the hostility of traditional authorities, perhaps this is the
source of the actual failure of the antipsychiatric undertakings, of their
co-option for the benefit of adaptational forms of familial psychotherapy
and of community psychiatry, and of Laing's own retreat to the Orient.
And is it not a contradiction on another level, but analogous, when some,
attempting to hasten the teaching of Lacan, place it back on a familial
and personological axis-whereas Lacan assigns the cause of desire in a
nonhuman "object," heterogeneous to the person, below the minimum
conditions of identity, escaping the inter subjective co-ordinates as well
as the world of meanings?
Long live the Ndernbu, for if we follow the detailed account by the
ethnologist Turner, the Ndembu doctor alone has been able to treat
Oedipus as an appearance, a decor, and to go back to the unconscious
libidinal investments of the social field. Oedipal familialism, even and
especially in its most modern forms, makes impossible the discovery of
what one claims nevertheless to be searching for today: schizophreno:1;;0 \

ANTI·OEDIPUS

genic social production. In the first place, it is futile to affirm that the
family expresses more profound social contradictions, for one confers
on it a value as microcosm, gives it the role of a necessary relay for the
transformation of social into mental alienation; what is more, one acts as
if the libido did not directly invest the social contradictions as such, and
in order to awaken, needed these contradictions translated according to
the family code. By that very fact, one has already substituted a familial
causation or expression for social production, and finds oneself back
within the categories of idealist psychiatry. Whatever one's stake in all
of this, society is thereby justified: all that remains to contest it with are
vague considerations on the sick nature of the family, or more generally
still, considerations on the modern way of life. One has therefore
glossed over what is essential: that society is schizophrenizing at the
level of its infrastructure, its mode of production, its most precise
capitalist economic circuits; and that the libido invests this social field,
not in a form where it would be expressed and translated by means of a
family-microcosm, but in the form where it causes its nonfamilial breaks
and flows, invested as such, to enter into the family; hence, that the
familial investments are always a result of the sociodesiring libidinal
investments, which alone are primary; finally, that mental alienation
refers directly to these investments and is no less social than social
alienation, which refers for its part to the preconscious investments of
interest.
Not only does one thereby fail to correctly evaluate social production in its pathogenic nature, but secondly, one also fails to understand
the schizophrenic process in its relationship with the schizophrenic as a
sick person. For one attempts to neuroticize everything. And doubtless
one thus conforms to the family's mission, which is to produce neurotics
by means of its oedipalization, its system of impasses, its delegated
psychic repression, without which social repression would never find
docile and resigned subjects, and would not succeed in choking off the
flows' lines of escape. We don't feel any need to attach the slightest
importance to psychoanalysis's claim to cure neurosis, since, for it,
curing consists of an infinite maintenance, an infinite resignation, an
accession to desire by way of castration-and of the establishment of
conditions where the subject is able to spread, to pass the sickness to his
offspring, rather than dying celibate, impotent, and masturbatory. Again,
perhaps it will be discovered that the only incurable is the neuroticwhence interminable psychoanalysis. It is a cause for selfcongratulation when one succeeds in transforming a schizo into a
paranoiac or a neurotic. Such a transformation perhaps entails many
misunderstandings. For the schizo is the one who escapes all Oedipal,
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

13111

familial, and personological references-I'll no longer say me, I'll no
longer say daddy-mommy-and he keeps his word. Now the question is,
first, if that is what makes him ill, or if on the contrary that is the
schizophrenic process, which is not an illness, not a "breakdown" but a
"breakthrough," however distressing and adventurous: breaking
through the wall or the limit separating us from desiring-production,
causing the flows of desire to circulate. Laing's importance lies in the
fact that, starting from certain intuitions that remained ambiguous in
Jaspers, he was able to indicate the incredible scope of this voyage. With
the result that schizoanalysis would come to nothing if it did not add to
its positive tasks the constant destructive task of disintegrating the
normal ego. Lawrence, Miller, and then Laing were able to demonstrate
this in a profound way: it is certain that neither men nor women are
clearly defined personalities, but rather vibrations, flows, schizzes, and
"knots." The ego refers to personological co-ordinates from which it
results, persons in their turn refer to familial co-ordinates, and we shall
see what the familial constellation refers to in order to produce
individuals in its turn. The task of schizoanalysis is that of tirelessly
taking apart egos and their presuppositions; liberating the prepersonal
singularities they enclose and repress; mobilizing the flows they would
be capable of transmitting, receiving, or intercepting; establishing
always further and more sharply the schizzes and the breaks well below
conditions of identity; and assembling the desiring-machines that countersect everyone and group everyone with others. For everyone is a little
group (un groupuscule) and must live as such-or rather, like the Zen tea
box broken in a hundred places, whose every crack is repaired with
cement made of gold, or like the church tile whose every fissure is
accentuated by the layers of paint or lime covering it (the contrary of
castration, which is unified, molarized, hidden, scarred, unproductive).
Schizoanalysis is so named because throughout its entire process of
treatment it schizophrcnizes, instead of neuroticizing like psychoanalysis.
What makes the schizophrenic ill, since the cause of the illness is
not schizophrenia as a process? What transforms the breakthrough into
a breakdown? It is the constrained arrest of the process, or its
continuation in the void, or the way in which it is forced to take itself as
a goal. We have seen in this sense how social production produced the
sick schizo: constructed on decoded flows that constitute its profound
tendency or its absolute limit, capitalism is constantly counteracting this
tendency, exorcizing this limit by substituting internal relative limits for
it that it can reproduce on an ever expanding scale, or an axiomatic of
flows that subjects this tendency to the harshest forms of despotism and
3!!:! \

ANTI-OEDIPUS

repression. It is in this sense that contradiction installs itself not only at
the level of the flows that traverse the social field, but at the level of their
libidinal investments, which form the flows' constituent parts-between
the paranoiac reconstruction of the Urstaat and the positive schizophrenic lines of escape. Thereafter three possibilities emerge. First, the
process is arrested, the limit of desiring-production is displaced, travestied, and now passes over into the Oedipal subaggregate. So the schizo is
effectively neuroticized, and it is this neuroticization that constitutes his
illness, for in any case neuroticization precedes neurosis, the latter being
the result of the former. Or, second, the schizo resists neuroticization
and oedipalization. Even the use of modern resources, the pure analytic
scene, the symbolic phallus, structural foreclosure, and the name of the
father do not succeed in "taking" on him. (Here again, in these modern
resources, what a strange use is made of Lacari's discoveries-Lacan,
who was the first on the contrary to schizophrenize the analytic field!) In
this second case the process, confronted with a neuroticization that it
resists, but that suffices to block it on all sides, is led to take itself as an
end: a psychotic is produced who escapes the delegated repression
properly speaking only to take refuge in primal repression, closing the
body without organs around itself and silencing his desiring-machines.
Catatonia rather than neurosis, catatonia rather than Oedipus and
castration-but it is stilI an effect of neuroticization, a countereffect of
one and the same illness. Or-the third case-the process sets to turning
round in the void. Since it is now a process of deterritorialization, it can
no longer search for and create its new land. Confronted with Oedipal
reterritorialization-an archaic, residual, ludicrously restricted
sphere-it will form stilI more artificial lands that, barring an accident,
accommodate themselves in one way or another to the established
order: the pervert. After all, Oedipus was already an artificial sphere, 0
family! And the resistance to Oedipus, the return to the body without
organs was still an artificial sphere, 0 asylum! So that everything is
perversion. But everything is psychosis and paranoia as well, since
everything is set in motion by the counterinvestment of the social field
that produces the psychotic. Again, everything is neurosis, since it is an
outcome of the neuroticization that runs counter to the process. Finally,
everything is process, schizophrenia as process, since it is against
schizophrenia that everything is measured; its peculiar trajectory, its
neurotic arrests, its perverse continuations in the void, its psychotic
finalizations.
Inasmuch as Oedipus arises out of an application of the entire social
field to the finite familial figure, it does not imply just any investment of
this field by the libido, but a very particular investment that renders this
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

363

application possible and necessary. That is why Oedipus seemed to us a
paranoiac's idea before being a neurotic's feeling. In fact, the paranoiac
investment consists in subordinating molecular desiring-production to
the molar aggregate it forms on one surface of the full body without
organs, enslaving it by that very fact to a form of socius that exercises
the function of a full body under determinate conditions. The paranoiac
engineers masses, and is continually forming large aggregates, inventing
heavy apparatuses for the regimentation and the repression of the
desiring-machines. Doubtless it is not hard for him to appear reasonable,
by appealing to collective interests and goals, reforms to be brought
about, sometimes even revolutions to be made. But madness breaks
through, beneath the reformist investments, or the reactionary and
fascist investments, which assume a reasonable appearance only in the
light of the preconscious, and which animate the strange discourse of an
organization of society. Even its language is demented. Listen to a
Secretary of State, a general, the boss of a firm, a technician. Listen to
the great paranoiac din beneath the discourse of reason that speaks for
others, in the name of the silent majority. The explanation is that,
beneath preconscious goals and interests, a uniquely unconscious
investment rises up that embraces a full body for itself, independently of
all aims, and a degree of development for itself, independently of all
reason: that very degree and no other, don't take another step; that very
socius and no other, hands off. A disinterested love of the molar
machine, a veritable enjoyment, with all the hatred it contains for those
who do not submit to the molar machine: the entire libido is at stake.
From the point of view of libidinal investment, it is clear that there are
few differences between a reformist, a fascist, and sometimes even
certain revolutionaries, who are distinguished from one another only in a
preconscious fashion, but whose unconscious investments are of the
same type, even when they do not adopt the same body. We can't go
along with Maud Mannoni when she sees the first historical act of
antipsychiatry in the 1902 decision granting Judge Schreber his liberty
and responsibility, despite the recognized continuation of his delirious
ideas. 46 There is room for doubting that the decision would have been
the same if Schreber had been schizophrenic rather than paranoiac, if he
had taken himself for a black or a Jew rather than a pure Aryan, if he had
not proved himself so competent in the management of his wealth, and if
in his delirium he had not displayed a taste for the socius of an already
fascisizing libidinal investment. As machines of subjugation, the social
machines give rise to incomparable loves, which are not explained by
their interests, since interests derive from them instead. At the deepest
level of society there is delirium, because delirium is the investment-of a
:llM

I ,~NTI-OEDIPUS

socius as such, beyond goals. And it is not merely the despot's body to
which the paranoiac lovingly aspires, but the body of capital-money as
well, or a new revolutionary body, the moment it becomes a form of
power and gregariousness. To be possessed by this body as well as
possessing it; to engineer subjugated groups for which one becomes so
many cogs and parts; to insert oneself into the machine to find there at
last the enjoyment of the mechanisms that pulverize desire-such is the
paranoiac experience.
Now Oedipus appears to be a relatively innocent thing, a private
kind of thing to be treated in the analyst's office. But we ask precisely
what type of unconscious social investment Oedipus presupposes, since
psychoanalysis does not invent Oedipus; psychoanalysis is content to
live off Oedipus, to develop and promote it, and to give it a marketable
medical form. Inasmuch as the paranoiac investment enslaves desiringproduction, it is very important for it that the limit of this production be
displaced, and that it pass to the interior of the socius, as a limit between
two molar aggregates, the social aggregate of departure and the familial
subaggregate of arrival that supposedly corresponds to it, in such a way
that desire is caught in the trap of a familial psychic repression that
comes to double the weight of social repression. The paranoiac applies
his delirium to the family-and to his own family-but it is first of all a
delirium of races, ranks, classes, and universal history. In short, Oedipus
implies within the unconscious itself an entire reactionary and paranoiac
investment of the social field that acts as an oedipalizing factor, and that
can fuel as well as counteract the preconscious investments. From the
standpoint of schizoanalysis, the analysis of Oedipus therefore consists
in tracing back from the son's confused feelings to the delirious ideas or
the lines of investment of the parents, of their internalized representatives and their substitutes: not in order to attain the whole of a family,
which is never more than a locus of application and reproduction, but in
order to attain the social and political units of libidinal investment. With
the result that all familialist psychoanalysis-with the psychoanalyst at
the fore-warrants a schizoanalysis. Only one way to spend time on the
couch: schizoanalyze the psychoanalyst.
We have maintained throughout that, by dint of their difference in
nature with regard to the preconscious investments of interest, the
unconscious investments of desire had sexuality as an index in their
social scope itself. Which does not mean, of course, that one need only
invest the poor woman, the maid, or the whore to have revolutionary
loves. There are no revolutionary or reactionary loves, which is to say
that loves are not defined by their objects, any more than by the sources
and aims of the desires and the drives. But there are forms of love that
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

365

are the indices of the reactionary or the revolutionary character of the
investment made by the libido of a sociohistorical or geographic field,
from which the loved and desired beings receive their definition.
Oedipus is one of these forms, the index of a reactionary investment.
And the well-defined figures, the well-identified roles, the clearly distinct
persons, in short the image-models of which Lawrence spoke-mother,
fiancee, mistress, wife, saint or whore, princess and maid, rich woman
and poor woman-are dependents of Oedipus, even in their reversals
and their substitutions. The very form of these images, their configurations, and the whole of their possible relations are the product of a code,
or of a social axiomatic to which the libido addresses itself through
them. Persons are simulacra derived from a social aggregate whose code
is unconsciously invested for itself. That is why love and desire exhibit
reactionary, or else revolutionary, indices; the latter emerge on the
contrary as nonfigurative indices, where persons give way to decoded
flows of desire, to lines of vibration, and where the cross-sections of
images give way to schizzes that constitute singular points, points-signs
with several dimensions causing flows to circulate rather than canceling
them. Nonfigurative loves, indices of a revolutionary investment of the
social field, and which are neither Oedipal nor pre-oedipal since it all
amounts to the same thing, but innocently anoedipal, and which give the
revolutionary the right to say, "Oedipus? Never heard of it." Undoing
the form of persons and the ego, not in behalf of a pre-oedipal
undifferentiated, but in behalf of anoedipal lines of singularities, the
desiring-machines. For there is indeed a sexual revolution, which does
not concern objects, aims, or sources, but only machinic forms or
indices.
The fourth and final thesis of schizoanalysis is therefore the
distinction between two poles of social libidinal investment: the paranoiac, reactionary, and fascisizing pole, and the schizoid revolutionary
pole. Once again, we see no objection to the use of terms inherited from
psychiatry for characterizing social investments of the unconscious,
insofar as these terms cease to have a familial connotation that would
make them into simple projections, and from the moment delirium is
recognized as having a primary social content that is immediately
adequate. The two poles are defined, the one by the enslavement of
production and the desiring-machines to the gregarious aggregates that
they constitute on a large scale under a given form of power or selective
sovereignty; the other by the inverse subordination and the overthrow
of power. TIle one by these molar structured aggregates that crush
singularities, select them, and regularize those that they retain in codes
or axiomatics: the other by the molecular multiplicities of singularities
:lllll

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

that on the contrary treat the large aggregates as so many useful
materials for their own elaborations. The one by the lines of integration
and territorialization that arrest the flows, constrict them, turn them
back, break them again according to the limits interior to the system, in
such a way as to produce the images that come to fiIl the field of
immanence peculiar to this system or this aggregate. the other by lines of
escape that follow the decoded and deterritorialized flows, inventing
their own non figurative breaks or schizzes that produce new flows,
always breaching the coded wall or the territorialized limit that separates
them from desiring-production. And to summarize all the preceding
determinations: the one is defined by subjugated groups, the other by
subject-groups. It is true that we still run up against all kinds of problems
concerning these distinctions. In what sense does the schizoid investment constitute, to the same extent as the other one, a real investment of
the sociohistorical field, and not a simple utopia? In what sense are the
lines of escape collective, positive, and creative? What is the relationship between the two unconscious poles, and what is their relationship
with the preconscious investments of interest?
We have seen that the unconscious paranoiac investment was
grounded in the socius itself as a full body without organs, beyond the
preconscious aims and interests that it assigns and distributes. The fact
remains that such an investment does not endure the light of day: it must
always hide under assignable aims or interests presented as the general
aims and interests, even though in reality the latter represent only the
members of the dominant class or a fraction of this class. How could a
formation of sovereignty, a fixed and determinate gregarious aggregate,
endure being invested for their brute force, their violence, and their
absurdity? They would not survive such an investment. Even the most
overt fascism speaks the language of goals, of law, order, and reason.
Even the most insane capitalism speaks in the name of economic
rationality. And this is necessarily the case, since it is in the irrationality
of the full body that the order of reasons is inextricably fixed, under a
code, under an axiomatic that determines it. What is more, the bringing
to light of the unconscious reactionary investment as if devoid of an aim,
would be enough to transform it completely, to make it pass to the other
pole of the libido, i.e., to the schizorevolutionary pole, since this action
could not be accomplished without overthrowing power, without reversing subordination, without returning production itself to desire: for it is
only desire that lives from having no aim. Molecular desiring-production
would regain its liberty to master in its turn the molar aggregate under an
overturned form of power or sovereignty. That is why Klossowski, who
has taken the theory of the two poles of investment the furthest, but still
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

:lqj7

within the category of an active utopia, is able to write: "Every
sovereign formation would thus have to foresee the destined moment of
its disintegration.... No formation of sovereignty, in order to crystalize, will ever endure this prise de conscience: for as soon as this
formation becomes conscious of its immanent disintegration in the
individuals who compose it, these same individuals decompose it. ...
By way of the circuitous route of science and art, human beings have
many times revolted against this fixity; this capacity notwithstanding,
the gregarious impulse in and by science caused this rupture to fail. The
day humans are able to behave as intentionless phenomena-for every
intention at the level of the human being always obeys the laws of its
conservation, its continued existence-on that day a new creature will
declare the integrity of existence.... Science demonstrates by its very
method that the means that it constantly elaborates do no more than
reproduce, on the outside, an interplay of forces by themselves without
aim or end whose combinations obtain such and such a result. ...
However, no science can develop outside a constituted social grouping.
In order to prevent science from calling social groups back in question,
these groups take science back in hand ... [integrate it] into the diverse
industrial schemes; its autonomy appears strictly inconceivable. A
conspiracy joining together art and science presupposes a rupture of all
our institutions and a total upheaval of the means of production.... If
some conspiracy, according to Nietzsche's wish, were to use science
and art in a plot whose ends were no less suspect, industrial society
would seem to foil this conspiracy in advance by the kind of mise en
scene it offers for it, under pain of effectively suffering what this
conspiracy reserves for this society: i.e., the breakup of the institutional
structures that mask the society into a plurality of experimental spheres
finally revealing the true face of modernity-an ultimate phase that
Nietzsche saw as the end result of the evolution of societies. In this
perspective, art and science would then emerge as sovereign formations
that Nietzsche said constituted the object of his countersociology-art
and science establishing themselves as dominant powers, on the ruins of
institutions. "47
Why this appeal to art and science, in a world where scientists and
technicians and even artists, and science and art themselves, work so
closely with the established sovereignties-if only because of the
structures of financing? Because art, as soon as it attains its own
grandeur, its own genius, creates chains of decoding and deterritorialization that serve as the foundation for desiring-machines, and make them
function. Take the example of the Venetian School in painting: at the
same time that Venice develops the most powerful commodity capital:ll!!!

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

ism, bordering an Urstaat, that grants it a large degree of autonomy, its
painting apparently molds itself to a Byzantine code where even the
colors and the lines are subordinated to a signifier that determines their
hierarchy as a vertical order. But toward the middle of the fifteenth
century, when Venetian capitalism confronts the first signs of its decline, something breaks out in this painting: what would appear to be another world opens up, an other art, where the lines are deterritorialized,
the colors are decoded, and now only refer to the relations they entertain
among themselves, and with one another. A horizontal or transverse
organization of the canvas is born, with lines of escape or breakthrough.
Christ's body is engineered on all sides and in all fashions, pulled in all
directions, playing the role of a full body without organs, a locus of
connection for all the machines of desire, a locus of sadomasochistic
exercises where the artist's joy breaks free. Even homosexual Christs.
Organs become direct powers of the body without organs, and emit
flows on it that the myriad wounds, such as Saint Sebastian's arrows,
come to cut and cut again in such a way as to produce other flows.
Persons and organs cease to be coded according to hierarchized
collective investments; each person, each organ has a merit all its own,
and tends to its own affairs: the infant Jesus looks from one side while
the Virgin Mary listens from the other, Jesus stands for all the desiring
children, the Virgin stands for all the desiring women, a joyous activity
of profanation extends beneath this generalized privatization. A painter
such as Tintoretto paints the creation of the world like a race represented in its whole length with God Himself on the sidelines, giving the
starting signal across the track as the figures speed away in a transversal
direction. Suddenly a painting by Lotto surges forth that could just as
easily be from the nineteenth century. And of course this decoding of
the flows of painting, these schizoid lines of escape that form desiringmachines on the horizon, are taken up again in scraps from the old code,
or else introduced into new codes, and first of all into a properly pictorial
axiomatic that chokes off the escapes, closes the whole constellation to
the transversal relations between lines and colors, and reduces it to
archaic or new territorialities (perspective, for example). So true is it
that the movement of deterritorialization can only be grasped as the
reverse side of territorialities, even the residual, artificial, or factitious
ones. But at least something arose whose force fractured the codes,
undid the signifiers, passed under the structures, set the flows in motion,
and effected breaks at the limits of desire: a breakthrough. It does not
suffice to say that the nineteenth century is already there in the middle of
the fifteenth, since the same would have to be said of the Byzantine code
underneath which strange liberated flows were already circulating. We
INTRODUCTIOI, TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

369

have seen this in the case of the painter Turner, and his most accomplished paintings that are sometimes termed "incomplete": from the
moment there is genius, there is something that belongs to no school, no
period, something that achieves a breakthrough-art as a process
without goal, but that attains completion as such.
The codes and their signifiers , the axiomatics and their structures,
the imaginary figures that come to occupy them as well as the purely
symbolic relationships that gauge them, constitute properly aesthetic
molar formations that are characterized by goals, schools, and periods.
They relate these aesthetic formations to greater social aggregates,
finding in them a field of application, and everywhere enslave art to a
great castrating machine of sovereignty. There is a pole of reactionary
investment for art as well, a somber paranoiac-Oedipal-narcissistic
organization. A foul use of painting, centering around the dirty little
secret, even in abstract painting where the axiomatic does without
figures: a style of painting whose secret essence is scatological, an
oedipalizing painting, even when it has broken with the Holy Trinity as
the Oedipal image, a neurotic or neuroticizing painting that makes the
process into a goal or an arrest, an interruption, or a continuation in the
void. This style of painting flourishes today, under the usurped name of
modern painting-a poisonous flower-and brought one of Lawrence's
heroes to speak much like Henry Miller of the need to have done with
pouring out one's merciful and pitiful guts, these "flows of corrugated
iron.":" The productive breaks projected onto the enormous unproductive cleavage of castration, the flows that have become flows of
"corrugated iron," the openings blocked on all sides. And perhaps this,
as we have seen, is Where we find the commodity value of art and
literature: a paranoiac form of expression that no longer even needs to
"signify" its reactionary libidinal investments, since these investments
function on the contrary as its signifier; an Oedipal form of content that
no longer even needs to represent Oedipus, since the "structure"
suffices. But on the other, the schizorevolutionary, pole, the value of art
is no longer measured except in terms of the decoded and deterritorialized flows that it causes to circulate beneath a signifier reduced to
silence, beneath the conditions of identity of the parameters, across a
structure reduced to impotence; a writing with pneumatic, electronic, or
gaseous indifferent supports, and that appears all the more difficult and
intellectual to intellectuals as it is accessible to the infirm, the illiterate,
and the schizos, embracing all that flows and counterflows, the gushings
of mercy and pity knowing nothing of meanings and aims (the Artaud
experiment, the Burroughs experiment). It is here that art accedes to its

;lii'O

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

authentic modernity, which simply consists in liberating what was
present in art from its beginnings, but was hidden underneath aims and
objects, even if aesthetic, and underneath recodings or axiomatics: the
pure process that fulfills itself, and that never ceases to reach fulfillment
as it proceeds-art as "experimentation.':"
And the same wiII be said of science: the decoded flows of
knowledge are first bound in the properly scientific axiornatics, but these
axiomatics express a bipolar hesitation. One of the poles is the great
social axiomatic that retains from science what must be retained in
terms of market needs and zones of technical innovation: the great
social aggregate that makes the scientific subaggregates into so many
applications that are characteristic of and that correspond to it-in
short, the set of methods that is not content to bring scientists back to
"reason" but anticipates any deviance on their part, imposes a goal on
them, and makes scientists and science into an agency perfectly
subjugated to the formation of sovereignty (for example, the way in
which nondeterminism was only tolerated to a point, then ordered to
make its peace with determinism). But the other pole is the schizoid
pole, in whose proximity flows of knowledge schizophrenize, and not
only flee across the social axiomatic, but pass beyond their own
axiomatics, generating increasingly deterritorialized signs, figuresschizzes that are no longer either figurative or structured, and reproduce
or produce an interplay of phenomena without aim or end: science as
experimentation, as previously defined. In this domain as in the others,
isn't there a properly libidinal conflict between a paranoiac-Oedipalizing
element of science, and a schizorevolutionary element? That very conflict that leads Lacan to say there exists a drama for the scientist. ("1. R.
Mayer, Cantor, I will not draw up an honor roll of these dramas that
sometimes lead to madness ... , a list that could not include itself in
Oedipus, unless it were to call Oedipus in question. "49 Since, in point of
fact, Oedipus does not intervene in these dramas as a familial figure or
even as a mental structure; its intervention is determined by an
axiomatic acting as an oedipalizing factor, resulting in a specifically
scientific Oedipus.) And in contrast to Lautreamont's song that rises up
around the paranoiac-Oedipal-narcissistic pole-"O rigorous mathematics. . . . Arithmetic! algebra! geometry! imposing trinity! luminous
"See all of John Cage's work, and his book Silence (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press,
1961): "The word experimental is apt, providing it is understood not as descriptive of an act to be later
judged in terms of success and failure, but simply as of an act the outcome of which is unknown" (p.
13). And regarding the active or practical notions of decoding, of deconstruction, and of the work as a
process, the reader is referred to the excellent commentaries of Daniel Charles on Cage, "Musique et
anarchie," in Bulletin de fa Societefrancoise de philosophie, July 1971, where there is violent anger on
the part of some participants in the discussion, reacting to the idea that there is no longer any code.

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

371

triangle!"-there is another song: 0 schizophrenic mathematics, uncontrollable and mad desiring-machines!
In the capitalist formation of sovereignty-the full body of capitalmoney as the socius-the great social axiomatic has replaced the
territorial codes and the despotic overcodings that characterized the
preceding formations; and a molar, gregarious aggregate has formed,
whose mode of subjugation has no equal. We have seen on what
foundations this aggregate operated: a whole field of immanence that is
reproduced on an always larger scale, that is continually multiplying its
axioms to suit its needs, that is filled with images and with images of
images, through which desire is determined to desire its own repression
(imperialism); an unprecedented decoding and deterritorialization,
which institutes a combination as a system of differential relations
between the decoded and deterritorialized flows, in such a way that
social inscription and repression no longer even need to bear directly
upon bodies and persons, but on the contrary precede them (axiomatic:
regulation and application); a surplus value determined as a surplus
value of flux, whose extortion is not brought about by a simple
arithmetical difference between two quantities that are homogeneous
and belong to the same code, but precisely by differential relations
between heterogeneous magnitudes that are not raised to the same
power: a flow of capital and a flow of labor as human surplus value in the
industrial essence of capitalism, a flow of financing and a flow of
payment or incomes in the monetary inscription of capitalism, a market
flow and a flow of innovation as machinic surplus value in the operation
of capitalism (surplus value as the first aspect of its immanence), a ruling
class that is all the more ruthless as it does not place the machine in its
service, but is the servant of the capitalist machine: in this sense, a single
class, content for its part with drawing incomes that, however enormous, differ only arithmetically from the workers' wages-income,
whereas this class functions on a more profound level as creator,
regulator, and guardian of the great nonappropriated, nonpossessed
flow, incommensurable with wages and profits, which marks at every
step along the way the interior limits of capitalism, their perpetual
displacement, and their reproduction on an always larger scale (the
movement of interior limits as the second aspect of the capitalist field of
immanence, defined by the circular relationship "great flux of
financing-reflux of incomes in wages-afflux of raw profit"); the effusion
of antiproduction within production, as the realization or the absorption
of surplus value, in such a way that the military, bureaucratic, and police
apparatus finds itself grounded in the economy itself, which directly

312

1 ANTI-OEDIPUS

-------

-------------------------------

produces libidinal investments for the repression of desire tantiproduction as the third aspect of capitalist immanence, expressing the twofold
nature of capitalism: production for production's sake, but under the
conditions of capital).
There is not one of these aspects-not the least operation, the least
industrial or financial mechanism-that does not reveal the insanity of
the capitalist machine and the pathological character of its rationality:
not at all a false rationality, but a true rationality of this pathological
state, this insanity, "the machine works too, believe me". The capitalist
machine does not run the risk of becoming mad, it is mad from one end
to the other and from the beginning, and this is the source of its
rationality. Marx's black humor, the source of Capital, is his fascination
with such a machine: how it came to be assembled, on what foundation
of decoding and deterritorialization; how it works, always more decoded, always more deterritorialized; how its operation grows more relentless with the development of the axiomatic, the combination of the
flows; how it produces the terrible single class of gray gentlemen who
keep up the machine; how it does not run the risk of dying all alone, but
rather of making us die, by provoking to the very end investments of
desire that do not even go by way of a deceptive and subjective
ideology, and that lead us to cry out to the very end, Long live capital in
all its reality, in all its objective dissimulation! Except in ideology, there
has never been a humane, liberal, paternal, etc., capitalism. Capitalism is
defined by a cruelty having no parallel in the primitive system of cruelty,
and by a terror having no parallel in the despotic regime of terror. Wage
increases and improvements in the standard of living are realities, but
realities that derive from a given supplementary axiom that capitalism is
always capable of adding to its axiomatic in terms of an enlargement of
its limits: let's create the New Deal; let's cultivate and recognize strong
unions; let's promote participation, the single class; let's take a step
toward Russia, which is taking so many toward us; etc. But within the
enlarged reality that conditions these islands, exploitation grows constantly harsher, lack is arranged in the most scientific of ways, final
solutions of the "Jewish problem" variety are prepared down to the last
detail, and the Third World is organized as an integral part of capitalism.
The reproduction of the interior limits of capitalism on an always wider
scale has several consequences: it permits increases and improvements
of standards at the center, it displaces the harshest forms of exploitation
from the center to the periphery, but also multiplies enclaves of
overpopulation in the center itself, and easily tolerates the so-called
socialist formations. (It is not kibbutz-style socialism that troubles the

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

I

373

Zionist state, just as it is not Russian socialism that troubles world
capitalism.) There is no metaphor here: the factories are prisons, they do
not resemble prisons, they are prisons.
Everything in the system is insane: this is because the capitalist
machine thrives on decoded and de territorialized flows; it decodes and
deterritorializes them still more, but while causing them to pass into an
axiomatic apparatus that combines them, and at the points of combination produces pseudo codes and artificial reterritorializations. It is in this
sense that the capitalist axiomatic cannot but give rise to new territorialities and revive a new despotic Urstaat. The great mutant flow of capital
is pure dcterritorialization, but it performs an equivalent reterritorialization when converted into a reflux of means of payment. The Third World
is de territorialized in relation to the center of capitalism but belongs to
capitalism, being a pure peripheral territoriality of capitalism. The
system teems with preconscious investments of class and of interest.
And capitalists first have an interest in capitalism. A statement as
commonplace as this is made for another purpose: capitalists have an
interest in capitalism ollly through the tapping of profits that they extract
from it. But no matter how large the extraction of profits, it does not
define capitalism. And for what does define capitalism, for what
conditions profit, theirs is an investment of desire whose natureunconscious-libidinal-is altogether different, and is not simply explained by the conditioned profits, but on the contrary itself explains
that a small-time capitalist, with no great profits or hopes, fully
maintains the entirety of his libidinal investments: the libido investing
the great flow that is not convertible as such, not appropriated as
such-"nonpossession and nonwealth," in the words of Bernard
Schmitt, who among modern economists has for us the incomparable
advantage of offering a delirious interpretation of an unequivocally
delirious economic system (at least he goes all the way). In short, a truly
unconscious libido, a disinterested love: this machine is fantastic.
If one keeps in mind the tautological statement made above, one
can then understand that people whose preconscious investments of
interest do not, or should not, go in the direction of capitalism, can
maintain an unconscious libidinal investment consonant with capitalism,
or that scarcely threatens it. In the first case, they confine and localize
their preconscious interest in wage increases and the improvement of
the standard of Jiving; powerful organizations represent them, which get
nasty as soon as the nature of their aims is questioned ("It's clear that
you're not workers, you have no idea whatsoever of real struggles, let's
attack profits for a better management of the system, vote for a clean
Paris-Welcome, Mister Brezhnev"). And how, indeed, could one fail to
3H

I

A.NTI-OEDIPUS

find one's interest in the hole where one has sunk it, at the heart of the
capitalist system? Or else, in the second case, there is truly a new
investment of interest, new aims that presuppose another body than that
of capital-money; those exploited become conscious of their preconscious interest, and this interest is truly revolutionary-a major break
from the standpoint of the preconscious.
But it is not enough for the libido to invest a new social body
corresponding to these new aims, in order for it to perform a revolutionary break at the unconscious level with the same mode as the preconscious break. In fact, the two levels do not function in the same mode.
The new socius invested by the libido as a full body can very well
function as an autonomous territoriality, but one that is caught and
wedged in the capitalist machine, and is localizable in the field of its
market. For the great flow of mutant capital repels its limits, adds new
axioms, and maintains desire within the mobile framework of its
expanded limits. There can be a preconscious revolutionary break, with
no real libidinal and unconscious revolutionary break. Or rather the
order of things is as follows: there is first a real libidinal revolutionary
break, which then shifts into the position of a simple revolutionary break
with regard to aims and interests, and finally re-forms a merely specific
reterritoriality, a specific body on the full body of capital. Subjugated
groups are continually deriving from revolutionary subject-groups. One
more axiom. This is no more complicated than in the case of abstract
painting. Everything begins with Marx, continues on with Lenin, and
ends with the refrain, "Welcome, Mister Brezhnev." Is this still a case of
revolutionaries speaking to another revolutionary, or rather a village
clamoring for a new prefect? And if one were to ask when it all started to
go bad, how far back must we go for an answer, back to Lenin, back to
Marx? So true is it that the various investments, even when opposed,
can coexist with one another in complexes that are not the province of
Oedipus, but that do concern the sociohistorical field, its preconscious
and unconscious conflicts and contradictions, about which it can only be
said that they fall back on Oedipus, Marx-the-father, Lenin-the-father,
Brezhnev-the-father. Fewer and fewer people believe in all this but it
makes no difference, since capitalism is like the Christian religion, it
lives precisely from a lack of belief, it does not need it-a motley
painting of all that has been believed.
But the reverse is also true: capitalism is constantly escaping on all
sides. Its productions, its art, and its science form decoded and
deterritorialized flows that do not merely submit to the corresponding
axiomatic, but cause some of their currents to pass through the mesh of
the axiomatic, underneath the recodings and the reterritorializations.
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOA.NA.LYSIS

I

315

Subject-groups in their turn derive from subjugated groups by way of
ruptures in the latter. Capitalism is continually cutting off the circulation
of flows, breaking them and deferring the break, but these same flows
are continually overflowing, and intersecting one another according to
schizzes that turn against capitalism and slash into it. Capitalism, which
is always ready to expand its interior limits, remains threatened by an
exterior limit that stands a greater chance of coming to it and cleaving it
from within, in proportion as the interior limits expand. That is why the
lines of escape are singularly creative and positive: they constitute an
investment of the social field that is no less complete, no less total than
the contrary investment. The paranoiac and the schizoid investments are
like two opposite poles of unconscious libidinal investment, one of
which subordinates desiring-production to the formation of sovereignty
and to the gregarious aggregate that results from it, while the other
brings about the inverse subordination, overthrows the established
power, and subjects the gregarious aggregate to the molecular multiplicities of the productions of desire. And if it is true that delirium is
coextensive with the social field, these two poles are found to coexist in
every case of delirium, and fragments of schizoid revolutionary investment are found to coincide with blocks of paranoiac reactionary
investment. The oscillation between the two poles is a constituent aspect
of the delirium.
It appears, however, that the oscillation is not equal, and that as a
rule the schizoid pole is potential in relation to the actual paranoiac pole
(how can we count on art and science except as potentialities, since their
actuality is easily controlled by the formations of sovereignty"). This
results from the fact that the two poles of unconscious libidinal
investment do not maintain the same relationship, nor the same form of
relationship, with the preconscious investments of interest. On the one
hand, in fact, the investment of interest fundamentally conceals the
paranoiac investment of desire, and reinforces it as much as it conceals
it: it covers over the irrational character of the paranoiac investment
under an existing order of interests, of causes and means, of aims and
reasons; or else the investment of interest itself gives rise to and creates
those interests that rationalize the paranoiac investment; or yet again, an
effectively revolutionary preconscious investment fully maintains a
paranoiac investment at the level of the libido, to the extent that the new
socius continues to subordinate the entire production of desire in the
name of the higher interests of the revolution and the inevitable
sequences of causality. In the other case, the preconscious interest must
on the contrary discover the necessity for a different sort of investment,

~,!l

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

and must perform a kind of rupture with causality as well as a calling in
question of aims and interests.
In each case the problem is different: it is not enough to construct a
new socius as full body; one must also pass to the other side of this
social full body, where the molecular formations of desire that must
master the new molar aggregate operate and are inscribed. Only by
making this passage do we reach the revolutionary break and investment
of the libido. This cannot be achieved except at the cost of, and by
means of a rupture with, causality. Desire is an exile, desire is a desert
that traverses the body without organs and makes us pass from one of its
faces to the other. Never an individual exile, never a persona! desert, but
a collective exile and a collective desert. It is only too obvious that the
destiny of the revolution is linked solely to the interest of the dominated
and exploited masses. But it is the nature of this link that poses the real
problem, as either a determined causal link or a different sort of
connection. It is a question of knowing how a revolutionary potential is
realized, in its very relationship with the exploited masses or the
"weakest links" of a given system. Do these masses or these links act in
their own place, within the order of causes and aims that promote a new
socius, or are they on the contrary the place and the agent of a sudden
and unexpected irruption, an irruption of desire that breaks with causes
and aims and overturns the socius, revealing its other side? In the
subjugated groups, desire is still defined by an order of causes and aims,
and itself weaves a whole system of macroscopic relations that determine the large aggregates under a formation of sovereignty. Subjectgroups on the other hand have as their sole cause a rupture with
causality, a revolutionary line of escape; and even though one can and
must assign the objective factors, such as the weakest links, within
causal series that made such a rupture possible, only what is of the order
of desire and its irruption accounts for the reality this rupture assumes at
a given moment, in a given place.P?
It is clear how everything can coexist and intermix: in the "Leninist
break," for example, when the Bolshevik group, or at least a part of this
group, becomes aware of the immediate possibility of a proletarian
revolution that would not follow the anticipated causal order of the
relations of forces, but that would singularly precipitate things by
plunging into a breach (the escape, or "revolutionary defeatism "). In
reality, everything coexists: still hesitant preconscious investments in
the case of some people who do not believe in this possibility;
revolutionary preconscious investments in those who "see" the possibility of a new socius but maintain it in an order of molar causality that

INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

377

already makes of the party a new form of sovereignty; and finally
unconscious revolutionary investments that perform a real rupture with
causality in the order of desire. And in the same people the most varied
kinds of investments can coexist at such and such a moment, the two
kinds of groups can interpenetrate. This is because the two groups are
like determinism and freedom in Kant's philosophy: they indeed have
the same "object"-and social production is never anything other than
desiring-production, and vice versa-but they don't share the same law
or the same regime.
The actualization of a revolutionary potentiality is explained less by
the preconscious state of causality in which it is nonetheless included,
than by the efficacy of a libidinal break at a precise moment, a schiz
whose sole cause is desire-which is to say the rupture with causality
that forces a rewriting of history on a level with the real, and produces
this strangely polyvocal moment when everything is possible. Of course
the schiz has been prepared by a subterranean labor of causes, aims, and
interests working together; of course this order of causes runs the risk of
closing and cementing the breach in the name of the new socius and its
interests. Of course one can always say after the fact that history has
never ceased being governed by the same laws of aggregates and large
numbers. The fact remains that the schiz came into existence only by
means of a desire without aim or cause that charted it and sided with it.
While the schiz is possible without the order of causes, it becomes real
only by means of something of another order: Desire, the desert-desire,
the revolutionary investment of desire. And that is indeed what undermines capitalism: where will the revolution come from, and in what form
within the exploited masses? It is like death-where, when? It will be a
decoded flow, a deterritorialized flow that runs too far and cuts too
sharply, thereby escaping from the axiomatic of capitalism. Will it come
in the person of a Castro, an Arab, a Black Panther, or a Chinaman on
the horizon? A May '68, a home-grown Maoist planted like an anchorite
on a factory smokestack? Always the addition of an axiom to seal off a
breach that has been discovered; fascist colonels start reading Mao, we
won't be fooled again; Castro has become impossible, even in relation to
himself; vacuoles are isolated, ghettos created; unions are appealed to
for help; the most sinister forms of "dissuasion" are invented; the
repression of interest is reinforced-but where will the new irruption of
desire come from?51
Those who have read us this far will perhaps find many reasons for
reproaching us: for believing too much in the pure potentialities of art
and even of science; for denying or minimizing the role of classes and
class struggle; for militating in favor of an irrationalism of desire; for

ara

I

f\NTI-OEDIPUS

identifying the revolutionary with the schizo; for falling into familiar,
all-too-familiar traps. This would be a bad reading, and we don't know
which is better, a bad reading or no reading at all. And in all probability
there are far more serious reproaches to be made, which we haven't
even thought of. As for those we have named, we hold in the first place
that art and science have a revolutionary potential, and nothing more,
and that this potential appears all the more as one is less and less
concerned with what art and science mean, from the standpoint of a
signifier or signifieds that are necessarily reserved for specialists; but
that art and science cause increasingly decoded and de territorialized
flows to circulate in the socius, flows that are perceptible to everyone,
which force the social axiomatic to grow ever more complicated, to
become more saturated, to the point where the scientist and the artist
may be determined to rejoin an objective revolutionary situation in
reaction against authoritarian designs of a State that is incompetent and
above all castrating by nature. (For the State imposes a specifically
artistic Oedipus, a specifically scientific Oedipus.)
Secondly, we have not at all minimized the importance of preconscious investments of class or interest, which are based in the infrastructure itself. But we attach all the more importance to them as they are the
index in the infrastructure of a libidinal investment of another nature,
and that can coincide as well as clash with them. Which is merely a way
to pose the question, "How can the revolution be betrayed?"-once it
has been said that betrayals don't wait their turn, but are there from the
very start (the maintenance of paranoiac unconscious investments in
revolutionary groups). And if we put forward desire as a revolutionary
agency, it is because we believe that capitalist society can endure many
manifestations of interest, but not one manifestation of desire, which
would be enough to make its fundamental structures explode, even at
the kindergarten level. We believe in desire as in the irrational of every
form of rationality, and not because it is a lack, a thirst, or an aspiration,
but because it is the production of desire: desire that produces-realdesire, or the real in itself. Finally, we do not at all think that the
revolutionary is schizophrenic or vice versa. On the contrary, we have
consistently distinguished the schizophrenic as an entity from schizophrenia as a process; now the schizophrenic as entity can only be
defined in relation to the arrests, the continuations in the void, or the
finalist illusions that repression imposes on the process itself. This
explains why we have only spoken of a schizoid pole in the libidinal
investment of the social field, so as to avoid as much as possible the
confusion of the schizophrenic process with the production of a
schizophrenic. The schizophrenic process (the schizoid pole) is revoluINTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANALYSIS

1 379

tionary, in the very sense that the paranoiac method is reactionary and
fascist; and it is not these psychiatric categories, freed of all familialism,
that will allow us to understand the politico-economic determinations,
but exactly the opposite.
And then, above all, we are not looking for a way out when we say
that schizoanalysis as such has strictly no political program to propose.
If it did have one, it would be grotesque and disquieting at the same time.
It does not take itself for a party or even a group, and does not claim to
be speaking for the masses. No political program will be elaborated
within the framework of schizoanalysis. Finally, schizoanalysis is
something that does not claim to be speaking for anything or anyone, not
even-in fact especially not-for psychoanalysis: nothing more than
impressions, the impression that things aren't going well in psychoanalysis, and that they haven't been since the start. We are still too
competent; we would like to speak in the name of an absolute incompetence. Someone asked us if we had ever seen a schizophrenic-no, no,
we have never seen one. If someone reading this book feels that things
are fine in psychoanalysis, we're not speaking for him, and for him we
take back everything we have said. So what is the relationship between
schizoanalysis and politics on the one hand, and between schizoanalysis
and psychoanalysis on the other? Everything revolves around desiringmachines and the production of desire. Schizoanalysis as such does not
raise the problem of the nature of the socius to come out of the
revolution; it does not claim to be identical with the revolution itself.
Given a socius, schizoanalysis only asks what place it reserves for
desiring-production; what generative role desire enjoys therein; in what
forms the conciliation between the regime of desiring-production and
the regime of social production is brought about, since in any case it is
the same production, but under two different regimes; if, on this socius
as a full body, there is thus the possibility for going from one side to
another, i.e., from the side where the molar aggregates of social
production are organized, to this other side, no less collective, where the
molecular multiplicities of desiring-production are formed; whether and
to what extent such a socius can endure the reversal of power such that
desiring-production subjugates social production and yet does not
destroy it, since it is the same production working under the difference
in regime; if there is, and how there comes to be, a formation of
subject-groups; etc.
If someone retorts that we are claiming the famous rights to
laziness, to nonproductivity, to dream and fantasy production, once
again we are quite pleased, since we haven't stopped saying the
opposite, and that desiring-production produces the real, and that desire

~I'@

I

ANTI-OEDIPUS

has little to do with fantasy and dream. As opposed to Reich, schizoanalysis makes no distinction in nature between political economy .a~d
libidinal economy. Schizoanalysis merely asks what are the machinic,
social, and technical indices on a socius that open to desiring-machines,
that enter into the parts, wheels, and motors of these machines, as much
as they cause them to enter into their own parts, wheels, and motors.
Everyone knows that a schizo is a machine; all schizos say this, and not
just little Joey. The question to be asked is whether schizophrenics are
the living machines of a dead labor, which are then contrasted to the
dead machines of living labor as organized in capitalism. Or whether
instead desiring, technical, and social machines join together in a
process of schizophrenic production that thereafter has no more. sCh.izophrenics to produce. In her Lettre aux ministres, Maud Mannoni writes:
"One of these adolescents, declared unfit for studies, does admirably
well in a third-level class, provided he works some in mechanics. He has
a passion for mechanics. The man in the garage has been his best
therapist. If we take mechanics away from him he will become schizophrenic again."52 Her intention is not to prais~ ergotherapy or t?e
virtues of social adaptation. She marks the point where the SOCIal
machine, the technical machine, and the desiring-machine join closely
together and bring their regimes into communication. She asks if our
society can handle that, and what it is worth if it can't. And this is indeed
the direction the social, technical, scientific, and artistic machines take
when they are. revolutionary: they form desiring-machines for which
they are already the index in their own regime, at the same time that the
desiring-machines form them in the regime that is theirs, and as a
. '
position of desire.
What, finally, is the opposition between schizoanalysis and psychoanalysis, when the negative and positive tasks of schizoanaly~is are
taken as a whole? We constantly contrasted two sorts of unconscious or
two interpretations of the unconscious: the one schizoanalytic , the other
psychoanalytic; the one schizophrenic, the other neurotic-Oedipal; the
one abstract and nonfigurative , the other imaginary; but also the one
really concrete, the other symbolic; the one machinic, the other structural; the one molecular, microphysical, and micrological, and the other
molar or statistical; the one material, the other ideological; the one
productive, the other expressive. We have seen how the negative task of
schizoanalysis must be violent, brutal: defamiJiarizing, de-oedipalizing,
decastrating; undoing theater, dream, and fantasy; decoding,
de territorializing-a terrible curettage, a malevolent activity. But everything happens at the same time. For at the same time the process is
liberated-the process of desiring-production, following its molecular
INTRODUCTION TO SCHIZOANAL YSIS

I

381

lines of escape that already define the mechanic's task of the schizoanaIyst. And the lines of escape are still full molar or social investments at
grips with the whole social field: so that the task of schizoanalysis is
ultimately that of discovering for every case the nature of the libidinal
investments of the social field, their possible internal conflicts, their
relationships with the preconscious investments of the same field, their
possible conflicts with these-in short, the entire interplay of the
desiring-machines and the repression of desire. Completing the process
and not arresting it, not making it turn about in the void, not assigning it
a goal. We'll never go too far with the deterritorialization, the decoding
of flows. For the new earth ("In truth, the earth will one day become a
place of healing") is not to be found in the neurotic or perverse
reterritorializations that arrest the process or assign it goals; it is no
more behind than ahead, it coincides with the completion of the process
of desiring-production, this process that is always and already complete
as it proceeds, and as long as it proceeds. It therefore remains for us to
see how, effectively, simultaneously, these various tasks of schizoanalysis proceed.
jajielaks
Reference Notes

INTRODUCTION
1. Henry Miller, Sexus (New York: Grove Press, 1965), pp, 429-30.
2. Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, trans. by Walter Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1969), 1,17, p. 38.
3. Ibid., p. 46.
.. .
..
. P h
4. Gilles DeJeuze, "Trois problernes de groupe in Felix Guattan, syc analyse et transversalite (Paris: Maspero, 1972, preface).
5. H. Miller, Sexus, pp. 425-26.
6. Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (New York: Harper & Row, 1973).
7. Ibid., pp. 12-13.
..
f
8. Cf. in this respect Ivan IlIich, Medical Nemesis: The Expropriation 0
Health, (New York: Pantheon, 1976).
.
9. R. D. Laing, The Politics of Experience (New York: Ballantine Books, 1971),
p.126.
96
10. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 24, p. .
11. Miller, Sexus, p. 427.

382/ ANTI·OEDIPUS

383

THE DESIRING-MACHINES
I. See Georg BUchner, Lenz, in Complete Plays and Prose, trans. Carl Richard
Mueller (New York: Hill & Wang, 1963), p. 141.
la. Ibid.
2. Samuel Beckett, Molloy, in Three Novels by Samuel Beckett (New York:
Grove Press, 1959), p. 16. Molloy was translated from the French by Patrick
Bowles in collaboration with the author. (Translators' note.)
3. Antonin Artaud, Van Gogh, the Man Suicided by Society, trans. Mary
Beach and Lawrence Ferlinghetti, in Artaud Anthology (San Francisco:
City Lights Books, 1965), p. 158.
4. On the identity of nature and production, and species life in general,
according to Marx, see the commentaries of Gerard Granel, "L'ontologie
marxiste de 1844 et la question de la coupure ," in L 'endurance de la pensee
(Paris: PIon, 1968), pp. 301-310.
5. D.H. Lawrence, Aaron's Rod (New York: Penguin, 1976), ppl 200-201.
6. Henri Michaux, The Major Ordeals of the Mind, trans. Richard Howard
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974), pp. 125-27.
7. Sigmund Freud, "Psycho-Analytic Notes upon an Autobiographical Case of
Paranoia (Dementia Paranoides)," Collected Papers: Authorized Translation under the Supervision of Joan Riviere (New York: Basic Books, 1959),
Vol. 3, p. 396.
8. Victor Tausk, "On the Origin of the Influencing Machine in Schizophrenia,"
Psychoanalytic Quarterly, no. 2 (1933), pp. 519-56.
9. Karl Marx, Capital, trans. Ernest Untermann (New York: International
Publishers, 1967), Vol. 3, p. 827. See in Louis Althusser, Lire Ie capital
(Paris: Maspero , J965), the commentaries of Etienne Balibar, Vol. 2, pp.
2I3ff., and of Pierre Macherey, Vol. I, pp. 201ff. (Translators' note: For the
English text of Balibar's commentaries, see Louis Althusser and Etienne
Balibar, Reading Capital, trans. Ben Brewster [New York: Pantheon, 1970],
Part III, pp. 199-308. For contributions by Pierre Macherey, see footnotes
in this edition on pp. 7, 30, and 251.)
O. Samuel Beckett, "Enough," in First Love and Other Shorts (New York:
Grove Press, 1974).
I. Freud, "Psycho-Analytic Notes," p. 432 (emphasis added).
2. Beckett, Molloy, p. 29.
2a. Antonin Artaud, "Here Lies," trans. F. Teri Wehn and Jack Hirschman in
Artaud Anthology (San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1965), pp. 247 ~nd
238 respectively.
3. W. Morgenthaler, "Adolf Wollli." French translation in L 'Art brut, no. 2.
4. Cited in Sigmund Freud, "Psycho-Analytic Notes," p. 415.
5. L 'Art brut, no. 3, p. 63.
6. Freud, "Psycho-Analytic Notes," pp. 400--401.
7. Michel Carrouges, Les machines cellbataires (Paris: Arcanes, 1954).
8. Antonin Artaud, Le pese-nerfs, in Oeuvres completes (Paris: Gallimard),
Vol. I, p. 112.
9. Samuel Beckett, TIle VI/namable, in Three Novels by Samuel Beckett, p.
452. The Unnamable was translated from the French by the author.
(Translators' note.)
B4

I

REFERENCE NOTES

20. Pierre Klossowski, Nietzsche et le cercle vicieux (Paris: Mercure de France,
1969).
21. Ibid.
22. Friedrich Nietzsche, letter to Jakob Burckhardt, January 5,1889, in Selected
Letters of Friedrich Nietzsche, trans. Christopher Middleton (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1969), p. 347. (Translators' note.)
23. Klossowski, op. cit.
24. Klossowski, op. cit.
25. G. de Clerambault, Oeuvre psychiatrique (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France).
26. Beckett, The Unnamable.
27. D.H. Lawrence, Aaron's Rod, p. 162.
28. Immanuel Kant, The Critique of Judgment, Introduction, §3.
29. Clement Rosser, Logique du pire (Paris: Presses Universitaries de France,
1970), p. 37.
30. Henry Miller, Sexus (New York: Grove Press, 1(65), pp. 262,430.
31. Wilhelm Reich, The Mass Psychology of Fascism, trans. Vincent R.
Carfagno (London: Souvenir Press, 1970).
32. Vladimir Jankelevitch, Ravel, trans. Margaret Crosland (New York: Grove
Press, 1959), pp. 73-80.
33. See J. Laplanche and J.B. Por.talis , The Language of Psycho-Analysis,
trans. Donald Micholson-Smith (New York: Norton, 1974). (Translators'
note.)
34. Robert Jaulin, La mort sara (Paris: PIon, 1967), p. 122.
35. C. von Monakow and Mourgue , Introduction biologique a I'etude de la
neurologie et de la psycho-pathologic (Paris: Alcan, 1928).
36. Jacques Lacan, "Position de l'inconscient," in Ecrits (Paris: Editions du
Seuil), p. 843..
37. Maurice Blanchot, L'entretien infini (Paris: Gallimard, 1969), pp. 451-52.
38. All quotes from Proust are translated by Richard Howard. We also retain
the title In Search of Lost Time, used by Richard Howard in his translation
of Gilles Deleuze, Proust and Signs (New York: Braziller, 1972), p. I. This
title stresses the notion of search and voyage. (Translators' note.)
39. J.H. Rush, The Dawn of Life (Garden City, N.Y.: Hanover House, 1957),p.
148.
40. Melanie Klein, Contributions to Psycho-Analysis, with an Introduction by
Ernest Jones (London: Hogarth Press, 1930), pp. 242--43 (emphasis added).
41. Ray Bradbury, The Illustrated Man (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1951).
42. Antonin Artaud, "Je n'ai jamais rien etudie ... ," 84, December 1950.
43. Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age
of Reason, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Random House, 1971). The
English version is an edition, abridged by the author himself, of his French
text: Michel Foucault, Histoire de la folie a ['age classique (Paris: PIon,
1961).

2 PSYCHOANALYSIS AND FAMILIALISM
1. J. Laplanche and J. B. Pontalis, "Fantasme originaire, fantasmes des
origines et origine du Iantasme ," Les Temps Modernes, no. 215 (April 1964),
pp. 1844-46.
REFERENCE NOTES

I

385

la. On the existence of a little machine in the "primal fantasy," an existence
nevertheless always in the wings, see Sigmund Freud, "A Case of Paranoia
Running Counter to the Psychoanalytic Theory of the Disease" (1915).
2. Sigmund Freud, Three Case Studies (New York: Collier, Macmillan, 1970).
3. Ibid., pp. 150··51.
4. Ibid., p. 154.
5. Ibid., pp. 152, 184-86.
6. Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, trans. Martin
Milligan (New York: International Publishers, 1964), p. 145. See also the
excellent commentary by Francois Chatelet on this point: "La question de
latheisme de Marx," Etudes philosophiques, July 1966.
7. Sigmund Freud, " 'A Child Is Being Beaten': A Contribution to the Study of
the Origin of Sexual Perversions (1919)," in Collected Papers, Vol. 2,
Hogarth Press, London, pp. 172-202. (Translators' note.)
8. Ibid., p. 180.
9. On the importance of this controversy, see Andre Green, "Sur la mere
phallique ," Revue jrancaise de psychanalyse, January 1968, pp. 8-9.
10. See for example the (moderate) protest of Betty Friedan against the
Freudian and psychoanalytic conception of "feminine problems," sexual as
well as social: The Feminine Mystique (New York: Norton, 1963).
11. Pierre Klossowski, Nietzsche et Ie cercle vicieux (Paris: Mercure de France,
1969), p. 122. Klossowski's meditation on the relationship between drives
and institutions, and on the presence of the drives in the economic
infrastructure itself, is developed in his article "Sade et Fourier," Topique,
no. 4-5, and especially in La monnaie vivante (Paris: Losfeld, 1970).
12. In Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund
Freud, ed. James Strachey (New York: Macmillan; London: Hogarth Press,
1974), Vol. 23. (Translators' note: Hereafter this source will be cited as
Standard Edition.)
13. Andre Green, L 'affect (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1970), pp.
154-68.
14. See Gilles Deleuze , Proust and Signs, trans. Richard Howard (New York:
Braziller, 1972), pp. 120-22 if. for a discussion in depth of the two Proustian
series. (Translators' note.)
15. Translated by Richard Howard, and first appearing in Deleuze, Proust and
Signs, pp. 121-22. Translation of Marcel Proust, A la recherche du temps
perdu, Bibliothque de la Pleiade (Paris: Gallimard, 1954), Vol. 2, 622
(emphasis added). (Translators' revised note.)
16. Luc de Heusch, Essai sur Ie symbolisme de l'inceste royal en Afrique
(Bruxelles: 1959), pp. 13-16.
17. Immanuel Kant, TIle Metaphysics of Morals, Part I.
18. Green, L 'affect, p. 167.
19. On the hysterical "question" (Am I man or woman?) and the obsessional
"question" (Am I dead or alive?), see Serge Leclaire, "La mort dans la vie
de I'obsede ," La Psychanalyse, no. 2, pp. 129-30.
20. L 'Art brut, no. 3, p. 139. In his presentation, Jean Oury calls Jayet "the
nondelimited," "in permanent flight."
21. Felix Guattari first develops this concept at length in "D'un signe a I'autre ,"
in Psych analyse et trans versa lite (Paris: Maspero , 1973). (Translators' note.)

386

I

REFERENCE NOTES-

22. Samuel Beckett, Molloy, in Three Novels by Samuel Beckett (New York:
Grove Press, 1959).
23. Vaslav Nijinsky , Diary (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1936), pp. 20, J56.
24. A. Besancon, "Vel's une his to ire psychanalytique ," Annales, May 1969.
25. Gregory Bateson et al., "Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia," Behavioral
Science, Vol. I (1956). See the commentaries of Pierre Fedida in "Psychose
et parente ," Critique, October 1968.
26. Sigmund Freud, Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, Ch. 12. B.
27. Alexander Mitscherlich, Society without the Father, trans. Eric Mosbacher
(New York: Schocken Books, 1970), pp. 296ff.
28. Marie-Claire Boons, "Le meurtre du pere chez Freud," L 'Inconscient, no. 5
(January 1968), p. 129.
29. Edmond Ortigues, Le discours et Ie symbole (Paris: Aubier, 1962), p. 197.
30. Jacques Lacan, Eerits (Paris: Editions du Seuil), p. 813.
31. R. D. Laing, The Politics of Experience (New York: Ballantine, 1967), pp.
154-55.
32. On the interplay of races and intensities in the theater of cruelty, see
Antonin Artaud, Oeuvres completes, (Paris: Gallimard), Vols. 4 and 5: for
example, the project of "La conquete du Mexique ," Vol. 4, p. 151; and the
role of intensive vibrations and rotations in "Les Cenci," Vol. 5, pp. 46ff.
(Translators' note: For the English text of the latter, see Antonin Artaud,
TIle Cenci, trans. Simon Watson Taylor [New York: Grove Press, 1970], pp.
viiff.)
33. Arthur Rimbaud, Une Saison en Enjer.
34. Nietzsche, letter to Jakob Burckhardt, January 5, 1889, in Selected Letters
of Friedrich Nietzsche, trans. Christopher Middleton (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1969), p. 347.
35. Jacques Besse, "Le danseur," in La grande piique (Paris: Editions Belf'ond,
1969). The whole first part of this book describes the schizo's stroll in the
city; the second part, "Legendes Iolles," progresses to the hallucinations or
deliriums of historical episodes.
36. Wilhelm Reich, The Function of the Orgasm, trans. Vincent R. Carfagno
(New York: Simon & Schuster,1973), p. 70. For a critique of autism, see
Roger Gentis, Les murs de l'asile (Paris: Maspero, 1970), pp. 41ff.
37. Maurice Garcon, Louis XVII au la [ausse enigme (Paris: Hachette, 1968), p.
177.
38. Maud Mannoni, Le psychiatre, son [ou et la psychanalyse (Paris: Editions
du Seuil, 1970).
39. Ibid.
40. Jacques Hochman, Pour une psychiatrie communautaire (Paris: Editions du
Seuil, 1971), Ch. 4. Also his article "Le postulat fusionnel," Information
ps ychiatrique, September 1969.
41. David Cooper, Psychiatry and Anti-Psychiatry (New York: Ballantine
Books, 1971), p. 44 (emphasis added).
42. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth, trans. Constance Farrington
(New York: Grove Press, 1968), p. 262.
43. Witold Grombrowicz, L'Herne, no. 14, p. 230.
44. Lacan, Ecrits, p. 870. With regard to the specific role of the rich woman and
the poor woman in the Rat Man case, the reader may refer to the analyses of

REFERENCE NOTES

I

3S7

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

55.

56.

57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.

388

Lacan in "Le mythe individuel du nevrose," C.D.U., not included in the
Ecrits.
Rimbaud, Une Saison en Enjer.
Gerard Mendel, La revolte contre Ie pete (Paris: Payot, 1968), p. 422.
Friedrich Engels, The Origin of the Family (New York: International
Publishers, 1942), preface, p. 10.
Friedrich Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom, V, § 346. See also Marx, Economic
and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, pp. 144-46.
Hochrnann, Pour une psychiutrie communautaire, p. 38.
Selected Letters of Malcolm Lowry, ed. Harvey Breit and Margerie Bonner
Lowry (Philadelphia and New York: J. B. Lippincott, 1965), p. 66.
"Letter to Michael Fraenkel by Henry Miller, May 7, 1936," in Henry
Miller, Hamlet (Puerto Rico: Carrefour, 1939), vet. I, pp. 124-26.
Sigmund Freud, "The Dissolution of the Oedipus Complex" (1924), Standard Edition, Vol, 19, pp. 176-78.
Sigmund Freud, Totem and Taboo, trans. James Strachey (New York:
Norton, 1950), p. 123.
D. H. Lawrence, "Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious," in Psychoanalysis
and the Unconscious and Fantasia of the Unconscious (New York: Viking
Press, 1969), pp. 11-30.
See the two classic accounts: Wilhelm Reich, The Function of the Orgasm,
Ch. 6; Herbert Marcuse, Eros and Civilization (Boston: Beacon Press,
1955), the chapter "Nco-Freudian Revisionism." The question has been
taken up more recently in some excellent articles in Partisans, no. 46
(February 1969): Francois Gantheret, "Freud et la question socio-politique"
(pp. 85ff.); Jean-Marie Brohm, "Psychanalyse et revolution" (pp. 97ff.).
The two 1924 articles are "Neurosis and Psychosis" and "The Loss of
Reality in Neurosis and Psychosis." See also J. Capgras and J. Carrette,
"Illusion des sosies et complexe dOedipe," Annales medicopsychologiques, May 1924. Freud's article "Fetishism" (1927) does not go
back on the distinction, despite what is sometimes said, but confirms it:
Collected Papers, Vol. 5, pp. 198-204 ("I can thereby maintain my
proposition ...").
Jacques Lacan, "La famille," Encyclopedie francoise, Vol. 8 (1938).
Jacques Besse, La grande piique, pp. 27,61.
Gerard de Nerval, "Sylvie," in SjJlected Writings, trans. Geoffrey Wagner
(New York: Grove Press, N.Y., 1957). (Translators' note.)
"EI Desdichado," in Selected Writings, p. 213. (Translators' note.)
Jean Laplanche, "La realite dans la nevrose et la psychose," a lecture given
at the Societe Francaise de Psychanalyse in 1961. See also J. Laplanche and
J. B. Pontalis, The Language of Psycho-Analysis, trans. Donald MichelsonSmith (New York: Norton, 1974), the articles "Frustration" and "Actual
Neurosis."
C. G. Jung, Contributions to Analytical Psychology (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1948), Ch. 1-4 and p. 345.
Gisela Pankow, L'homme et sa psychose (Paris: Aubier, 1969), pp. 24-26.
The reader is referred to the very fine theory of the sign developed by
Pankow in Structuration dynamique dans la schizophrenic (paris: Huber,
1956). For Bettelheim's critique of regression, see Bruno Bettelheim, The
Empty Fortress (New York: The Free Press, 1967), pp. 294-96.

I

REFERENCE NOTES

64. Vincent Van Gogh, "Letter of September 8, 1888," cited in Artau<

Anthology, trans. Mary Beach and Lawrence Ferlinghetti (San Francisco
City Lights Books, 1965), p. 150.

3 SAVAGES, BARBARIANS, CIVILIZED MEN
1. Lewis Mumford, "La premiere megamachine ", Diogene, July 1966.
2. Meyer Fortes, Recherches voltaiques, 1967, pp. 135-37.
3. F. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals (New York: Random House
1969), II, 2-7. But these authors indulge in a strange gymnastics to maintaii
the existence of an Oedipal problem or complex, despite all the reasons thei
advance to the contrary, and although they say this complex is no

"clinically accessible."
4. Ibid. Section 4.
5. Ibid. Section 3.
6. E. R. Leach, Rethinking Anthropology (London: Athlone Press, 1966), pp
122-23.

.

7. L. G. Leffler, "L'alliance asyrnetrique chez Ies Mru," L 'Homme, July 1966
pp. 78-79. Leach, in Rethinking Anthropology, analyzes the difference
between ideology and practice apropos of the Kachin marriage (pp. 81-82)
he greatly advances the critique of conceptions of kinship as a closer
system (pp. 89-90).
8. Pierre Clastres, "L'arc et Ie panier,' L 'Homme, April 1966, p. 20.
9. Jeanne Favret, "La segrnentarite au Maghreb," L'Homme, April 1966
Pierre Clastres, "Echange et pouvoir,' L 'Homme, January 1962.
10. Edward E. Evans-Pritchard, "The Nuer of the Southern Sudan," in Africar.
Political Systems, ed. Meyer Fortes and Edward E. Evans-Pritcharc
(London: Oxford University Press, 1958), p. 287.
II. Marcel Griaule , Dieu d'eau (Paris: Fayard, 1948), especially pp. 46-52.
12. Claude Levi-Strauss, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, trans. James
Harle Bell and John Richard von Sturmer, ed. Rodney Needham (Boston
Beacon Press, 1969), pp. 130-31.
13. Marcel Griaule , "Remarques sur l'oncle uterin au Soudan," Cahiers internationaux de sociologie, January 1954. Alfred Adler and Michel Cartry, "L
transgression et sa derision," L 'Homme, July 1971.
14. Griaule, "Rernarques sur l'oncle ute rin au Soudan."
15. T. D. Lysenko, La situation dans la science biologique, French editior
(Moscow, 1949), p. 16.
16. The Elementary Structures of Kinship, pp. 485-88.
17. Robert Jaulin, La mort sara (Paris: PIon, 1967), p. 284.
18. Levi-Strauss, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, p. 309. Levi-Strauss
analyzes cases, abnormal or paradoxical on the surface, of beneficiaries 01
matrimonial prestations.
19. Leffler, "L'alliance asymetrique chez les Mru,' p. 80.
20. Georges Devereux, "Considerations ethnopsychanalytiques sur la notion d.
parente," L 'Homme, July 1965.
21. Victor W. Turner, "Magic, Faith, and Healing," in An Ndembu Doctor ir
Practice (New York: Collier, Macmillan, 1964).
22. M. C. and Edmond Ortigues, Oedipe africain (Paris: Pion, 1966), p. 305.
REFERENCE NOTES

/389

23. Geza Roheim, Psychoanalysis and Anthropology (New York: International
Universities Press, 1950), pp. 490--91.
24. E. R. Leach, "Magical Hair," in Myth and Cosmos (Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, 1967), p. 92.
25. Wilhelm Reich, Der Einbruch der Sexualmoral (Verlag fiir Sexualpolitik,
1932), p. 6. (The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality [New York: Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, 1971].)
26. Herbert Marcuse, Eros and Civilization (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955), p.
220.
27. Laura and Paul Bohannan, The Tiv of Central Nigeria (London: International African Institute, 1953).
28. Abram Kardiner, The Individual and His Society (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1939), p. 248.
29. Victor Turner, "Themes in the Symbolism of Ndembu Hunting Ritual," in
Myth and Cosmos (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1967), pp. 249-{i9.
30. Michel Cartry, "Clans, Iignages et groupements familiaux chez les Gourmantche ," L 'Homme, April 1966, p. 74.
31. Levi-Strauss, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, p. 267; also, regarding
his way of presenting Leach's argument, pp. 221ff. But with respect to this
argument itself, see Leach, Rethinking Anthropology, pp. 60--64, 81-95.
32. Levi-Strauss, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, pp. 193-95. See the
statistical comparison with the "cyclists."
33. Emmanuel Terray, Le Marxisme devant les societes primitives (Paris:
Maspero, 1969), p. 164.
34. Andre Leroi-Gourhan, Le geste et la parole, technique et langage (Paris:
Albin Michel, 1964), pp. 270ff., 290ff.
35. Michel Cartry , "La calebasse de I'excision en pays gourrnantche ,' Journal
de la Societe des africanistes, no. 2 (1968), pp. 223-25.
36. Pierre Clastres, Chroniques des indiens Guayaki (Paris: Plan, 1972).
37. On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 6.
38. Ibid., II, 17.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid., II, 16.
41. Ibid., II, 21.
42. lean Steinmann, Saint lean-Baptiste et la spiritualite du desert (Paris:
Editions du Seuil, 1959), p. 69.
43. Karl Marx, Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations (1857), trans. lack Cohen
(New York: International Publishers, 1965), pp. 69-70.
44. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 17.
45. Franz Kafka, "The Great Wall of China," The Great Wall of China, trans.
Willa and Edwin Muir (New York: Schocken, 1948).
46. On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 12.
47. Etienne Balazs, La bureaucratie celeste (Paris: Gallirnard , 1968), Ch. 13:
"La naissance du capitalisme en Chine" (especially the State and money,
and the merchants' impossibility of gaining an autonomy, pp. 229-3(0).
Regarding imperial formations founded on the control of commerce rather
than control over public works-in black Africa, for example-see the
comments of Maurice Godelier and J. Suret-Canale , in Maurice Godelier,

390

I

REFERENCE NOTES

48.
49.
50.
51.

52.
53.

54.

55.
56.
57~

58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

67.
68.
69.

Sur Ie mode de production asiatique (Paris: Editions Sociale s, 1969), pp
87-88, 120--22.
Michel Foucault, "La volonte de savoir", a course given at the College de
France in 1971.
Lewis Carroll, "Peter and Paul," in Sylvie and Bruno.
Franz Kafka, "The Great Wall of China," pp. 163-{i4, 167-{i8.
On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 17.
Luc de Heusch, Essais sur Ie symbolisme de l'inceste royal en Afrique
(Brussels, 1958), pp. 72-74.
Jacques Derrida, De la grammatologie (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1967), anc
"Freud et la scene de I'ecriture ," in L 'ecriture et la difference (Paris
Editions du Seuil, 1967).
Andras Zernpleni, L'interpretation et la therapie traditionelles du desordri
mental chez les Wolof et les Lebou (Paris: Universie de Paris, 1968), Vol. 2.
pp. 380, 506.
Jean Nougayrol, in L 'ecriture et la psychologie des peuples, (Paris: Armand
Colin, 1963), p. 90.
Guy Rosalato, Essais sur Ie symbolique (Paris: Gallimard, 1969), pp , 25-28.
Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 17.
Kafka, "The Great Wall of China," p. 167.
Neitzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 17.
Ibid.
Concerning the regime of private property already present in the despotic
State itself, see Karl Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism (New Haven, Conn.
Yale University Press, 1957), pp. 78-85, 228-300. On private property in the
Chinese state, see Balazs, La bureaucratie celeste, Ch. 7-9. Regarding the
two paths of transition from the despotic State to feudalism, according tc
whether or not commodity production is joined with private property, set
Godelier, Sur Ie mode de production asiatique. pp. 90-92.
Jean-Pierre Vernant, Les origines de la pen see grecque (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1962), pp. 112-13.
Karl Marx, Grundrisse, trans. Martin Nicolaus (New York: Random House
1973), p. 102.
Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques (Paris:
Aubier, 1969), pp. 25-49.
Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 22.
Karl Marx, "Reply to Milkhailovski " (Nov.; 1877), in Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy (Garden City
N.Y.: Doubleday, 1959), p. 441.
Fernand Braudel, Capitalism and Material Life, 14()()"'1800, trans. Miriam
Kochan (New York: Harper and Row, 1973), p. 308.
Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, (trans. Martin
Milligan (New York: International Publishers, 1964), p. 148.
See Balibar's commentary, in Louis Althusser and Etienne Balibar, Reading
Capital, trans. Ben Brewster (New York: Pantheon, 1970), p. 281: "The
unity possessed by the capitalist structure once it has been constituted is no
found in its rear. [It requires] that the meeting should have been producec
and rigorously thought, between those elements, which are identified on the

REFERENCE NOTES

1391

92.
93.

basis of the result of their conjunction, and the historical field within which
their peculiar histories are to be thought. In their concepts, the latter have
nothing to do with that result, since they are defined by the structure of a
different mode of production. In this historical field (constituted by the
previous mode of production), the elements whose genealogy is being
traced have precisely only a marginal situation, i.e., a non-determinate one."
Maurice Dobb, Studies in the Development of Capitalism (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1959), pp. 177-86.
Marx, Grundrisse, pp. 104-106.
Karl Marx, Capital, trans. Ernest Untermann (New York: International
Publishers, 1967), Vol. 1, p. 154.
Suzanne de Brunhoff, L 'offre de monnaie, critique d'un concept (Paris:
Maspero, 197]); and La monnaie chez Marx (Paris: Editions Sociales, 1967)
(see the critique of Hilferding's arguments, pp. 16ff.).
Jean-Joseph Goux, "Derivable et inderivable ," Critique, January 1970, pp.
48-49.
Samir Amin, L 'accumulation Ii l'echelle mondiale (Paris: Anthropos, 1970),
pp.373ff.
Maurice Clavel, Qui est alieni? (Paris: Flammarion, 1970), pp. 110-24,
320-27. See Marx's great chapter on automation (1857-58) in the Grundrisse, pp. 692ff.
Paul Baran and Paul Sweezy, Monopoly Capital (New York: Monthly
Review Press, 1966), pp. 93-97.
Regarding the concept of depreciation implied by this proposition, ibid., pp.
99-102.
Capital, Vol. 3, p. 244.
Andre Gorz, Strategy for Labor trans. Martin Nicolaus and Victoria Ortiz
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1967), p. 106.
Baran and Sweezy, Monopoly Capital, p. 344.
Bernard Schmitt, Monnaie, salaires et profits (Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France, 1966), pp. 234-36.
Ibid., p. 292.
Michel Serres, "Le rnessager," Bulletin de la Societfrancaise de philo sophie,
November 1967.
Jean-Francois Lyotard, Discours, figure (Paris: Klincksieck, 197]).
Ibid.
See Herbert Marcuses analysis of the functional language of "total
administration"-especially in abbreviations (e.g., S.E.A.T.G.), the floating
configurations formed by letters-figures: One Dimensional Man (Boston:
Beacon Press, 1964), Ch. 4.
Marx, Capital, Vol. I, p. 150.
Schmitt, Monnaie, salaires et profits.
For a discussion of all these points, see Dobb, Studies in the Development of
Capitalism, pp. 23-25, 161-67, 193-210.
G. Plekhanov, "Augustin Thierry et la conception rnaterialiste de I'histoire"
(1895), in Les questions fondamentales du marxisme (Paris: Editions
sociales.).
Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, p. 592.
Jean-Paul Sartre, Critique de la raison dialectique(Paris: Gallimard, 1960).

392

I

70.
71.
72.
73.

74.
75.
76.

77.
78.
79.
80.

81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

88.
89.
90.
91.

REFERENCE NOTES

94. Wilhelm Reich, "What Is Class Consciousness?" (1934), trans. Anna
Bostock, Liberation, Vol. 16, no. 5 (October 1971), p. 22.
95. Marx, Grundrisse, p. 104, and Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts oj
1844, pp. 128-31.
96. Marx, Capital, Vol. 3, pp. 249-50.
97. See Emmanuel Terray's differential analysis of production modes, Le
Marxisme devant les societes primitives, pp. 140-55 (why, in precapitalist
societies, "the reproduction of the economic and social structure depends in
large measure on the conditions under which the physical reproduction of
the group is maintained").
98. Regarding the production of the capitalist, etc., see Marx, Pre-Capitalist
Economic Formations, pp. 118-19, and Capital, Vol. I, pp. 591-92.
99. Jacques Lacan, Lettres de l'ecole [reudienne, March 7, 1970, p. 42.
100. D. H. Lawrence, "Art and Morality," in Phoenix (New York: Viking
Press, 1936), pp. 522-26. On the "reality" of modern man as a composite and
motley image, see Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra, II, "Of the Land 01
Culture."
101. Marx, Grundrisse, pp. 104-108.

4 INTRODUCTION TO SCmZOANALYSIS
I. Claude Levi-Strauss, The Raw and the Cooked, trans. John and Doreen

Weightman (New York: Harper and Row, 1969), p. 48.
2. Joseph Gabel, "Delire politique chez un paranoide," L 'Evolution psychia
trique, no. 2 (1952).
3. Abram Kardiner, The Individual and His Society (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1939), pp. 223ff. And concerning the two possible paths
from the child to the adult or from the adult to the child, see Mike
Dufrenne's commentaries in La personnalite de base, (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1953), pp. 287-320.
4. For a rigorous philosophical discussion of the notion of repetition, both the
radical repetition of the Same and of Difference (the Eternal Return), anc
the normative repetition of Habit and Representation, see Gilles Deleuze
Difference et repetition (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1972), pp
128-67. (Translators' notes
5.
.
6. Allen Ginsberg, "Kaddish," IV, in Kaddish and Other Poems, , (Sar
Francisco: City Lights Books, 1961), pp. 34-35.
7. Samuel Butler, Erewlloll, Everyman's Library (New York: E.P.Dutton
London: J. M.Dent, 1965), pp. 146-60.
8. Ibid., p. 148.
9. Ibid., p. 156.
10. Ibid., p. 159.
11. Karl Marx, Critique of Hegel's "Philosophy of Right", trans. Annette Jolii
and Joseph O'Malley (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1970), p):
88-90. And on this text of Marx, see the fine commentary by Lyotard (se
reference note 12), pp. 138-41.
12. Jean-Francois Lyotard, Discours, figure (Paris: Klincksieck, 1971).
13. Henry Miller, Hamlet (Puerto Rico: Carrefour, 1939), Vol. I, pp. 124-29.

REFERENCE NOTES

I

39

14. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things (New York: Random House, 1970),
pp. 208-11 (on the opposition between desire or desiring-production and
representation); pp. 253-56 (on the opposition between social production
and representation, in Adam Smith and especially Ricardo).
15. On myth as the expression of the organization of a despotic power that
represses the Earth, see Jean-Pierre Vernant, Les origines de la pensee
grecque (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1962), pp. 109-16; and on
tragedy as the expression of an organization of the city-state that represses
in its turn the fallen despot, Vernant, "Oedipe sans complexe," Raison
presente, August 1967.
16. Octave Mannoni, Clefs pour I'imaginaire ou I'autre scene (Paris: Editions du
Seuil, 1969), Ch. 1 and 7.
17. Louis Althusser and Etienne Balibar, Reading Capital, trans. Ben Brewster
(New York: Pantheon, 1970).
18. Serge Leclaire, Demasquer Ie reel (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1971), pp. 28-31.
19. Elisabeth Roudinesco, "L'action d'une metaphore ," La Pensee, February
1972. See in Jacques Lacan, Baits (Paris: Editions du SeuiI) , p. 821, the way
in which Lacan raises the idea of a "signifier of the lack of this symbol"
above the "zero symbol," taken in its linguistic sense.
20. Sigmund Freud, "Analysis Terminable and Interminable," Standard Edition, Vol. 23, pp. 251-52.
21. Miller, Hamlet, pp. 124-25.
22. Wilhelm Reich, The Function of the Orgasm, trans. Vincent R. Carfagno
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1973), pp. 167--68.See also Wilhelm Reich,
Character Analysis (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1974).
23. Gisela Pankow, L'homme et sa psychose (Paris: Aubier, 1969), pp. 68-72.
And on the role of the house: "La dynamique de I'espace et Ie temps vecu,"
Critique, February 1972.
24. Michel Cournot, Le Nouvel Observateur, Nov. I, 1971.
25. D. H. Lawrence, "Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious," in Psychoanalysis
and the Unconscious and Fantasia of the Unconscious (New York: Viking
Press, 1969), p, 30.
26. Serge Leclaire, "La realite du desir," in Sexualite humaine (Paris: Aubier,
1970), p. 245. And Seminaire Vincennes, 1969, pp. 31-34 (the opposition
between the "erogenous body" and the organism).
27. Jacques Monad, Chance and Necessity, trans. Austryn Wainhouse (New
York: Knopf, 1971), p. 98.
28. On "the double death," see Maurice Blancbot, L 'espace litteraire (Paris:
Gallimard, 1955), pp . 104, 160.
29. Arthur Rimbaud, letter to Paul Demeny, May 15, 1871.
30. Reich, The Function of the Orgasm. A correct interpretation-marked
throughout by idealism-of Freud's theory of culture and its catastrophic
evolution concerning guilt feeling, can be found in Paul Ricoeur: on death,
and "the death of death," see De l'interpretation (Paris: Edition's du Seuil)
pp. 299-303.
31. Sigmund Freud, The Problem of Anxiety, trans. Henry Alden Bunker (New
York: Psychoanalytic Quarterly Press, Norton, 1936); or Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, trans. Alix Strachey (London: Hogarth Press, 1936).
32. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, II, 13.

394

I

REFERENCE NOTES

33. D. H. Lawrence, Aaron's Rod (New York: Penguin, 1976), p. 101.
34. Henry Miller, Sexus (New York: Grove Press, 1965), pp. 429-30 (words j
brackets added). One would do well to consult the exercises of com
psychoanalysis in Sexus.
35. L.-F. Celine, in L 'Herne, no. 3, p. 171.
36. Ibid.
37. Maurice Blanchot , L 'amitie (Paris: Gallimard, 1971), pp. 232-33.
38. See Sigmund Freud, "The Unconscious" (1915), in Collected Papers, Vol.,
pp. 131-34: the two uses made of the sock-the psychotic use that treats
as a molecular multiplicity of stitches, and the neurotic use that treats it as
global object and molar lack.
39. For a first formulation of this notion of clothed and naked matter in terms (
the repetition of difference and the Eternal Return, see the conclusion I
Gilles Deleuze, Difference et repetition (Paris: Presses Universitaires (
France, 1972). (Translators' note.)
40. Pierre Klossowski, Nietzsche et Ie cercle vicieux (Paris: Mercure de Franc
1969), pp. 174-75. Klossowski's commentary on the formations of sove
eignty according to Nietzsche (Herrschajtsgebildei, their absurd pOWI
without purpose, and the ends or meanings they invent for themselves
terms of a degree of development of energy, is essential in every respec:
41. D. H. Lawrence, "We Need One Another," in Phoenix: The Posthumot
Papers of D. H. Lawrence (New York: The Viking Press, 1936), p. 191.
42. Sigmund Freud, Three Case Histories (New York: Collier, Macmilla
1970), p. 162.
43. On the first point, Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (Ne
York: Basic Books, 1953), Vol. I, Ch. I. For the second point, Freud, "TI
Familial Romance of the Neuroses" (1909). For the third point, The R,
Man, passim, and Jacques Lacan, "Le my the individuel du nevrose
CD.V., pp. 7-18 (and p. 25 on the necessity of a "critique of the enti
system of Oedipus"). For the fourth point, see Freud, "The Wolf Man
Three Case Histories, pp. 205, 285, 286.
44. Freud, Three Case Histories, p. 291. See also pp. 205, 286.
45. R. D. Laing, Self and Others (New York: Pantheon, 1970), pp. 113-14, 12
46. Maud Mannoni, Le psychiatre, son [ou et la psychanalyse (Paris: Editio
du Seuil, 1970), Ch. 7.
47. Klossowski, Nietzsche et Ie cercle vicieux, pp. 175,202-203,213-14. TI
opposition between aggregates of gregariousness and multiplicities
singularities is developed throughout this book, and then in Pierre Klosso:
ski, La monnaie vivante (Paris: Losfeld, 1970).
48. The authors are referring here to D. H. Lawrence's "We Need 0,
Another" (see reference note 41) and to the comical psychoanalytical see
in Henry Miller's Sexus, pp. 429-31. (Translators' revised note.)
49. Lacan, Ecrits, p. 870.
50. On the analysis of subject-groups and their relations with desire and wi
causality, see Jean-Paul Sartre , Critique de la raison dialectique (Par
Gallimard, 1960).
51. Andre Glucksmann has analyzed the nature of this special counterrevol
tionary axiomatic in "Le discours de la guerre ," L 'Heme (1967).
52. Maud Mannoni, Lettre aux ministres.

REFERENCE NOTES

I

3!

INDEX
Abrahams, Jean-Jacques, 56n
Adler, Alfred, 128, 157, 160, 161n,
182n, 331, 354
Althusser, Louis, 247, 306
Amin, Sarnir, 231, 239, 392
Anzieu, Didier, 300n, 304n
Aristotle, 84, 263
Arman, 31
Artaud, Antonin, 8, 9n, 15, 122n,
125,134-35,143,211,370
Bachofen, 107
Balazs, Etienne, 197
Balibar, Etienne, 228, 247
Balzac, Honore de, 42, 133
Bastide, Roger, 179n
Bataille, Georges, 4n, 190
Bateson, Gregory, 79, 236, 360
Beckett, Samuel, 2, 12, 14,20,76,
84, 324, 338
Bergson, Henri, 95-96, 276n
Berthe, Louis, 147
Besse, Jacques, 87
Bettelheim, Bruno, 37, 130
Binswanger, Ludwig, 22
Bion, W. R., 19n
Blanchot, Maurice, 42, 330, 341
Bleuler, Paul Eugen, 22
Bohannan, Laura, 176

Bohannan, Paul, 176, 248
Bonnafe, Pierre, 181, 182n, 326n
Bourbaki, Nicolas, 251n
Bradbury, Ray, 47
Braudel, Fernand, 224
Brunhoff, Suzanne de, 230n, 260n
Buber, Martin, 360
BUchner, Georg, 2
Butler, Samuel, 284-85
Cage, John, 371n
Canetti, Elias, 279
Cantor, Georg, 100
Capgras, J., 122
Carrette, J., 122
Carroll, Lewis, 135, 198
Carrouges, Michel, 18
Cartry, Michel, 157,160, 161n
Castro, Fidel, 378
Celine, L-F., 99, 114,277
Cesar, 31
Chaplin, Charlie, 316-18
Charles, Daniel, 371n
Clast res, Pierre, 148, 190
Clavel, Maurice, 28n, 232, 238
Clerambault, G. de, 22
Columbus, Christopher, 87
Cooper, David, 95, 320
Coumot, Michel, 316
35

Dali, Salvador, 31
Darien, Georges, 99
Deleuze, Gilles, 30n, 214n, 309n
Derrida, Jacques, 161n, 202, 301n
Detienne, M" 212n
Devereux, Georges, 33n, 165, 167
Dieterlen, Germaine, 154
Dobb, Maurice, 22011, 225, 344
Donzelot, Jacques, 3011
Dubuffet, Jean, 6n
Duchamp, Marcel, 18
Dufrenne, Mikel, 17411
Engels, Friedrich, 107, 133, 145,
219,297,388
Ey, Henry, 149
Fanon, Frantz, 96
Favret, Jeanne, 152
Faye, Jean-Pierre, 349n
Feuerbach, LUdwig, 22
Fortes, Meyer, 142, 146,170
Foucault, Michel, 50, 92, 93n, 132n,
197, 212~ 271,299, 303~ 321,
359
Fourier, Charles, 292, 294
Fraenkel, Michael, 299
Frazer, Sir J.G., 114
Freud, Sigmund, 2n, 13, 14, 17,23,
28,46,51,53-68,72,74,76,
80, 81,8211, 83, 84, 85, 89, 92,
9311, 96, 100, 106, 113, 114, 115,
117,118,119,121,122,123,
128, 12811, 172,216,270,271,
275,276,278,280,289,290,
291,29111,292,29311,294,297,
299-300, 301n, 30411, 314,331,
332-33,335,349,351-57
Fromm, Erich, 171, 270n, 312
Gabel, Joseph, 274
Gernet, L., 212n
Gie, Robert, 17
Ginsberg, Allen, 132
Girard, Philippe, 353, 354
Gobard, Henri, 110
Godelier, Maurice, 140n, 219n
Gordon, Pierre, 200
Gorz, Andre, 236
Goux, Jean-Joseph, 231
Green, Andre, 66, 289n, 305, 307
Griau1e, Marcel, 154, 155, 157,158,
160,163,219
Grcddeck, G., 54
398 ) INDEX

Grombrowicz, Witold, 97
Grunow, Oskar, 34
Guattari, Felix, 30n, 300n, 309n
Hardy, Thomas, 132
Hegel, Georg, 207n, 311
Heusch, Luc de, 147
Hincker, Francois, 220/1
Hitler, Adolf, 102, 104, 293
Hjelmslev, Louis, 242-43, 246
Hochman, Jacques, 93, 94
HOlderlin, Friedrich, 21
Jacobs, Claire, 151 n
James, William, 276n
Jarry, Alfred, 18
Jaspers, Karl, 24-25, 33n, 131, 136
Jaulin, Robert, 36, 160, 169, 169n,
178n
Jones, Ernest, 118, 171
Joyce, James, 43, 186
Jung, Carl, 46, 57, 58,114,128,
162,276,289,300,301,331,
354
Kafka, Franz, 18,198,212,213
Kant, Immanuel, 13, 19, 25, 71, 75,
76,378
Kardiner, Abram, 30n, 171, 1731l,
174,177,178,275
Kerouac, Jack, 132, 277
Keynes, John Maynard, 230
Klee, Paul, 243
Klein, Melanie, 37, 43, 44-45, 60,
72,295, 309n, 324
Klossowski, Pierre, 20, 63, 77, 87,
186, 330, 345, 367
Kraepelin, Emil, 22, 24
Lacan, Jacques, 27n, 30n. 38, 39n,
41,52, 52n, 53, 53n, 73,81,8283,92,100,104,123, 171, 17~
209, 217, 244, 268, 295, 308,
309, 309~ 31~ 310n, 31~ 32~
353,359,360,363, 371
Lacarriere, Jacques, 222n
Laing, R. D., 84, 95, 124, 131,
132n, 135, 320, 360, 362
Laplanche, I. J., 53, 333
Laurent, Eric, 182n
Lautremont,371
Lawrence, D.H., 5, 49, 115, 132,
177,268,292,298,315,323,
351, 362, 366, 370

Leach, E. R., 146, 147, 150n, 164,
172, 179n, 182, 187
Leclaire, Serge, 27n, 309n, 31 On,
314, 323-24
Lefebvre, Henri, 251
Leibnitz, G. w., 156, 309n
Lenin, Vladimir, 256, 344, 349,
375,377
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre, 188-89,202
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 7, 147n, 150n,
151,156,157,159,167,182,
185,187,273
Lindner, Richard, 7, 47,358
Loffler, L. G., 164
Lotto, 369
Lowry, Malcolm, 109, 132
Luther, Martin, 102,270
Lyotard, Jean-Francois, 204, 243244,295, 392
Lysenko, T. D., 158
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 53, 159,
171,172
Mallarrne, Stephane, 243
Mannoni, Maud, 89-90,95, 364,
381
Mannoni, Octave, 305, 307
Mao Tse-tung, 378
Marcuse, Herbert, 30n, 112, 118,
173
Martinet, Andre, 243n
Marx, Karl, 4, 10, 11, 16, 22, 24,
27,28, 28n, 31,34,56, 58, 63,
81,107,140,153,175,194,
221,223, 225,227,230,231n,
234,238, 248n, 258-59,270,
294,295,302-303,373,375
Mauss, Marcel, 150, 185, 190
Mayer, J. R., 371
McLuhan, Marshall, 240, 241fn.
Mendel, Gerard, 81,108
Michaux, Henri, 6
Miller, Henry, 51l, 132, 268, 292,
298-99,315,362,370
Mitscherlich, Alexander, 80
Monakow, C. von, 40
Monod,Jacques,288, 289n, 328
More, Marcel, 325n
Morin, Edgar, 257
Mourgue,40
Moussa, Pierre, 231
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 325
Mumford, Lewis, 141, 222n

Nerval, Gerard de, 126
Nicolaus, Martin, 140n
Niederland, W. G., 297n
Nietzsche, Friedrich W., 20-21, 63,
86,106-107,111,121,144,
166,185,190,191,192,196,
199,207n, 213,214n, 215,216,
217/1,268,299,342,343,345,
368
Nijinsky, Vaslav, 77,84,341
Nougayrol, Jean, 208
Ortigues, Edmond, 73n, 144n, 170
Ortigues, M. C., 73n, 14411, 170
Oury, Jean, 30n, 62, 94,319
Pankow, Gisela, 130, 315
Parin, Paul, 144n, 170, 178, 178n
Pautrat, Bernard, 207 n
Pinel, Philipe, 92, 93n
Plekhanov, G., 253
Poe, Edgar Allan, 18
Pohier, J. M., 82n, 108
Pontalis, J. B., 53
Proust, Marcel, 42-43, 68-70, 98,
318
Rank, Otto, 128n, 300
Ravel, Maurice, 31
Ray, Nicolas, 274
Reich, Wilhelm, 29-30, 30n, 87,
112,113,117,118-19,127,
172,257,291-92,312,314,
331,332, 344, 349, 380
Reuleaux, Franz, 141
Ricardo, David, 270, 299-300
Roberts, Harry, 28711
Roheirn, Geza, 171-72
Rolland, Romain, 80
Rosset, Clement, 26
Roudinesco, Elisabeth, 20911,310
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 112, 161n
Roussel, Raymond, 18,316
Russell, 79-80
Ruwet, Nicolas, 243n
Ruyer, Raymond, 286n, 289n
Sade, Marquis de, 210
Safouan, Moustafa, 306
Saint-Iuste, 349
Saint-Simon, 253
Salisbury, R., 248
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 28n, 256
INDEX

I

31

------------~

Saussure, Ferdinand de, 207
Schmitt, Bernard, 237, 250, 374
Schoepf, Brooke Grundfest, 151n
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 299
Schreber, Daniel Paul, 2, 8, 11, 13,
14,15,16,17,19,56,57,77,
89,105,274,280,297,316,364
Segur, Contesse de, 297
Serres, Michel, 241
Smith, Adam, 258, 259, 270

Spinoza, B., 29, 276n 309n, 327
Stephane, Drs., 81, 108
Stravinsky, Igor, 121
Szondi, Lipot, 85, 289-90, 333
Tausk, Victor, 9
Tintoretto, 369

'f!lO jlNDEX

Tippett, L. H. C., 287n
Tuke, William, 92, 93n
Turner, J. M., 132, 370
Turner, VictorW., 167, 181,360
Valles, Jules, 99
Vernant, Jean-Pierre, 219
Villiers, Jean-Marie, 18
Wallis, Allen, 287n
Weismann, August, 158-59
Wilden, Anthony, 32n
Will, Edouard, 197
Wittfogel, Karl, 211, 220
wsiar, Adolf, 15

Zernpleni, Andras, 206

