oxford world’s classics

MEDITATIONS ON
FIRST PHILOSOPHY
René Descartes was born at La Haye near Tours on 31 March
1596. He was educated at the Jesuit Collège de la Flèche in Anjou, and
at the University of Poitiers, where he took a Licenciate in Law in
1616. Two years later he entered the army of Prince Maurice of
Nassau in Holland, and met a local schoolmaster, Isaac Beeckman,
who fostered his interest in mathematics and physics. After further
travels in Europe he settled in Paris in 1625, and came into contact
with scientists, theologians, and philosophers in the circle of the
Minim friar Marin Mersenne. At the end of 1928 Descartes left for
Holland, which he made his home until 1648; he devoted himself to
carrying forward the mathematical, scientiﬁc, and philosophical
work he had begun in Paris. When he learned of the condemnation
of Galileo for heresy in 1633, he abandoned his plans to publish a
treatise on physics, and under pressure from his friends consented
to have the Discourse on the Method printed, with three accompanying essays on topics in which he had made discoveries. In 1641 his
Meditations appeared, setting out the metaphysical underpinnings of
his physical theories; these were accompanied by objections written
by contemporary philosophers, and Descartes’s replies to them.
His writings provoked controversy in both France and Holland,
where his scientiﬁc ideas were banned in one university; his works,
however (including the Principles of Philosophy of 1644) continued to
be published, and to bring him notoriety and renown. In 1648 he
accepted an invitation from Queen Christina of Sweden to settle in
Stockholm; it was there he died of pneumonia on 11 February 1650.
Michael Moriarty is Centenary Professor of French Literature
and Thought at Queen Mary, University of London. Among his
publications are Early Modern French Thought: The Age of Suspicion
(2003) and Fallen Nature, Fallen Selves: Early Modern French
Thought II (2006).

oxford world’s classics
For over 100 years Oxford World’s Classics have brought
readers closer to the world’s great literature. Now with over 700
titles—from the 4,000-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the
twentieth century’s greatest novels—the series makes available
lesser-known as well as celebrated writing.
The pocket-sized hardbacks of the early years contained
introductions by Virginia Woolf, T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene,
and other literary ﬁgures which enriched the experience of reading.
Today the series is recognized for its ﬁne scholarship and
reliability in texts that span world literature, drama and poetry,
religion, philosophy and politics. Each edition includes perceptive
commentary and essential background information to meet the
changing needs of readers.

OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS

RENÉ DESCARTES

Meditations on
First Philosophy
With Selections from the
Objections and Replies
Translated with an Introduction and Notes by
MICHAEL MORIARTY

1

3

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With oﬃces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Michael Moriarty 2008
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published as an Oxford World’s Classics paperback 2008
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Descartes, René, 1596–1650.
[Meditationes de prima philosophia. English]
Meditations on first philosophy: with selections from the objections and replies/
René Descartes translated with an introduction and notes by Michael Moriarty.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–0–19–280696–3
1. First philosophy. 2. God—Proof, Ontological. 3. Methodology. 4. Knowledge,
Theory of. I. Moriarty, Mike. II. Title.
B1853.E5M67 2008
194--dc22
2007044519
Typeset by Cepha Imaging Private Ltd., Bangalore, India
Printed in Great Britain by
Clays Ltd., St Ives plc
ISBN 978–0–19–280696–3
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

CONTENTS
Acknowledgements

vi

List of Abbreviations

vii

Introduction

ix

Note on the Text and Translation

xli

Select Bibliography

xlvi

A Chronology of René Descartes

xlix

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY
Letter of Dedication
Preface to the Reader
Synopsis of the following Six Meditations
First Meditation
Second Meditation
Third Meditation
Fourth Meditation
Fifth Meditation
Sixth Meditation

1
3
7
10
13
17
25
38
45
51

THE OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES
Introduction
First Objections and Replies
Second Objections and Replies
Third Objections
Fourth Objections and Replies
Fifth Objections and Replies
Sixth Objections and Replies
Seventh Objections

65
67
74
85
107
125
166
199
214

Explanatory Notes

232

Index

273

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I have many people to thank for assistance with this edition. In particular, I would like to thank Terence Cave, Hannah Dawson, Susan
James, Ian Maclean, and Morag Shiach for their generous assistance
and support. I am most grateful to the anonymous readers for Oxford
University Press for their valuable comments and suggestions. As
series editor, Judith Luna has been an unfailing source of guidance
and encouragement. Thanks also to Jeff New for his painstaking
and vigilant copy-editing. As always, my colleagues at Queen Mary,
University of London, have been a pleasure to work with and alongside. This work was begun in the last stages of a research leave jointly
funded by Queen Mary and the Arts and Humanities Research
Council. I am most grateful for this support.
Anyone working on Descartes knows how much he or she owes to
the generations of scholars in various disciplines and from many
countries whose work has illuminated the life, background, and above
all the texts of this author. I hope that my own debts are, however
imperfectly, acknowledged in the notes.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AT
BGDM
CCD
CHSCP

Discourse

F
JHI
L
OP
PL
VS

Œuvres de Descartes, ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery,
11 vols., rev. edn. (Paris: Vrin, 1996)
Stephen Gaukroger (ed.), The Blackwell Guide to Descartes’
‘Meditations’ (Oxford: Blackwell, 2006)
John Cottingham (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to
Descartes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992)
Daniel Garber and Michael Ayers (eds.), The Cambridge
History of Seventeenth-Century Philosophy, 2 vols.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998)
Descartes, A Discourse on the Method, ed. and trans.
Ian Maclean, Oxford World’s Classics (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006)
Descartes, Meditations, French text
Journal of the History of Ideas
Descartes, Meditations, Latin text
Descartes, Œuvres philosophiques, ed. Ferdinand Alquié,
3 vols., Classiques Garnier (Paris: Garnier, 1963–73)
Patrologiæ cursus completus, Series latina, ed. J. P. Migne
(Paris: Migne, 1844–55)
Montaigne, Les Essais, ed. Pierre Villey and V.-L. Saulnier,
3 vols. paginated as one (Paris: Quadrige/Presses
Universitaires de France, 1992 [1st publ. 1924])

INTRODUCTION
Descartes’s Meditations is among the most inﬂuential texts in the history of Western philosophy. Many thinkers have challenged or
rejected his thought, some of them almost totally, but his rigorous
questioning of traditional certainties is at the source of most subsequent philosophical developments. The criticism he has received and
continues to receive is a backhanded compliment he would not have
appreciated, but an index, nonetheless, of the power of his philosophy.

Descartes’s Life
Descartes was born in 1596, in La Haye, a town in Touraine (centralwestern France): the family home was in Châtellerault, in the neighbouring province of Poitou.1 France was emerging from a civil war
between Catholics and Protestants that had lasted for over thirty
years. His family’s background was in the legal profession and the
royal administration. The oﬃce held by his father conferred noble
rank, but such oﬃce-holding nobles had far less prestige than the
military nobility. Yet Descartes, as Ian Maclean observes, derived a
sense of status from this background, borne out in his later attitudes,
including a tendency to refuse to be identiﬁed as a professional
scholar.2 In 1607 he entered the Jesuit college of La Flèche, near Le
Mans, where he received an excellent education, which he describes
1 For biographical material I have drawn on Stephen Gaukroger, Descartes: An
Intellectual Biography (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995); Geneviève RodisLewis, Descartes: biographie (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1995: in English as Descartes: His
Life and Thought, trans. Jane Marie Todd (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998));
A. C. Grayling, Descartes: The Life of René Descartes and its Place in his Times (London:
The Free Press, 2005); Desmond M. Clarke, Descartes: A Biography (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2006). I am particularly grateful to Ian Maclean for his
comments on a draft of this Introduction as well as on the draft Explanatory Notes.
2 Descartes, A Discourse on the Method of Correctly Conducting One’s Reason and
Seeking Truth in the Sciences, ed. and trans. Ian Maclean, Oxford World’s Classics
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), pp. viii, xli, xliii. All references to the Discourse
are to this edition, which gives a very full account of the context and signiﬁcance of the
text. (I give ﬁrst the Part of the text referred to, and then the page number, so that ii. 15
refers to Part II of the Discourse, the passage in question being found on p. 15.)

This page intentionally left blank

x

Introduction

in Part I of A Discourse on the Method. After leaving school in 1615 he
attended the University of Poitiers for a year, emerging with a degree
in law. But he did not follow a legal career: instead, in 1618 he did
what many young gentlemen did, namely volunteer for military
service. He enlisted ﬁrst in the army of the United Provinces (the
Netherlands) under Prince Maurice of Nassau. During his stay in
the Netherlands he met the mathematician and scientist Isaac
Beeckman, who became an intellectual inspiration for him. In
January 1619 he left Maurice’s army, and travelled to Germany,
where he joined the army of the Catholic Maximilian, duke of
Bavaria. While billeted at Neuburg in November 1619, sheltering
from the winter in a stove-heated room, he began, he tells us in
Part II of the Discourse, his search for a new method of seeking truth.
On the night of 10 November he had a series of dreams which he
associated with intellectual inspiration. He may have been present at
the Battle of the White Mountain near Prague in November 1620,
the ﬁrst engagement in what became the horriﬁc Thirty Years War.
He returned to France in 1622, travelled to Italy in 1623, returned to
France in 1625, and in 1628 left for the Netherlands, where he would
spend the next twenty years in various places. He seems to have
relished the isolation of being a foreigner, and the United Provinces
was a more tolerant society than most. In 1635 he had a child,
Francine, by a servant called Helena: Francine’s death in 1640
seems to have been a source of great grief. For much of the 1640s
he was engaged in controversy, with Dutch Protestant theologians
and with his former disciple Regius. He also conducted a sustained
correspondence with Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia, whose intelligent and critical engagement with his philosophy encouraged him
to develop the psychological and ethical aspects of his thought. In
1649 he travelled to Sweden to take up a position at the court of
Queen Christina. He died in Stockholm of pneumonia in February
1650.
Throughout the 1620s and the early 1630s Descartes was developing his scientiﬁc work, without publishing it. He was committed to
the mechanistic conception of the physical world, which has been
excellently deﬁned as follows: ‘All natural phenomena . . . can be
explained in terms of the arrangement and motion (or rest) of
minute, insensible particles of matter (corpuscles), each of which is
characterized exclusively by certain fundamental and irreducible

Introduction

xi

properties—shape, size, and impenetrability.’3 His plans to publish
Le Monde, a treatise explaining the universe on mechanistic principles, had to be shelved when, in 1633, the Roman Catholic Church
condemned Galileo for supporting the heliocentric view of the
universe, to which Descartes himself was committed.4 In 1637 he
published Discours de la méthode pour bien conduire sa raison et chercher
la vérité dans les sciences (A Discourse on the Method of Correctly
Conducting One’s Reason and Seeking Truth in the Sciences), accompanied by three essays on optics, geometry, and meteorology. True
to its title, the Discourse sets out a programme and method for
scientiﬁc research, but does so in the unusual form of an intellectual
autobiography designed to justify the apparently strange project of
approaching the search for knowledge by rejecting what currently
passes for knowledge. Four years later Descartes published the
Meditationes de prima philosophia (Meditations on First Philosophy, in
which the existence of God and the distinction of the human soul from the
body are demonstrated). This was followed in 1644 by the Principia
Philosophiæ (Principles of Philosophy), which expounded his metaphysical and scientiﬁc theories in textbook form, and in 1649 by Les
Passions de l’âme (The Passions of the Soul), which examines mind–
body interaction with particular reference to the emotions.

The Genesis of the Meditations
In a letter of 1629 Descartes refers to ‘a little treatise’ he is working on
(to Gibieuf, 18 July 1629, AT 1. 17);5 this is normally identiﬁed with
the unﬁnished ‘little treatise on metaphysics’, dedicated to proving
the existence of God and the soul (to Mersenne, 25 November 1630,
AT 1. 182). This work has been lost or destroyed. In any case, he
explains to Mersenne that he wished to postpone publishing his
3 Steven Nadler, ‘Doctrines of Explanation in Late Scholasticism and in the
Mechanical Philosophy’, in Daniel Garber and Michael Ayers (eds.), The Cambridge
History of Seventeenth-Century Philosophy, 2 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998 [hereafter CHSCP]), i. 513–52, at p. 520. Nadler cites Mersenne, Gassendi,
and Boyle as other partisans of this approach.
4 Le Monde was published posthumously, ﬁrst in 1662 in a Latin translation, then in
1664 in the original French. See Gaukroger, Descartes, 225–92.
5 The letters AT refer to the standard edition of Descartes’s works, Œuvres de
Descartes, ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery, 11 vols., rev. edn. (Paris: Vrin, 1996).
The AT page numbers are given in many other editions, including this one, and are the
standard method of referring to Descartes’s work.

xii

Introduction

metaphysical discoveries until he had some idea of how his work in
physics would be received (15 April 1630, AT 1. 145).
Part IV of the Discourse on the Method describes the author’s
attempt to ﬁnd metaphysical positions solid enough to serve as foundations for the ediﬁce of the new science. Here Descartes narrates his
project of rejecting all those beliefs in the slightest degree open to
doubt; his discovery of the Cogito (‘I think, therefore I am’, or ‘I am
thinking, therefore I exist’) as a ﬁrst principle for his new philosophy; the conclusion from the Cogito that he is, essentially, a thinking
thing, a soul entirely distinct from the body; and the generalization,
from the experience of certainty aﬀorded by the Cogito, a truth
clearly and distinctly conceived, that whatever we clearly and distinctly conceive is true.6 The experience of doubt is an experience of
imperfection: but this presupposes the idea of a being more perfect
than oneself. Such an idea, Descartes argues, can only come from
outside ourselves—from an actually existing perfect being, God. In
fact, as an imperfect being, he himself cannot be independent; he
could not even exist, were there not a perfect being on which he, and
indeed all other ﬁnite beings, depended. Subsequent investigations
in geometry reinforce the lesson that certainty depends on clear and
distinct conception, and suggest a further argument for the existence
of God: the concept of a perfect being involves existence, just as the
concept of a triangle involves having three angles the sum of which
is equal to two right angles. From the concept itself, we can thus
infer God’s actual existence. Descartes goes on to argue that
all knowledge depends on that of God. If we do not know of his
existence, we cannot ward oﬀ sceptical doubts about the reality of
our bodies and the physical world: indeed, it is only because he
exists, and is a perfect being, from whom all our properties derive,
that we can be sure that whatever we clearly and distinctly conceive
is true. Once, however, we know he exists, veracity being one of his
perfections, all sceptical doubts fade away.7
Stated thus baldly, these arguments may seem unconvincing. And
certainly Descartes himself was not satisﬁed with the formulation of
6 Descartes, writing the Discourse in French, uses the verb ‘concevoir’ (to conceive
intellectually) in his formulation of this rule. In Latin he tends to use ‘percipere’ (to perceive). These terminological issues are discussed below.
7 Discourse, iv. 28–34, AT 6. 31–40.

Introduction

xiii

them in the Discourse. He explains to a correspondent that he only
decided at the last minute to include this section at all, implying that
he wrote it under pressure; more importantly, he says he had toned
down the sceptical arguments he there considers, as being unsuitable
for a general readership, and had not suﬃciently explained some of
his principles.8 The sceptical case—an indispensable preliminary to
his own reconstruction of knowledge—is given its full force only in
the Meditations—written in Latin for the learned.9 But the Meditations
are more than an expanded version of Part IV of the Discourse. The
substance of the argument is very similar: but its ordering is altered,
in ways that are philosophically signiﬁcant.
The Meditations on First Philosophy are as original in philosophical
form as in content. ‘First philosophy’ would have been recognized
by Descartes’s readers as synonymous with ‘metaphysics’, the study
of being in general, rather than particular kinds of being: but
although he speaks of the work as his ‘metaphysics’, he prefers the
title ‘Meditations on First Philosophy’, because the book deals ‘not
speciﬁcally with God and the soul, but in general with all the ﬁrst
things we can know by philosophizing’.10 And indeed, Descartes’s
‘metaphysics’ or ‘ﬁrst philosophy’ foregrounds questions of what we
can know (what would nowadays be classed as ‘epistemology’ rather
than ‘metaphysics’) as a prelude to discussion of what exists. But the
word ‘Meditations’ itself suggests a radically new approach to philosophizing, aﬀecting the whole form of the work. A typical scholastic
treatise would have been composed in forms based on scholastic pedagogical techniques, in which debate or ‘disputation’ on opposite sides
of the question played a key role. The subject-matter would have been
divided into a series of ‘questions’, or debates, which might themselves be subdivided. Arguments on both sides of the question would
be given, supported by accepted deﬁnitions and principles,
and quotations from authoritative sources, especially Aristotle.
The author’s eventual resolution of the problem would thus be
Descartes to Vatier, 22 Feb. 1638, AT 1. 560–1.
Meditations on First Philosophy, Preface to the Reader, AT 7. 7; Fourth Replies,
AT 7. 247.
10 To Mersenne, 11 Nov. 1640, AT 3. 235: see John Cottingham, ‘Introduction’, in
John Cottingham (ed.), Descartes (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 6. In early
modern terminology ‘philosophy’ in the broader sense (as in Descartes’s Principles of
Philosophy) includes the study of the physical world (what we would call ‘science’).
8
9

xiv

Introduction

situated explicitly in relation to the views of other scholars, from the
recent or remote past: he would be seen, and would have seen himself, as contributing to an ongoing debate.
Descartes’s approach is utterly diﬀerent. He makes no reference
in the body of the text to other thinkers’ views, in accordance with
his opinion that everyone is entitled to write what they think true,
without worrying about whether they are disagreeing or agreeing
with others.11 Moreover, the title ‘Meditations’ presents the work
as something other than a chain of philosophical argumentation,
and links it, rather, to religious exercises.12 In the Second Replies,
Descartes explains the importance of his distinctive approach: ‘I
wrote Meditations, rather than Disputations, as philosophers normally do, or Theorems and Problems, in the manner of geometers,
so that by this fact alone I might make clear that I have no business
except with those who are prepared to make the eﬀort to meditate
along with me and to consider the subject attentively’ (p. 101). Thus,
in the First Meditation Descartes is not simply putting forward
abstract arguments in favour of distrusting the senses. In the
Second Replies, he suggests that ‘readers [should] dwell on the matters contained in it, not simply for the short period of time required
to read it, but for several months, or at least weeks, before they go
on to the rest of the work’ (AT 7. 130). The temporal dimension
is marked in the text itself by such expressions as ‘yesterday’ (p. 17),
‘these last few days’ (p. 38), ‘these past days’ (p. 63), suggesting that
each Meditation is the work of a day (even though the reader
may need to extend these ‘days’ in order to assimilate the material
properly). The ‘withdrawal of the mind from the senses’ Descartes

To Huygens, 13 [it should be 10] Oct. 1642, AT 3. 579.
See Discourse, 71 n., and Gary Hatﬁeld, ‘The Senses and the Fleshless Eye: The
Meditations as Cognitive Exercises’, in Amelie Oksenberg Rorty (ed.), Essays on
Descartes’ Meditations (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986), 45–79. Hatﬁeld
stresses the diﬀerent aims of Christian and Cartesian meditation (see p. 54), as does
Fernand Hallyn, who pronounces the resemblance to religious meditation superﬁcial
(Descartes: dissimulation et ironie (Geneva: Droz, 2006), 110–15). See also Ferdinand
Alquié, La Découverte métaphysique de l’homme chez Descartes, 6th edn. (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 2000 [1950]), 162–4; but also, for a diﬀerent approach, Peter
Dear, ‘Mersenne’s Suggestion: Cartesian Meditation and the Mathematical Model of
Knowledge in the Seventeenth Century’, in Roger Ariew and Marjorie Grene (eds.),
Descartes and his Contemporaries: Meditations, Objections, and Replies (Chicago and
London: University of Chicago, Press, 1995), 44–62.
11
12

Introduction

xv

recommends as a precondition of the search for truth may well
seem more reminiscent of spiritual techniques than of scientiﬁc
enquiry:13 yet it is essential, he thinks, if our search for truth is not to
be vitiated at the start by the long-held habits of thought, in which
what we know by the senses is the most accessible and most solid
reality.
Descartes was well aware that the novelty of this approach would
be liable to arouse suspicion in a learned readership for whom what
we might value as originality might well appear mere eccentricity and
arrogance. He adopted various strategies aimed at overcoming this
resistance. He hoped to receive the endorsement of the Sorbonne,
the highly inﬂuential Theology Faculty of the University of Paris
(for his letter to the Faculty see p. 3 below), and the ﬁrst edition
claims the work was so approved.14 Another strategy bore more
abundant fruit. The Meditations eschew the scholastic practice of
formally setting out objections to one’s position and replies to these
objections. Instead, Descartes prevailed upon his friend the theologian, philosopher, and scientist Marin Mersenne, one of the great
intellectual networkers of his age, to solicit objections from a variety
of competent readers. The objections and Descartes’s replies to these
would be printed along with the main text of the Meditations.15
Descartes’s hope, repeatedly expressed in the Replies, was that the
objections would be suﬃciently comprehensive and searching to
convince readers that his text had been as rigorously examined as
possible, while his replies would convince them that it was invulnerable. The Objectors were, indeed, a varied and mostly distinguished
13 The phrase ‘abducere mentem a sensibus’ (to withdraw one’s mind from the senses)
appears in letters to Mersenne (Mar. 1637) [probably, in fact, late April], AT 1. 351;
and to Vatier (22 Feb. 1638, AT 1. 560). See Henri Gouhier, La Pensée métaphysique de
Descartes (Paris: Vrin, 1962), 51–5; Stephen Menn, Descartes and Augustine (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998), 220–4.
14 Jean-Robert Armogathe explains what happened in terms of the workings of the
Sorbonne’s system of censorship. In accordance with standard practice, a committee of
censors was appointed to examine the Meditations. If the censors did not condemn a text,
it was regarded as having the Faculty’s approval. On this showing, the Meditations could
be claimed to have been approved (‘L’Approbation des Meditationes par la Faculté de
Théologie de Paris (1641)’, Bulletin Cartésien, 21: 1–3, in Archives de philosophie, 57: 1
(1994)).
15 On the link between the Objections and Replies and the scholastic practice of
disputation see Gary Hatﬁeld, Descartes and the ‘Meditations’ (Abingdon: Routledge,
2003), 43.

xvi

Introduction

group, including Mersenne himself, Pierre Gassendi, the English
philosopher Thomas Hobbes, and Antoine Arnauld, who would soon
win fame as a powerful and controversial theologian.16 The Objections
and Replies are of vital assistance to the understanding of the
Meditations. They are therefore summarized, and the most important
passages quoted, in this edition. Two sets, the Third and the Fourth
(Hobbes’s and Arnauld’s respectively), are included unabridged,
Hobbes’s because of his standing as a philosopher, and Arnauld’s
because Descartes thought him the most penetrating of his readers
(to Mersenne, 4 March 1641, AT 3. 331).
The ﬁrst edition of the Meditations, including six sets of Objections
and Replies, was published by Michel Soly in Paris in late August
1641. Descartes seems to have been dissatisﬁed with it (it contained
many printer’s errors), and started work on a second edition, to be
printed in Amsterdam by the famous ﬁrm of Elzevier. It appeared in
January 1642, and contained a seventh set of objections from the Jesuit
priest Bourdin, with Descartes’s replies, and a letter to Dinet, a former
teacher of Descartes at La Flèche, who was now head of the French
province of the Society of Jesus.17 In 1647 a French translation
(Méditations métaphysiques touchant la première philosophie) was published: the Meditations themselves were translated by a great nobleman, the duc de Luynes, a sympathizer of the Jansenist religious
movement, and the Objections and Replies by Claude Clerselier.18
16 More information on the Objectors is given in the Introduction to the Objections
and Replies. The ﬁrst set of Objections was solicited without the intervention of
Mersenne (Clarke, Descartes, 202).
17 The title of the ﬁrst edition reads as Meditations on First Philosophy in Which the
Existence of God and the Immortality of the Soul are Demonstrated. The title of the second
edition claims (more accurately) proof not for the immortality of the soul but for its real
distinction from the body (see the Synopsis, pp. 10–12, and Descartes to Mersenne, 24
Dec. 1640, AT 3. 265–6).
18 ‘Jansenism’ is a term, originally hostile, applied to followers of the Flemish Roman
Catholic theologian Cornelius Jansenius (1585–1638), who oﬀered a rigorous restatement of St Augustine’s doctrines on grace and predestination that, to his critics, seemed
very close to Calvinism. It has often been noted that in France followers of Augustine’s
theology were sympathetic to Descartes: but not all of these were ‘Jansenists’—
Malebranche, for instance, was not. Antoine Arnauld is the most obvious example of a
Jansenist whose philosophy was Cartesian. See Geneviève Rodis-Lewis, ‘Augustinisme
et cartésianisme’, in L’Anthropologie cartésienne (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1995 [1955]), 101–25; Henri Gouhier, Cartésianisme et augustinisme au XVIIe siècle
(Paris: Vrin, 1978); Tad M. Schmaltz, ‘What Has Cartesianism To Do With Jansenism?’,
Journal of the History of Ideas, 60 (1999), 37–56.

Introduction

xvii

Descartes himself, according to the publisher’s preface to the French
edition, checked the translations (AT 9. 2–3). But there are two
exceptions here. This 1647 translation did not contain the Seventh
Objections or the letter to Dinet. Clerselier’s translation of these was
published in the second French-language edition in 1661, but this
was not revised by Descartes. Besides, Descartes did not initially
wish the 1647 translation to include the exchange with Gassendi (the
Fifth Objections and Replies). He consented, eventually, to its inclusion, but did not revise the translation. This edition also contained a
letter by Descartes to Clerselier addressing a number of points
(‘instances’) extracted from Gassendi’s Disquisitio metaphysica, published in 1641, containing his original objections, and criticisms of
Descartes’s replies.19

The Rationale of the Meditations
Descartes’s approach to the problem of truth was strikingly innovative. Truth was not to be sought by mastering a range of authoritative texts, and analysing the questions to which the reading of these
might give rise, with full attention to the variety of views that might
be taken. What was required was an individual search, conducted
along the correct methodical lines, and the correct method involved
divorcing oneself from one’s inveterate tendency to turn to the senses
for information about the world in which one lives. More particularly, it involved a wholesale repudiation of one’s former beliefs: not
merely casual opinions but deep convictions.
It is some years now since I realized how many false opinions I had
accepted as true from childhood onwards, and that, whatever I had since
built on such shaky foundations, could only be highly doubtful. Hence I
saw that at some stage in my life the whole structure would have to be
utterly demolished, and that I should have to begin again from the bottom
up if I wished to construct something lasting and unshakable in the
sciences. . . . I have withdrawn into seclusion and shall at last be able to
devote myself seriously and without encumbrance to the task of destroying all my former opinions. (p. 17)
19 On the publication history of the various editions in French and Latin see
AT 7. v–xviii (Latin) and AT 9. v–x (French). On the translation of the Fifth Objections,
see Clerselier’s note at AT 9. 200–1. On Gassendi’s Disquisitio metaphysica, see
AT 7. 391–412.

xviii

Introduction

But what need for such an unconventional approach? It puzzled
many of Descartes’s contemporaries, who would have been content,
where certain knowledge was unavailable, with probabilities. But
Descartes was urging them to put the probable on a level with the
absolutely false.20 Now, it is perfectly possible to oﬀer a purely philosophical rationale for his approach.21 It is equally possible to seek to
focus on ‘the speciﬁc question to which Descartes may have intended
his doctrine of certainty as a solution’, and thus to read the
Meditations more in their historical context.22 Some have read it as a
response to the revival of ancient scepticism, to which Montaigne’s
essay ‘Apologie de Raimond Sebond’, ﬁrst published in 1580, had
given a powerful expression. Montaigne’s challenge to all claims to
achieve knowledge by purely human means was inspired by the
‘Pyrrhonist’ strand of scepticism represented by Sextus Empiricus
(c.AD 160–210). Pyrrhonism challenges any attempt to achieve
knowledge of a reality behind appearance. Snow looks white: but
whether it is white or not we cannot know. Pyrrhonism makes no
truth-claims itself: it does not even say: ‘We cannot achieve knowledge.’ It merely undermines everyone else’s truth-claims. Any argument can be matched by an equally convincing counter-argument.
We have no criterion or mark that guarantees a perception or a
proposition as true. In particular, Montaigne draws on the
Pyrrhonist argument that all our knowledge is unreliable, because it
is ultimately based on sense-perception, which is untrustworthy.23
20 That is, for the purposes of scientiﬁc knowledge. From the point of view of practical conduct, Descartes not only admits but insists that we must normally be content with
probability. See Discourse iii. 22–3, AT 6. 24–5.
21 See Bernard Williams, Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry (Harmondsworth:
Pelican, 1978), esp. ch. 2. In a work aimed at introducing the reader both to the
Meditations and to analytical philosophy, Catherine Wilson likewise oﬀers an account of
the project in terms of an ideal scientist’s quest for non-obvious truths about things:
Descartes’s ‘Meditations’: An Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2003), 1, 13–31. But she supplements this with a contextual account (pp. 230–8).
22 Quentin Skinner, ‘Meaning and Understanding in the History of Ideas’, in Visions
of Politics, vol. 1, Regarding Method (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 83
(my italics). The study of philosophy in France does not make the same sharp distinction between philosophy itself and the history of philosophy, or even of ideas, as is current in the English-speaking world. Moreover, much recent English-language Descartes
scholarship bridges these distinctions very eﬀectively.
23 Montaigne, ‘Apologie de Raimond Sebond’, Essais, ed. Pierre Villey and
V.-L. Saulnier, 3 vols. paginated as one (Paris: Quadrige/Presses Universitaires de
France, 1992), II. 12, 438–604 (on Pyrrhonism, see esp. pp. 502–6, on the senses

Introduction

xix

(Scepticism of this kind did not necessarily imply rejection of
religious belief: Montaigne presented it, rather, as a justiﬁcation for
religious faith.) Descartes’s presentation of sceptical arguments certainly owes much to Montaigne.24 But his ultimate aim is quite
diﬀerent: to use scepticism to root out not all claims to knowledge,
but invalid ones, in particular the established Aristotelian philosophy
for which he aimed to substitute his own mechanistic theories.
(Descartes asserts that the Meditations contain all the principles of his
physics (to Mersenne, 11 November 1640, AT 3. 233), but asks
Mersenne to keep this quiet, to avoid alienating Aristotelian readers,
who he hopes will assimilate his principles before they have realized
that they make Aristotle’s untenable (28 January 1641, AT 3. 297–8).)
The use of scepticism, then, is a demolition exercise designed to clear
a space for the laying of new and solid foundations, not only in
metaphysics but in science.25
Although Descartes retains some key Aristotelian concepts (the
diﬀerence, for example, explained below, between substance and
accident), he rejects the Aristotelian heritage in more ways than can
even be summarized here. I shall focus on merely two aspects in this
section: others will emerge in the Explanatory Notes.
First, Descartes rejects the Aristotelian conception in which
bodies are seen as combinations of fundamental elements (ﬁre, air,
water, earth), themselves understood as combinations of fundamental qualities (hot, cold, wet, dry), and in which their movements are
ascribed to a tendency or ‘inclination’ of the diﬀerent elements to
return to their place of origin (a ﬂame moves upwards, because the
element of ﬁre belongs in the upper regions of the universe; a stone
downwards, because the earth of which it is composed seeks its
pp. 587–601). All references to Montaigne are to this edition (hereafter abbreviated to
VS). The classic statement of Pyrrhonism is Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism
[Hypotyposes]: see the edition by R. G. Bury, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, Mass.
and London, 1933).
24 Descartes’s use of Montaigne is succinctly treated by Clarke, Descartes, 191, and in
more detail by Gaukroger, Descartes, 314–19.
25 The interpretation of Descartes’s work as a response to scepticism is set out in
Richard Popkin, The History of Scepticism from Savonarola to Bayle, rev. and expanded
edn. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), ﬁrst published as The History of
Scepticism from Erasmus to Descartes (1960), and in more detail by E. M. Curley, Descartes
against the Skeptics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1978). Curley, however, also stresses the antiAristotelian thrust of Descartes’s philosophy (pp. 1–9, 207–36). This latter dimension
is stressed in Gaukroger’s biography, and by many recent writers.

xx

Introduction

resting-place at the centre of the universe).26 He argues in Le Monde
that a world exactly similar to the world we experience today could
in theory have been formed out of homogeneous matter, credited
with no qualities beyond extension (possession of length, breadth,
and depth) and divisibility into parts: if diﬀerent movements were
produced by God in the diﬀerent parts of matter, the ultimate result
would be the formation of an ordered cosmos, such as the one we
inhabit. (Descartes states the theory as a ﬁction so as to avoid the
appearance of clashing with the biblical account of creation.)27 The
later Principles of Philosophy restate it, but in a less polemical fashion,
so as not to provoke Aristotelian ire.
Now the philosophical strategy of the Meditations enables
Descartes to conclude that matter has, in fact, no basic properties but
those (extension, divisibility, etc.) presupposed by the mechanistic
conception.28 This strategy—this is the second point—involves
showing that what we think we know through the senses is in fact
unreliable, and that true knowledge must be sought independently of
the senses through the understanding alone. Here Descartes clashes
with a key Aristotelian thesis, summed up in the scholastic axiom
(which he quotes in Part IV of the Discourse) that ‘there is nothing in
the intellect which has not previously been in the senses’:29 that is,
that all our concepts, even those of immaterial entities, are formed,
by means of abstraction, out of sense-perceptions. (In rejecting this
26 W. D. Ross, Aristotle, 3rd edn. revd. (London: Methuen, 1937), 105–8, 99;
Roger Ariew, ‘Descartes and Scholasticism’, in John Cottingham (ed.), The Cambridge
Companion to Descartes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992 [hereafter
CCD]), 58–90, at p. 82, n. 14. The key Aristotelian text is De caelo, III. 2–IV
(300a–313b), trans. On the Heavens, ed. and trans. W. K. C. Guthrie, Loeb Classical
Library (London: Heinemann and Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953).
27 Le Monde ou Traité de la lumière, AT 11. 1–118; see esp. chs. 2, 5–7 (AT 11. 7–10,
23–48). On Descartes’s natural philosophy see Daniel Garber, ‘Descartes’s Physics’, in
CCD 286–334, and Descartes Embodied: Reading Cartesian Philosophy Through Cartesian
Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001); Gary C. Hatﬁeld, ‘Force (God)
in Descartes’ Physics’, in John Cottingham (ed.), Descartes, 281–310. On the Principles
in particular, see Gaukroger, Descartes’s System of Natural Philosophy (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002).
28 In a sense, this conception of body corresponds to Aristotle’s basic deﬁnition of it,
in terms of three-dimensional extension and divisibility, De caelo, I.i (268a). It discards
the more speciﬁc theories Aristotle advances as to the actual constitution and properties
of bodies.
29 Discourse, iv. 32, AT 6. 37 and see p. li. A speciﬁc source is Aquinas, De veritate,
II.3, ad 19 (see Jorge Secada, Cartesian Metaphysics: The Late Scholastic Origins of
Modern Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 10).

Introduction

xxi

Aristotelian epistemology, Descartes has been seen as reviving the
metaphysical approach of St Augustine.)30 Alternatively, Descartes’s
break with Aristotelian scholasticism has been seen as powered by a
metaphysical rather than (or as well as) a scientiﬁc programme: as a
rejection of the generally accepted view that knowledge that a substance exists must precede knowledge of its essence or nature.31
There is a third possible contextual factor: the existence in 1620s
Paris, perhaps ampliﬁed by the anxiety of the religious, of unbelievers, denying the existence of God and the life after death.32 (Not all
unbelievers were Pyrrhonists, nor all Pyrrhonists unbelievers.) In
producing a philosophy that made the existence of God and the
immateriality of the soul certain, Descartes was not simply laying
foundations for science: he could claim, as he does in his letter to the
Sorbonne, and quite sincerely, to be serving religion by depriving
unbelief of any claim to rational justiﬁcation.33
All of these arguments have historical relevance and plausibility;
and we can continue to seek for ever-deeper knowledge of the context
of Descartes’s thought while agreeing with Jorge Secada that there is
no ‘single key to the interpretation of the Cartesian philosophy’.34

Reading the Meditations
It has been stressed above that the form of the ‘meditation’ is essential to Descartes’s philosophical enterprise. Descartes eschews the
impersonal discourse of scholastic philosophy or of mathematics:
instead, the text narrates a series of discoveries made by a ﬁgure who
refers to himself in the ﬁrst person—an example of what Charles
Taylor has called ‘radical reﬂexivity’, in which one focuses not on the
objects of one’s experience, but on oneself as experiencing it.35
30

See Menn, Descartes and Augustine.
Secada, Cartesian Metaphysics, 1–4.
32
Gaukroger, Descartes, 135–8. The contemporary term was ‘libertins’: it often
implied an immoral and debauched lifestyle as well as rejection of religion.
33
Margaret Dauler Wilson, Descartes (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978), 3;
Rodis-Lewis, Descartes, 10. She oﬀers a broader discussion of Descartes’s religious views
on pp. 284–97.
34
Secada, Cartesian Metaphysics, 2.
35
Charles Taylor, Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1989), 130. He sees St Augustine as the source of this way
of thinking, and Montaigne as another early modern practitioner (pp. 177–84). On
Descartes, see pp. 143–58.
31

xxii

Introduction

It would be a mistake to identify this ﬁgure with the individual
Descartes: when Descartes wrote the Meditations he knew already
what he thought about many issues about which the ‘I’ in the text
appears initially to be ignorant or in error or confused. Hence it has
become conventional to refer to the ‘I’ of the text as the Meditator,
and I follow this usage here.36
The reader’s task, then, is in a sense to identify with, to think
along with, the Meditator.37 But Descartes knows that there must be
many resistances to such an identiﬁcation, to the call to abandon
spontaneous attitudes. The work of breaking down this resistance
devolves partly on the writing, the style. Descartes scorns one of the
objectors, Gassendi, for resorting to rhetorical shifts instead of philosophical argument (Fifth Replies, p. 183). But in fact he himself
resorts to rhetoric: it is an integral part of his strategy. This is not to
say that he uses rhetoric where he should be using philosophical
argument, or to plug gaps in his arguments; or to assert, in deconstructionist fashion, that his discourse is controlled, unbeknownst to
himself, by the play of rhetorical structures, which undermine the
attempts to operate with pure concepts. (Hobbes, to be sure, accuses
Descartes of substituting metaphors for proof: but Descartes replies,
quite fairly, that he is using metaphor to clarify not to prove (Third
Objections, XIII, p. 121).) Rhetoric has a speciﬁc function in the
Meditations, which is not dissimilar to its function in the Discourse.
There, the metaphors of the journey, the building, the city, and so
forth were used to justify the apparently eccentric or arrogant project of rejecting the existing structure of knowledge in order to erect
a new one.38 Here metaphors and other rhetorical devices are used to
unsettle the reader, to disturb his or her spontaneous convictions,
ﬁrst, about the world and his or her own relation in it, and secondly,
about his or her own fundamental nature or self.
36
Some recent commentators speak of the Meditator as ‘she’, in order to emphasize
the distinction between the ‘I’ of the text and the historical Descartes (Hatﬁeld,
Descartes and the ‘Meditations’, 51; and cf. C. Wilson, Descartes’s ‘Meditations’, 7). I do
not follow this reasonable practice only because the original Latin puts the Meditator in
the masculine gender.
37
M. D. Wilson, Descartes, 4–5; C. Wilson, Descartes’s ‘Meditations’, 7; Hatﬁeld,
Descartes and the ‘Meditations’, 50–1.
38
Michèle Le Dœuﬀ points out that philosophers have often treated metaphor as a
device connecting the space of philosophy and the space outside (L’Imaginaire
philosophique (Paris: Payot, 1980), 16), though she argues that its relationship with
philosophical discourse is in fact more complex.

Introduction

xxiii

Thus, in the First Meditation Descartes is not simply giving a set
of arguments for doubting the evidence of the senses. He is trying to
induce a state of confusion and anxiety in the reader. In the
unﬁnished dialogue La Recherche de la vérité par la lumière naturelle
(The Search for Truth by Means of the Natural Light), Descartes’s
spokesman says that his arguments for doubting the senses will have
been successful if they appeal suﬃciently to the listener’s imagination to make him afraid of them (AT 10. 513). This appeal to the passions is traditionally one of the functions of rhetoric. One of
Descartes’s rhetorical devices is to incorporate an element of dialogue into the structure of the Meditation. Especially, but not only,
in the First Meditation it is not always clear at once who is speaking,
or how we are supposed to take what is being said. It is important,
then, to sort out the diﬀerent voices in the text: one, sometimes
rather bluﬀ and blustering, which oﬀers a defence of common-sense
beliefs; the other, sometimes mordantly ironic, which corrodes them
with sceptical arguments. But it is also important to recognize that
we cannot securely distribute them between clearly identiﬁed
ﬁgures, as we can in his The Search for Truth, where Poliandre represents the average gentleman, better acquainted with life than with
books, Epistémon the scholar, and Eudoxe the correct thinker. In the
First Meditation the speaker has conﬁdently prepared himself for the
wholesale and fearless demolition of all his opinions. But when he
comes to assess the evidence of his senses, he cannot quite rest content with the prudent maxim of never wholly trusting those who
have once cheated you, as the senses have sometimes done by giving
us false information. The hammer is already uplifted to smash his
belief in the senses, when he suddenly loses heart and lowers it.
Surely, he tells himself, there are some things I can take for granted,
on the basis of sensory evidence; but then he argues himself into
rejecting this reassurance. Throughout this Meditation a debate, an
argumentative duel, is going on within the Meditator, between the
voice of doubt and the voice of common sense: again and again, he
tries to resist the assaults of doubt and remain secure in a fall-back
position; again and again, this security is denied him.
Descartes’s sceptical arguments, like those of his proxy Eudoxe in
The Search for Truth, appeal to the imagination. We are invited to
imagine (ourselves as) the Meditator sitting by the ﬁre in his gown;
and then to consider that he might be dreaming, and imagine him in

xxiv

Introduction

bed, dreaming he is sitting by the ﬁre. The diﬀerence between the
two states is artfully suggested by a series of antitheses. I think I am
sitting: I am in fact lying down; I think I am by the ﬁre: I am between
the sheets; I think I am wrapped in my gown: I have taken oﬀ my
clothes. The speaker’s nakedness (real or imagined) associates him
with the poor naked wretches of madmen he has just been thinking
of. The writing blurs the distinction between sleeping and waking,
madness and sanity. When I am stupeﬁed by my inability to ﬁnd reliable grounds for distinguishing sleeping from waking, maybe this
stupor is real, and I am in fact asleep. I try to reassure myself: look,
I can move my head, I am in control, therefore awake. But the movement of the head is rendered by the Latin verb commoveo, which
tends to denote a violent or agitated movement. We might imagine it
as the kind of jerky, exaggerated movement one makes when one is
gesturing to make a point: ‘Look, I am not asleep: I can move my
head.’ But such jerky movements are also characteristic of the person
struggling against sleep, ‘nodding oﬀ’, in fact, and this casts doubt
on the Meditator’s subsequent claim that he is knowingly and deliberately stretching out his hand, which a sleeper could not do. The
appeal to the imagination, and the ambiguities of the writing, thus
help to convey the strictly philosophical point that all of us are liable
to vivid illusions of presence that in fact have no objective foundations: that we cannot settle a philosophical doubt by simply appealing to a supposedly self-evident division between the sane and the
mad, and that, if such a division exists, we cannot know, from our
subjective experience, on which side of it we should fall.39
This antithetical structure can be found on a larger scale in the use
of metaphors. The end of the First Meditation juxtaposes images of
sleeping and waking, darkness and light. But perhaps the key
metaphor here, as in the Discourse, is that of building, solidity being
contrasted with precariousness. The Meditator realizes that existing
knowledge is unreliable: it must be demolished, and rebuilt from the
bottom up.40 Yet his search for solid ground on which to build seems
39
On Descartes’s attitude to madness, see Michel Foucault, Histoire de la folie à l’âge
classique (Paris: Gallimard, 1972 [1961]), 56–9, and the reply by Jacques Derrida,
‘Cogito et histoire de la folie’, in L’Écriture et la diﬀérence (Paris: Seuil, 1967), 51–97.
40 The metaphor of knowledge as a building and the basic principles of a science as its
foundations is central to the Discourse on Method. But it was already used by Montaigne
(Les Essais, II. 12, ‘Apologie de Raimond Sebond’, VS ii. 587–8).

Introduction

xxv

doomed: doubt has pushed him into a deep whirlpool, so that he can
neither touch bottom nor swim to the surface. Eventually, he ﬁnds a
stable if narrow footing on the discovery of his own existence. At this
point the building can commence.

Summary of the Text
At the start of the First Meditation the Meditator is setting out to
fulﬁl a long-held ambition: to achieve certainty in the sciences.41 To
this end, he decides he must abandon all his former opinions. To disprove each and every one of them would perhaps be impossible: but
he decides to reject any he can ﬁnd some reason for doubting. It
would take for ever to examine them one by one, but he could demolish them all at once, by unsettling their foundations. Up to now, he
believes, all his beliefs were founded on sense experience. What is
meant here is that they involve either speciﬁc perceptions (e.g. the
sun is yellow) or concepts that (according to the prevailing AristotelianThomist theory of knowledge) ultimately derive, by abstraction,
from such perceptions.42 But the senses are sometimes unreliable:
therefore, if we reject what is open to doubt, we must reject what
they seem to teach us. Various attempts to vindicate the senses’ reliability, at least to a certain extent, are tested out. These founder on
the dream hypothesis: that is, given that in dreams we have vivid perceptual ‘experiences’ of non-existent objects, how can we know that
our so-called waking experience is not an illusion?43 If the senses are
unreliable, the Meditator wonders whether mathematical truths, at
least, are immune to doubt. But two sceptical hypotheses invalidate
41 In what follows, ‘the Meditator’ refers to the ‘I’ in the text, Descartes to the author
of the text.
42 The critique of the senses as the foundation of knowledge can be found, as noted
above, in Montaigne, ‘Apologie de Raimond Sebond’, VS ii. 587–601. The hypothesis
that our experience might be all a dream appears there also (p. 596).
43 There is disagreement as to whether Descartes is claiming that we may be dreaming all the time, or rather that, on any given occasion, we cannot know whether or not we
are dreaming. The latter possibility, in any case, is enough for his purpose: it makes it
impossible to point to an unquestionably reliable sense-experience. See Harry G. Frankfurt,
Demons, Dreamers, and Madmen: The Defense of Reason in Descartes’s ‘Meditations’
(Indianapolis and New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970), 49–53; M. D. Wilson, Descartes,
12–13, 17–31; Curley, Descartes Against the Skeptics, 46–69; Georges Dicker, Descartes:
An Analytical and Historical Introduction (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1993), 27–9; Hatﬁeld, Descartes and the ‘Meditations’, 76–7.

MEDITATIONS ON
FIRST PHILOSOPHY
in which the existence of god
and the distinction of the
human soul from the body
are demonstrated

This page intentionally left blank

LETTER
To these wisest and most distinguished men,
the Dean and Doctors of the holy Faculty of Theology
at the University of Paris
I have such good reason for oﬀering this work to you, and I trust
that you will have such good reason for taking it under your protection, once you understand my intention in writing it, that I could
recommend it here in no better way than by saying brieﬂy what my
aim was.
I have always thought that the two issues of God and the soul
were the most important of those that should be resolved by philosophical rather than theological means. For although it is suﬃcient
for us Christians to believe by faith that the human soul does not
perish with the body and that God exists, yet it seems certain that
unbelievers cannot be convinced of the truth of religion, and scarcely
even of any moral values, unless these ﬁrst two truths are proved to
them by natural reason. And since often in this life there are greater
rewards for the vices than for the virtues, few will prefer what is right
to what is useful, if they neither fear God nor expect an afterlife. And
although it is completely true that we should believe in the existence
of God because it is taught in the holy scriptures, and by the same
token that we should believe the holy scriptures because we have
them from God—since, faith being a gift of God, he who gives us
the grace to believe the rest of religion can also give us the grace to
believe he exists—there is no point in asserting this to unbelievers,
because they would call it arguing in a circle. And indeed I have
observed that not only do you and all other theologians aﬃrm that
God’s existence can be proved by natural reason, but that also the
holy scriptures imply that the knowledge of him is much easier to
attain than that of many created things: so easy, in fact, that those
who lack it do so by their own fault. This is clear from this passage
of Wisdom 13: ‘They have no excuse. For if they are capable of
acquiring enough knowledge to be able to investigate the world, how
have they been so slow to ﬁnd its Master?’* And in Romans 1: [20]
they are said to ‘have no excuse’. In the same chapter [1: 19], the
words ‘What can be known about God is perfectly plain in them,’*

1

2

4

3

4

Letter of Dedication

seem to be pointing out that all that can be known of God can be
shown by reasons derived from no other source than our own mind.
How this comes to be true, and by what means God may be known
more easily and with more certainty than the things of this world,
I thought it would be appropriate to investigate.
And as regards the soul, even though many authors have judged
that it is very diﬃcult to discover its nature, and some have even
dared to say that human reasoning convinces us that it perishes along
with the body, and that we believe the contrary by faith alone,
nonetheless because the Council of the Lateran* held in the reign of
Leo X condemns these people (session 8), and explicitly enjoins
Christian philosophers to refute their arguments, and to make every
eﬀort to prove the truth, I did not hesitate to tackle this issue as well.
Besides, I know that most of the impious refuse to believe that God
exists and that the human mind is distinct from the body, for no
other reason than that they say that these two points have never been
proved by anybody up to now. I do not agree with them at all in this:
on the contrary, I think that nearly all the reasons adduced by great
thinkers in this debate, when they are suﬃciently grasped, have the
status of demonstrations;* and I can scarcely persuade myself that
any proofs might be found that have not been already discovered by
someone else. Nonetheless I think that I could achieve nothing more
useful in philosophy than to perform a careful search, once and for
all, for the best arguments put forward by anyone, and to arrange
them in so clear and precise an order* that from now on everyone
will accept them as having the status of demonstrations. And ﬁnally,
since there are several people who know that I have developed a
particular method for resolving all diﬃculties in the sciences—not
indeed a new one, for nothing is older than truth, but one they have
seen me use with some success in other areas—they have insistently
urged me to do this; and therefore I decided it was my duty to make
an eﬀort in this area as well.
Whatever I have been able to achieve is all in this treatise. It is not
that I have sought in it to bring together all the diﬀerent arguments
that can be adduced to prove these two points, since this does not
seem worth while, except where there is no argument considered
suﬃciently certain. But I have gone into the primary and most
important arguments in such a way that I now dare to oﬀer them as
demonstrations that are as certain and evident as possible. I will add

Letter of Dedication

5

that they are such, that I do not think there is any path open to
human intelligence along which better ones can ever be found: for
the importance of the issues and the glory of God, for the sake of
which this whole book was written, compel me here to speak a little
more freely about my own work than is my custom. Yet, however
certain and evident I think them, I do not for that reason convince
myself that they are capable of being grasped by all. In geometry
there are many arguments by Archimedes, Apollonius, Pappus, and
others that are regarded as evident and also as certain by everyone,
because everything they contain, considered separately, is very easy
to know, and the later sections are fully coherent with the earlier
ones; yet because they are on the long side and demand a very attentive reader, they are grasped by very few people indeed. In the same
way, although I think the arguments I use here are no less certain and
evident than the geometrical ones, indeed more so, I am afraid that
many people will not be able to grasp them suﬃciently clearly, both
because they too are on the long side, and one part depends on
another, and above all because they require a mind completely free of
prejudices, and which can readily withdraw itself from the company
of the senses. And it is certain that the capacity for metaphysics is
not more widespread than that for geometry. And there is another
diﬀerence between the two. In geometry everyone is convinced that
nothing is written down, as a rule, without a rigorous demonstration,
and so the unskilful more often err in approving what is false, since
they want to be thought to understand it, than in challenging what is
true. On the other hand, in philosophy, since it is believed that one
can argue on both sides of any question,* few search for the truth,
and many more seek a reputation for intelligence on account of their
daring to challenge the soundest views.
And therefore, whatever my reasons are worth, because they
deal with philosophical issues, I do not think they will have a great
impact, unless you help me with your patronage. But since everyone
holds your faculty in such high and deep-rooted esteem, and since
the name of the Sorbonne has such authority that not only in matters
of faith there is no group of men, after the holy councils, that has
greater inﬂuence than yours, but also in human philosophy no one
can think of anywhere where there is greater perspicacity and seriousness, and a greater integrity and wisdom in passing judgement,
than among yourselves, I do not doubt that if you deign to take an

5

6

6

Letter of Dedication

interest in this work—ﬁrst, by correcting it (for mindful of my own
humanity and above all of my own ignorance, I do not claim that it
contains no errors); secondly, where there are gaps, or imperfections,
or parts that need further explanation, by adding to it, improving it,
and clarifying it, or at least, pointing out these defects to me so that
I can undertake the task; and ﬁnally, once the arguments contained
in it, by which the existence of God and the distinction between
mind and body are proved, have been brought to the degree of clarity to which I trust they can be brought, so that they can be considered as absolutely rigorous demonstrations, by agreeing to declare
this and bear public witness to it—I do not doubt, I say, that if this
takes place, all the erroneous views that have ever been held on these
questions will swiftly be erased from people’s minds. For the truth
itself will readily bring other intelligent and learned men to subscribe
to your judgement; and your authority will bring atheists, who are
generally pretenders to knowledge rather than genuinely intelligent
and learned, to lay aside their urge to contradict, and perhaps even to
give their support to reasons that they know are regarded as demonstrative by all people of intelligence, in case they might seem incapable of understanding them. And ﬁnally everyone else will readily
believe so many testimonies, and there will be no one else in the
world who dares to question the existence of God or the real distinction between the human soul and the body. How useful this would
be, you yourselves, with your outstanding wisdom, will judge better
than anybody; nor would it be seemly for me to recommend the
cause of God and religion any further to you, who have always been
the staunchest support of the Catholic Church.

PREFACE TO THE READER
I have already touched on questions concerning God and the
human mind a few years ago in the Discourse on the Method of Rightly
Conducting One’s Reason and of Seeking for Truth in the Sciences, published in French in 1637. But I was not intending to treat such matters thoroughly there, but merely oﬀering a foretaste of them, so that
I could learn from readers’ responses how they should subsequently
be properly dealt with. For they seemed to me of such importance
that I judged I should deal with them more than once; and I follow
a path in their investigation that is so untrodden, and so remote
from common experience, that I thought it would not be useful to
expound it more fully in a work written in French for all to read, in
case those of rather feeble intellect should think that they too should
set out on that path.
Although, however, I had requested in that text that everyone who
found something deserving of criticism in my writings should be so
kind as to point it out to me,* no objection worthy of note was put
forward with regard to my discussion of these matters, except for
two, to which I shall brieﬂy reply here, before embarking on a more
thorough explanation of the same issues.
The ﬁrst is that although the human mind, when it turns in on
itself, does not perceive itself to be anything apart from a thinking
thing, it does not follow that its nature or ‘essence’ consists purely in
its being a thinking thing, ‘purely’, that is, in a sense that would
exclude everything else that might perhaps be said to belong to its
nature. To this objection I reply that at this point I did not wish to
exclude these other things from the point of view of the actual truth
of the matter (with which in fact I was not then concerned), but
solely from the point of view of my own perception, so that my meaning was that I was aware of nothing at all that I knew to belong to my
essence, except the fact that I was a thinking thing, or a thing possessing the faculty of thinking. However, in the present work I shall
show how, from the fact that I know nothing else as belonging to my
essence, it follows that nothing else in fact belongs to it.
The second objection is, that it does not follow from the fact that
I have in myself the idea of a more perfect thing than myself, that the

7

8

8

9

Preface to the Reader

idea itself is more perfect than me. Still less does it follow that the
thing represented by this idea exists. I answer that the term ‘idea’
here is ambiguous. It can be taken either in the material sense, as an
operation of the understanding, in which case it cannot be said to be
more perfect than myself, or objectively, for the thing represented by
this operation; and this thing, even if it is not supposed to exist outside my understanding, can nonetheless be more perfect than me in
virtue of its essence. How in fact it follows, from the mere fact that
the idea of a more perfect thing is within me, that the thing itself
actually exists, I shall show at length in the present work.
I have in fact also seen two quite long writings* in which, however,
it is not so much my proofs as my conclusions that are attacked, by
arguments borrowed from the stock of atheists’ commonplaces. And
since arguments of this kind can have no credibility for those who
understand my proofs, and, besides, the judgements of many people
are so perverse and feeble that they are convinced more readily by
the opinions they ﬁrst encounter, however false and repugnant to
reason these are, than by a true and unshakeable refutation of these
opinions that they encounter subsequently, I have no intention of
responding to them here, since I should ﬁrst have to set them out.
I shall only remark in general that all the common objections to the
existence of God that atheists so smugly put forward, always depend
on one of two things: either they imagine human emotions in God,
or they claim so much power and wisdom for our own minds, that
we should try to decide and understand whatever God can or ought
to do. So much is this the case that, as long as we simply remember that
our minds have to be considered as ﬁnite, and God as incomprehensible and inﬁnite, these arguments will never cause us any diﬃculty.
But now, since I have once and for all made trial of people’s
responses, I will again tackle these same questions about God and the
human mind, and at the same time deal with the foundations of the
whole of ﬁrst philosophy. But I shall do so in such a way that I must
expect no popular approval, and no great crowds of readers. Indeed,
I shall go so far as to say that I seek to be read by none, except those
who will be able and willing to meditate seriously alongside me, and
to withdraw their minds from the senses, and at the same time from
all their preconceptions. Of these I well know already that there are
very few. But as for those who do not trouble to grasp the chain and
connection of my arguments, and who busy themselves in quibbling

Preface to the Reader

9

over isolated propositions (and there are many people whose habit
this is), they will derive very little beneﬁt from reading this work;
and although perhaps they will ﬁnd frequent opportunities to carp,
it is unlikely that they will be able to put forward any objection that
causes real diﬃculty or deserves a reply.
But because I do not promise even the other kind of readers that
I will satisfy them throughout on ﬁrst reading, nor am I so arrogant
as to be sure that I can foresee everything that will seem diﬃcult to
anybody, I shall ﬁrst explain in these Meditations the particular
thought-processes by the help of which I think I have attained the
certain and evident knowledge of truth, so that I may test whether,
perhaps, I can convince other people by the same arguments as I
have convinced myself. Afterwards, however, I shall reply to the
objections of several people outstanding for their intelligence and
learning to whom these Meditations were sent for examination
before publication. Their objections are so many and so various that
I dare to hope that it will be diﬃcult for anyone else to think of
anything (anything signiﬁcant, at least) that they have not already
put forward. Hence I would very strongly urge my readers not to
pass judgement upon these Meditations before they have taken the
trouble to read through all these objections and my replies to them.

10

12

13

SYNOPSIS OF THE FOLLOWING
SIX MEDITATIONS
In the First Meditation the reasons are set out why we can doubt of
all things, especially material things: that is, as long as we have no
foundations for the sciences other than those we have had up to now.
Now, although the beneﬁts of such far-reaching doubt do not appear
at ﬁrst sight, it has this very great beneﬁt, that it liberates us from all
prejudices, and opens up a very easy pathway to the withdrawal of
our mind from the senses. Finally, it means that we can doubt no
further of whatever we subsequently discover to be true.
In the Second, the mind that, using its own freedom, supposes that
all the things of the existence of which it can entertain even the slightest doubt, do not exist, becomes aware that this cannot happen unless
it itself exists at the same time. This also is very useful, since by this
means the mind can easily distinguish what belongs to it, that is, to an
intellectual nature, and what to the body. But because some people will
perhaps expect some proofs of the soul’s immortality here, I think I
should warn them right away that I have tried to put nothing in this
treatise that I do not rigorously demonstrate. Therefore I could follow
no other order than the one geometers use, that is, I deal with everything on which the proposition we are investigating depends, before
drawing any conclusion about the proposition itself. The ﬁrst and
most important prerequisite to discovering the soul’s immortality is to
form a concept of the soul that is as clear as possible, and entirely distinct from any concept of the body. This I have done here. But further,
we also need to know that whatever we clearly and distinctly understand is true, in the way in which we understand it. This could not
have been proved before the Fourth Meditation. We also need to have
a distinct concept of bodily nature, which is formed partly in this
Second Meditation, partly in the Fifth and Sixth. From these points
we must conclude that all things we clearly and distinctly conceive as
diﬀerent substances, as mind and body are conceived, are indeed substances really distinct from each other; and I drew this conclusion in
the Sixth Meditation. The same point is proved there from the fact
that we can understand no body except as divisible, but on the other
hand no mind except as indivisible: for we cannot conceive a half of

Synopsis

11

any mind, as we can with any body, however small it is. The upshot of
this is that their natures are recognized not only as diﬀerent, but also
in a sense contrary. But I have treated no further of this matter in the
present work. For one thing, because these points are suﬃcient to show
that the corruption of the body does not cause the mind to perish, and
thus that mortals may have hope of another life. For another, because
the premises from which this immortality of the mind may be deduced
depend on an explanation of the whole of physics, which would show,
ﬁrst, that all substances whatever—things, that is, that have to be created by God in order to exist—are of their own nature incorruptible,
and can never cease to exist, unless they are reduced to nothing by the
same God’s denying them his support; and, secondly, that body in a
general sense is a substance, and never perishes; but that the human
body, in so far as it diﬀers from the rest of bodies, is constituted purely
by a certain arrangement of parts and by other accidents of the same
kind; whereas the mind is not composed of any accidents in this way,
but is a pure substance. For even if all its accidents were to change,
for instance, if it understood, or wished, or perceived via the senses
a diﬀerent set of things, it would still be the same mind. On the other
hand, the human body becomes something diﬀerent from the very
fact that the shape of some of its parts is changed. From this it follows
that the body can very easily perish, but that the mind is of its nature
immortal.
In the Third Meditation I have explained my principal proof of
the existence of God at, I think, considerable length. However, because,
in order to withdraw my readers’ minds as far as possible from the
senses, I decided to make use of no comparisons derived from bodily
things, perhaps many obscurities have remained. These, I hope, will
be fully cleared up later on, in my Replies to the Objections: for
instance, how the idea we possess of a supremely perfect being has so
much objective reality that it can derive only from a supremely perfect cause. This is illustrated in the Replies by the comparison with
a very perfect machine, the idea of which is in the mind of some
artiﬁcer. For just as the objective artiﬁce of this idea must have some
cause, namely the knowledge of the artisan, or of someone else from
whom he derived his knowledge, so the idea we possess of God can
have only God as its cause.*
In the Fourth Meditation it is proved that all those things we
clearly and distinctly perceive are true, and at the same time it is

14

15

12

16

Synopsis

explained in what falsity consists. Both these points are necessary, in
order to set the seal on what goes before, as well as for the understanding of what comes after. (But I should point out that at this
point I am not at all dealing with sin,* that is, the error that is committed in the pursuit of good and evil, but only of error that aﬀects
the discernment of true from false.) Nor do I examine matters to do
with faith or with the conduct of one’s life, but only speculative
truths known by the help of the natural light.
In the Fifth, besides the explanation of the nature of bodies in general, the existence of God is also demonstrated by a new argument.
In this, however, perhaps several diﬃculties will crop up again,
which will be settled in the Reply to Objections. Finally, it will be
shown how it comes to be true that the certainty of geometrical
demonstrations themselves depends on the knowledge of God.
Finally, in the Sixth the distinction is made between intellection
and imagination; the distinctive features of each are described; it is
proved that the mind is really distinct from the body; and yet so
closely conjoined to it that it forms a single entity with it; a full list is
given of all the errors that typically arise from the senses and the
means by which these may be avoided are explained. Finally, all the
reasons are put forward that lead us to conclude in the existence of
material things: not that I think these are very useful when it comes
to proving what they do prove, namely that a world really exists, and
that human beings have bodies, and so forth, things which no one in
their right mind has ever seriously doubted; they are useful because,
by considering them, we come to recognize that they are not as solid
and clear as those by which we come to the knowledge of our mind
and of God; indeed, those latter are the most certain and evident of
all reasons that can be grasped by human intelligence. And this is all
I was intending to prove in these Meditations. This is why I do not
here mention several questions that are also treated incidentally in
the course of the work.

FIRST MEDITATION

17

of those things that may be called into doubt
It is some years now since I realized how many false opinions I had
accepted as true from childhood onwards,* and that, whatever I had
since built on such shaky foundations, could only be highly doubtful.
Hence I saw that at some stage in my life the whole structure would
have to be utterly demolished, and that I should have to begin again
from the bottom up if I wished to construct something lasting and
unshakeable in the sciences. But this seemed to be a massive task, and
so I postponed it until I had reached the age when one is as ﬁt as one
will ever be to master the various disciplines. Hence I have delayed
so long that now I should be at fault if I used up in deliberating the
time that is left for acting. The moment has come, and so today I have
discharged my mind from all its cares, and have carved out a space of
untroubled leisure. I have withdrawn into seclusion and shall at last
be able to devote myself seriously and without encumbrance to the
task of destroying all my former opinions.
To this end, however, it will not be necessary to prove them all
false—a thing I should perhaps never be able to achieve. But since
reason already persuades me that I should no less scrupulously
withhold my assent from what is not fully certain and indubitable
than from what is blatantly false, then, in order to reject them all, it
will be suﬃcient to ﬁnd some reason for doubting each one. Nor shall
I therefore have to go through them each individually, which would
be an endless task: but since, once the foundations are undermined,
the building will collapse of its own accord, I shall straight away
attack the very principles that form the basis of all my former beliefs.
Certainly, up to now whatever I have accepted as fully true I have
learned either from or by means of the senses: but I have discovered
that they sometimes deceive us, and prudence dictates that we
should never fully trust those who have deceived us even once.
But perhaps, although they sometimes deceive us about things
that are little, or rather a long way away, there are plenty of other
things of which there is clearly no doubt, although it was from the
senses that we learned them: for instance, that I am now here, sitting
by the ﬁre, wrapped in a warm winter gown, handling this paper,

18

14

19

20

First Meditation

and suchlike. Indeed, that these hands themselves, and this whole
body are mine—what reason could there be for doubting this? Unless
perhaps I were to compare myself to one of those madmen, whose
little brains have been so befuddled by a pestilential vapour arising
from the black bile,* that they swear blind that they are kings, though
they are beggars, or that they are clad in purple, when they are
naked, or that their head is made of clay, or that their whole body is
a jug, or made entirely of glass. But they are lunatics, and I should
seem no less of a madman myself if I should follow their example in
any way.
This is all very well, to be sure. But am I not a human being, and
therefore in the habit of sleeping at night, when in my dreams I have
all the same experiences as these madmen do when they are awake—
or sometimes even stranger ones? How often my sleep at night has
convinced me of all these familiar things—that I was here, wrapped
in my gown, sitting by the ﬁre—when in fact I was lying naked
under the bedclothes.—All the same, I am now perceiving this paper
with eyes that are certainly awake; the head I am nodding is not
drowsy; I stretch out my hand and feel it knowingly and deliberately;
a sleeper would not have these experiences so distinctly.—But have
I then forgotten those other occasions on which I have been deceived
by similar thoughts in my dreams? When I think this over more carefully I see so clearly that waking can never be distinguished from
sleep by any conclusive indications that I am stupeﬁed; and this very
stupor comes close to persuading me that I am asleep after all.
Let us then suppose* that we are dreaming, and that these particular things (that we have our eyes open, are moving our head, stretching out our hands) are not true; and that perhaps we do not even have
hands or the rest of a body like what we see. It must nonetheless be
admitted that the things we see in sleep are, so to speak, painted
images, which could not be formed except on the basis of a resemblance with real things; and that for this reason these general things
at least (such as eyes, head, hands, and the rest of the body) are not
imaginary things, but real and existing. For the fact is that when
painters desire to represent sirens and little satyrs with utterly unfamiliar shapes, they cannot devise altogether new natures for them, but
simply combine parts from diﬀerent animals; or if perhaps they do
think up something so new that nothing at all like it has ever been
seen, which is thus altogether ﬁctitious and false, it is certain that at

First Meditation

15

least the colours which they combine to form images must be real. By
the same token, even though these general things—eyes, head, hands,
and so forth—might be imaginary, it must necessarily be admitted
that at least some other still more simple and universal realities must
exist, from which (as the painter’s image is produced from real
colours) all these images of things—be they true or false—that
occur in our thoughts are produced.
In this category it seems we should include bodily nature in general, and its extension; likewise the shape of extended things and
their quantity (magnitude and number); likewise the place in which
they exist, the time during which they exist, and suchlike.
From all this, perhaps, we may safely conclude that physics, astronomy, medicine, and all the other disciplines which involve the study of
composite things are indeed doubtful; but that arithmetic, geometry,
and other disciplines of the same kind, which deal only with the very
simplest and most general things, and care little whether they exist in
nature or not, contain something certain and indubitable. For whether
I am waking or sleeping, two plus three equals ﬁve, and a square has
no more than four sides; nor does it seem possible that such obvious
truths could be aﬀected by any suspicion that they are false.
However, there is a certain opinion long ﬁxed in my mind, that
there is a God who is all-powerful, and by whom I was created such
as I am now. Now how do I know that he has not brought it about
that there is no earth at all, no heavens, no extended things, no shape,
no magnitude, no place—and yet that all these things appear to me
to exist just as they do now?* Or even—just as I judge now and again
that other people are mistaken about things they believe they know
with the greatest certitude—that I too should be similarly deceived
whenever I add two and three, or count the sides of a square, or make
a judgement about something even simpler, if anything simpler can
be imagined?
But perhaps God has not willed that I should be so cheated, for he
is said to be supremely good.—But if it were incompatible with his
goodness to have created me such that I am perpetually deceived, it
would seem equally inconsistent with that quality to permit me to be
sometimes deceived. Nonetheless, I cannot doubt that he does permit it.
Perhaps, indeed, there might be some people who would prefer to
deny the existence of any God so powerful, rather than believing that
all other things are uncertain. But let us not quarrel with them, and

21

16

22

23

First Meditation

let us grant that all this we have said of God is only a ﬁction; and let
them suppose that it is by fate or chance or a continuous sequence of
things that I have come to be what I am. Since, though, to be
deceived and to err appear to be some kind of imperfection, the less
powerful the source they invoke to explain my being, the more probable it will be that I am so imperfect that I am perpetually deceived.
To all these arguments, indeed, I have no answer, but at length I am
forced to admit that there is nothing of all those things I once
thought true, of which it is not legitimate to doubt—and not out of
any thoughtlessness or irresponsibility, but for sound and wellweighed reasons; and therefore that, from these things as well, no
less than from what is blatantly false, I must now carefully withhold
my assent if I wish to discover any thing that is certain.*
But it is not enough to have realized all this, I must take care to
remember it: for my accustomed opinions continually creep back
into my mind, and take possession of my belief, which has, so to
speak, been enslaved to them by long experience and familiarity, for
the most part against my will. Nor shall I ever break the habit of
assenting to them and relying on them, as long as I go on supposing
them to be such as they are in truth, that is to say, doubtful indeed
in some respect, as has been shown just now, and yet nonetheless
highly probable, so that it is much more rational to believe than to
deny them. Hence, it seems to me, I shall not be acting unwisely if,
willing myself to believe the contrary, I deceive myself, and make
believe, for some considerable time, that they are altogether false and
imaginary, until, once the prior judgements on each side have been
evenly balanced in the scales, no evil custom can any longer twist my
judgement away from the correct perception of things. For I know
for sure that no danger or error will ensue as a result of this, and that
there is no risk that I shall be giving too free a rein to my distrustfulness, since my concern at the moment is not with action but only
with the attainment of knowledge.*
I will therefore suppose that, not God, who is perfectly good and
the source of truth, but some evil spirit, supremely powerful and
cunning, has devoted all his eﬀorts to deceiving me.* I will think that
the sky, the air, the earth, colours, shapes, sounds, and all external
things are no diﬀerent from the illusions of our dreams, and that they
are traps he has laid for my credulity; I will consider myself as having
no hands, no eyes, no ﬂesh, no blood, and no senses, but yet as falsely

Second Meditation

17

believing that I have all these;* I will obstinately cling to these
thoughts, and in this way, if indeed it is not in my power to discover
any truth,* yet certainly to the best of my ability and determination
I will take care not to give my assent to anything false, or to allow this
deceiver, however powerful and cunning he may be, to impose upon
me in any way.
But to carry out this plan requires great eﬀort, and there is a kind of
indolence that drags me back to my customary way of life. Just as a prisoner, who was perhaps enjoying an imaginary freedom in his dreams,
when he then begins to suspect that he is asleep is afraid of being woken
up, and lets himself sink back into his soothing illusions; so I of my
own accord slip back into my former opinions, and am scared to awake,
for fear that tranquil sleep will give way to laborious hours of waking,
which from now on I shall have to spend not in any kind of light, but in
the unrelenting darkness of the diﬃculties just stirred up.

SECOND MEDITATION
of the nature of the human mind; that it is
more easily known than the body
Yesterday’s meditation has plunged me into so many doubts that
I still cannot put them out of my mind, nor, on the other hand, can
I see any way to resolve them; but, as if I had suddenly slipped into
a deep whirlpool, I am in such diﬃculties that I can neither touch
bottom with my foot nor swim back to the surface. Yet I will struggle on, and I will try the same path again as the one I set out on yesterday, that is to say, eliminating everything in which there is the
smallest element of doubt, exactly as if I had found it to be false
through and through; and I shall pursue my way until I discover
something certain; or, failing that, discover that it is certain only that
nothing is certain. Archimedes* claimed, that if only he had a point
that was ﬁrm and immovable, he would move the whole earth; and
great things are likewise to be hoped, if I can ﬁnd just one little thing
that is certain and unshakeable.
I therefore suppose that all I see is false; I believe that none of
those things represented by my deceitful memory has ever existed; in
fact I have no senses at all; body, shape, extension in space, motion,

24

18

25

Second Meditation

and place itself are all illusions. What truth then is left? Perhaps this
alone, that nothing is certain.
But how do I know that there is not something diﬀerent from all
those things I have just listed, about which there is not the slightest
room for doubt? Is there not, after all, some God, or whatever he
should be called, that puts these thoughts into my mind? But why
should I think that, when perhaps I myself could be the source of
these thoughts? But am I at least not something, after all? But I have
already denied that I have any senses or any body. Now I am at a loss,
because what follows from this? Am I so bound up with my body
and senses that I cannot exist without them? But I convinced myself
that there was nothing at all in the world, no sky, no earth, no minds,
no bodies. Did I therefore not also convince myself that I did not
exist either? No: certainly I did exist, if I convinced myself of
something.—But there is some deceiver or other, supremely powerful and cunning, who is deliberately deceiving me all the time.—
Beyond doubt then, I also exist, if he is deceiving me; and he can
deceive me all he likes, but he will never bring it about that I should
be nothing as long as I think I am something. So that, having weighed
all these considerations suﬃciently and more than suﬃciently, I can
ﬁnally decide* that this proposition, ‘I am, I exist’, whenever it is
uttered by me, or conceived in the mind, is necessarily true.
But indeed I do not yet suﬃciently understand what in fact this ‘I’
is that now necessarily exists;* so that from now on I must take care
in case I should happen imprudently to take something else to be me
that is not me, and thus go astray in the very knowledge [cognitione]
that I claim to be the most certain and evident of all. Hence I shall
now meditate afresh on what I once believed myself to be, before
I fell into this train of thought. From this I shall then subtract
whatever it has been possible to cast doubt on, even in the slightest
degree, by the reasons put forward above, so that in the end there
shall remain exactly and only that which is certain and unshakeable.
So what in fact did I think I was before all this? A human being, of
course. But what is a human being? Shall I say, ‘a rational animal’?*
No, for then I should have to examine what exactly an animal is, and
what ‘rational’ is, and hence, starting with one question, I should
stumble into more and more diﬃcult ones. Nor do I now have so
much leisure that I can aﬀord to fritter it away on subtleties of this
kind. But here I shall rather direct my attention to the thoughts that

Second Meditation

19

spontaneously and by nature’s prompting came to my mind beforehand, whenever I considered what I was. The ﬁrst was that I have a
face, hands, arms, and this whole mechanism of limbs, such as we see
even in corpses; this I referred to as the body. Next, that I took nourishment, moved, perceived with my senses, and thought: these
actions indeed I attributed to the soul.* What this soul was, however,
either I never considered, or I imagined it as something very rareﬁed
and subtle, like a wind, or ﬁre, or thin air, infused into my coarser
parts. But about the body itself, on the other hand, I had no doubts,
but I thought I distinctly knew its nature, which, if I had attempted
to describe how I conceived it in my mind, I would have explained as
follows: by body I mean everything that is capable of being bounded
by some shape, of existing in a deﬁnite place, of ﬁlling a space in such
a way as to exclude the presence of any other body within it; of being
perceived by touch, sight, hearing, taste, or smell, and also of being
moved in various ways, not indeed by itself, but by some other thing
by which it is touched; for to have the power of moving itself, and
also of perceiving by the senses or thinking, I judged could in no way
belong to the nature of body; rather, I was puzzled by the fact that
such capacities were found in certain bodies.
But what about now, when I am supposing that some deceiver,
who is supremely powerful and, if I may venture to say so, evil, has
been exerting all his eﬀorts to delude me in every way? Can I aﬃrm
that I possess the slightest thing of all those that I have just said
belong to the nature of body? I consider, I think, I go over it all in my
mind: nothing comes up. It would be a waste of eﬀort to go through
the list again. But what about the attributes I used to ascribe to the
soul? What about taking nourishment or moving? But since I now
have no body, these also are nothing but illusions. What about senseperception? But certainly this does not take place without a body,
and I have seemed to perceive very many things when asleep that
I later realized I had not perceived. What about thinking? Here I do
ﬁnd something: it is thought; this alone cannot be stripped from me.
I am, I exist, this is certain. But for how long? Certainly only for as
long as I am thinking; for perhaps if I were to cease from all thinking
it might also come to pass that I might immediately cease altogether
to exist. I am now admitting nothing except what is necessarily true:
I am therefore, speaking precisely, only a thinking thing, that is,
a mind, or a soul, or an intellect, or a reason—words the meaning of

26

27

20

28

Second Meditation

which was previously unknown to me. I am therefore a true thing,
and one that truly exists; but what kind of thing? I have said it
already: one that thinks.
What comes next? I will imagine: I am not that framework of limbs
that is called a human body; I am not some thin air infused into these
limbs, or a wind, or a ﬁre, or a vapour, or a breath, or whatever I can
picture myself as: for I have supposed that these things do not exist.
But even if I keep to this supposition, nonetheless I am still something.*—But all the same, it is perhaps still the case that these very
things I am supposing to be nothing, are nevertheless not distinct
from this ‘me’ that I know* [novi].—Perhaps: I don’t know. But this
is not the point at issue at present. I can pass judgement only on
those things that are known to me. I know [novi] that I exist; I am
trying to ﬁnd out what this ‘I’ is, whom I know [novi]. It is absolutely
certain that this knowledge [notitia], in the precise sense in question
here, does not depend on things of which I do not yet know [novi]
whether they exist; and therefore it depends on none of those things
I picture in my imagination. This very word ‘imagination’ shows
where I am going wrong. For I should certainly be ‘imagining things’
if I imagined myself to be anything, since imagining is nothing other
than contemplating the shape or image of a bodily thing. Now, however, I know [scio] for certain that I exist; and that, at the same time,
it could be the case that all these images, and in general everything
that pertains to the nature of body, are nothing but illusions. Now
this is clear to me, it would seem as foolish of me to say: ‘I shall use
my imagination, in order to recognize more clearly what I am’, as
it would be to say: ‘Now I am awake, and I see something true; but
because I cannot yet see it clearly enough, I shall do my best to get
back to sleep again so that my dreams can show it to me more truly
and more clearly.’ And so I realize [cognosco] that nothing that I can
grasp by means of the imagination has to do with this knowledge
[notitiam] I have of myself, and that I need to withdraw my mind
from such things as thoroughly as possible, if it is to perceive its own
nature as distinctly as possible.
But what therefore am I? A thinking thing. What is that? I mean a
thing that doubts, that understands, that aﬃrms, that denies, that
wishes to do this and does not wish to do that, and also that imagines
and perceives by the senses.

Second Meditation

21

Well, indeed, there is quite a lot there, if all these things really do
belong to me. But why should they not belong to me? Is it not me
who currently doubts virtually everything, who nonetheless understands something, who aﬃrms this alone to be true, and denies the
rest, who wishes to know more, and wishes not to be deceived, who
imagines many things, even against his will, and is aware of many
things that appear to come via the senses? Is there any of these things
that is not equally true as the fact that I exist—even if I am always
asleep, and even if my creator is deceiving me to the best of his ability? Is there any of them that can be distinguished from my thinking?
Is there any that can be said to be separate from me? For that it is I
that am doubting, understanding, wishing, is so obvious that nothing
further is needed in order to explain it more clearly. But indeed it is
also this same I that is imagining; for although it might be the case,
as I have been supposing, that none of these imagined things is true,
yet the actual power of imagining certainly does exist, and is part of
my thinking. And ﬁnally it is the same I that perceives by means of
the senses, or who is aware of corporeal things as if by means of the
senses: for example, I am seeing a light, hearing a noise, feeling heat.—
But these things are false, since I am asleep!—But certainly I seem to
be seeing, hearing, getting hot. This cannot be false. This is what is
properly meant by speaking of myself as having sensations; and,
understood in this precise sense, it is nothing other than thinking.
From all of this, I am indeed beginning to know [nosse] rather
better what I in fact am. But it still seems (and I cannot help thinking this) that the bodily things of which the images are formed in our
thought, and which the senses themselves investigate, are much
more distinctly recognized than that part of myself, whatever it is,
that cannot be represented by the imagination. Although, indeed, it
is strange that things that I realize are doubtful, unknown, unrelated
to me should be more distinctly grasped by me than what is true and
what is known—more distinctly grasped even than myself. But I see
what is happening. My mind enjoys wandering oﬀ the track, and will
not yet allow itself to be conﬁned within the boundaries of truth. Very
well, then: let us, once again, slacken its reins as far as possible—
then, before too long, a tug on them at the right moment will bring
it more easily back to obedience.*
Let us consider those things which are commonly thought to be
more distinctly grasped than anything else: I mean the bodies we

29

30

22

31

Second Meditation

touch and see; but not bodies in general, for these general perceptions are usually considerably more confused, but one body in particular. Let us, for example, take this wax: it has only just been
removed from the honeycomb; it has not yet lost all the ﬂavour of its
honey; it retains some of the scent of the ﬂowers among which it was
gathered; its colour, shape, and size are clearly visible; it is hard,
cold, easy to touch, and if you tap it with your knuckle, it makes a
sound. In short, it has all the properties that seem to be required for
a given body to be known as distinctly as possible. But wait—while
I am speaking, it is brought close to the ﬁre. The remains of its
ﬂavour evaporate; the smell fades; the colour is changed, the shape is
taken away, it grows in size, becomes liquid, becomes warm, it can
hardly be touched, and now, if you strike it, it will give oﬀ no sound.
Does the same wax still remain? We must admit it does remain: no
one would say or think it does not. So what was there in it that was
so distinctly grasped? Certainly, none of those qualities I apprehended by the senses: for whatever came under taste, or smell, or
sight, or touch, or hearing, has now changed: but the wax remains.
Perhaps the truth of the matter was what I now think it is: namely,
that the wax itself was not in fact this sweetness of the honey, or the
fragrance of the ﬂowers, or the whiteness, shape, or sonority, but the
body which not long ago appeared to me as perceptible in these
modes,* but now appears in others. But what exactly is this that I am
imagining in this way? Let us consider the matter, and, thinking
away those things that do not belong to the wax, let us see what
remains. Something extended, ﬂexible, mutable: certainly, that is all.
But in what do this ﬂexibility and mutability consist? Is it in the fact
that I can imagine this wax being changed in shape, from a circle to
a square, and from a square into a triangle? That cannot be right: for
I understand that it is capable of innumerable changes of this sort,
yet I cannot keep track of all these by using my imagination. Therefore
my understanding of these properties is not achieved by using the
faculty of imagination. What about ‘extended’? Surely I know something about the nature of its extension. For it is greater when the wax
is melting, greater still when it is boiling, and greater still when the
heat is further increased. And I would not be correctly judging
what the wax is if I failed to see that it is capable of receiving
more varieties, as regards extension, than I have ever grasped in my
imagination. So I am left with no alternative, but to accept that I am

Second Meditation

23

not at all imagining what this wax is, I am perceiving it with my mind
alone: I say ‘this wax’ in particular, for the point is even clearer about
wax in general. So then, what is this wax, which is only perceived by
the mind? Certainly it is the same wax I see, touch, and imagine, and
in short it is the same wax I judged it to be from the beginning. But
yet—and this is important—the perception of it is not sight, touch,
or imagination, and never was, although it seemed to be so at ﬁrst: it
is an inspection by the mind alone, which can be either imperfect and
confused, as it was before in this case, or clear and distinct, as it now
is, depending on the greater or lesser degree of attention I pay to
what it consists of.
But in the meantime I am amazed by the proneness of my mind to
error. For although I am considering all this in myself silently and
without speech, yet I am still ensnared by words themselves, and all
but deceived by the very ways in which we usually put things. For
we say that we ‘see’ the wax itself, if it is present, not that we judge
it to be there on the basis of its colour or shape. From this I would
have immediately concluded that I therefore knew the wax by the
sight of my eyes, not by the inspection of the mind alone—if I had
not happened to glance out of the window at people walking along
the street. Using the customary expression, I say that I ‘see’ them,
just as I ‘see’ the wax. But what do I actually see other than hats and
coats, which could be covering automata?* But I judge that they are
people. And therefore what I thought I saw with my eyes, I in fact
grasp only by the faculty of judging that is in my mind.
But one who desires to know more than the common herd might
be ashamed to have gone to the speech of the common herd to ﬁnd a
reason for doubting. Let us then go on where we left oﬀ by considering whether I perceived more perfectly and more evidently what
the wax was, when I ﬁrst encountered it, and believed that I knew
[cognoscere] it by these external senses, or at least by what they call the
‘common sense’,* that is, the imaginative power; or whether I perceive
it better now, after I have more carefully investigated both what it is
and how it is known [cognoscatur]. Certainly it would be foolish to
doubt that I have a much better grasp of it now. For what, if anything, was distinct in my original perception? What was there, if anything, that seemed to go beyond the perception of the lowest animals?*
But on the other hand, when I distinguish the wax from its external
forms, and, as if I had stripped oﬀ its garments, consider it in all its

32

24

33

34

Second Meditation

nakedness, then, indeed, although there may still be error in my judgements, I cannot perceive it in this way except by the human mind.
But what, then, shall I say about this mind, or about myself? For
I do not yet accept that there is anything in me but a mind. What,
I say, am I who seem to perceive this wax so distinctly? Do I not
know [cognosco] myself not only much more truly, much more certainly, but also much more distinctly and evidently than the wax?
For, if I judge that the wax exists, for the reason that I see it, it is certainly much more evident that I myself also exist, from the very fact
that I am seeing it. For it could be the case that what I am seeing is
not really wax; it could be the case that I do not even have eyes with
which to see anything; but it certainly cannot be the case, when I see
something, or when I think I am seeing something (the diﬀerence is
irrelevant for the moment), that I myself who think should not be
something. By the same token, if I judge that the wax exists, for the
reason that I am touching it, the same consequence follows: namely,
that I exist. If I judge it exists, for the reason I am imagining it, or for
any other reason, again, the same certainly applies. But what I have
realized in the case of the wax, I can apply to anything that exists outside myself. Moreover, if the perception of the wax appeared more
distinct after it became known to me from many sources, and not
from sight or touch alone, how much more distinctly—it must be
admitted—I now know [cognosci] myself. For there are no reasons
that can enhance the perception either of the wax or of any other
body at all that do not at the same time prove better to me the nature
of my own mind. But there are so many things besides in the mind
itself that can serve to make the knowledge [notitia] of it more distinct, that there seems scarcely any point in listing all the perceptions
that ﬂow into it from the body.
But I see now that, without realizing it, I have ended up back
where I wanted to be. For since I have now learned that bodies themselves are perceived not, strictly speaking, by the senses or by the
imaginative faculty, but by the intellect alone, and that they are not
perceived because they are touched or seen, but only because they
are understood, I clearly realize [cognosco] that nothing can be perceived by me more easily or more clearly than my own mind. But
since a long-held opinion is a habit that cannot so readily be laid
aside, I intend to stop here for a while, in order to ﬁx this newly
acquired knowledge more deeply in my memory by long meditation.

THIRD MEDITATION
of god, that he exists
I shall now close my eyes, I shall block up my ears, I shall divert all
my senses, and I shall even delete all bodily images from my thought
or, since this is virtually impossible to achieve, at least count them as
empty and worthless; and I shall try, by conversing only with myself
and looking deep within myself, to make myself gradually better
known and more familiar to myself. I am a thinking thing, that is, one
that doubts, aﬃrms, denies, understands a few things, is ignorant of
many others, wills this and not that, and also imagines and perceives
by the senses; for as I have already remarked, although the things
I perceive or imagine outside myself do not perhaps exist, yet I am
certain that the modes of thinking that I call sensations and imaginations, considered purely and simply as modes of thinking, do exist
inside me.
And this, short as it is, is a complete list of what I truly know [scio],
or at least of what, up to now, I have realized that I know. Now I shall
examine more carefully whether perhaps there are any further items
of knowledge in my possession to which I have not yet paid attention.
I am certain that I am a thinking thing. But do I not therefore also
know what is required in order for me to be certain of something?
For in this ﬁrst act of knowledge [cognitione] there is nothing other
than a clear and distinct perception of what I aﬃrm to be the case;
and this certainly would be insuﬃcient to make me certain of the
truth of the matter, if it could ever come to pass that something I perceived so clearly and distinctly was false. And therefore I seem already
to be able to lay down, as a general rule, that everything I very clearly
and distinctly perceive is true.
And yet there are many things that I once accepted as completely
certain and obvious, that I have since realized were doubtful. What
kind of things were these? The earth, the sky, the stars, and everything else I became aware of through the senses. But what did
I clearly perceive here? Certainly, that the ideas or thoughts of such
things were present to my mind. And even now I do not deny that
these ideas exist in me. But there was something else that I was
aﬃrming, and that, because I was used to believing it, I thought

35

26

36

37

Third Meditation

I perceived clearly, although in fact I was not really perceiving it;
namely, that there were certain things existing outside me from
which these ideas derived and that the ideas perfectly resembled.
This was my mistake; or at least, if I was after all right in thinking
this, the rightness was not due to my perception.
But when in arithmetic or geometry I considered something very
simple and easy—for instance, two plus three equals ﬁve—surely
I intuited this kind of thing at least clearly enough to declare it true?
In fact, when I later judged that such things should be doubted, this
was only because the thought had come to me, that perhaps some
God might have endowed me with such a nature that I could be
deceived even about those things that appeared supremely obvious.
But whenever this preconceived opinion of God’s supreme power
occurs to me, I cannot help admitting, that, if indeed he wishes to, he
can easily bring it about that I should be mistaken, even about
matters that I think I intuit with the eye of the mind as evidently as
possible. On the other hand, whenever I turn my attention to the
things themselves that I think I perceive very clearly, I am so thoroughly convinced by them, that I cannot help exclaiming: ‘Let whoever can, deceive me as much as he likes: still he can never bring it
about that I am nothing, as long as I think I am something; or that
one day it will be true that I have never existed, when it is true now
that I exist; or that perhaps two plus three added together are more
or less than ﬁve; or that other such things should be true in which
I recognize an obvious contradiction.’ And certainly, since I have no
grounds for thinking that any deceitful God exists—in fact, I do not
yet suﬃciently know whether there is any God at all—then a reason
for doubting that depends wholly on the belief in a deceitful God is
very slight, and, so to speak, metaphysical. In order to remove it,
then, at the ﬁrst opportunity, I must examine whether there is a God,
and, if there is, whether he can be a deceiver; since, as long as
I remain ignorant of this matter, I seem unable ever to be certain of
any other at all.*
But now it seems that, to proceed in an orderly fashion, I should
ﬁrst divide up all my thoughts into deﬁnite categories, and examine
to which of these truth and falsity can properly be said to pertain.
Some of these thoughts are apparently images of things,* and to
these alone the name ‘idea’ is properly applied: for instance, when
I think of a human being, or a chimera, or the heavens, or an angel,

Third Meditation

27

or God. But others have certain other forms as well; thus, when I
will, or fear, or aﬃrm, or deny, I am always in fact apprehending
some thing as the subject of this thought,* but I am including something further within the thought than the mere likeness of the thing;
and of thoughts of this kind some are called volitions, or aﬀects,
whereas others are called judgements.
Now, as far as ideas are concerned, if they are considered purely
in themselves, and if I do not connect them with anything outside
themselves, they cannot, strictly speaking, be false; for whether I am
imagining a goat or a chimera, it is no less true that I am imagining
one than that I am imagining the other. Again, there is no fear of
falsehood in the will itself, or in the aﬀects: for although I can desire
something wicked, and even something that does not exist at all, this
does not mean that it is not true that I desire it. This leaves only
judgements: in these alone I must take care not to be deceived. The
most glaring and widespread error that can be found in them consists
in my judging that the ideas that are in me are similar to or in accordance with some things existing outside me. For certainly, if I conceived the ideas themselves purely and simply as modiﬁcations of my
thinking, and did not connect them with anything else, they could
scarcely give me any occasion to err.
Of these ideas, some seem to me to be innate, others adventitious,*
others produced by myself. For understanding what a thing is, what
truth is, what thought is, is something I seem to possess purely in
virtue of my nature itself. But if I am now hearing a noise, seeing the
sun, feeling the heat of a ﬁre,* up to now I have judged that such sensations derive from things existing outside myself. Finally, sirens,
hippogriﬀs, and suchlike creatures are inventions of my own imagination. But perhaps I can think that all my ideas are adventitious, or
all innate, or all produced by me: for I have not yet clearly discovered
their true source.
About those ideas that I consider as proceeding from things
existing outside myself, the key question to ask here is: What reason
do I have for thinking the ideas are like the things? Well, certainly,
nature itself seems to teach me to think so. Besides, experience shows
me that they do not depend on my own will, and therefore do not
depend on myself. For they often intrude upon me against my will.
Now, for instance, I am feeling heat, whether I want to or not, and
this is why I think that this sensation, or idea, of heat is coming to me

38

28

39

Third Meditation

from a thing distinct from myself, in this case from the heat of the
ﬁre by which I am sitting. And by far the most obvious judgement to
make is that what the thing is transmitting to me is its own likeness
rather than anything else.
But I shall now see whether these reasons are suﬃciently solid.
When I say here that ‘I am taught by nature’ to think so, I mean only
that I am prompted to believe this by some spontaneous inclination,
not that it is shown to me to be true by some natural light.* The two
things are very diﬀerent: for whatever is shown to me by the natural
light (for instance, that, from the fact that I am doubting, it follows
that I exist, and suchlike) can in no way be doubtful, because there
can be no other faculty that I could trust as much as this light, and
that could teach me that such things are not, after all, true. But when
it comes to natural inclinations, I have before now often judged in the
past that I have been led by these in the wrong direction, when it was
a matter of choosing the good,* nor do I see why I should trust them
more in any other domain.
Then again, although these ideas do not depend on my own will,
it does not necessarily follow that they derive from things existing
outside me. For just as those inclinations of which I was speaking a
moment ago, although they are inside me, seem, however, to be distinct from my will, so perhaps there is some other faculty within me,
as yet insuﬃciently known to me, that produces such ideas—just as
up to now it has always seemed to me that they form themselves in
me while I am asleep without any assistance from external things.*
And ﬁnally, even if they did derive from things distinct from
myself, it does not follow that they have to be like those things. Indeed,
in many of them I seem to have discovered major discrepancies
between the idea and the object. For instance, I ﬁnd within me two
diﬀerent ideas of the sun. One appears to be derived from the senses,
and it would absolutely have to be placed in the category of ideas
I class as ‘adventitious’. This idea represents the sun as very small.
The other, however, derives from astronomical reasoning—that is to
say, it is derived from some notions innate within me, or has been
produced by me in some other way. This idea represents the sun as
several times larger than the earth. But certainly, both cannot be like
one and the same sun existing outside me; and reason persuades me
that the one that seems to have ﬂowed directly from the sun itself* is
in fact the one that is most unlike it.

Third Meditation

29

All these considerations are suﬃcient proof that, up to now, it is as
a result not of a certain judgement, but only of some blind inclination, that I have believed in the existence of various things distinct
from myself, and conveying ideas or images of themselves to me
through the sense-organs or in some other manner.
But there is yet another way that occurs to me by which I could
investigate whether any of those things of which the ideas are in me
exist outside me. Certainly, in so far as these ideas are only various
modiﬁcations of my thinking, I acknowledge that they are all on the
same footing, and they all seem to derive from me in the same way.
But, in so far as one represents one thing, another another, it is plain
that they diﬀer widely among themselves. For beyond doubt those
ideas that represent substances to me are something greater, and contain, if I may use the term, more ‘objective reality’ in themselves,
than those that represent merely modes or accidents. And by the
same token, the idea by which I conceive a supreme God, eternal,
inﬁnite, omniscient, all-powerful, and the creator of all things that
exist beside himself, certainly has more objective reality in itself than
those by which ﬁnite substances are represented.
But now it is manifest by the natural light that there must be at
least as much reality in the total and eﬃcient cause as in its eﬀect.
For, I ask, from where could the eﬀect derive its reality, if not from
the cause? And how could the cause give it reality, if it did not
also possess it? Hence it follows, both that nothing can come from
nothing, and that what is more perfect (that is, what contains more
reality within itself ) cannot derive from what is less perfect. And this
is not only plainly true of those eﬀects whose reality is actual or formal,
but also of ideas, in which only the objective reality is considered.
For instance, a stone that did not previously exist, cannot now begin
to be, unless it is produced by some thing in which everything exists,
either formally or eminently,* that enters into the composition of the
stone. Nor can heat be brought about in a subject that was not hot
before, unless by a thing that belongs to at least the same order of
perfection as heat; and the same is true elsewhere. But, by the same
token, the idea of heat, or of the stone, cannot exist in me, unless it is
produced in me by some cause in which there is at least as much reality as I conceive to be in the heat or in the stone. For although this
cause transmits none of its actual or formal reality to my idea, we
must not therefore think that it (the cause) must be less real; rather,

40

41

30

42

43

Third Meditation

the nature of the idea itself is such that it requires no other formal
reality outside itself,* except what it borrows from my thought, of
which it is a mode. But the fact that this idea contains this or that
objective reality, and not some other kind—this must certainly be
due to some other cause, in which there is at least as much formal
reality as the idea contains objective reality. For if we suppose that
something is found in the idea that is not in its cause, it would have
this something from nothing; and however imperfect the kind of
being by which a thing exists objectively in the understanding in the
form of an idea, it is certainly not nothing, and therefore cannot come
from nothing.
Nor should I suppose that since the reality I am considering in my
ideas is purely objective, there is no need for the same reality to exist
formally in the causes of these ideas, but that it is enough for it also
to exist in them objectively. For just as this objective mode of being
pertains to ideas from their very nature, so the formal mode of being
pertains to the causes of the ideas—at least the ﬁrst and dominant
causes—from their nature also. And although perhaps one idea can
be born from another, we cannot here have an inﬁnite regress, but in
the end we have to arrive at some ﬁrst idea, the cause of which takes
the form of an archetype, which formally contains all the reality that
is only objectively in the idea. So that it is clear to me by the natural
light that the ideas in me are of the nature of images, which can easily
fall short of the perfection of the things from which they derive, but
cannot, however, contain anything greater or more perfect.
And the longer and more carefully I examine all these things, the
more clearly and distinctly I realize [cognosco] they are true. But what
conclusion am I to draw from them? Certainly, if the objective reality of some one of my ideas is so great that I am certain that that reality does not exist in me either formally or eminently, and therefore
that I myself cannot be the cause of this idea, it necessarily follows
that I am not alone in the world, but that some other thing also
exists that is the cause of this idea. But if in fact no such idea is found
in me, I shall certainly have no argument that can convince me with
certainty of the existence of any thing distinct from myself; for I have
examined all these things very closely, and up to now I have found
no other such argument.
Of these ideas I have—apart from the one that represents me to
myself, about which there can be no diﬃculty here*— one represents

Third Meditation

31

God, others bodily and inanimate things, others angels, others animals, and others, ﬁnally, other human beings like myself.
As regards the ideas that represent other human beings, or
animals, or angels, I can easily see that they might have been put
together from the ideas I have of myself, and bodily things, and God,
even if there were no other human beings, or animals, or angels in the
world.
As regards ideas of bodily things, they contain nothing that is so
great that it cannot apparently derive from myself: for if I inspect
them more closely, and examine them one by one in the same way as
I yesterday examined the idea of the wax, I realize that there is very
little in them that I clearly and distinctly perceive: there is only magnitude, or extension in length, breadth, and depth; shape, which
results from the limitation of this extension; place, the situation
diﬀerently shaped bodies occupy relative to one another; and motion,
that is, change of place. To these substance, duration, and number
can be added. But the rest, such as light and colours, sounds, smells,
tastes, heat and cold, and the other tactile qualities are thought by me
only in very confused and obscure fashion—so much so that I do not
even know whether they are true or false, that is, whether the ideas
I have concerning them, are ideas of actual things or of non-things.
For although I remarked not long ago that falsity in the proper
(‘formal’) sense can be found only in judgements, there is nonetheless certainly another (‘material’) kind of falsity in ideas, when they
represent what is nothing as if it were something. For example, the
ideas I have of heat and cold are so unclear and so indistinct that
I cannot tell from them whether cold is nothing but a privation of
heat, or heat a privation of cold, or whether both are real qualities, or
neither. But there can be no ideas that do not seem to represent
something to us. And therefore, if indeed it is true that cold is nothing other than the privation of heat, the idea that represents it to me
as something real and positive can very properly be called false. The
same applies to all other such ideas.
Certainly, I do not need to ascribe any author to these ideas apart
from myself. For if indeed they are false—that is, if there is nothing
they actually represent—it is known to me by the natural light that
they derive from nothing: that is, they exist in me purely on account
of some shortcoming in my nature, which indeed is far from perfect.
But if, on the other hand, they are true, the degree of reality they

44

32

45

Third Meditation

represent to me is so scanty that I cannot even distinguish between it
and unreality; and therefore I cannot see why they might not derive
from myself.*
But of the clear and distinct elements in my ideas of bodily things,
there are some that it seems possible I borrowed from the idea of
myself, namely substance, duration, number, and any other things
there may be of that sort. For when I think that a stone is a substance,
that is to say, a thing capable of existing by itself, and likewise that
I am myself a substance, then although I conceive myself to be a
thinking and not an extended thing, and the stone, on the other
hand, to be an extended and not a thinking thing, so that there is a
very great diﬀerence between the two concepts, they seem, however,
to have this in common: they both represent a substance. Again,
when I perceive that I exist now, and also remember that I existed at
some time before now, and when I have various thoughts of which
I know the number, I acquire the ideas of duration and number,
which then I can transfer to other things, of whatever kind they are.
On the other hand, all the other elements from which the ideas of
bodily things are put together, namely extension, shape, place, and
motion, are not contained formally in myself, since I am nothing
other than a thinking thing. But because they are only various modes
of substance, and I moreover am a substance, it seems they could be
contained in me eminently.
And so there remains only the idea of God, in which I must consider whether there is anything that could not derive from myself. By
the name ‘God’ I understand an inﬁnite, independent, supremely
intelligent, supremely powerful substance, by which I myself and
whatever else exists (if anything else does exist) was created. But
certainly, all these properties are such that, the more carefully
I consider them, the less it seems possible that they can be derived
from me alone.* And so I must conclude that it necessarily follows
from all that has been said up to now that God exists.
For indeed, even if the idea of substance is in me as a result of the
very fact that I am a substance, the idea of an inﬁnite substance
would not therefore be in me, since I am ﬁnite, unless it derived from
some substance that is really inﬁnite.
Nor should I think that I perceive the inﬁnite not by a true idea
but only by negation of the ﬁnite, as I perceive rest and darkness by

Third Meditation

33

the negation of motion and light; for on the contrary, I manifestly
understand that there is more reality in inﬁnite than in ﬁnite substance,
and that therefore the perception of the inﬁnite in me must be in
some way prior to that of the ﬁnite: the perception of God, in other
words, prior to that of myself. For how could I possibly understand
that I doubt, and that I desire, that is, that there is something lacking
in me, and that I am not completely perfect, if there were no idea in
me of a more perfect being, by comparison with which I could recognize my own shortcomings?*
Nor can it be said that perhaps this idea of God is materially false,
and could therefore derive from nothing, as I remarked not long ago
apropos of the ideas of heat and cold and suchlike. For on the contrary, since it is supremely clear and distinct, and contains more
objective reality than any other, there is no idea that is truer in itself
and in which less suspicion of falsity can be found. This idea of a
supremely perfect and inﬁnite being is, I say, supremely true; for
although it perhaps might be imagined that no such being actually
exists, it cannot be imagined that the idea of it represents nothing
real to me, as I previously said of the idea of cold. It is also supremely
clear and distinct; for whatever I clearly and distinctly perceive that
is real and true and that contains some perfection is all included
within it. And this remains no less true even though I do not comprehend the inﬁnite, or even if there are innumerable other attributes
in God that I can neither comprehend, nor even perhaps apprehend*
in the slightest by my thought; for it is of the nature of the inﬁnite
that it should be incomprehensible to me, who am ﬁnite. Provided
that I understand this and judge that everything I clearly perceive,
and that I know [scio] to involve some perfection, as well, perhaps, as
innumerable other attributes I do not know, exists in God either formally or eminently, the idea I have of him will be the truest and most
clear and distinct of all my ideas.
And yet perhaps I am something greater than I understand myself
to be, and all the perfections I attribute to God, are in some sense in
me potentially, even if they have not yet revealed themselves, or been
brought into actuality.* For I am already experiencing a gradual
increase in my knowledge [cognitio]; and I cannot see any reason why
it should not be increased in this way further and further to inﬁnity;
nor why, if my knowledge were so increased, I could not by means of

46

47

34

48

Third Meditation

it obtain all the other perfections of God; nor ﬁnally why the potentiality of these perfections, if it exists in me already, should not be
enough actually to produce the idea of them.
But none of this can be true. For, ﬁrst of all, even granting it to be
true that my knowledge [cognitio] is gradually increasing and that
there are many things in me in potentiality that are not yet so in actuality, nothing of this is relevant to the idea of God, in which indeed
there is absolutely no potentiality: for this very fact of gradual
increase is an infallible index of imperfection. Besides, even if my
knowledge did continually increase, nonetheless I understand that it
would still never be actually inﬁnite, since it will never get to the
point of being incapable of further increase; but I judge God to be
inﬁnite in actuality in such a way that nothing can be added to his
perfection. And ﬁnally I perceive that the objective being of an idea
cannot be produced from purely potential being, which properly
speaking is nothing, but only from actual or formal being.
And indeed there is nothing in all this that is not manifest by the
natural light to one who considers it carefully; but because, when my
attention wavers, and the images of sensible things blind the eye of
the mind, I do not remember so easily why the idea of a being more
perfect than myself necessarily proceeds from some being that is
truly perfect, I wish to investigate further whether I, who have this
idea, could exist if no such being existed.*
From what indeed could I derive my being? From myself, perhaps, or from my parents, or from some other beings less perfect than
God: for nothing more perfect than him, or even equally perfect, can
be conceived or imagined.
But if I existed of myself, I would not doubt, or wish, or lack anything at all: for I would have given myself all the perfections of which
there is some idea in me, and thus I should myself be God. Nor
should I suppose that what is lacking in me is perhaps more diﬃcult
to acquire than what is already in me, since on the contrary, it is plain
that it was far more diﬃcult for me, that is, a thinking thing or substance, to emerge from nothing than to acquire knowledge of the
many things I do not know, since such knowledge is only an accident
of this substance. But certainly, if I had this greater thing [existence]
from myself, I should not have denied myself at least the things that
can more easily be obtained; what is more, I should not have denied
myself any of those things I perceive to be contained in the idea of

Third Meditation

35

God; for indeed none of them seems to me more diﬃcult to achieve.
But if any were in fact more diﬃcult to achieve, certainly they would
appear to me to be so, if I did indeed derive my other properties from
myself, since I would experience the limits of my power with respect
to them.
And I cannot elude the force of these reasons by supposing that
perhaps I have always been as I now am, as if it followed from that
that there is no need to seek an author of my existence. For since all
the time of a life can be divided into innumerable parts, of which
each particular one in no way depends on the rest, it does not follow
from the fact that I existed not long ago that I have to exist now,
unless some cause, so to speak, creates me again at this moment, or
in other words, conserves me in being. For it is clear, if one considers the nature of time, that the same power and action is required to
conserve any thing, whatever it may be, in being during the individual moments in which it continues to exist, as would be needed to
create the same thing from the start if it did not yet exist. So clear
is this in fact that we may add to the list of things manifest by the
natural light that the distinction between conservation and creation
exists purely in our thought.*
So therefore I need now to inquire of myself, whether I have some
power, by means of which I can bring it to pass that this ‘I’* that now
exists shall still exist at some time in the near future. For since I am
nothing other than a thinking thing, or at least, to speak precisely,
since I am now dealing only with that part of myself that is a thinking thing, if any power of this sort were in me, I should beyond doubt
be conscious of it. But I can ﬁnd no such power, and from this I very
clearly realize [cognosco] that I depend upon some being distinct from
myself.
But perhaps this being is not God, and I was and am produced
either by my parents or by some other causes less perfect than God,
whatever they might be. No: for, as I have already said, it is plain that
there must be at least as much in the cause as there is in the eﬀect;
and therefore, since I am a thinking thing, and one that has the idea
of God in myself, it must be admitted that whatever cause is ﬁnally
assigned to me must also itself be a thinking thing and one that has
the idea of all the perfections I ascribe to God. And then of this thing
too we can ask whether it exists of itself or by virtue of some other
thing. For if it exists of itself, it is clear from the above that it must

49

36
50

51

Third Meditation

itself be God, because since it has from itself the power to exist, it
undoubtedly has the power to possess in reality all the perfections of
which it has the idea in itself, that is, all the perfections I conceive to
be in God. But if, on the other hand, it exists in virtue of some other
thing, then we shall ask whether this thing too exists of itself, or in
virtue of some other thing, until ﬁnally we come to an ultimate cause:
and this will be God.
For it is suﬃciently plain that here there is no possibility of an
inﬁnite regress,* especially because I am not dealing so much with
the cause that produced me at some time in the past, as, above all,
with the one that conserves me in the present time.
Nor can it be imagined that perhaps many partial causes have
come together to produce me, and that from one of them I received
the idea of one of the perfections I attribute to God, and from
another the idea of another perfection, so that all these perfections
are found, indeed, somewhere in the universe, but not all combined
together in any one being that would be God. For on the contrary,
the unity, simplicity, or inseparability of all those things that are in
God is one of the principal perfections that I understand to inhere in
him. Nor, certainly, could the idea of this unity of all his perfections
have been implanted in me by any cause from which I did not also
derive the ideas of the other perfections: for such a cause could not
have brought it about that I should understand them as simultaneously combined and inseparable, unless it had at the same time
enabled me to know what they all were.
Finally, as far as my parents are concerned, even if everything is
true of them that I have ever thought to be so, certainly they do not
conserve me in being, nor did they in any way produce me insofar as
I am a thinking thing; they only implanted certain dispositions in the
matter that I judged myself (that is, my mind, which for the moment
I take to be identical with my self ) to inhabit. And so there can be no
diﬃculty here about them; but we must necessarily conclude that,
from the bare fact that I exist, and that in me there is an idea of a
supremely perfect being, that is, God, it is proved beyond question
that God also exists.
It remains for me only to examine in what manner I received this
idea from God. For I did not derive it from the senses, nor did it
ever thrust itself spontaneously on my attention, as do the ideas of
sensible things, when the things themselves make an impression on

Third Meditation

37

the external sense-organs (or appear to do so). Nor is it a ﬁction,
a creation of my own, for I cannot subtract anything from it, or add
anything at all to it. It must therefore be that the idea is innate within
me, in the same way as the idea of myself is innate within me.
And certainly it is no wonder if God, when he created me,
inscribed this idea within me, to serve, so to speak, as the mark by
which the craftsman makes himself known in his handiwork. This
mark does not have to be something distinct from the object itself.
But, given this one basic fact that God created me, it is highly credible that I was in some way created in his image and likeness,* and
that the likeness, in which the idea of God is contained, is perceived
by me by the same faculty by which I myself am perceived by myself.
That is, when I turn the eye of my mind on myself, I do not
only understand myself to be an entity that is incomplete and that
depends on another, and that is endowed with an indeﬁnite aspiration to greater and greater or better things; but at the same time
I understand that the being on whom I depend possesses all these
greater things not only indeﬁnitely and in potentiality but in actuality and inﬁnitely, and is thus God. The whole force of the argument
comes down to this, that I recognize that it cannot be that I should
exist, with the nature I possess (that is, having the idea of God within
myself), unless in reality God also exists—the same God whose idea
is within me, that is, the one who possesses all the perfections that
I cannot comprehend but can to some extent apprehend in my thinking, and who is subject to no kind of deﬁciency. From this it is
suﬃciently clear that he cannot be a deceiver: for all cunning and
deception presuppose some shortcoming, as is plain by the natural
light.
But before I go more thoroughly into this, and at the same time
investigate the other truths that can be deduced from it, I wish to
remain here for some time in the contemplation of God himself,
to ponder on his attributes, and to gaze on, wonder at, and worship
the beauty of this immense light, as much as the eye of my understanding, shrouded as it is in darkness, is capable of doing. For, just
as we believe by faith that the supreme happiness of the other life
consists purely in the contemplation of the divine greatness, so
we ﬁnd also by experience that this contemplation, though far less
perfect, aﬀords us the greatest pleasure of which we are capable in
this life.

52

FOURTH MEDITATION
of truth and falsity
53

54

Over these last few days I have grown so accustomed to withdrawing
my mind from the senses, and have so thoroughly grasped that true
perceptions of bodily things are very rare, but that more can be
known [cognosci] about the human mind, and still more about God,
that I can now direct my thought without any diﬃculty away from
things that can be imagined and towards those that are purely intelligible, and detached from all matter. And certainly the idea I have of
the human mind, in so far as it is a thinking thing, not extended in
length, breadth, and depth, or having any other bodily properties, is
much more distinct than the idea of any bodily thing. And when
I consider that I doubt, or that I am an incomplete and dependent
thing, so clear and distinct an idea of an independent and complete
being (that is, God) comes to my mind, and from this single fact that
such an idea is in me, or that I exist possessing this idea, I so manifestly conclude that God also exists, and that all my existence, from
one moment to the next, depends on him, that I can conﬁdently
assert that nothing can be more evidently or certainly discovered
[cognosci] by human intelligence. And now I seem to glimpse a path
by which, from this contemplation of the true God, in whom indeed
all the treasures of the sciences and wisdom lie hidden, we can pass
to the knowledge of other things.
First of all, I recognize that it cannot happen that he should ever
deceive me; for in all deceit and trickery some element of imperfection is to be found; and although to be able to deceive seems to be some
indication of intelligence or power, nonetheless to wish to deceive is
beyond doubt a proof of malice or feeble-mindedness, to which God
cannot be liable.
Besides, I know by experience that there is within me a faculty of
judging, which I certainly received from God, along with everything
else that is in me; and since he does not wish to deceive me, this
God-given faculty must be such that I shall never go astray, as long
as I use it correctly.
It would seem that there is no room left for doubt on this matter,
except that it would apparently follow from what has just been said,

Fourth Meditation

39

that I can therefore never be mistaken at all. For if whatever is in me,
I have from God, and if he has not given me any faculty of making
mistakes, it seems I can never be mistaken. And indeed, as long as
I am thinking only of God, and directing my attention wholly to him,
I cannot detect any cause of error or falsity; but when presently I turn
back to myself, I ﬁnd by experience that I am, on the contrary,
subject to innumerable errors. When I investigate the cause of
these, I observe that, besides the real and positive idea of God, or the
supremely perfect being, there is also, so to speak, a certain negative
idea of nothingness, or of that which is inﬁnitely remote from all perfections, that presents itself to me; and I see also that I am so constituted as a medium term between God and nothingness, or between
the supreme being and non-being, that, in so far as I was created by
the supreme being, there is indeed nothing within me by which I can
be deceived or led into error; but that, in so far as I have, in a way, a
share of nothingness or non-being (in so far, in other words, as I am
not myself the supreme being), and very many things are lacking to
me, it does not seem so strange that I should be deceived. And thus
I can understand, quite certainly, that error, in so far as it is error,
is not something real dependent on God, but purely and simply a
deﬁciency; and therefore that, in order to make mistakes I do not
need a special mistake-making faculty given me by God for this
purpose, but that it happens that I make mistakes, for the reason that
the faculty of judging the truth, which he did give me, is not inﬁnite
in me.
And yet this does not satisfy me completely. For error is not a pure
negation but a privation,* a lack of some knowledge [cognitio] that
ought to be in me in some way; and when I consider God’s nature, it
does not seem possible that he should have endowed me with some
faculty that is not perfect of its kind, or that is deprived of some
perfection due to it. For if, the more skilful the craftsman, the more
perfect the works he produces, what can have been produced by this
supreme creator of everything that is not perfect in all its components? Nor is there any doubt that God could have created me
incapable of being deceived; besides, there is no doubt that he wishes
always what is best—but could it be better for me to be deceived
than not?
When I go into this more closely, it ﬁrst occurs to me that I should
not be surprised if God does some things the reasons for which I do

55

40

56

Fourth Meditation

not understand. Nor would there be any reason to doubt his existence
if perhaps I discovered other things of which I cannot understand
how or why he produced them. For since I already know [sciam] that
my nature is very weak and limited, while on the other hand God’s
is immense, incomprehensible, and inﬁnite, it follows that I know
[scio] quite clearly that he can do innumerable things of the causes of
which I am ignorant; and for this reason alone, I judge that the whole
category of causes that people are in the habit of seeking by considering the purposes of things* is of no use in the study of physics; for
I think that it could only be rash of me to investigate God’s purposes.
My next reﬂection is that we should not look at any one single
creature in isolation, but at the whole universe of things, whenever
we are inquiring whether God’s works are perfect. For what would
perhaps appear (and not without reason) very imperfect if it were
taken in isolation, is completely perfect if considered as a part of the
universe; and although, since I have decided to doubt everything,
I have not yet discovered [cognovi] for certain whether anything else
exists besides God and myself, I cannot however deny, since I have
become aware of the immense power of God, that many other things
have been created by him, or at least could be created by him, in
which case I too would exist as a part of the universe.
Finally, coming closer to myself and investigating the nature of
my errors (which are suﬃcient proof by themselves that there is
some imperfection in me), I realize that they depend on two simultaneously operative causes, namely, the faculty I possess of acquiring
knowledge [cognoscendi] and the faculty of choosing, or free will; that
is, they depend on the intellect and the will simultaneously. For
through the intellect alone I only perceive ideas on which I can pass
judgement, nor can any error in the strict sense be found in it when
considered from this precise viewpoint. For although, perhaps, there
are innumerable things in existence of which the ideas are not in me,
I cannot be said, strictly speaking, to be deprived of these ideas, but
only, in a negative sense, to be without them; since, certainly, I can
adduce no reason to prove that God should have given me a greater
faculty of acquiring knowledge [cognoscendi] than the one he has
given me; and although I understand him to be the most skilful
craftsman possible, I do not therefore think that he should have
endowed each individual piece of his handiwork with all the perfections with which he may endow some. Nor indeed can I complain

Fourth Meditation

41

that I have received from him an insuﬃciently wide-ranging and
perfect will, or freedom of choice; for I experience it as unbounded
by any limits. And it seems to me particularly important to note that
there is no other property in me, apart from this one, that is so
perfect or so great that I cannot understand how it could be more
perfect or greater. For if, for example, I consider the faculty of
understanding, I immediately recognize that in me it is very small
and seriously limited; and at the same time I form the idea of another
faculty that is far greater, one indeed that is supremely great and
inﬁnite, and, from the very fact that I can form the idea of it, I perceive that it belongs to the nature of God. By the same token, if
I examine the faculty of remembering or imagining, or any other,
I realize they are all very inadequate and restricted in me, but that in
God they are boundless. It is only the will, or freedom of choice, that
I experience in myself as so great that I can form the idea of none
greater; so much so that it is chieﬂy on account of the will that
I understand that I bear a certain image and likeness of God. For
although the will is incomparably greater in God than in me, ﬁrst, in
virtue of the knowledge and power that are combined with it in him,
and that make it stronger and more eﬀective, and secondly, in virtue
of its object, since its range is far greater, nonetheless, when it is considered strictly as it is essentially in itself, it does not seem to be
greater in him than in me. This is because it consists purely in our
ability to do or not to do a given thing (that is, to aﬃrm or deny
something, pursue something or avoid it); or rather, it consists
purely in this: that we are moved in relation to that which the intellect presents to us as to be aﬃrmed or denied, pursued or avoided, in
such a way that we feel we are not being determined in that direction
by any external force.* For, in order to be free, I do not have to
be able to be moved in either direction.* On the contrary, the more
I incline to one alternative, whether because I clearly understand that
the good and the true are on that side, or because God so disposes my
innermost thoughts,* the more freely I choose it. Certainly, neither
divine grace nor natural knowledge [cognitio] ever diminishes freedom; on the contrary, they increase and reinforce it. On the other
hand, the indiﬀerence I experience, when no reason impels me
towards one alternative rather than the other, is the lowest degree of
freedom, and is not a mark of perfection but only of a shortfall in my
knowledge, or a certain negation;* for if I always clearly saw what is

57

58

42

59

Fourth Meditation

true and good, I would never need to deliberate about a judgement
to be made or a course of action to be chosen; and in that case,
although I would be fully free, I could never be indiﬀerent.
From all this, I perceive that the cause of my errors is neither the
God-given power of willing, considered in itself, for it is extremely
extensive and perfect of its kind; nor the power of understanding, for
whatever I understand, since my understanding is a gift of God,
most certainly I understand it correctly, nor is there any possibility
of my being deceived in this. So what is the origin of my errors? It
can only be this: that, since the range of the will is greater than that
of the intellect, I do not conﬁne it within the same limits, but extend
it even to matters I do not understand;* and since it is indiﬀerent to
these, it easily falls away from the true and the good, and this is both
how I come to be deceived and how I come to sin.*
For example, when I was examining, over these last few days,
whether anything existed in the world, and realized that, from the
very fact that I was examining this point, it clearly followed that
I existed, I could not indeed refrain from judging that what I so
clearly understood was true. It was not that I was compelled to this
by some external force, but that a great illumination of the intellect
was followed by a great inclination of the will; and in this way my
belief was all the freer and more spontaneous for my being less
indiﬀerent. But now, however, I not only know that I, in so far as
I am a thinking thing, exist: a certain idea of bodily nature also presents itself to me, as a result of which I doubt whether the thinking
nature that is within me, or rather that I myself am,* is distinct from
this bodily nature, or whether they are both one and the same. (I am
supposing here that no reason has yet occurred to my intellect to
convince me in favour of one view or the other.) And from this fact
alone, I am certainly indiﬀerent as regards aﬃrming or denying one
view or the other, and indeed as regards making no judgement at all
about the matter.
But indeed, this indiﬀerence does not extend only to those matters
about which the intellect has no knowledge at all, but also to all
things in general that are not suﬃciently clearly known by the intellect at the time when the will is deliberating about them. For however strongly probable conjectures may draw me to one alternative,
the mere fact of knowing that they are only conjectures, and not
certain and indubitable reasons, is suﬃcient to impel me to assent to

Fourth Meditation

43

the contrary view. This has been fully borne out in my own experience during these last few days, when, considering all the beliefs
I had once very ﬁrmly held as true, I decided, simply because I had
realized that it was possible to doubt them in some respect, to suppose them to be altogether false.
Now, if indeed, whenever I do not suﬃciently clearly and distinctly perceive where the truth lies, I refrain from passing judgement, it is clear that I am acting rightly and not being deceived. But
if I either aﬃrm or deny, then I am not making the right use of my
freedom of choice; and if I adopt the view that is false, I shall be altogether deceived. Yet if I adopt the other view, although it happens to
be the true one, I shall still be at fault, because it is manifest by the
natural light that a decision on the part of the will should always be
preceded by a perception on the part of the intellect. The privation
in which the essence of error consists lies in this wrong use of free
choice. The privation, that is, lies in the operation itself, in so far as
it derives from me, but not in the faculty given to me by God, or in
the operation in so far as that depends on him.*
Nor do I have any grounds for complaining that God has not given
me a more powerful intellectual capacity, or a greater natural light,
than he actually has, since it is of the essence of a ﬁnite intellect that
it is unable to understand many things, and to be ﬁnite is of the
essence of a created intellect. Rather, I should be grateful to him,
who has never owed me anything, for what he has bestowed on me.
But I have no cause to think that I have been deprived by him of
those things he has not given me, or that he has robbed me of them.
I have no more reason to complain at his giving me a will that
is more wide-ranging than my understanding; for since the will
consists purely in a single property that is, so to speak, indivisible,
its very nature seems to make it impossible that anything should
be taken away from it. Indeed, the more extensive it is, the more
grateful I should be to him who has given it to me.
And ﬁnally, I have no right to complain that God cooperates with
me in the production of those acts of the will, or those judgements,
in which I am deceived; for these acts are altogether true and good,
in so far as they depend on God, and it is in some ways a greater perfection in me to be able to perform them than not. For the privation
in which alone the essence of falsity and guilt consists requires no
cooperation on God’s part, since it is not a thing, nor a privation

60

61

44

62

Fourth Meditation

related to him as to its cause: it should be classed, purely and simply,
as a negation.* For it is certainly no imperfection on God’s part that
he has given me the freedom to assent or not to assent to some things
of which he has implanted no clear and distinct perception in my
intellect; but it is undoubtedly an imperfection on my part not to use
this freedom properly, and to pass judgement on things I do not
rightly understand. I see, however, that God could have easily
brought it about that, while remaining free and endowed only with
ﬁnite knowledge, I should never err: for instance, if he had implanted
in my intellect a clear and distinct perception of everything upon
which I would ever have to make up my mind; or if he had simply
engraved on my memory, so deeply that I could never forget it, the
resolution never to pass judgement about anything I do not clearly
and distinctly understand. And I can easily grasp that, in so far as
I consider myself as a totality, I would have been more perfect than
I am now, if I had been so created by God. But, for all that, I cannot
deny that in a way the universe as a whole is more perfect as a result
of the fact that some of its parts are not immune from error, while
others are, than it would have been if all its parts were entirely similar.
And I have no right to complain that the part God has given me to
play in the world is not the most prominent and perfect of all.
Besides, even though I cannot refrain from error in the ﬁrst of
the ways just mentioned, which would involve my having an
evident perception of everything about which I would ever need to
make up my mind, I can in the second way, which simply involves
my remembering that, whenever the truth of a matter is not clear,
I should abstain from passing judgement. For although I ﬁnd by
experience that there is a weakness in my nature that means that
I cannot always concentrate attentively on one and the same piece
of knowledge [cognitioni], I can nonetheless, by careful and frequently repeated meditation, ensure that I remember this maxim
whenever I need to, and thus I can acquire a certain habit of not
making mistakes.
And since the greatest and most distinctive perfection of a human
being consists in this, I think I have derived no little proﬁt from
today’s meditation, since I have tracked down the cause of error and
falsity. And indeed, this cause can be no other than I have explained.
For whenever in passing judgement I so keep my will under control
that it conﬁnes itself to items clearly and distinctly represented to it

Fifth Meditation

45

by the intellect, it certainly cannot come about that I should make a
mistake; since every clear and distinct perception is something, and
therefore cannot come from nothing, but necessarily derives from
God—God, the supremely perfect being, whose nature is incompatible with deception. It is therefore undoubtedly true. And I have
learned today not only what I should avoid in order not to be deceived,
but at the same time what I must do in order to attain truth; for I certainly shall attain it, provided I pay suﬃcient attention to everything
I perfectly understand, and keep it quite separate from everything
else that I apprehend more confusedly and obscurely. And I shall
take particular care to do this in future.

FIFTH MEDITATION

63

of the essence of material things; and again
of god, that he exists
There remain many attributes of God, and many aspects of the
nature of myself, or my mind, for me to investigate. But perhaps I
shall return to these another time, and for the moment nothing
appears more urgent (now that I have realized what to avoid and
what to do in order to attain truth) than to attempt to extricate myself
from the doubts I have fallen into during these past days, and to see
whether any certainty is possible with respect to material things.
And indeed, before investigating whether any such things exist
outside me, I should ﬁrst consider the ideas of them, in so far as these
ideas exist in my thought, and see which of them are distinct, and
which confused.
I can certainly distinctly imagine the quantity that philosophers
commonly call ‘continuous’: that is, the extension of this quantity (or
rather, of the thing to which the quantity is attributed) in length,
breadth, and depth. I can count various parts within it. To each of
these parts I ascribe various magnitudes, shapes, positions, and local
motions, and to the motions I ascribe various durations.
Not only are these things, considered in these general terms,
clearly known and grasped by me: I also, if I pay close attention, perceive innumerable particular facts involving shape, number, motion,
and suchlike—facts so plainly true, and so much in conformity with

64

46

65

Fifth Meditation

my nature, that when I ﬁrst discover them I do not seem to be learning anything new, but rather to be remembering something I knew
before, or to be noticing for the ﬁrst time something that was in me
already, although I had not previously turned the gaze of my mind in
its direction.
And what I think particularly needs to be considered here is this:
that I ﬁnd in myself innumerable ideas of certain things, that, even
if, perhaps, they do not exist anywhere outside me, cannot yet be
said to be nothing. And although, in a sense, whether I think of them
or not is up to me, yet they are not inventions of my own mind, but
they have true and immutable natures of their own. For instance,
when I imagine a triangle, even if perhaps such a ﬁgure does not
exist, and has never existed, anywhere at all outside my thought, it
nonetheless certainly has a determinate nature, or essence, or form,
that is immutable and eternal, which was not invented by me, and
does not depend on my mind. This is clear from the fact that it
is possible to demonstrate various properties of the triangle (for
instance, that its three angles are equal to two right angles, and that
the hypotenuse subtends the greatest angle, and so forth) which,
whether I like it or not, I now clearly recognize to hold good, even if
up to now I have never thought of them in any way when imagining
a triangle. And therefore these properties were not invented by me.
It would make no diﬀerence if I were to say that perhaps this
idea of a triangle has come to me from things outside myself via the
sense-organs, because, that is, I have occasionally seen bodies of a
triangular shape. For I can think up innumerable other shapes that it
is impossible to suspect ever reached me via the senses; and yet
I can demonstrate several of their properties, just as I can with the
triangle. And all of these properties are certainly true, since they are
clearly known [cognoscuntur] by me, and therefore they are something, and not a pure nothing. For it is clear that everything that is
true, is something; and I have already abundantly demonstrated that
everything I clearly know [cognosco], is true. And even if I had not
demonstrated this, the nature of my mind is such that I cannot in any
case help assenting to the things I clearly perceive, at least, for as long
as I clearly* perceive them; and I remember that even in past times,
when I was as closely attached to the objects of the senses as it is
possible to be, I always considered that truths of this kind that I
clearly recognized, concerning shapes, or numbers, or other matters

Fifth Meditation

47

belonging to arithmetic or geometry or, in general, pure and abstract
mathematics, were the most certain of all.
But now, if, from the fact alone that I can produce the idea of a
given thing from my thought, it follows that everything I clearly and
distinctly perceive to belong to the thing does in fact belong to it,
cannot I also ﬁnd here a further proof of the existence of God?
Certainly, I ﬁnd the idea of him, that is, of a supremely perfect being,
in myself, just as much as I ﬁnd the idea of any shape or number.
And I clearly and distinctly understand that eternal existence belongs
to his nature—just as clearly and distinctly as I understand that the
properties I can demonstrate of some shape or number belong in fact
to the nature of that shape or number. So that, even if not all the conclusions I have come to in my meditations over the past few days
were true, I would still have to ascribe the same degree of certainty to
the existence of God that I up to now have ascribed to mathematical
truths.
To be sure, this is not altogether evident at ﬁrst sight: it appears
to be something of a sophism. For since I am accustomed in all other
things to distinguish existence from essence, I can easily convince
myself that existence can be separated from the essence of God, and
thus that God can be thought of as not existing. But if one considers
the matter more closely, it becomes plain that existence can no more
be separated from the essence of God than we can separate from the
essence of a triangle that the sum of its three angles adds up to two
right angles, or than we can separate the idea of a mountain from the
idea of a valley.* So true is this that the thought of a God (that is,
a supremely perfect being) who lacks existence (that is, who lacks
a certain perfection) is no less contradictory than the thought of a
mountain without a valley.
However, even if I can no more think of God without existence
than I can think of a mountain without a valley, yet certainly, it does
not follow from my thinking of a mountain as having a valley that any
mountain exists in the world; similarly, from my thinking of God as
existing, it does not seem to follow that God exists. For my thought
imposes no necessity on things; and just as I am free to imagine a
winged horse, even if no horse actually does have wings, so perhaps
I can imagine the existence of a God, even though no God in fact exists.
No: this is where the sophism is lurking here. The point is not
that, from my inability to think of a mountain except with a valley, it

66

48
67

68

Fifth Meditation

follows that a mountain and a valley exist somewhere, but only that
the mountain and the valley, whether they exist or not, cannot be
separated from each other. Whereas from the fact that I cannot think
of God except as existing, it follows that existence is inseparable from
God, and therefore that he exists in reality. It is not that my thought
brings his existence about, or that it imposes any necessity on anything, but, on the contrary, that the necessity of the thing itself, namely
the existence of God, determines me to think it. Nor am I free to
think of God without existence (that is, to think of the supremely
perfect being without the supreme perfection), in the way I am free
to imagine a horse with or without wings.
Nor can it be maintained that, although it is necessary to admit
that God exists, once I have supposed him to possess all perfections,
since existence is one of these perfections, the original supposition
was not itself necessary* (just as it is not necessary for me to think
that all quadrilateral shapes can be inscribed in a circle, but, supposing I do think this, I must admit that a rhombus can be inscribed
in a circle, which, however, is patently impossible). For although it
is not necessary that I should ever ﬁnd myself thinking of God,
nonetheless, whenever I choose to think about the ﬁrst and supreme
being, and bring forth the idea of him, so to speak, from the treasury
of my mind, I must necessarily credit him with all perfections, even
if at the time I neither list them all nor consider them individually.
And this necessity is quite suﬃcient for me subsequently, when
I recognize that existence is a perfection, to conclude, quite rightly,
that the ﬁrst and supreme being exists. In the same way, it is not
necessary that I should ever imagine any triangle: but whenever I want
to consider a straight-sided shape having only three angles, I must
necessarily credit it with properties from which it can be correctly
inferred that the sum of its three angles does not exceed that of two
right angles, even if I do not at the time realize this. On the other
hand, when I am examining what shapes can be inscribed in a circle,
there is absolutely no necessity for me to think that all quadrilaterals
fall into this category: indeed, I cannot even imagine this to be true,
as long as I am intending to accept only what I clearly and distinctly
understand. Hence there is a great diﬀerence between false suppositions, such as this one, and true ideas innate within me, the ﬁrst and
most important of which is the idea of God. For indeed, I understand in many ways that this idea is not something ﬁctitious that

Fifth Meditation

49

depends on my own thinking, but the image of a true and immutable
nature: ﬁrst, because no other thing can be conceived by me to the
essence of which existence belongs, besides God himself; secondly,
because I cannot conceive of two or more such Gods, and because,
granted that one exists now, I plainly see that it is necessary both that
he should have existed for all eternity up to now, and that he will
continue to exist for an eternity in the future; and ﬁnally, because
I perceive many other properties in God of which none can be
subtracted or altered by me.
But indeed, whatever kind of proof I use, the issue always comes
down to this: that nothing convinces me fully but what I clearly and
distinctly perceive. It is true that, of the things I so perceive, although
there are several that are obvious to anyone, there are others that can
be discovered only by those who look into the matter more closely
and examine it carefully. Once, however, these latter have been discovered, they are counted as no less certain than the former. Just as,
if we are dealing with a right-angled triangle, it does not so readily
appear that that the square of the base is equal to the square of the
sides as it does that the base is subtended by its greatest angle, nonetheless, once the ﬁrst proposition has been grasped, it is as ﬁrmly
believed as the second. But as far as God is concerned, certainly, if
I were not overwhelmed by prejudices and if the images of sensible
things were not pressing in on my thoughts from all directions,
I should recognize nothing sooner and more readily than him. For
what is more obvious in itself than that the supreme being exists, that
is to say, that God, to whose essence alone existence belongs, exists?
And although careful consideration was required before I was
capable of perceiving this truth, now, however, not only am I equally
certain of it as I am of anything else that seems completely certain,
but, moreover, I also observe that the certitude of all these other
things depends on it so completely that without it nothing can ever
be perfectly known [sciri].
For although my nature is such that, as long as I perceive
something very clearly and distinctly, I cannot not believe that it is
true, nonetheless, because my nature is also such that I cannot continuously ﬁx the gaze of the mind on the same thing in order to perceive it clearly, and what often happens is that I remember judging
something to be true, then, when I am no longer concentrating on the
reasons for which I made that judgement, other reasons can be

69

50

70

71

Fifth Meditation

adduced that would easily (were I ignorant of God) shake me out of
my opinion. And thus I should never have true and certain knowledge [scientia] of anything, but only vague and shifting opinions.
Thus, for example, when I am considering the nature of a triangle, it
certainly appears utterly evident to me (being, as I am, well versed in
the principles of geometry) that its three angles are equal to two right
angles; and I cannot not believe this is true, as long as I am concentrating on the proof; but, as soon as I have turned the eye of the mind
in a diﬀerent direction, then however well I remember that I grasped
the proof very clearly, I can still easily ﬁnd myself doubting its truth,
if I am ignorant of God. For I can persuade myself that I was so made
by nature that I am sometimes deceived in matters which I think
I perceive entirely clearly, especially since I remember counting many
things as true and certain that later, when guided by other reasons,
I judged to be false.
But once I have perceived that God exists, then because I grasped
at the same time that everything else depends on him, and that he is
no deceiver, and from this deduced that everything I clearly and
distinctly perceive is necessarily true, then, even if I am no longer
concentrating on the reasons why I judged this to be true, provided
I remember that I did see it clearly and distinctly, no contrary reason
can be adduced that can induce me to doubt it; and thus I have true
and certain knowledge [scientia] of it. And not only of it, but of all the
other propositions I remember demonstrating at some stage, such as
the truths of geometry and others of the same kind. For what objections can now be raised against me? That I am so constituted as often
to be deceived? But I know now [scio] that in matters I clearly understand, I cannot be deceived. That I once counted many things as true
and certain that I later realized to be false? But I had perceived none
of these clearly and distinctly, but, unaware as I was of this criterion
of truth, perhaps I believed them for other reasons, which I later discovered to be less sound than I had thought. So what further objection can be raised? Perhaps (an objection I put to myself not long ago)
I am sleeping, or all the things I am now thinking are no more true
than the thoughts that occur to one who is asleep. But this makes no
diﬀerence. For certainly, even if I were sleeping, if something is evident to my understanding, then it is altogether true.
And so I plainly see that the certitude and truth of all
knowledge [scientiae] depends on the knowledge [cognitione] of the

Sixth Meditation

51

true God alone: so much so, that before I had discovered this knowledge, I could have no perfect knowledge [scire] of anything else at all.
But now innumerable truths, concerning both, on the one hand, God
himself and other intellectual things and, on the other, the whole of
this bodily nature which is the object of pure mathematics,* can be
plainly known to me with certainty.

SIXTH MEDITATION
of the existence of material things, and the
real distinction between mind and body
It remains for me to examine whether material things exist. And
indeed, I now know [scio] at least that, in so far as they are the object
of pure mathematics, they can exist, since I perceive them clearly and
distinctly. For there is no doubt that God is capable of producing
everything I am capable of perceiving in this way; and I have never
judged that anything was impossible for him to do, except when, in
attempting to perceive it distinctly, I ran up against a contradiction.
Besides, it seems to follow from the existence of the imaginative
faculty, of which I experience myself as making use when dealing
with these material things, that they exist. For if I consider more
closely what kind of thing the imagination is, it appears to be nothing other than a certain application of the knowing faculty to a body
intimately present to that faculty, and therefore existing.
To make this plain, I shall ﬁrst examine the diﬀerence that
exists between imagination and pure intellection. For example, when
I imagine a triangle, not only do I understand it to be a shape
enclosed by three lines, but at the same time, with the eye of the
mind, I contemplate the three lines as present, and this is what I call
imagining. But if, on the other hand, I wish to think of a chiliogon,
I do indeed understand that this is a shape consisting of a thousand
sides, no less clearly than I understand that the triangle consists of
three: but I do not imagine the thousand sides in the same way, that
is, contemplate them as present. And although at the time, because
I am accustomed always to imagine something whenever I am thinking of bodily things, I may perhaps picture some ﬁgure to myself
in a confused fashion, it is quite clear that this is not a chiliogon,

72

52

73

74

Sixth Meditation

because it is not at all diﬀerent from the picture I would also form
in my mind if I were thinking about a myriogon,* or some other
many-sided ﬁgure. Nor is it of any assistance in recognizing the
properties by which the chiliogon diﬀers from other polygons. But if
I am dealing with a pentagon, I can certainly understand its shape,
like that of the chiliogon, without the help of the imagination: but
I can also imagine it, that is, by applying the eye of the mind to its
ﬁve sides, and at the same time to the area contained within them;
and here I observe very plainly that I need to make a particular
mental eﬀort in order to imagine, that I do not make when understanding. This further eﬀort of the mind clearly indicates the
diﬀerence between imagination and pure intellection.
At this point, I consider that this power of imagining I possess, in
so far as it diﬀers from the power of understanding, is not integral to
my essence, that is, to the essence of my mind; for even if I lacked it,
I should nonetheless certainly remain the same person as I now am.
From this it seems to follow that the imagination depends on something distinct from me.* And I can easily understand that if some
body exists to which the mind is so closely joined that it may, whenever it chooses, apply itself, so to speak, to looking into it, it could
be the case that this is exactly how I imagine corporeal things. So that
this mode of thinking would diﬀer from pure intellection in the
following respect alone: that the mind, while it understands, turns
itself in some way towards itself, and gazes on one of the ideas that
are contained within itself; but, while it imagines, it turns itself
towards the body, and considers something in it that corresponds
either to an idea it understands itself * or to an idea perceived by
the senses. I can readily understand, I say, how the imagination
may function in this way, provided, that is, the body exists. And
because no other equally convenient way of explaining it occurs to
me, I therefore conclude with great probability that the body exists.
But this is only a probability, and although I am investigating the
whole matter with great care, I do not yet see that, from this distinct
idea of bodily nature that I ﬁnd in my imagination, any argument can
be derived that will lead necessarily to the conclusion that some body
exists.
But I am accustomed to imagining many other things, besides this
bodily nature that is the object of pure mathematics,* such as colours,
sounds, pain, and suchlike: but none of these with equal distinctness.

Sixth Meditation

53

And because I perceive these things better by the senses, from which
they seem to have made their way, with the help of memory, to the
imagination, in order to examine them more conveniently, I should
examine sensation at the same time, and see whether, from those
things that are perceived by the form of thinking I call ‘sensation’,
I can derive some decisive argument in favour of the existence of
bodily things.
And ﬁrst of all, I will here go over in my memory what those
things were that I previously thought were true, because they were
perceived by the senses, and the reasons I had for thinking this. Then
I shall weigh the reasons for which I later called these things into
question. Finally, I shall consider what view I should now take.
First of all, then, I had the sensation of having a head, hands, feet,
and all the other parts comprising this body I used to consider as part
of myself, or perhaps even as the whole of myself. Then I had the sensation of this body as situated among many other bodies by which it
could be aﬀected—harmed or beneﬁted: and I measured the beneﬁts
by a certain feeling of pleasure and the harm by a feeling of pain. And
besides pain and pleasure, I also had the sensation of hunger, thirst,
and other such appetites in myself, not to mention various bodily
propensities, to joy, to sadness, to anger, and other such passions.
Outside myself, besides the extension, shapes, and motions of bodies,
I had sensations of hardness, heat, and other tactile qualities in them;
light, as well, and colours, and smells, and tastes, and sounds, the
variety of which enabled me to distinguish the sky, the earth, the sea,
and other bodies one from another. And surely it was not without
reason that, on account of the ideas of all these qualities that presented
themselves to my thought, and of which alone I had personal and
immediate sensations, I believed I was sensing certain things quite
distinct from my thought, that is to say, bodies from which these ideas
proceeded. For I experienced these ideas as coming to me without any
consent of mine: so much so, that neither could I have a sensation of
any object, however much I wanted to, unless the object itself were
present to a sense-organ, nor could I help having the sensation of it
when it was present. And since the ideas perceived by the senses were
much more vivid and emphatic,* and in their own way more distinct,
than any of the ideas that I deliberately and knowingly formed* by
myself in my meditations, or that I found engraved upon my memory,
it seemed impossible that they should proceed from myself.* And so

75

54

76

77

Sixth Meditation

it had to be the case that they derived from some other things. But
since I had no knowledge of these other things except from these ideas
themselves, I could only suppose that the things were like the ideas.
And also because I remembered that I had made use of my senses
before I made use of my reason, and saw, as well, that the ideas I formed
myself were not as emphatic as those I perceived by the senses, and
were mostly put together from those ideas, I readily convinced myself
that I had nothing at all in the intellect, that I had not previously had
in the senses.* Nor was it without reason that I judged that the particular body I seemed specially entitled to call my own belonged more
closely to me than any other body. For I could not ever be separated
from it, as I could from the other bodies; I felt all my appetites and
passions in it and for it; and ﬁnally I was aware of pain and pleasure
in parts of it, but not in any other body existing outside it. But why
this mysterious feeling of pain is followed by a feeling of sadness in
the soul, and why the awareness of pleasure is followed by joy, or why
the mysterious pangs in the stomach I call hunger prompt me to take
food, while a dryness in the throat prompts me to drink, and so on,
I certainly could not explain except by saying that nature teaches me
that it is so. For there is plainly no aﬃnity (at least, none that I understand) between the pangs in the stomach and the will to eat, or
between the sensation of a thing that is causing pain and a thought of
sadness arising from this feeling. And all the other things I judged
concerning the objects of the senses, I thought I had also learned from
nature. For I had persuaded myself that this was the way things were
before I had considered any reasons by which this could be proved.
But afterwards many experiences gradually undermined all the
faith I had placed in the senses. For sometimes towers that from a
distance had seemed round appeared from close up as square;* and
giant statues perched on the top of those towers did not look particularly large to one gazing up from below; and by innumerable other
such experiences I came to realize that in matters of the external
senses our judgements are at fault. Not only the internal senses,
moreover; the internal ones as well. For what can be more intimate
than pain? Yet I had often heard from people whose arm or leg had
been amputated, that they still occasionally seemed to feel pain in the
part of the body they were missing; and therefore even in myself it
did not seem to be wholly certain that one of my limbs was hurting,
even though I was feeling pain in it. To these points I recently added

Sixth Meditation

55

two very general reasons for doubting. The ﬁrst was that everything
I have ever believed I was having a sensation of while awake, I can
sometimes think I am having a sensation of while asleep; and since
I do not believe that what I seem to see when asleep comes from anything existing outside me, I could not see any reason why I should
believe this of the sensations I seem to have when awake. The second
reason was that, since I was still ignorant of the author of my existence (or at least was pretending to be so),* I could see no reason why
I could not be so constituted by nature as to be deceived, even in
things that appeared to me entirely true. And as for the reasons by
which I had previously convinced myself of the truth of sensible
things, I could answer them without diﬃculty. For since I saw that
I was impelled by nature to many things from which reason dissuaded me, I thought I should not place much faith in the teachings
of nature. And although sense-perceptions do not depend on my
will, I thought that I should not therefore conclude that they derived
from things distinct from myself, because perhaps there might be some
faculty within me, although yet unknown to me, that produces them.
Now, however, that I begin to know myself and the author of my
existence rather better, although I do not think that all that the senses
seem to teach me is to be rashly accepted, I do not think that it
should all be called in doubt.
First, since I know that whatever I clearly and distinctly understand can be produced by God such as I understand it to be, then if
I can clearly and distinctly understand one thing without another,
this is suﬃcient for me to be certain that the one is distinct from the
other, since they can at least be produced separately by God. By what
power this separation comes about makes no diﬀerence to the judgement that the things are distinct. Next, from the very fact that I know
[sciam] I exist, and that for the moment I am aware of nothing else at
all as belonging to my nature or essence, apart from the single fact
that I am a thinking thing, I rightly conclude that my essence consists in this alone, that I am a thinking thing. And although perhaps
(or rather certainly, as I shall shortly claim) I have a body, which is
very closely conjoined to me, yet because, on the one hand, I have a
clear and distinct idea of myself, in so far as I am a thinking and not
an extended thing, and, on the other, a distinct idea of the body, in
so far as it is only an extended and not a thinking thing, it is certain
that I am really distinct from my body,* and can exist without it.

78

56

79

80

Sixth Meditation

Moreover, I ﬁnd in myself faculties of thinking in various speciﬁc
ways—namely, the faculties of imagination and sensation—without
which I can understand myself clearly and distinctly as a whole. But
the converse is not true—I cannot understand them apart from an
intelligent substance in which they inhere (for they contain a certain
degree of intellection in their formal concept).* Hence I perceive that
they are to be distinguished from me as modes are from a thing.*
I also recognize various other faculties, such as those of changing
place, and assuming various postures, that cannot be understood
(any more than those just mentioned) without some substance in
which to inhere, and that therefore cannot exist without it. But it is
plain that, if indeed these exist, they must inhere in a bodily or
extended substance—but not, however, an intelligent one; for the
clear and distinct concept of them includes some measure of extension, but does not at all include intellection. Moreover, there is in
me a certain passive faculty of sensation, that is, of receiving and
knowing [cognoscendi] ideas of sensible things. But I could make no
use of it at all, if there did not exist, either in me or in another being,
some active faculty of producing or generating these ideas. Now this
faculty cannot, certainly, exist in myself,* because it presupposes no
intellection at all, and because these ideas are produced not only
without my cooperation but often even against my will.* It therefore
follows that it must exist in some substance distinct from me, which
substance must contain, either formally or eminently, all the reality
that exists objectively in the ideas produced by the faculty (as I have
already pointed out above).* This substance is either a body, or a
bodily nature, that formally contains all that is contained objectively
in the ideas; or else it has to be God, or some other creature nobler
than a body, in which this is contained eminently. But because God
is no deceiver, it is altogether plain that he does not transmit these
ideas to me immediately, or by the intermediary of some creature, in
whom their objective reality is contained not formally but only eminently. For since he has certainly given me no faculty by which
I might realize this to be true, but has, on the contrary, endowed me
with a strong propensity to believe that these ideas are conveyed
by bodily things, I cannot see how, if they were in fact from some
other source, it would be possible to think of him except as a
deceiver. And therefore bodily things exist. Perhaps, however, they
do not all exist exactly as I apprehend them by the senses, since this

Sixth Meditation

57

sensory apprehension is very obscure and confused in many respects.
But at least all those properties are in them that I clearly and distinctly understand: that is, all those, generally considered, that are
included in the object of pure mathematics.*
As to the remaining properties that are either purely particular
(for instance, the sun’s being of a certain magnitude or shape) or less
clearly understood (for instance, light, sound, pain, and suchlike),
although they are very doubtful and uncertain, yet this basic fact,
that God is no deceiver, and that therefore it cannot be the case that
any falsity should be found in my opinions, unless there is also some
God-given faculty in me for correcting it, oﬀers me a ﬁrm hope of
discovering the truth with respect to them as well. And certainly,
there is no doubt that everything I am taught by nature contains
some element of truth: for by nature, in a general sense, I now mean
nothing other than either God himself, or the system of created
things established by God; and by my own nature in particular,
I mean nothing other than the combination of all the properties
bestowed on me by God.
Now there is nothing I am more emphatically taught by this
nature of mine than that I have a body, with which there is something wrong when I feel pain, which needs food or drink, when
I experience hunger or thirst, and so on and so forth. Hence I cannot
doubt that there is some truth in all this.
Nature likewise teaches me, through these very feelings of pain,
hunger, thirst, and so forth, that I am not present in my body only as
a pilot is present in a ship,* but that I am very closely conjoined to it
and, so to speak, fused with it, so as to form a single entity with it.
For otherwise, when the body is injured, I, who am nothing other
than a thinking thing, would not feel pain as a result, but would perceive the injury purely intellectually, as the pilot perceives by sight
any damage occurring to his ship; and when the body lacks food or
drink, I would understand this explicitly, instead of having confused
feelings of hunger and thirst. For certainly, these feelings of thirst,
hunger, pain, and so forth are nothing other than certain confused
modes of thinking, arising from the union and, so to speak, fusion of
the mind with the body.
Besides, I am further taught by nature that various other bodies
exist around mine: of these, some are to be pursued by me, others
avoided. And certainly, from the fact that I perceive very diﬀerent

81

58

82

83

Sixth Meditation

colours, sounds, smells, tastes, degrees of heat, of hardness, and suchlike, I can validly conclude that in the bodies from which these varied
sensory perceptions arise there are variations that correspond to
them, even if, perhaps, they do not resemble them. And from the fact
that some of these perceptions are pleasing to me, others displeasing,
it is quite certain that my body, or rather myself as a whole, in so far
as I am composed of a body and a mind, can be beneﬁted or harmed
by the surrounding bodies.
But there are many other beliefs that, although I seem to be taught
them by nature, I have in fact derived not from nature itself, but
from a certain habit of judging without due consideration, and so
these can easily turn out to be false. For instance, that every space in
which nothing at all is happening that has an impact on my senses is
a vacuum;* or that in a body that is hot, say, there is something altogether similar to the idea of heat in me; that in a white or green body,
there is the same whiteness or greenness of which I have the sensation, in one that is bitter or sweet the same taste, and so on and so
forth;* that stars and towers and whatever other distant bodies one
can think of are only of the same size and shape as they appear to be
to my senses, and so on. But there is a risk I may fail to perceive this
matter suﬃciently clearly if I do not ﬁrst deﬁne more precisely what
exactly I mean when I say that I am taught something by nature.
Here I am taking ‘nature’ in a more restricted sense than when I use
the term to denote the combination of all the properties bestowed on
me by God. For in this combination there are many things that
belong to the mind alone, such as my perception that what has happened cannot not have happened, and all the other things that I know
by the natural light. These are not my concern here. There are also
many that relate to the body alone, as that it has a tendency to fall
downwards,* and suchlike. But I am not here concerned with these
either, only with those things bestowed by God on me, as a composite of mind and body. Now nature in this sense teaches us to avoid
those things that cause a sensation of pain, and pursue those that produce a sensation of pleasure, and so forth. But it does not appear that
nature teaches us anything else that would enable us to reach any
conclusion, on the basis of these sensory perceptions, about things
existing outside ourselves, without a prior examination by the intellect; because it seems that a true knowledge [scire] of these belongs
to the mind alone, but not to the composite entity. Thus, although a

Sixth Meditation

59

star aﬀects my eye no more than the gleam of a small torch, there is
no real or positive inclination here to believe that the star is no bigger
than the torch:* but I formed this belief in childhood without any
reason to support it. And although when I come close to the ﬁre I feel
heat, and in fact I feel pain when I come too close to it, there is certainly no reason that should persuade me that there is something in
the ﬁre like the heat, any more than there is something in it like the
pain—only that there is something in the ﬁre, whatever in fact it is,
that produces these feelings of heat or pain. Again, although in a
given space there may be nothing that aﬀects the senses, it does not
therefore follow that there is no body in it. But I see that in these, and
in very many other things, I have grown accustomed to perverting
the order of nature, because I use sensory perceptions, which were
speciﬁcally given by nature for signifying to the mind* what things
are beneﬁcial or harmful to the composite of which the mind is
part—for which purpose they are suﬃciently clear and distinct—as
if they were reliable criteria for immediately discerning the essence
of bodies existing outside us. Of this, however, they signify nothing,
except in very obscure and confused fashion.
But I have already suﬃciently examined how it can come to pass
that, notwithstanding the goodness of God, my judgements are false.
A further diﬃculty, however, arises here concerning these very
things that are represented to me by nature as to be pursued or
avoided, and concerning also the internal senses in which I seem to
have discovered errors: as when someone, tricked by the pleasant
taste of some food, absorbs a poison concealed in it. But in this case
he is prompted by nature to desire only the source of the pleasant
taste, not the poison of which he knows nothing. And nothing more
is to be inferred from this than that this nature is not omniscient;
which is not surprising, since, man being a limited creature, the only
nature he can be endowed with is one of limited perfection.
But yet we do quite frequently go astray even in things to which we
are impelled by nature: as when sick people desire drink or food that
will shortly do them harm. Someone might say here that they are led
astray only because their nature has been corrupted:* but this does
not remove the diﬃculty, because in truth, a sick human being is just
as much a creature of God as a healthy one. And so it seems just as
contrary to the goodness of God that his nature should be deceptive.
Now a clock, an assembly of wheels and weights, obeys all the laws of

84

60

85

Sixth Meditation

nature just as strictly when it has been badly manufactured and does
not tell the time accurately as when it fulﬁls the clockmaker’s wishes
in every respect. And I can likewise consider the body of a human
being as a kind of machine made up of bones, nerves, muscles, veins,
blood, and skin so ﬁtted together that, even if there were no mind
within it, it would still have all the movements it currently has that do
not result from the command of the will (and hence the mind). I can
easily see that it would be natural, if, for example, the body were
suﬀering from dropsy, for it to experience the dryness of the throat
that usually communicates the sensation of thirst to the mind, so that,
as a result, its nerves and other parts would be so disposed that it
would have something to drink, thus making the disease worse; just
as natural as it would be for a perfectly healthy body to be prompted
by a similar dryness in the throat to take a drink that would do it good.
And although, if we take into account the intended function of the
clock, we can say that, when it fails to indicate the time correctly, it
has fallen away from its nature; and likewise, if we consider the
machine of the human body as designed so as to enable the movements that usually take place in it, I may think that it has gone astray
from its own nature if its throat is dry at a time when drink will not
conduce to its preservation, yet I can see perfectly clearly that this
latter meaning of ‘nature’ is quite diﬀerent from the former. For the
latter meaning is nothing more than a denomination* dependent on
my thinking, when I compare a sick human being and a badly made
clock with my idea of a healthy human being and a well-made clock,
and it tells us nothing about the actual things in question; whereas by
the former I mean something that is actually found in the things
themselves, and therefore contains a degree of truth.
But certainly, even though, when considering the body suﬀering
from dropsy, to speak of its nature being corrupted, on the grounds
that its throat is dry and yet it does not need to drink, is merely an
extrinsic denomination; yet if we consider the composite entity, that
is, the mind as united to a body in this state (thirsty when drink
would be harmful to it), this is not a pure denomination, but a genuine error of nature.* And so the question refuses to go away, how it
is that the goodness of God does not prevent nature in this precise
sense from being deceptive.
Now, ﬁrst of all, I observe here that there is a great diﬀerence
between the mind and the body, in this respect, that the body of its

Sixth Meditation

61

nature is endlessly divisible, but the mind completely indivisible: for
certainly, when I consider the mind, or myself in so far as I am purely
a thinking thing, I can distinguish no parts in myself but understand
myself to be a thing that is entirely one and complete. And although
the whole mind appears to be united with the whole body, if the foot
is cut oﬀ, or the arm, or any other part of the body, I know [cognosco]
that nothing is therefore subtracted from the mind. Nor can the faculties of willing, perceiving by the senses, understanding, and so
forth be said to be parts of the mind, since it is one and the same
mind that wills, that senses, and that understands. On the other
hand, however, no bodily or extended thing can be thought by me
that I cannot mentally divide into parts, without any diﬃculty; and
I therefore understand it is divisible. This point alone would suﬃce
to show me that the mind is altogether distinct from the body, if I did
not yet suﬃciently know [scirem] this for other reasons.
Next, I observe that the mind is not aﬀected immediately by all the
parts of the body, but only by the brain, or perhaps only by one very
small part of the brain, namely that in which the ‘common sense’ is
said to reside.* Whenever this part is aﬀected in the same way, it represents the same thing to the mind, even if the other parts of the body
happen to be diﬀerently aﬀected at the same time. This is proved by
innumerable observations* [experimenta] that there is no need to go
into here.
Moreover, I observe that it is of the nature of a body that none of
its parts can be moved by another part somewhat distant from it,
without its being able to be moved in the same way by any of the
parts that lie between them, even when the more distant part is not
involved in the movement. For instance, take a piece of string, with
points A, B, C, and D. If the last part, D, is pulled, the ﬁrst part, A,
will be moved in exactly the same way as it would be moved if one of
the intermediate points, B or C, were pulled, while the ﬁnal point, D,
remained immobile. By the same token, when I feel a pain in the foot,
physics* teaches me that this sensation is produced by means of the
nerves dispersed through the foot, which, since they extend upwards
like strings as far as the brain, when plucked in the foot also pluck the
inmost parts of the brain in which they terminate, thus stimulating a
particular motion in these parts of the brain, which is so ordained by
nature that it aﬀects the mind with a feeling of pain apparently
located in the foot. But because these nerves have to pass up the leg,

86

87

62

88

Sixth Meditation

the thigh, the loins, the back, and the neck in order to connect the
foot and the brain, it can come about that, even if the part of the
nerve that is in the foot is not aﬀected, but only one of the intermediate parts, exactly the same movement will take place in the brain
as takes place when the foot is injured, so that the mind will necessarily experience the same pain. And the same must apply to all our
other sensations.
Finally, I observe that, since each one of the motions that take
place in the part of the brain that directly aﬀects the mind produces
only one sensation in the mind, no better explanation of this can be
conceived than that the particular movement produces, of all the
possible sensations it could produce, the sensation that most
eﬀectively and most frequently conduces to the preservation of the
human being in good health. And experience bears witness that this
applies to all the sensations with which nature has endowed us, and
that therefore nothing at all can be found in them that does not bear
witness to God’s immense power and goodness. Thus, for instance,
when the nerves in the foot are violently and unusually stimulated,
their movement, transmitted through the spinal cord to the inner
parts of the brain, there gives a signal to the mind to experience a certain sensation, namely a pain experienced as being in the foot. By this
the mind is stimulated to do its best to remove the cause of the pain,
as being damaging to the foot. To be sure, the nature of man could
have been so established by God that this same motion in the brain
could have represented something diﬀerent to the mind: it could
have represented itself, in so far as it takes place in the brain, or in so
far as it takes place in the foot, or in any of the places in between, or
it could have represented something else altogether;* but nothing
else would have been so conducive to the body’s preservation. In the
same way, when we need to drink, a certain dryness originates in
the throat, setting in motion the nerves there, and by their means the
inner parts of the brain; and this motion aﬀects the mind with the sensation of thirst, because in this situation there is nothing more useful
to us to know than that we need a drink for the sake of preserving our
health. And the same applies with all our other sensations.
From all this, it is entirely plain that, notwithstanding God’s
immense goodness, the nature of man, as a composite of mind and
body, cannot but be liable to error at times. For if some cause not in
the foot, but in some one of the other parts through which the nerves

Sixth Meditation

63

run on their way from the foot to the brain, or indeed in the brain
itself, stimulates the very same motion as is usually stimulated by
some injury to the foot, a pain will be felt as if in the foot, and our
sense will be naturally deceived. This is because, since one and the
same movement in the brain can only produce one and the same sensation in the mind, and since it is much more usually produced by
some cause injuring the foot than by any other cause located somewhere else, it is in accordance with reason that it should always
represent to the mind a pain in the foot rather than in any other part.
And if sometimes a dryness in the throat arises, not from its usual
cause, which is that the body’s health would be beneﬁted by drinking, but from some other, contrary cause, as happens with those
suﬀering from dropsy, it is better that it should deceive us in this
latter case, than that, on the contrary, it should always deceive us
when the body is healthy. And the same applies elsewhere.
And this consideration will assist me greatly, not only to be aware
of all the errors to which my nature is liable, but also to correct or
avoid them easily. For certainly, since I know [sciam] that all our
sensations indicate the truth far more frequently than the contrary,
as far as the well-being of the body is concerned, and since in examining a particular case I can almost always draw on several of them,
as well as on my memory, which connects present with past, and on
my understanding, which has already discovered all the causes of
error, I need no longer fear that the things the senses represent to me
in ordinary life are false: on the contrary, the hyperbolic doubts of
these past days can be dismissed as ridiculous. Especially the ultimate doubts concerning sleeping, which I could not distinguish from
waking; for now I realize that there is a massive diﬀerence between
them, inasmuch as dreams are never combined by my memory with
the rest of the actions of my life, as happens with my waking experiences. For certainly if, while I was awake, someone suddenly appeared
before me, and then immediately disappeared, as happens in dreams,
in such a way, I mean, that I could not see where he was coming
from or where he was going, I would not unreasonably judge it to
be an apparition or a delusion produced by my brain, rather than a
real person. But when things happen to me in such a way that I am
distinctly aware of whence, where, and when they have come, and
I connect the perception of them to the rest of my life, without any
gaps, then I am well and truly certain that they are happening not in

89

90

64

Sixth Meditation

my sleep but when I am awake. Nor should I doubt even in the
slightest degree of their truth, if after I have summoned all the senses,
the memory, and the understanding to join in their examination,
none of these reports anything that clashes with the report of the rest.
For, from the fact that God is not a deceiver, it follows inescapably
that in such cases I am not deceived. But because the necessities of
action do not always allow us the opportunity for such a thorough
examination, we must admit that human life is subject to frequent
error in connection with particular things, and we must acknowledge
the frailties of our nature.*

THE OBJECTIONS
AND REPLIES

This page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION
The Objections and Replies1
Descartes sent the text of the Meditations to two Dutch acquaintances, Bannius and Bloemart, and they submitted the text for comment to Johann de Kater—Caterus, to give the Latin form of his
name—a Roman Catholic priest living in Alkmaar. His reply, the
First Objections, is addressed to them rather than to Descartes. His
comments bear chieﬂy on the proofs of the existence of God.
Although Caterus refers to St Thomas Aquinas, and his reactions
bear the marks of his scholastic training, Jean-Robert Armogathe
suggests that his own point of view was neither thoroughly Thomist
nor coherently independent.2 But his objections are shrewd, and
required Descartes to clarify his notion of objective reality, his conception of God as cause of himself, and the nature of the distinction
between mind and body. Both the ﬁrst and the last points are represented in the extracts: to avoid repetition, the second is held over till
the fuller discussion in the Fourth Objections and Replies, which
relates back to the text of the First Objections.
The Second Objections and Replies were collected by Mersenne.
But it has been argued by Daniel Garber3 that the mathematician and
astrologer Jean-Baptiste Morin was among the contributors, and that
Descartes’s reply was targeting a work of Morin’s, Quod Deus sit
(That God Exists). The Objectors raise some signiﬁcant points: they
cannot see how Descartes has proved that thinking is not a bodily
operation; they cast doubt on both the causal and ontological proofs of
God; query whether Descartes’s argumentation is self-undermining,
and whether all knowledge does depend on the knowledge of God.
They ask Descartes for a presentation of his argument along geometrical lines: his reply contains some interesting discussion of method,
and shows his sense of the limitations of a purely mathematical approach
to knowledge.
1 An indispensable study of the Objections and Replies is Roger Ariew and Marjorie
Grene (eds.), Descartes and His Contemporaries: Meditations, Objections and Replies
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995). I have drawn on it frequently in what follows, but mention the individual chapters only as regards particular points.
2 Jean-Robert Armogathe, ‘Caterus’ Objections to God’, in ibid. 34–43.
3 Ibid. 63–82.

68

Introduction to Objections and Replies

Thomas Hobbes (1588 –1679), author of the Third Objections
(there are no separate replies: the text gives Descartes’s reply to each
of Hobbes’s objections as it comes up), is undoubtedly the greatest
thinker among the Objectors. He was living in Paris when the
Meditations were published, since he feared being targeted by the
parliamentary opponents of the king, and got to know Mersenne. His
ﬁrst major work, De cive, appeared in the year after the Meditations.
His objections and Descartes’s replies hardly indicate a meeting of
minds, but they are philosophically interesting for Hobbes’s attempt
to substitute a materialist ontology and method for Descartes’s own
approach.
Antoine Arnauld (1612–94), who submitted the Fourth Objections, was the most remarkable member of a remarkable family,
which was closely linked to the convents of Port-Royal that were the
centre of the movement in theology and spirituality known as
Jansenism. His learning, acumen, logic, and sheer doggedness made
him the foremost defender of the version of Augustine’s theology
upheld by the ‘Jansenists’.4 But his interests were not conﬁned to
theology. He and Pierre Nicole drew up one of the classic textbooks
of logic, La Logique ou l’art de penser (1662). Later he engaged in
philosophical controversy with Malebranche, and in correspondence
with Leibniz. When Louis XIV set about extirpating the Jansenist
movement, Arnauld went into exile. The Objections show his critical engagement with Descartes, but he seems to have been satisﬁed
with Descartes’s replies, though there was a further exchange of views
in 1648. At any rate, he thereafter maintained Cartesian positions in
philosophy, albeit in a critical and independent fashion.5 At the time
of the Objections, however, he was very much an up-and-coming
scholar, preparing for the doctorate in theology, and his sympathies,
it has been argued, were with the theology of William of Ockham
rather than that of St Thomas: which may have prepared him to
accept certain Cartesian positions.6
4 Blaise Pascal (1623–62), the mathematician and scientist, was also a follower of the
Jansenist movement, and a more original thinker than Arnauld. But Arnauld’s theology
is more systematic.
5 Steven Nadler argues for the innovative and speciﬁc character of Arnauld’s
Cartesianism: Descartes and His Contemporaries, ‘Occasionalism and the Question of
Arnauld’s Cartesianism’, in Ariew and Grene, 129–44.
6 Vincent Carraud, ‘Arnauld: From Ockhamism to Cartesianism’, in ibid. 110–28.

Introduction to Objections and Replies

69

The Fifth Objections come from Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655),
who was, like Descartes, an anti-Aristotelian: but his opposition took
a very diﬀerent form, which hardly predisposed him to espouse
Descartes’s philosophy. His own philosophical interests were in
scepticism and Epicureanism, and commentators have laboured to
reconcile this with his status as an apparently conscientious Catholic
priest.7 His objections are sometimes prolix, which is why they have
been largely summarized rather than translated here, but contain some
signiﬁcant points: in particular, he can be said to anticipate Kant’s
critique of the ontological argument. As with Hobbes, the interest is
partly in the clash of opposing, and indeed irreconcilable, philosophical perspectives; and, as with Hobbes, the tone of Descartes’s replies
is often far from amicable. Gassendi pursued the debate, and Descartes
replied again (see above, p. xvii). In 1648 Descartes and Gassendi
were publicly reconciled.8
The Sixth Objections were put forward by a group of philosophers, theologians, and geometers, and collected by Mersenne. Most
of the points they raise had already been urged by others. The most
signiﬁcant relate to dualism: the real distinction between soul and
body and the denial of souls to animals. Descartes’s replies are often
of interest, especially the last section, where he describes his own
intellectual evolution.
The Seventh Objections, by the Jesuit Pierre Bourdin, are the
longest set of all. They are diﬃcult, and would be unrewarding, to
summarize in great detail. This is principally because Bourdin misunderstands Descartes more seriously than any of the other objectors, to the point where the latter accuses him of dishonesty.
Moreover, the intercutting of Bourdin’s dissertation and Descartes’s
comments makes for diﬃcult reading. (The structure is not identical
to that of the Third Objections and Replies: Hobbes is working his
way through Descartes’s actual text, and raising diﬃculties as they
come up, whereas Bourdin oﬀers a dissertation, based on his own
arrangement of Descartes’s material.) But the diﬃculty also derives
7
A thorough and judicious analysis is provided by Olivier René Bloch, La Philosophie
de Gassendi: nominalisme, matérialisme, métaphysique (The Hague: Nijhoﬀ, 1971).
Detailed analyses in relation to his Objections are given by Margaret J. Osler and
Thomas M. Lennon, in Ariew and Grene, Descartes and His Contemporaries, 145–58,
159–81.
8 Clarke, Descartes, 377.

70

Introduction to Objections and Replies

from Bourdin’s style, which is elaborately metaphorical and dialogical.
His attempts at humour are painfully laboured, and his tone is often
irritatingly smug and snide, with its aﬀectation of submission and
respect giving way to schoolmasterly diatribes addressed as if to a
cocky pupil who needs taking down a peg or two: Descartes understandably objects to it (AT 7. 526). In other ways Bourdin’s style is
rhetorically interesting, especially in the sections of dialogue, rapidﬁre exchanges of succinct utterances, systematically sustaining a set
of core metaphors: a far cry from the complex syntax and technical
vocabulary of most contemporary scholastic philosophy. Provoked by
Bourdin’s needling, and despising his philosophical critique, Descartes
responds in a far more rhetorical vein than is usual in his writings,
playing with metaphors to ridicule his opponent. Seizing on the military imagery used by Bourdin, Descartes depicts him as a sort of
rhetorical Don Quixote, battling with enemies spawned by his own
imagination.
The Objections cover only the ﬁrst two Meditations, though, to be
fair, Bourdin clearly believes that his critique of Descartes’s fundamental positions is so destructive that there is no point in discussing
the subsequent arguments based on them. But the institutional context may be relevant here. Descartes was planning, as he explains to
Dinet, head of the French branch, or ‘province’, of the Society of
Jesus, a presentation of his philosophy suitable for use in educational
establishments (this was eventually published as the Principles of
Philosophy, AT 7. 577–8). Had the Jesuits themselves adopted it as a
textbook, the success of his philosophy would have been assured. If
Bourdin was, as has been suggested, expressing the view of the
Society of Jesus, it is natural that he should concentrate on the supposed ﬂaws of the Method, in order to show its unsuitability as a
basis for teaching.9
Although on the whole less philosophically signiﬁcant than any of
the earlier sets, the Seventh Objections are of great interest from the
point of view of intellectual and cultural history. Generally, the other
Objectors at least make an eﬀort to engage with Descartes’s arguments, even when their own approach, as with Hobbes and
Gassendi, is quite antithetical to his. But the Seventh Objections
9
See Roger Ariew, ‘Pierre Bourdin and the Seventh Objections’ in Ariew and Grene,
Descartes and His Contemporaries, 208–25.

Introduction to Objections and Replies

71

show why an intelligent reader, not hidebound by traditional views,
could either ﬁnd his eﬀort to understand completely fruitless or perhaps simply fail to see why the eﬀort was worth making. Precisely
because they do not closely engage with the particular arguments, they
throw light on what Bourdin sees as baﬄing in Descartes’s general
approach. Essentially, Bourdin cannot see that Descartes is constructing and regulating a philosophical experience in the course of
which truth is discovered, in which propositions that may initially
have appeared false or doubtful emerge as true, and some we initially
took as true are revealed as needing to be rejected or corrected. As
Descartes points out, Bourdin treats ‘true’, ‘false’, ‘doubtful’ as if
they were inherent properties of propositions, irrespective of the
thinker’s relationship to them as it develops over time. (This is not
an individual quirk, but reﬂects a general scholastic habit of thought,
whereby to become learned in a discipline involves assimilating the
general consensus of scholars as to what propositions are true, false,
or doubtful.) He tries to put Descartes’s arguments into a traditional
logical framework, e.g. as follows:
I am either a mind or a body.
But I am not a body.
... I am a mind;
and then points out that they do not work. But this way of putting
the argument is foreign to Descartes, whose concern is with the discovery of knowledge in experience.10 Moreover, Bourdin fails to distinguish between beliefs Descartes once held, and those he currently
upholds. He thus supposes that the former beliefs about soul and
body recalled by Descartes in the Second Meditations are being
reasserted as his current position, when of course they are being
drastically corrected. The following summary does not contain all
the many instances where Descartes objects to Bourdin’s misunderstandings or misrepresentations of his views, or where he imputes
unworthy motives to his critic.
In one area, though, Bourdin’s criticism is distinctive, and sharper
than Descartes acknowledges. Scholars have sometimes noted that
10 The fundamental clash between Bourdin’s logical approach and Descartes’s experiential method is well brought out by Alquié (OP II, 1052, n. 1, 1053, nn. 1–2).

72

Introduction to Objections and Replies

Descartes’s sceptical critique really bears on the unreliability of
sense-perception: clear and distinct intellectual perception is left out
of account.11 Bourdin urges that Descartes’s doubt ought logically to
extend further: that the dream-hypothesis destabilizes not only
sense-perceptions but supposedly clear and distinct perceptions of
intellectual truths.
Bourdin’s dissertation consists essentially of two Questions (a
scholastic way of organizing the material), each of which is subdivided into a number of sections, in which Descartes’s positions are
expounded and criticized. (He represents the Questions as being
put to him by Descartes, who objects to this version of the relationship between them.) Each Question is followed by an Answer, in
which Bourdin delivers his overall judgement on the issue.12 The
core of Bourdin’s dissertation (his Question 2) consists of a series of
attempts to get inside Descartes’s method (he takes up the image of
thinking as a journey found in the Discourse on Method, and sustains
the metaphor throughout this section). He represents himself as
a nervous fellow-traveller seeking guidance from the philosopher,
and reconstructs the dialogue between them, in a set of rapid-ﬁre
exchanges. But every time they attempt to get moving they are confronted by a new impassable obstacle, some previously unsuspected
crying defect in the method. Finally, the would-be traveller gives up,
and conducts, as he puts it, an orderly retreat. That is, he sets out
what he takes to be Descartes’s key argument in syllogistic form, in
such a way as to expose its invalidity. The Answer to Question 2 contains a twelve-part condemnation of Descartes’s method.
Descartes’s comments are slotted in between the sections of
Bourdin’s text (a detailed account is given below). His comments on
the Answer to Question 2 involves a sustained development of the
building metaphor which he also used in the Discourse and which
Bourdin occasionally invokes here. Descartes compares himself to an
architect, methodically clearing and excavating the ground before
laying the foundations for a temple. He is persecuted by a common
11
See Louis E. Loeb, ‘The Cartesian Circle’, in CCD 200–35 (p. 228, n. 21). JeanLuc Marion, ‘Cartesian Metaphysics and the Role of the Simple Natures’, CCD 115–39
(p. 129) makes a similar point in diﬀerent terms.
12 It is important to recognize that the Answers are Bourdin’s replies to his own
Questions: they are not replies to Descartes’s critique of those Questions, which is
printed before them.

Introduction to Objections and Replies

73

mason (Bourdin), who ignorantly criticizes the architect’s whole procedure in public. The metaphor is historically interesting in that it
draws on a very general reconﬁguration of productive practices in the
early modern period, the emergence of a distinction between ‘arts’,
with an intellectual and conceptual content that renders them more
socially prestigious, and ‘crafts’, inferior because (supposedly) reliant on
mere manual knowhow. Bourdin’s criticisms are restated by Descartes
in keeping with this allegory, so as to exhibit their irrelevance.
The summary given is selective, not exhaustive. Bourdin addresses
Descartes in the second person: Descartes’s comments usually refer
to Bourdin in the third, and I follow this pattern here. Descartes’s
replies are sometimes addressed to points explicitly made by Bourdin,
sometimes to implications (perhaps unsuspected) or ﬂaws in the Jesuit’s
text. In the latter case, I have not troubled to summarize the original
statement of Bourdin’s to which Descartes takes exception or on
which he comments. Bourdin’s text was printed with marginal letters
indicating the points to which Descartes replies. To ﬁnd Descartes’s
reply to a particular point, the reader looks for the corresponding
letter in his section of the text. I shall include these letters here,
where possible and helpful.
In what follows, the Objections are printed in italic, Descartes’s Replies
in roman type. My summaries and comments are given in smaller
type. As before, numbers in the margin or in square brackets refer to
page numbers in AT.

FIRST OBJECTIONS
BY A LEARNED THEOLOGIAN
FROM THE NETHERLANDS
92

93

Descartes’s proof of God by means of the concept of
‘objective reality’
Here I am forced to linger a little, lest I become exhausted. For my mind
is seething like the turbulent straits of Euripus.* I accept, I deny, I
approve, I refute again, I do not wish to disagree with him, I cannot
agree. For I ask what cause does an idea require? Or tell me what an idea
is. It is the thing itself that is thought, insofar as it exists objectively in the
intellect.* But what does it mean, to ‘exist objectively in the intellect’? As
I was taught, it means determining the act of the intellect in the manner
of an object.* But this is purely an extrinsic denomination,* and no part
of the thing.* For just as for me to be seen is nothing other than an act of
vision’s being directed at me, so for a thing’s to be thought, or to exist
objectively in the intellect means that it determines and arrests the mind’s
thought in itself. This can happen without any movement and change in
the thing, indeed even if the thing does not exist. Why therefore should I
seek a cause for something that does not exist in actuality, which is a bare
denomination, a nothing?
And yet, this great mind asserts, the fact that this idea contains one
objective reality rather than another—this must certainly be due to some
cause (p. 30). But it has no cause at all. For objective reality is a pure
denomination, it has no existence in actuality. A cause, however, exerts a
real and actual inﬂuence; but what does not exist in actuality cannot
receive anything, and therefore it cannot even receive an actual causal
inﬂuence, let alone require it. Therefore, I have ideas, but I do not have
a cause for my ideas, let alone one greater than myself and inﬁnite.
‘But if you will not concede a cause for ideas, at least give some reason
why this idea contains this objective reality rather than that one.’ Very
willingly: for I am not in the habit of acting meanly with my friends, but
I deal with them as generously as possible. I say in general, as applicable
to all ideas, what M. Descartes says of the triangle: Even if perhaps such
a ﬁgure does not exist, and has never existed, anywhere at all outside
my thought, it nonetheless has a certain determinate nature, or essence,
or form, that is immutable and eternal (p. 46). For a truth is eternal that

First Objections and Replies

75

does not require a cause, e.g. that a boat is a boat, and not something else;
that Davus is Davus and not Oedipus. But if you insist on demanding a
reason, it is the imperfection of our understanding, which is not inﬁnite.
For since it cannot encompass the universal good, which exists all at the
same time and once and for all, in a single act of understanding, it divides
it all up into parts. And thus what it cannot realize as a whole, it conceives bit by bit, or, as they say, inadequately.
But the great man goes on to say: However imperfect the kind of
being by which a thing exists objectively in the understanding in the
form of an idea, it is certainly not nothing, and therefore cannot come
from nothing (p. 30). There is an ambiguity here. For if ‘nothing’ means
the same as not existing in actuality, this ‘kind of being’ is certainly nothing, because it does not exist in actuality, and therefore it comes from
nothing, that is, it comes from no cause. But if ‘nothing’ means ‘something
imagined’, what is commonly called an ‘ens rationis’,* that is not nothing,
but something real that is distinctly conceived. And yet because it is simply
conceived and does not exist in actuality, it can indeed be conceived, but
cannot possibly be caused.
[94–5] The proof of God from the Meditator’s own existence
Caterus goes on to suggest that when Descartes argues that he could not
exist, unless God existed, he is putting forward the same argument, based
on eﬃcient causality, as Aquinas’s ‘second way’ of proving the existence of
God, an argument ultimately derived from Aristotle.
He then criticizes Descartes’s argument that if he existed of himself, he
would have given himself all the perfections of which he has the idea in
himself, and would therefore in eﬀect be God (p. 34). This depends on the
ambiguous phrase ‘to exist of oneself’, which can mean ‘to exist of oneself
as if in virtue of a cause’ or simply ‘not to exist on account of anything
else’. But it is impossible for something to be the cause of itself: and speaking of a thing’s ‘giving itself all perfections’ makes it sound as if an entity
could, prior to its existence, foresee what it could be, so as to choose in
advance what it is going to be. But if something exists of itself in the sense
of ‘not existing on account of anything else’, then it might still have limitations intrinsic to its nature: so that existing of oneself in this sense is no
proof of having an inﬁnite nature.

[95–7] The knowledge of God
Caterus accepts that everything we clearly and distinctly know is true, and
that error is due to judgement and will, but he doubts that we can claim

94

76

First Objections and Replies

any clear and distinct knowledge of the inﬁnite being, any more than we
can clearly picture a chiliogon. He cites St Thomas in support.

[97–100] The proof of God’s existence from his essence
Caterus points out that St Thomas had already quoted an argument
(derived from St Anselm) identical to Descartes’s, and goes on to cite St
Thomas’s reply to this argument: ‘Granted that everyone understands
that the word “God” means what has been said, i.e. a being than which
nothing greater can be thought, it does not therefore follow that everyone
understands that what is signiﬁed by the name exists in reality, but only
that it exists in the apprehension of the intellect. Nor can it be argued that
it exists in reality, unless it is conceded that there exists in reality something than which nothing greater can be thought: but this is not conceded
by those who hold that God does not exist’ (Summa theologiæ, Ia, q. 2,
a. 1, ad 2). Caterus endorses this objection.
100

The distinction between soul and body
Of the essence of the soul, and of its distinction with the body, I shall say
little. For I admit that this great mind has so exhausted me that I can
barely do anything more. The distinction between mind and body, if it
exists, seems to be being proved from the fact that they can be conceived
distinctly and separately. Here I would refer this most learned man to
Duns Scotus.* Scotus says that in order for something to be conceived distinctly and separately from something else, what he calls a formal and
objective distinction is suﬃcient. He posits this as a halfway house between
real distinction and abstract distinction. This is the kind of distinction he
says exists between the divine justice and the divine mercy: for they have,
he says, prior to any operation by the intellect, distinct essences [rationes
formales], inasmuch as one is not the other; yet it does not follow that the
justice can be conceived separately from the mercy, or hence that they can
exist separately.

101

FIRST REPLIES

102

The proof of God by means of the concept of
‘objective reality’
. . . I wrote The idea is the thing itself that is thought about, in so far as
it exists objectively in the intellect.* These words the theologian represents himself as understanding* in a completely diﬀerent sense from

First Objections and Replies

77

that in which I meant them, so that he may give me a fuller opportunity to explain the matter. He says that existing objectively in the intellect means determining the act of the intellect in the manner of an object.
But this is purely an extrinsic denomination, and adds nothing to the thing
itself. Here I should point out that he is considering the thing itself
as existing outside the intellect, from which point of view its objective existence in the intellect is indeed an extrinsic denomination.
But I was talking of the idea that does not exist at any time outside
the intellect, from which point of view ‘objective existence’ means
nothing other than ‘existing in the intellect, in the way that objects
normally exist within it’. So, supposing someone asks, for example,
how it aﬀects the sun that it exists objectively in my intellect, we can
very well answer that it is not at all aﬀected, except that an extrinsic
denomination is applied to it, that is, it does indeed determine the
operation of the intellect in the manner of an object. But if the question is ‘What is the idea of the sun?’ and the answer is given that it is
the thing itself that is being thought of, in so far as it exists objectively in the intellect, no one will think that the idea is the sun itself,
in so far as this extrinsic denomination is being applied to it. Nor
does ‘to exist objectively in the intellect’ here mean ‘to determine the
operation of the intellect, in the manner of an object’. What it means
is ‘to exist in the intellect, in the way that its objects normally exist
within it’: so that the idea of the sun is the sun itself existing in the
intellect, not indeed formally (as the sun exists in the sky), but objectively, that is, in the way that objects normally exist within the intellect; and this mode of being is far more imperfect than that in which
things exist outside the understanding, but, as I have previously
written, this does not mean it is nothing.
And when the most learned theologian says that there is an ambiguity in these words, he seems to have been wishing to draw my
attention to the misunderstanding I remarked on just now, in case
I had missed it. For he says, ﬁrst of all, that the thing thus existing in
the intellect by means of an idea does not exist in actuality, that is, it
is not something existing outside the intellect. Which is true. Then
he goes on to say that it is not something imagined, or an ‘ens rationis’,
but something real that is distinctly conceived: in these words he
concedes everything I have aﬃrmed. However, he goes on to add
that because it is simply conceived and does not exist in actuality (that
is, because it is only an idea, and not a thing existing outside the

103

78

104

First Objections and Replies

intellect) it can indeed be conceived, but cannot possibly be caused, that
is to say, it does not need a cause for its existing outside the intellect.
This I admit, but it certainly needs a cause in order for it to be conceived, and this alone is what we are talking about. For instance, if
someone has in their intellect the idea of some machine devised with
extraordinary complexity,* we are certainly quite justiﬁed in asking
what is the cause of this idea. Nor shall we be satisﬁed if someone
says that the idea does not exist outside the intellect, and therefore
cannot be caused, but only conceived, because the point at issue here
is precisely this: what is the cause of its being conceived? And we
shall not be satisﬁed either by someone’s saying that the intellect
itself is the cause of it, that is, inasmuch as the idea is an operation of
the intellect. For that is not the point at issue: what we are asking
about is the cause of the objective complexity that exists in the idea.
For the fact that this idea of the machine contains one kind of objective complexity rather than another must derive from some cause.
And objective complexity stands in the same relation to this idea as
objective reality to the idea of God. Now we could ﬁnd diﬀerent
causes for this complexity: for perhaps the cause is a real machine of
this kind that the person has already seen, and on which the idea was
patterned; or the person possesses in his understanding a profound
knowledge of mechanics, or perhaps great subtlety of intelligence, by
the help of which he was able to discover the idea even without prior
knowledge. And we should note that all the complexity that exists
purely objectively in this idea, must necessarily exist in its cause,
whatever that may be, whether formally or eminently. And the same
applies to the objective reality contained in the idea of God. For in
what can this exist in this way, except in a God that really exists? But
my perspicacious reader has seen all this very clearly, and therefore
admits that we can ask why this idea contains more objective reality than
that one. His ﬁrst answer to this question is this: I say in general, as
applicable to all ideas, what M. Descartes says of the triangle: Even if
perhaps such a ﬁgure does not exist, and has never existed, anywhere at
all outside my thought, it nonetheless has a certain determinate nature, or
essence, or form, that is immutable and eternal. And this, he says, does
not require a cause. But he has seen clearly enough that this will not
quite do. For even if the nature of a triangle is immutable and eternal, this does not make it any less legitimate to ask why we have an
idea of it in us. Therefore he adds: But if you insist on demanding a

First Objections and Replies

79

reason, it is the imperfection of our understanding. By this answer it
seems he meant to show* purely that those who wish to disagree with
me on this point cannot give any plausible answer. For it is certainly
no more probable that the cause of our having an idea of God in us is
the imperfection of our intellect, than that ignorance of the mechanical art is the cause of our imagining some machine of extremely complex ingeniousness rather than another and more imperfect machine.
The contrary is patently true: if someone has the idea of a machine in
which every conceivable kind of workmanship is displayed, this is a
very good reason for thinking that this idea derives from some cause
in which every conceivable kind of workmanship actually exists, even
though it exists in the idea in purely objective fashion. And by the
same token, since we have in ourselves the idea of God, in which all
conceivable perfection is contained, it follows beyond question that
this idea depends on some cause in which all this perfection also
exists, namely in God himself, who actually exists. For surely no
greater diﬃculty would appear in one case than in the other if, just as
not everyone is skilled in mechanics, and therefore not everyone can
have ideas of machines of very complex workmanship, similarly not
everyone has the same faculty of conceiving the idea of God; but
because it is imprinted in the same way on all of our minds, and we
are never aware of it as coming to us from somewhere other than ourselves, we suppose it belongs to the nature of our intellect. And this
in itself is not wrong, but we overlook something else of great importance, on which the whole force and clarity of the argument depends,
namely that this faculty of having the idea of God within ourselves
could not exist in our intellect, if this intellect were only a ﬁnite
being, as indeed it is, and did not have God to cause it. Therefore
I pursued the investigation by asking whether I could exist, if God did
not exist, not so much to put forward a diﬀerent argument from the
preceding one, as to explain one and the same argument more fully.
[106–7] The proof of God from the Meditator’s
own existence
Descartes goes on to explain how his causal argument diﬀers from that of
St Thomas. He does not base his argument on causal relations between
sensible things, both because he thinks that God’s existence is much more
evident than that of any sensible things, and because he sees that his
inability to conceive an inﬁnite succession of causes unfolding from all

105

106

80

First Objections and Replies

eternity, without a ﬁrst cause, does not necessarily prove that there is in
fact a ﬁrst cause, only that his ﬁnite intellect cannot embrace inﬁnity.
Therefore, he concentrates on the fact of his existence in the present, of
which he is in any case most certain, thus eliminating the aspect of temporal succession.
107

108

Moreover, I did not investigate what is the cause of myself, in so far
as I consist of mind and body, but only in so far as I am a thinking
thing. I think this is far from insigniﬁcant: for in this way I was far
better able to rid myself of prejudice, to concentrate on the natural
light, to question myself, and to assert for certain that there can be
nothing in me of which I am in no way aware* [conscius]. [. . .]
Besides, I did not ask only what is the cause of myself, in so far as
I am a thinking thing, but especially and above all, in so far as I am
aware within myself, among other thoughts, of the idea of a
supremely perfect being. For on this one thing the whole force of my
demonstration depends: ﬁrst, because this idea contains what God is,
at least, to the extent that he can be understood by me; and, according to the rules of true logic, before we ask of anything whether it
exists we must ﬁrst understand what it is;* secondly, because it is this
very idea that gives me an opportunity to investigate whether I exist
of myself or by another and to acknowledge my own deﬁciencies; and
ﬁnally, it is this idea that teaches me that not only there is some cause
of my existence, but besides that in that cause all perfections are contained, and therefore that it is God.*
[108–12] Descartes’s analysis of the sense in which a being may be said to
be cause of itself is taken up again in the Fourth Replies, with reference
back to the present discussion: hence it is omitted here.

[112–15] The knowledge of God
Descartes holds that although we cannot comprehend the inﬁnite, we can
understand it, in the sense that if we clearly and distinctly understand that
a thing is such that no limits can be found within it, we clearly understand
that it is inﬁnite. He distinguishes inﬁnity, the absence of all limits, which
pertains only to God, from indeﬁniteness, the absence of limits from a certain point of view: thus space, extending without limit, is indeﬁnite, but
not inﬁnite, because its absence of limits applies only to its limited range
of attributes. We must distinguish between inﬁnity as a concept and an
inﬁnite thing. We grasp the concept only negatively, that is, as the absence
of limits: but we understand the thing positively, although not adequately:
that is, we do not understand everything in it that is understandable.

First Objections and Replies

81

We cannot fully comprehend God, but we can have a clear and distinct
knowledge of his perfections.

[115–20] The proof of God’s existence from his essence
Descartes argues that he agrees with St Thomas that the knowledge of
God is not so plain as to make proof unnecessary. He accepts St Thomas’s
refutation of St Anselm’s proof of God (that, if ‘God’ means a being than
which no greater can be thought, and if it is greater to exist in reality than
only in the intellect, then God must exist in reality). But he contends that
his own argument is quite diﬀerent: it runs as follows:

Whatever we clearly and distinctly understand to belong to the true
and immutable nature, or essence, or form, of some thing, can be
truly asserted of that thing; but after we have carefully examined
what God is, we clearly and distinctly understand that it belongs to
his true and immutable nature to exist; therefore we can truly assert
of God, that he exists. Here the conclusion at least is clearly valid.
But nor can we deny the major premise, because it has been granted
already that all we clearly and distinctly understand is true. This leaves
only the minor, and here I admit that there is a signiﬁcant diﬃculty.
First, we are so accustomed in the case of all other things to distinguish existence from essence that we do not suﬃciently realize how
existence belongs to the essence of God as distinct from other things;
secondly, because we fail to distinguish between what belongs to the
true and immutable essence of some thing and what is merely attributed to it by a ﬁction of our intellect, and therefore, even if we are
quite aware that existence belongs to God’s essence, we fail to conclude that God exists, because we do not know whether his essence
is immutable and true or merely a ﬁction created by ourselves.
But, to remove the ﬁrst part of this diﬃculty, we have to distinguish between possible and necessary existence,* and to note that
possible existence is contained in the concept or idea of all things that
are clearly and distinctly understood, but that necessary existence is
contained only in the idea of God. For I have no doubt that those
who pay careful attention to the diﬀerence between the idea of God
and all other ideas will perceive that, even if we never understand
other things except as if they existed, it does not follow that they do
exist, only that they can exist. This is because we do not understand
it to be necessary that actual existence should be conjoined with
their other properties. But from the fact that we understand actual

115
116

117

82

118

119

First Objections and Replies

existence necessarily and always to be conjoined with the rest of
God’s attributes, it follows beyond doubt that God exists.
Next, to remove the second part of this diﬃculty, we need to realize that those ideas that contain not true and immutable natures, but
only ﬁctitious natures put together by the intellect, can be broken
down by this same intellect not only by abstraction, but by a clear
and distinct operation—so much so, that whatever cannot be thus
broken down by the intellect must certainly not have been put
together by it. For example, when I think of a winged horse or a lion
actually existing, or a triangle inscribed in a square, I readily understand that I can on the contrary think of a horse without wings, or a
non-existent lion, or a triangle without a square, and so forth: I understand, therefore, that such things do not possess true and immutable
natures. But if I think of a triangle or a square (I shall say nothing here
of the lion or the horse, because their natures are not entirely known
to us), then, certainly, whatever I grasp as being contained in the idea
of the triangle (for instance, that the sum of its three angles equals
two right angles) I shall aﬃrm of the triangle, and with truth; and
whatever I ﬁnd in the idea of the square, I shall aﬃrm of the square.
For even if I can understand a triangle, in abstraction from the fact
that the sum of its three angles equals two right angles, I cannot deny
this of it, by means of a clear and distinct operation, that is, I cannot
do so if I properly understand what I am saying. [. . .]
If I consider existence as being contained in the idea of a
supremely perfect body, because it is a greater perfection to exist
both in reality and in the intellect than in the intellect alone, I cannot
therefore conclude that this supremely perfect body exists, only that
it can exist; for I clearly realize that this idea was put together by my
own intellect combining all bodily perfections; and that existence
does not result from the other bodily perfections, because we can
equally well say that they exist or that they do not. And indeed, because,
examining the idea of body, I can perceive within it no power of
producing or conserving itself, I rightly conclude that necessary existence (which alone is in question here) does not belong to the nature
of a body, however perfect, any more than it belongs to the nature of
a mountain that it does not have a valley, or to the idea of a triangle
that the sum of its angles is greater than two right angles. But now,
if we enquire, not of a body, but of a thing, whatever it may be, that
has all perfections that can simultaneously coexist, whether existence

First Objections and Replies

83

should be counted among these, we shall at ﬁrst sight be uncertain:
because, since our mind, which is ﬁnite, is unused to considering
these perfections except in isolation, it perhaps does not immediately
realize how necessarily they are interrelated. However, if we carefully
examine whether existence belongs to a supremely powerful being,
and, if so, what type of existence, we shall clearly and distinctly perceive, ﬁrst of all, that possible existence at least belongs to it, as it does
to all other things of which there is a distinct idea in ourselves, and
even those put together by a ﬁction of our intellect. Then, because we
cannot think that its existence is possible, without immediately recognizing, when we consider its immense power,* that it can exist in
virtue of that, we shall therefore conclude that it does exist in reality,
and has existed from all eternity. For it is very obvious to the natural
light that what can exist by its own power has always existed. And thus
we shall understand that necessary existence is contained in the idea of
the supremely powerful being, not in virtue of any ﬁction of the intellect, but because it belongs to the true and immutable nature of such a
being to exist. And we shall also readily perceive that this supremely
powerful being cannot not possess in itself all the other perfections
contained in the idea of God, so that, without any ﬁction of the
intellect being involved, and in virtue of their own nature, they are
simultaneously combined together, and exist in God.
All this is clearly obvious to anyone who will consider it attentively.
Nor does it diﬀer from what I had written previously, except in the
form in which I have explained it, which I have deliberately modiﬁed
in order to cater for the diversity of people’s minds. Nor shall I deny
here that this argument is such that those who do not bear in mind
everything that contributes to the proof of it, will readily take it for a
sophism. Therefore at the outset I was quite doubtful whether to use
it, for fear of giving occasion to those who failed to grasp it to disagree
with other proofs. But because there are only two ways of proving the
existence of God,* one, that is, by arguing from his eﬀects, and the
other by considering his very essence or nature, I explained the ﬁrst
of these, to the best of my ability, but I thought I should not fail to
include the other at a later stage.
The distinction between soul and body
As for the formal distinction, which our most learned theologian
ﬁnds in Scotus, I shall say here brieﬂy that it does not diﬀer from the

120

84

121

First Objections and Replies

modal distinction,* and applies only to incomplete entities, which I
have carefully distinguished from complete ones. For the formal distinction to apply, it is suﬃcient that one thing can be conceived as
distinct and separate from the other by an act of abstraction on the
part of the intellect, but not as distinct and separate in the sense that
we understand each of them individually as a being by itself and distinct from every other being: for that to be the case, there has to be a
real distinction between them. Thus, for example, between the
motion and the shape of one and the same body, there is a formal distinction, and I can perfectly well understand the motion without the
shape, and the shape without the motion, and both of them in
abstraction from the body: but I cannot, however, completely understand motion apart from the thing in which it takes place, nor shape
without a thing in which the shape exists; nor, ﬁnally, can I imagine
that motion exists in a thing that can exist without shape, or that
shape exists in a thing incapable of motion. And in the same way, I
cannot understand justice apart from one who is just, or mercy apart
from one who is merciful; nor can we imagine that one and the same
person, who is just, cannot be merciful. But I have a complete understanding of what body is, by thinking of it purely as having extension, shape, motion, and so forth, and by denying that it has any of
the properties that belong to the nature of mind. And on the other
hand, I understand the mind to be a complete thing, which doubts,
understands, wills, and so forth, although I deny that there is anything in it that is contained in the idea of body. And this could not
possibly be the case, if there were not a real distinction between the
mind and the body.

[122–8] SECOND OBJECTIONS
1. You concluded in the Second Meditation that you are a thinking thing,
but you do not know what a thinking thing is: how do you know thinking
is not a bodily operation?
2. The idea of a supreme being does not need to derive from an actually existing supreme being:
(i) It could have been formed by ourselves. We possess some degree of
perfection: can we not form the idea of a supreme being by adding more
and more degrees of perfection to this, just as we can go on adding number
to number?
(ii) It is not necessarily true that there must be as much reality in the
cause as in the eﬀect. Flies and plants are produced by the sun, the rain,
and the earth, which are lifeless.*
(iii) The idea of God is a purely intellectual entity [ens rationis] having
no greater reality [lit. ‘being no more noble than’] than the human mind
[and could therefore have been produced by it].
(iv) The idea has probably been derived from other people: would you
have formed it if you had been raised in isolation? Savages such as the
Canadians and the Hurons do not possess it.*
(v) The idea might have been formed from the knowledge of bodily
things: but this would only prove the existence of a very perfect corporeal
being.
(vi) Would not the same argument apply to the idea of an angel, which
is more perfect than you? On your showing, this would have to have been
produced by an actual angel.
(vii) You have in fact no idea of God, any more than you have that of
an inﬁnite number or an inﬁnite line; and if you had such an idea, this
would not imply that an inﬁnite number exists, which is impossible.
(viii) The idea of a unitary perfection encompassing all the others is a
production by the intellect, of the same kind as universal ideas such as
generic unity,* which correspond to nothing in reality.
3. (i) You say that you can be certain of nothing unless you know for
certain that God exists. But when you concluded that you are a thinking
thing, you had not proved God’s existence: therefore your conclusion was
not certain.*
(ii) An atheist knows for certain that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles.
(iii) He might support his disbelief in God by arguing that an inﬁnitely
perfect being would exclude all other forms of being and good, on the one

86

Second Objections and Replies

hand, and of non-being and evil, on the other: but in fact there are many
beings and many goods, and many non-beings and many evils.
4. (i) You deny that God can deceive: but there are biblical texts to the
contrary:* he might deceive us for our own good, like a doctor with his
patients or a father with his children.
(ii) We might be so constituted as to be deceived even in things we
think we know clearly and distinctly, even in the absence of a deceiving
deity.
(iii) Clear and distinct perception is no guarantee of certainty: we often
see people in error about things they believe they perceive in this way.
5. You say that the will is safe from error or sin when it is governed by
clear and distinct knowledge, and is in danger only when it pursues
obscure and confused intellectual conceptions. If this were so, then Turks
and other inﬁdels would be wrong to espouse the Christian and Catholic
religion, since they do not have a clear and distinct knowledge of its truth.*
Besides, we know so few things clearly and distinctly that if such knowledge were requisite to all our decisions, there are very few decisions we
could ever take.
6. You argue that what we know to belong to the essence of a thing can
be safely asserted of that thing and then that, having considered the essence
of God, we see that existence belongs to it. You thus conclude
that he exists. You should have concluded only that it belongs to his nature
to exist. For his actual existence follows only if we know his nature is
intrinsically possible: that is, if we know that the idea of a supremely perfect being is not self-contradictory. Besides, since all God’s attributes are
inﬁnite, how can we understand them except imperfectly? In other words,
how can we have the clear knowledge of his essence to which you lay claim?
7. You say nothing of the soul’s immortality, although you claimed
you would be proving this.* You have not suﬃciently proved the distinction between mind and body (as suggested above), and even if the soul is
distinct from the body, this does not make it incorruptible. For all we
know, it may expire along with the body.
In general, it would be a good idea to present your argument in geometrical form, beginning with deﬁnitions, postulates, and axioms.

SECOND REPLIES

129

1. How do you know a body cannot think?
1. [. . .] [In the second Meditation] I was not yet investigating
whether the mind was distinct from the body, only examining those of
its properties of which I could have certain and evident knowledge.

Second Objections and Replies

87

And because I became aware of several of these at this point, I cannot
unreservedly accept what you go on to say, that I do not know what a
thinking thing is. For even if I admit that at that stage I did not know
whether this thinking thing was identical with the body or distinct
from it, I do not therefore admit that I had no knowledge of it. For who
has ever known anything in such a way that he knew that there was
absolutely nothing in it except what he knew?* But the more we perceive of some thing, the better we are said to know it. In this way, we
know the people we live with every day better than those of whom we
have only seen the face or heard the name, even if these latter would
not be said to be completely unknown to us. In this sense, I think I have
demonstrated that the mind, considered without those properties that
are normally ascribed to the body, is better known than the body considered without the mind, and this is all I meant to establish here.

130

Descartes goes on to suggest that what the Objectors are getting at is that
the ﬁrst two Meditations yield very little beyond the above conclusion. He
thus justiﬁes his method:

Since therefore nothing is so conducive to the acquisition of reliable knowledge, as to accustom ourselves beforehand to doubt of all
things and especially bodily things, even though I had long ago seen
several books on this subject composed by Academics* and Sceptics,
and therefore it was with some distaste that I found myself rehashing
all this stuﬀ, I could not dispense myself from devoting a whole
Meditation to it; and I would wish readers to dwell on the matters
contained in it, not simply for the short period of time required to
read it, but for several months, or at least weeks, before they go on to
the rest of the work. For by doing so they would beyond doubt derive
much greater beneﬁt from what follows.
Then, because previously we did not have any ideas of those
things that belong to the mind, except very confused ones, muddled
up with the ideas of sensible things, and this was the ﬁrst and most
important reason why none of what people said about the soul and
God could be suﬃciently clearly understood, I thought I would be
doing something of considerable value if I showed how the properties or qualities of the mind are to be distinguished from the qualities
of the body. For although many had previously said that in order
to understand metaphysical matters, the mind must be withdrawn
from the senses, no one up to now, to the best of my knowledge, had
shown by what method this was to be achieved. But the true and, to

131

88

132

133

Second Objections and Replies

my mind, the only way to achieve it is contained in my Second
Meditation. However, it is of such a nature that it is not enough to
have glanced over it once only: it must be studied for a long time and
examined again and again, so that the lifelong habit of confusing the
things of the intellect with those of the body can be erased by a habit
of distinguishing them built up at least over a few days. And this
seemed to be a very good reason why I should not attempt to deal
with any other subject in the Second Meditation.
Besides you inquire here how I demonstrate that the body cannot
think? But excuse me if I answer that I have not yet given any occasion for this question, since I ﬁrst engaged with it only in the Sixth
Meditation. [. . .]. To this we can readily add the following: Whatever
can think is a mind, or is called a mind; but since mind and body are
really distinct, no body is a mind; therefore no body can think.
And I certainly cannot see what you can disagree with here: or can
you deny that it is suﬃcient for us to clearly understand one thing
without another, in order to recognize that they are really distinct? If
so, give us some more certain sign of a real distinction; for I am
conﬁdent that none can be given. What can you say instead? That
two things are really distinct if either of them can exist without the
other? But again, I shall ask how you know that one thing can exist
without the other? For this has to be known, if it is to be the sign of
a distinction. Perhaps you will say you have learned this from the
senses, because you see or touch one thing in the absence of the
other. But the senses are less reliable than the intellect; and it can
happen in many ways that one and the same thing can appear in various forms or in several places or modes, and thus be mistaken for
two things. And, ﬁnally, if you remember what was said about the
wax at the end of the Second Meditation, you will realize that bodies
themselves are not even perceived, properly speaking, by the senses,
but by the intellect; so that there is no diﬀerence between, on the one
hand, having a sensation of one thing in the absence of another thing
and, on the other, having the idea of one thing, and understanding
that this idea is not the same as the idea of another thing. And this
can be understood only if one thing is perceived without the other;
and it can be understood with certainty only if the idea of each thing
is clear and distinct; so that if this sign of a real distinction is to be a
certain one, it has to be equated with mine.
But if there are any people who deny that they have distinct ideas
of the mind and the body, I can do no more than request them to

Second Objections and Replies

89

consider carefully the points I make in this Second Meditation; and
they should realize that the opinion they have (if they do in fact have
it) that the parts of the brain play a role in the formation of thoughts
derives from no positive reason, but simply from the fact that they
have never experienced themselves in the absence of body, and have
not infrequently been impeded by the body in their operations; they
are like someone who, having been continually in fetters ever since
his childhood, thinks that the fetters are part of his body and that he
needs them in order to walk.
[133–5] 2. The proof of God from the objective reality
of the idea of God
Descartes replies systematically to this set of objections (the roman numbers have been added to guide the reader):
i. In a sense, the Objectors are quite right to say that the foundation of
the idea of God is in ourselves; Descartes holds it to be an innate idea. But
we could not have the faculty of forming it, his argument establishes, if
God did not exist.
ii. The point about ﬂies and plants does not prove that something can
exist in the eﬀect that does not exist in the cause. Our ignorance of their
causes is no reason to doubt a principle evident by the natural light.
Besides an objection based on the assumption material things exist will not
occur to one following the method of withdrawing his thoughts from sensible things.
iii. The idea of God is not an ens rationis, a purely intellectual construct,
if by this is meant something non-existent in reality. Descartes’s concern
is with the objective reality of the idea, as requiring a really existent cause.*

And indeed I cannot see what more could be added to make it clearer
that this idea could not be present in me, unless a supreme being
existed, except on the part of the reader—I mean, that, by very carefully considering what I have already written, he should free himself
from the prejudices by which, perhaps, his natural light is clouded,
and accustom himself to believe in primary notions than which there
can be nothing more evident or more true, rather than obscure and
false opinions rooted in the mind by inveterate custom.
For that there is nothing in the eﬀect that was not previously in the
cause, either in similar or in more eminent form, is a primary notion, as
clear as any we have; and it comes to the same thing as the common
saying of nothing, nothing will come; because if it were granted that
there was something in the eﬀect that was not in the cause, one would

135

90

136

Second Objections and Replies

also have to grant that this something was made by nothing; nor is it
clear why nothing cannot be the cause of anything, except because in
such a cause there would not be the same as there is in the eﬀect.
It is also a primary notion that all the reality or perfection that exists
only objectively in ideas, must exist either formally or eminently in the
cause of these ideas; and this is the sole foundation for all our opinions
we have had as to the existence of things outside our minds. For how
did we come to suspect that they existed, except because the ideas of
them were transmitted by the senses to our mind?
But that there is some idea in us of a being supremely powerful
and perfect, and also that the objective reality of this idea is not to be
found within us either formally or eminently—this will be clear to
those who pay suﬃciently close attention and meditate for a long
time along with me.* From all this, the manifest conclusion is that
God exists. But for the sake of those whose natural light is so limited
that they cannot see that all the perfection that exists objectively in the
idea must exist in reality in some cause of the idea, I have given a still
more palpable demonstration of the point, based on the fact that the
mind that has this idea cannot exist of itself; and therefore I cannot
see what you could further require of me in order to give your assent.
iv. Nor does it cause any diﬃculty, to think that perhaps I
acquired the idea that represents God to me, from preconceived ideas
in the mind, from books, conversations with friends, etc., rather than from
my own mind. For it makes no diﬀerence to the progress of the
argument, whether I am asking if those from whom I am said to have
received it, have the idea from themselves, or from someone else,
or whether I am asking the question of myself; and I shall always
conclude that the one from whom it ﬁrst derived is God.
[136–7] v. We can no more have formed the idea of God from that of
bodily things than we could form the idea of sounds from the faculty of
vision, if we had no sense of hearing. If you want to know how to arrive at
the idea of incorporeal or spiritual being, reread the Second Meditation,
where this is gone into as carefully as possible.

137

Nor is it a problem that in this Meditation I was dealing only with
the human mind; for I freely and willingly admit that the idea we
have, for instance, of the divine intellect does not diﬀer from our idea
of our own intellect, except in the same way as the idea of an inﬁnite
number diﬀers from the idea of a ﬁnite number. The same applies to

Second Objections and Replies

91

the rest of God’s individual attributes* of which we recognize there
to be some trace in ourselves.
But, more than this, we understand there to be in God an absolute
immensity, a simplicity, and a unity encompassing all his other attributes, of which there is no other example, but which is, as I said before,
the mark by which the craftsman makes himself known in his handiwork,
in virtue of which we recognize that nothing of those things that, on
account of the shortcomings of our intellect, we consider in God separately, as we perceive them in ourselves, pertains to him and to us
univocally; and so we also come to realize that, of many particulars
without limit, of which we have ideas, such as knowledge without
limit, and power, number, length, and so on, without limit, there are
some that are contained formally in the idea of God, such as knowledge and power, others only eminently, such as number and length;
and this could certainly not be the case, if this idea in ourselves were
nothing more than a ﬁction.*
Nor, [if it were], would it be so consistently conceived by everyone in the same way. For it is an extremely striking fact that all metaphysicians are unanimously agreed in their description of God’s
attributes (I mean those that can be known by human reason alone),
whereas there is no physical or sensible thing, no thing of which we
have an idea, however solid and palpable it may be, on the nature of
which we do not ﬁnd philosophers disagreeing far more extensively.

138

[138–9] The notion, invoked by the Objectors, of an extremely perfect
bodily entity is self-contradictory (since divisibility is less perfect than
indivisibility), and could never be confused with the notion of God.
vi. The idea of an angel, as Descartes himself acknowledges in the
Third Meditation, could have been formed by combining the ideas of God
and a human being.

But, as for those who deny they have an idea of God but instead of
him imagine some idol or something of the kind, they are denying
the name and aﬃrming the thing.*
vii. Descartes takes up the Objectors’ analogy between the idea of God
and the idea of an inﬁnite number. That he cannot grasp the idea of an
inﬁnite number does not imply that such a number cannot exist. But it
does show that his power of understanding that a number can exist that
transcends his own ability to conceive it comes not from himself, but from
a more perfect being.

139

92

Second Objections and Replies

[140] He discusses what is meant by calling God unthinkable (incogitabilis) or inconceivable:

When God is said to be unthinkable, what this excludes is a conception of him that grasps him adequately: it does not rule out the inadequate idea of him that we possess and which is suﬃcient for a
knowledge of his existence.
viii. The analogy between the idea of the unity of God’s perfections and
generic unity falls down. The unity of the genus is simply an intellectual
construct: it adds nothing to the nature of the individuals within it.
Whereas the unity of God’s perfections is a distinctive and positive perfection in God: it makes him diﬀerent from other beings.

141

3. Whether all knowledge depends on the knowledge of
God’s existence
Thirdly, when I said, that we can know [scire] nothing for certain
unless we ﬁrst know that God exists, I made it quite clear in so many
words that I was speaking only of those conclusions of which the
memory may come back to us, when we are not particularly considering
the reasons on the basis of which we deduced them.* For the knowledge
[notitia] of principles is not usually called ‘scientiﬁc knowledge’* by
logicians. But when we realize we are thinking things, this is a ﬁrst
notion not derived from any syllogism. And, when someone says,
I am thinking, therefore I am, or exist, he is not deducing existence
from thought by means of a syllogism, but recognizes it as known
directly [per se notam]* by a simple intuition of the mind. This is
clear from the fact that, if he were deducing it by a syllogism, he
would ﬁrst have had to know the major premise, Whatever thinks, is
or exists. Whereas in fact he actually learns this truth from what he
experiences in himself, that it cannot be that he should think, unless
he exists. For such is the nature of our mind that it forms general
propositions on the basis of the knowledge of particulars.
But that an atheist can clearly know [cognoscere] that the three
angles of a triangle add up to two right angles, I do not deny. All I say
is that this knowledge [cognitio] is not true scientiﬁc knowledge
[scientia], because it seems that no knowledge that can be rendered
doubtful should be called scientiﬁc. And since he is supposed to be
an atheist, he cannot be certain that he is not deceived even in things
that appear to him completely evident, as has been suﬃciently
shown; and although perhaps this doubt has never occurred to him,

Second Objections and Replies

93

it may occur to him, if he considers the matter, or if someone suggests it to him: nor will he ever be safe from it, unless he ﬁrst recognizes a God.
And it makes no diﬀerence if he happens to think he has demonstrations proving that there is no God. For since these are not at all
true, their faults can always be pointed out to him; and when this is
done, he will be shaken out of his opinion.
This will not be diﬃcult to achieve, if the only demonstration he
can put forward is the one you add here, namely, that the inﬁnite in
every kind of perfection excludes all other kinds of being. For, ﬁrst, if
questioned how he knows that it belongs to the nature of the inﬁnite
to exclude all other beings in this way, he can make no reasonable
reply, because the word inﬁnite is not generally taken to mean something that excludes the existence of ﬁnite things and because he can
know nothing of the nature of what he thinks is non-existent and
therefore has no nature, except what consists in the bare meaning of
the name as it is understood by other people. Then, what would be
produced by the inﬁnite power of this imaginary inﬁnite being, if it
could never create anything? And ﬁnally, from the fact that we are
aware of a certain power of thinking within ourselves, we can readily
conceive that the power of thinking may exist in some other being, in
a greater degree than in us; but although we can suppose that this
power can be extended to inﬁnity, we are not therefore afraid that
our own will become less as a result. The same applies to all the other
properties that are ascribed to God, including his power, as long as
we do not suppose that there is any power in us not subject to the will
of God; and therefore he can be understood to be absolutely inﬁnite
without any exclusion of created things.
4. Descartes sets aside appeals to the Bible by appealing to an established
distinction between types of discourse:

Everyone is familiar with the distinction between ways of speaking
of God (such as are common in the holy scriptures) adapted to the
understanding of ordinary people, and containing a certain kind of
truth, but one relative to human beings, and other ways of speaking
of him, that instead express the naked truth, not in any relation to
human beings. Everyone in philosophy should stick to these latter ways
of speaking, and this applied particularly to me in my Meditations,
since I did not at this stage even suppose that there were any human

142

94
143

Second Objections and Replies

beings known to me, nor did I consider myself as consisting of mind
and body, but as a mind pure and simple.
[143–4] Thus, when he says God cannot lie, what he means to exclude is
not literal falsity but the will to harm through deception. (In any case,
‘Nineveh will be destroyed’ was a threat, not a false statement about the
future; and God’s hardening of Pharaoh’s heart was not a positive
action, but a negative one, that of denying him the grace of conversion.)*
Descartes entertains the possibility, then, that God may, like a doctor,
occasionally make literally false statements for the listener’s good, but this
would not apply to the wholesale deception involved in allowing us to
assent to clear and distinct ideas that are in fact false. The occasional existence of deceptive impulses, like the dropsical patient’s desire to drink, has
been dealt with in the Sixth Meditation. The fact that we have ideas of
true and false shows we have a positive faculty for recognizing truth. If,
when we use this faculty correctly, by assenting only to clear and distinct
ideas, we may in fact be wrong, then God, the giver of the faculty, would
be not an occasional but a wholesale deceiver.
Descartes, perceiving that the Objectors seem not to have grasped his
solution to the doubts he put forward in the First Meditation, expands
upon the nature of human certainty:

144

145

First of all, immediately we think something has been rightly perceived by us, we spontaneously convince ourselves it is true. If this
conviction is so ﬁrm that we can never have any cause to doubt what
we convince ourselves of in this way, there is no need for further investigation; we have all we can rationally desire. For what diﬀerence does
it make to us if, say, someone imagines that the very thing of the truth
of which we are so ﬁrmly convinced, appears false to God or an angel,
and is therefore, absolutely speaking, false? Why should we bother
about this absolute falsity, since we simply do not believe in it in any
way, or even have the slightest suspicion of it? For we suppose there
to be a conviction so ﬁrm that it cannot in any way be uprooted; and
so this conviction is precisely the same as the most perfect certitude.
But it is possible to doubt whether we can have any such certitude,
or ﬁrm and unshakable conviction.
It is indeed perfectly clear that we do not have it as regards things
that we perceive with the slightest degree of confusion or obscurity:
for this obscurity, whatever form it takes, is suﬃcient reason for our
doubting them. Nor do we have it as regards things that are perceived by the senses alone, however clearly, because we have often

Second Objections and Replies

95

observed that errors may be found in sense-perception, as when a
suﬀerer from dropsy is thirsty or one with jaundice sees snow as
yellow: for he sees it no less clearly and distinctly as yellow than we
see it as white. It therefore remains that, if we do have any such certainty, it applies only to things clearly perceived by the intellect.
Of these, there are some that are so clear and at the same time so
simple, that we can never think of them without believing them to be
true: for instance, that while I am thinking, I exist; that what has
once happened, cannot not have happened, and suchlike. Of these it
is obvious that we have such certitude. For we cannot doubt of them,
without thinking of them; but we cannot think of them, without
simultaneously believing them true, as I just said; therefore we
cannot doubt of them, without simultaneously believing them to be
true. That is, we cannot ever doubt of them.
And it is pointless to urge that we have often found others to have
been deceived in things they believed themselves to know more clearly than
the sun. For we have never observed, nor can anyone ever observe,
that this has befallen those who sought the clarity of their perception
from the intellect alone, only those who derived it either from the
senses, or from some false prejudice.
It is likewise pointless for someone to imagine that these things
appear to be false to God or to an angel, because the evidence of
our perception does not allow us to pay any attention to someone
imagining this.
There are other things that are indeed very clearly perceived by
our intellect, when we pay suﬃcient attention to the reasons on
which our knowledge of them depends, and therefore at the time we
cannot doubt them. But because we can forget those reasons, and yet
sometimes remember the conclusions deduced from them, it can be
asked whether we also have a ﬁrm and unshakeable certitude of these
conclusions, as long as we recall that they were deduced from evident
principles. For we must suppose that there is this recall, for them to
be called conclusions in the ﬁrst place. I answer that such certitude
is enjoyed by those who know God in such a way as to understand
that it cannot be that the faculty of understanding he has granted
them should not be directed to the truth. But others do not enjoy it.
And I explained all this so clearly in the Fifth Meditation that nothing further needs to be said here.

146

96

Second Objections and Replies
[147] 5. Faith and understanding

Descartes insists that all philosophers and theologians, indeed all reasonable people, would agree that the danger of error is less when we clearly
understand what it is we are giving our assent to. He expands on the issue
of our assent to faith:
148

149

Then we must observe that the clarity or perspicuity by which our
will can be moved to assent to something takes two forms: one
derived from the natural light, and the other from divine grace. Now,
even though faith is commonly said to deal with obscure matters,
this, however, is understood to apply only to the thing, or the matter,
in question; but it does not mean that the formal reason, in virtue of
which we give our assent to the things of faith, is obscure. For this
formal reason consists in a certain inner light, by means of which,
supernaturally enlightened by God, we ﬁrmly believe that those
things put forward for our belief have been revealed by God, and that
it simply cannot be the case that he should lie—a light more certain
than the whole light of nature,* and often also, on account of the light
of grace, more evident.
And certainly, when Turks and other inﬁdels fail to embrace the
Christian religion, they are guilty of sin not because they refuse to
assent to things that are obscure, in so far as they are obscure; only
because they are ﬁghting against an inner impulse of divine grace
or because, on account of their other sins, they render themselves
unworthy of grace. And I will boldly say that an inﬁdel wholly
deprived of supernatural grace and completely ignorant of those
things we Christians believe have been revealed by God, who
nonetheless, on the basis of some faulty arguments, gave his assent to
these beliefs, although they were obscure to him, would not therefore
count as having faith—rather, he would be sinning, inasmuch as he
would not be using his reason correctly. And I do not think any
orthodox theologian has ever had a diﬀerent opinion about this. Nor
can any of my readers think I have failed to acknowledge this supernatural light, when in the Fourth Meditation, in which I investigated
the cause of falsity, I quite explicitly said that it disposes my innermost
thoughts to willing, and yet does not diminish our freedom.*
Besides, I would urge you to remember here that, as regards those
things that are ﬁt objects for the will to embrace, I have distinguished
most scrupulously between the conduct of life and the contemplation
of the truth. For, as regards the conduct of life, I am so far from

Second Objections and Replies

97

thinking that we should give our assent only to what we clearly
perceive, that, on the contrary, I think we cannot always even wait
for probabilities: sometimes, we have to choose one of a number of
options that are completely unknown; and yet we must hold fast to
this choice, once it has been made, as long as no reasons to the
contrary emerge, just as much as if we had made it for very obvious
reasons (I explained this in the Discourse on the Method [III. 22–3,
AT 6. 25]). But when the issue is the contemplation of truth, who has
ever denied that we must withhold our assent from what is obscure
and not suﬃciently distinctly perceived? And this alone is what I was
dealing with in my Meditations, as the subject-matter itself indicates,
and as I made clear in so many words at the end of the First
Meditation, when I said that my concern there was not with action but
only with the attainment of knowledge (p. 16).
6. The argument from the nature of God to his existence
When you criticize the conclusion of my syllogism, it seems that you
are in the wrong about it. For, given the conclusion you wish to
draw, the major premise should be formulated as follows: Whatever
we clearly understand to belong to the nature of some thing, can be truly
aﬃrmed to belong to that thing’s nature. And there would be nothing
in this beyond a pointless tautology. But my major premise is this:
Whatever we clearly understand to belong to the nature of some thing, can
be truly aﬃrmed of that thing. Thus, if to be an animal belongs to
man’s nature, we can aﬃrm that man is an animal; if to have three
angles equal to two right angles belongs to the nature of a triangle,
we can say that a triangle has three angles equal to two right angles;
if existence belongs to the nature of God, we can aﬃrm that God
exists; and so on. And the minor premise was this: But it belongs to
the nature of God to exist. From the major and the minor, it is clear
that we should draw the conclusion I drew: Therefore we can truly
aﬃrm of God, that he exists; but not, as you would have it: Therefore
we can truly aﬃrm, that it belongs to God’s nature to exist.
Therefore, in order to make room for the qualiﬁcation you make,
you should have denied the major premise, and said: Whatever we
clearly understand to belong to the nature of some thing, cannot, however,
be aﬃrmed of that thing, unless the thing’s nature is possible, that is, not
self-contradictory. But I urge you to recognize the pointlessness of
this qualiﬁcation. For you are either using possible in its normal sense

150

98

151

152

Second Objections and Replies

to mean whatever is not repugnant to human understanding—in
which sense it is obvious that God’s nature, as I described it, is possible, since I have supposed it to contain nothing except what we
clearly and distinctly perceive must belong to it, so that it cannot be
repugnant to the understanding. Or you must be imagining some
other kind of possibility pertaining to the object itself, and unless this
coincides with the former kind, it can never be known by the human
intellect, and has therefore no more power to compel us to deny the
nature or existence of God than to overthrow human knowledge
about everything else. For if it were legitimate to deny that the nature
of God is possible, even though no impossibility can be discovered on
the conceptual level, but, on the contrary, all those attributes we
include in this concept of the divine nature are so interconnected that
it seems to us self-contradictory that any one of them should not
belong to God, by the same token one could deny that it is possible
for the three angles of a triangle to be equal to two right angles, or for
one who is actually thinking to exist; and certainly one would be far
more entitled to deny that any of those things we access by the senses
is true; and thus the whole of human knowledge would be overthrown—and yet without the slightest reason. [. . .]
Even if we conceive God only inadequately, or, if you like, only very
inadequately, this does not prevent its being certain that his nature is
possible, or not self-contradictory. Nor does it prevent us from truly
asserting that we have investigated it suﬃciently clearly (suﬃciently,
that is, in order to know this, and indeed to know that necessary existence belongs to this same nature of God). For all impossibility (or
‘implicancy’*) resides in our thought alone, when it incorrectly joins
together ideas that clash with one another; and it cannot reside in
anything existing outside the intellect, because, by the very fact
that something exists outside the intellect, it is clear that it is not selfcontradictory but possible. Now all self-contradictoriness arises in our
concepts purely and simply because they are obscure and confused,
and it cannot exist at all in concepts that are clear and distinct. And
therefore it is suﬃcient for us to understand clearly and distinctly,
although by no means adequately, the few things we perceive about
God, and to realize, among other things, that necessary existence is
contained in this concept we have of him, however inadequate it may
be, in order for us to aﬃrm that we have investigated his nature
suﬃciently clearly, and that it is not self-contradictory.

Second Objections and Replies

99

[153–4] 7. Immortality
Descartes has explained in the Synopsis why he says nothing of immortality. He has shown that mind is a substance distinct from the body, and
therefore need not be aﬀected by the disintegration of the body; nor is
there any reason for thinking that a substance can perish by annihilation.
Natural philosophy therefore concludes that the soul is immortal. Yet God
could indeed have decreed, as the Objectors suggest, that human souls
should cease to exist when the bodies to which they are coupled are
destroyed. Only revelation assures us that this is not so, and that the soul
is in fact immortal.
[154–5] Descartes thanks the Objectors for their frank and helpful statement of objections, and discusses the suggestion that he should set out his
arguments in geometrical form:

Finally, as regards your suggestion that I should put forward my
arguments in the geometrical manner, so that they can be grasped by the
reader at a single glance, it would be worth my while to explain how
far I have followed it, and then how far I think it should be followed.
I distinguish two things in the geometrical manner of writing, the
order and the method of proof.
Order consists purely and simply in this, that the things that are
put forward ﬁrst have to be known without any help from those that
come later, and all the rest then have to be arranged in such a way that
they are demonstrated only from those that go before. And I have
certainly tried to follow this order as rigorously as possible in my
Meditations. It was in keeping with this that I dealt with the distinction between mind and body not in the second but only when I had
got to the sixth; and I left out many other things knowingly and deliberately, because they presupposed my explaining several other things.
But the method of proof takes two forms, one by analysis, the
other by synthesis.
Analysis shows the true path by which the thing was methodically
discovered, as if a priori,* so that, if the reader is willing to follow
it and to pay suﬃcient attention to every point, he will understand it
and assimilate it as perfectly as if he had discovered it himself. But it
has nothing that can compel the assent of a lazy or reluctant reader.
For if the slightest element in the argument is missed, the necessity
of the resultant conclusions does not appear, and often this form of
argument scarcely touches on many things, because they are quite
obvious to one paying suﬃcient attention, that it is nonetheless crucial to realize.

155

156

100

157

Second Objections and Replies

Synthesis, on the other hand, works in the opposite direction,
retracing the path, so to speak, a posteriori.* It clearly demonstrates
whatever conclusions have been drawn, and makes use of a long
string of deﬁnitions, postulates, axioms, theorems, and problems; so
that if a reader should deny any of its consequences, it immediately
shows that the consequence is contained in the antecedents, and thus
forces him, however reluctant or recalcitrant, to yield his assent. But
it is not so satisfying as the other, nor so fulﬁlling for those who really
wish to learn, since it does not reveal the method by which the thing
was discovered.
The old geometers used only the second method in their writings,
not because they were altogether unaware of the other, but because,
to my mind, they thought of it so highly that they kept it to themselves as a valuable secret.
Now I have followed this analytic method alone, as the true and
best way of teaching, in my Meditations; but as for synthesis, which
is certainly what you are asking of me here, although it plays a most
valuable role in geometry, when placed after analysis, it cannot be
applied so conveniently to these metaphysical matters.
For this is the diﬀerence: that the primary notions that are presupposed in order to demonstrate geometrical truths are in accordance
with habitual sense-perception, and are readily accepted by everyone.
Therefore there is no diﬃculty here except in deducing the consequences properly; and this can be achieved by all kinds of people,
even the less attentive, provided only that they remember what has
gone before. And their memory is assisted by the formulation of
diﬀerent propositions, each corresponding to a particular aspect of
the problem in question, so that readers can dwell separately on each
one, which can be subsequently referred to so as to refresh the
memory even of the reluctant.*
On the other hand, the major diﬃculty in metaphysics is with the
clear and distinct perception of the primary notions. For even if they
are intrinsically no less knowable, or even more knowable, than those
considered by geometers, because they are, nonetheless, at odds with
many prejudices of the senses to which we have grown accustomed
since childhood, they are not perfectly known except to those who pay
close attention, who meditate, and who withdraw their minds from
bodily things as far as possible. And thus, if they were baldly stated by
themselves, they could be easily denied by those inclined to contradict.

Second Objections and Replies

101

This is why I wrote Meditations, rather than Disputations,* as
philosophers normally do, or Theorems and Problems, in the manner
of geometers, so that by this fact alone I might make clear that I have
no business except with those who are prepared to make the eﬀort to
meditate along with me and to consider the subject attentively. In
fact, by setting himself to ﬁght against truth, which is what someone
is doing if he holds back from considering the reasons that establish
it, so as to ﬁnd others that tend against it, he makes himself less capable of perceiving it.*
Perhaps someone will object that there is admittedly no need to
search for reasons to the contrary, when we know that the truth is
being oﬀered us; but that, as long as there is any doubt on this point,
it is proper for the reasons on both sides to be set out, so that we can
discover which are more solid; and that I am therefore making unfair
demands, if I require my arguments to be accepted as true, before
they have been examined, and forbid other arguments to the contrary
to be considered.
This would certainly be a fair point, if any of the reasons that
I required the reader to be attentive and cooperative in order to grasp
were such as to distract him from considering various other reasons,
in which there was even the slightest hope of ﬁnding more truth than
in mine. But since the reasons I put forward include a universal
doubt taken to its limits, and I recommend nothing more strongly
than very careful consideration of each particular point, and nothing,
in short, is accepted except what has been viewed so clearly and distinctly that we cannot withhold our assent from it; and since, on the
other hand, there are no other reasons from which I wish to convert
my readers’ minds, except those they have never examined properly,
and that they derived not from any solid reason, but from the senses
alone, I do not think anyone can believe that he will be in greater
danger of erring, if he considers only the reasons I have to oﬀer him,
than if he turns aside his mind from them and turns it instead to
other reasons that are opposed to these in some way and that merely
darken the issue (I mean the prejudices of the senses).
Therefore, not only is it perfectly fair of me to require particular
attention on the part of my readers, I chose the particular way of
writing that I thought most capable of inspiring it, and from which
I am convinced that my readers will receive more beneﬁt than
they themselves will realize; whereas, on the other hand, from the

158

159

102

Second Objections and Replies

synthetic way of writing they usually think they have learned more
than in fact they have; but I also think myself entitled to reject out of
hand and to regard as of no account whatever the judgements passed
on my work by those who have refused to meditate along with me
and who stick to their own prior opinions.
But because I know how diﬃcult it will be, even for those who will
pay attention and make a serious search for truth, to get an overall
view of my Meditations, and at the same time to pick out the particular elements (both of which I think must be done at the same
time, if one is to derive the fullest possible beneﬁt from the work), I
shall add a few points here in the synthetic style, which I hope will be
of some assistance; provided that these readers will be good enough to
bear in mind that I do not wish to cover as much material here as in
the Meditations, because I would have to be much more prolix than
I had to be in the original work, and also that what I do cover I shall
not be explaining in detail, partly because I am concerned to be brief,
and partly in case anyone thinks that this is suﬃcient, and therefore
takes less trouble to examine the Meditations, from which I am convinced there is much more beneﬁt to be gained.
160

reasons proving the existence of god and the
distinction between the soul and the body,
set out in geometrical fashion
Deﬁnitions

I. I use the term thought to cover everything that is in us in such a
way that we are immediately conscious of it. Thus all operations of
the will, the intellect, the imagination, and the senses are thoughts.
But I added ‘immediate’, so as to exclude the consequences of these
operations: for instance, voluntary motion certainly has thought at its
origin, but is not itself a thought.
II. By the term idea I understand the form, of any thought whatever, by the immediate perception of which I am conscious of the
same thought itself; so that I cannot express anything in words
(understanding what I am saying), without its being certain, for this
very reason, that there is in me the idea of the thing that is signiﬁed
by those words. And therefore I do not conﬁne the term ‘ideas’ only
to the mental pictures depicted in the imagination; in fact, I do not

Second Objections and Replies

103

here call these ‘ideas’ at all, in so far as they are depicted in the bodily
imagination, that is, in some part of the brain, but only in so far as
they inform the mind itself, when it is directed towards that part of
the brain.
III. By the objective reality of an idea I mean the being of the thing
represented by the idea, in so far as it exists in the idea; along the
same lines, one can say ‘objective perfection’, or ‘objective complexity’, and so forth. For whatever we perceive as being in the objects of
our ideas, is in the ideas themselves objectively.
IV. The same properties are said to exist formally in the objects of
ideas, when they are in them such as we perceive them; and eminently, when they are not in the object in this way, but instead there
are properties so great as to take their place.
V. Every thing in which something we perceive—that is, some
property, or quality, or attribute—exists immediately, as in its subject, or through which something we perceive exists, and of which we
have a real idea in ourselves, is called a substance. Nor do we have any
other idea of substance in this precise sense than this: it is a thing in
which, either formally or eminently, the something exists that we
perceive or that exists objectively in some one of our ideas; because
it is known to the natural light that there can be no real attributes of
nothing.
VI. The substance in which thought immediately exists is called
mind: I say mind here, rather than soul, because the word ‘soul’ is
equivocal, and is often used to refer to a bodily thing.
VII. The substance that is the immediate subject of local extension, and of the accidents that presuppose extension, such as shapes,
places, local motions, and so forth, is called body. But whether there
is one and the same substance, called both mind and body, or two distinct substances, will be investigated later.
VIII. The substance we understand to be supremely perfect, and
in which we conceive nothing at all that involves any defect or limitation of perfection, is called God.
IX. When we say that something is contained in the nature or
concept of some thing, this is the same as saying that it is true of that
thing, or that it can be aﬃrmed of that thing.
X. Two substances are said to be really distinguished, when each
of them can exist without the other.

161

162

104

Second Objections and Replies

Postulates*

163

First, I request my readers to realize how feeble are the reasons for
which, up to now, they have trusted to their senses, and how uncertain are all the judgements that they have founded on these; and to
go over this so long and so often that they will ﬁnally acquire the habit
of no longer trusting to them excessively. For I judge this necessary
if one is to perceive certainty in metaphysical matters.
Secondly, that they should consider their own mind, and all its
attributes, about which they will realize that they cannot doubt, even
though they suppose that everything they have ever received from
the senses is false; and they should pursue this consideration as long
as it takes to acquire the habit of perceiving the mind clearly, and of
believing it to be easier to know than all bodily things.
Thirdly, that they should carefully weigh the directly known
[per se notas] propositions that they discover within themselves, such
as That a thing cannot both be and not be at one and the same time; that
nothingness cannot be the eﬃcient cause of any thing, and suchlike; they
will thus be putting into practice the perspicuity of the intellect
that nature has implanted in us, purifying and liberating it from the
powerful disturbing inﬂuence constantly exerted by the perceptions
of the senses. By this method they will easily come to be aware of the
truth of the Axioms that follow.
Fourthly, that they should examine the ideas of diﬀerent natures
in which a simultaneous combination of many diﬀerent attributes is
contained, such as the nature of a triangle, or of a square, or of any
other shape; and also, the nature of mind, the nature of body, and
above all the nature of God, or the supremely perfect being; and that
they should realize that all that we perceive to be contained in these
can be truly aﬃrmed of them. For instance, because it is contained in
the nature of a triangle that its three angles are equal to two right
angles, and in the nature of a body, or an extended thing, that it
should be divisible (for we can conceive of no extended thing, however small, that we cannot divide, at least in thought), it is true to say
that the three angles of any triangle are equal to two right angles, and
that every body is divisible.
Fifthly, that they should devote considerable time to serious
contemplation of the nature of the supremely perfect being; and
consider, among other things, that possible existence is contained in
the ideas of all other natures whatsoever; but that in the idea of God

Second Objections and Replies

105

not only possible but absolutely necessary existence is contained.
From this alone, and without any process of reasoning, they will
know God exists; and this will be as directly known to them as that
the number two is even and the number three odd, and suchlike. For
there are many truths directly known to some that are understood by
others only by a process of reasoning.
Sixthly, that, by examining all the examples of clear and distinct
perception, and also those of obscure and confused perception, that
I have listed in my Meditations, they should accustom themselves to
distinguishing things that are clearly known from those that are
obscure; for this is learned more easily by examples than by rules,
and I think that in the text I have either explained or at least touched
on all the examples of this.
Seventhly, and ﬁnally, that, realizing that they have never
detected any falsity in things that they have clearly perceived, and on
the other hand that they have never, except by chance, encountered
the truth in things they have understood only obscurely, that they
should consider that it is altogether contrary to reason that, purely on
account of the prejudices of the senses, or on account of some hypothesis that contains an unknown element, they should call into question
things that are clearly and distinctly perceived by the pure intellect.
For in this way they will readily accept the following axioms as true
and indubitable. Although indeed some of these could have been
better explained, and put forward as theorems rather than axioms,*
if I had wished to take the trouble.

164

Axioms
or
Common Notions
I. Nothing exists of which we cannot ask what is the cause of its
existence. We can even ask this question of God himself, not that he
requires some cause for his existence, but because the very immensity of
his nature is the cause or reason why he needs no cause for his existence.
II. The present moment does not depend on the moment immediately preceding, and therefore the conservation of a thing requires
a cause no less than its original bringing into being.
III. No thing, nor any actually existing perfection of a thing, can
have nothing, or a non-existent thing, as the cause of its existence.

165

106

166

Second Objections and Replies

IV. Whatever reality or perfection there is in any thing exists formally or eminently in its ﬁrst and adequate cause.
V. Hence it follows that the objective reality of our ideas requires a
cause, in which this same reality is contained, not only objectively but
formally or eminently. And it should be noted that this axiom is so necessary to accept because all knowledge, whether its object can be perceived by the senses or not, depends on it alone. For how, for example,
do we know that the sky exists? Because we see it? But this sight
does not aﬀect the mind, except in so far as it is an idea: an idea, I say,
inhering in the mind itself, not an image depicted in the imagination.
Now on the basis of this idea we cannot judge that the sky exists,
unless because every idea must have a really existing cause of its
objective reality, a cause we judge to be the sky itself, and so on.
VI. There are diﬀerent degrees of reality or being; for a substance
has more reality than an accident or mode; and inﬁnite substance
more than ﬁnite. Therefore there is more objective reality in the idea
of a substance than in that of an accident; and in the idea of an
inﬁnite substance than in that of a ﬁnite substance.
VII. The will of a thinking thing is carried, but voluntarily and
freely (for this is of the essence of will), and yet infallibly, towards a
good it clearly knows; therefore, if it knows that there are some perfections it lacks, it will give them to itself immediately, if they are in
its power.
VIII. What can bring about what is greater or more diﬃcult, can
also bring about what is less so.
IX. It is a greater thing to create or conserve a substance than to
create or conserve the attributes or properties of a substance; nor is
creating a greater thing than conserving, as has already been stated.
X. Existence is contained in the idea or concept of every thing,
because we can conceive nothing except as existing; to be precise,
possible or contingent existence is contained in the concept of a
limited thing, but necessary and perfect existence in the concept
of a supremely perfect being.
[166–70] There follow four propositions proved from these deﬁnitions
and axioms: that God’s existence is known from his nature; that it is
known from the presence of his idea in us; that it is known from the fact
that we, having this idea, exist (with the corollary that he created all
things, and can produce all that we can clearly perceive, as we perceive it);
that there is a real distinction between soul and body.

THIRD OBJECTIONS

171

WITH THE AUTHOR’S REPLIES*

First Objection
On the First Meditation: Of those things that can be
called into doubt
It is clear from what is said in this Meditation, that there is no criterion*
by which our dreams may be distinguished from the waking state and from
true sensation; and, therefore, that the phantasms* we have when awake
and sentient are not accidents inhering in external objects, nor a proof that
such external objects exist at all. Hence if we go along with our senses
without any further reasoning-process, we shall rightly doubt whether
anything exists or not. Therefore we recognize the truth of this Meditation.
But since Plato and other ancient philosophers argued for the uncertainty
of sensible things, and the diﬃculty of distinguishing sleep from waking is
a matter of common observation, I would have wished this excellent
author of new speculations to refrain from publishing these old ones.
Reply
The reasons for doubting, which are here admitted to be true by the
Philosopher,* were put forward by me only as probable; and when
I made use of them, I was not intending to pass them oﬀ as new, but
partly to prepare readers’ minds to consider intellectual things and to
distinguish them from those of the body, for which purpose they
seem to me to be altogether necessary; partly to answer them in the
succeeding Meditations; and partly also to show how ﬁrm are the
truths I later advance, since they cannot be shaken by these metaphysical doubts.* So in listing them here I was not seeking for praise;
but I think I could no more have omitted them here than a writer on
medicine can omit the description of the disease he aims to show us
the method of curing.
Objection II
On the Second Meditation: On the nature of the human mind
I am a thinking thing (p. 19): all well and good. For from the fact that
I think, or have a phantasm, whether I am asleep or awake, it can be

172

108

173

Third Objections

inferred that I am thinking; for ‘I think’ and ‘I am thinking’ mean the
same. From the fact that I am thinking, it follows that I exist, since what
thinks is not nothing. But where he goes on to say that is, I am a mind,
a soul, an understanding, a reason (p. 19), this is where doubt creeps in.
For it does not seem a valid piece of reasoning to say, ‘I am thinking,
therefore I am a thought’; or ‘I am understanding, therefore I am an
understanding’. For I could similarly argue ‘I am walking, therefore I am
a walk’. Therefore M. Descartes is running together the thing that understands and intellection, which is an act of the thing that understands; or at
least he is taking the thing that understands to be the same thing as the
understanding, which is a power of the intelligent thing. Yet all philosophers distinguish the subject from its faculties and acts, that is, from its
properties and essences; for the ‘being’ itself is one thing, and its ‘essence’ is
another. Therefore it may be the case that a thinking thing is the subject of
the mind, the reason, or the understanding, and therefore something bodily.
M. Descartes assumes the contrary without proof. But his inference is the
foundation of the conclusion he seems to be trying to establish here.
In the same place, we ﬁnd this: I know that I exist; I am trying to
ﬁnd out what this ‘I’ is, whose existence I know. It is absolutely certain that this knowledge, in the precise sense in question here, does
not depend on things of which I do not yet know whether they exist
(p. 20).
It is absolutely certain that the knowledge of this proposition ‘I exist’
depends on this one ‘I am thinking’, as he himself has rightly shown. But
where does the knowledge that ‘I am thinking’ come from? Certainly from
nothing else than this: that we cannot conceive any action without its subject: we cannot conceive dancing without a dancer, knowledge without
one who knows, thinking without a thinker.
And it seems to follow from this that the thinking thing is something
bodily; for it seems that the subject of any act* can be understood only in
bodily or material terms. He shows this himself later by the example of the
wax, which, although its colour, hardness, shape, and other acts are
changed, is still understood to be the same thing all along, that is, the same
matter, subjected to all these transformations. For ‘I am thinking’ is not
inferred from another thought: someone may think that he has thought
(which is the same as remembering he has thought), but it is altogether
impossible to think that one is thinking, just as one cannot know one is
knowing. For there would then be an inﬁnite string of questions: how do
you know that you know that you know that you are knowing?

Third Objections

109

Since, therefore, the knowledge of this proposition ‘I exist’ depends on
the knowledge of this one, ‘I am thinking’; and the knowledge of the latter
on the fact that we cannot separate the act of thought from the matter that
thinks, it seems the inference should be that a thinking thing is material
rather than immaterial.
Reply
When I said, ‘that is, a mind, a soul, an understanding, a reason’, I
did not use these words merely to denote the various faculties, but to
denote the things endowed with the faculty of thinking. The ﬁrst two
are usually understood in this sense, and the other two are often used
in this way. And I have said this so explicitly and in so many places,
that there seems to be no room for doubt here.
Nor does the comparison between walking and thinking hold good
here. For the word ‘walk’ is normally understood only as denoting
the action; but ‘thought’ is sometimes taken to refer to the action,
sometimes to the faculty, and sometimes to the thing possessing the
faculty.
Nor am I saying that the thing that understands and the act of
intellection are one and the same, or that the thing that understands
is the same as the understanding, in the sense of the faculty of understanding; they are the same only when ‘understanding’ is taken to
refer to the thing that understands. I readily admit that I have used
the most abstract words possible when referring to a thing or a
substance, which I wanted to strip of everything that does not belong
to it; whereas, on the other hand, the Philosopher uses the most concrete words possible—‘subject’, ‘matter’, ‘body’—when he refers to
the thinking thing, so as to prevent it being divested of its body.
Nor do I fear that a reader may think that his method of combining a number of things together* is better equipped for ﬁnding the
truth than mine, in which I distinguish things as much as possible.
But let us forget about words, and talk about things.
He says: ‘It may be the case that the thinking thing is something
bodily. M. Descartes assumes the contrary without proof.’ I certainly
did not assume the contrary, or treat it as a foundation. I left the issue
completely open, until the Sixth Meditation, in which I prove my
view.*
Then he says, rightly, that ‘we cannot conceive any action without its subject’, as thought without a thinker, because what thinks is

174

175

110

176

Third Objections

not nothing. But without any reason, and contrary to all our ordinary
ways of talking and all logic, he adds: It seems to follow from this that
the thinking thing is something bodily; for indeed the subjects of all acts
can be understood only in terms of substances (or, if you prefer, in terms
of matter, that is, metaphysical matter), but this does not mean they
can be understood only in bodily terms.*
But all logicians and nearly all ordinary people as well are accustomed to say that some substances are spiritual, others bodily. And
all I proved by the example of the wax was that colour, hardness,
shape do not belong to the essence (ratio formalis) of the wax itself.
And I said nothing here of the essence of the mind, or indeed of the
essence of body.
Nor is what the Philosopher says here, that one thought cannot be
the subject of another thought, at all relevant. Whoever, apart from
himself, ever imagined this?* But—to explain the issue as brieﬂy as
possible—it is certain that thought cannot exist without a thinking
thing, nor can any act or any accident at all exist without a substance
in which it inheres.
But since we do not know substance itself immediately by itself,
but only inasmuch as it is the subject of certain acts,* it is entirely
reasonable and in accordance with ordinary usage to call those substances we recognize to be the subjects of quite diﬀerent acts or accidents by diﬀerent names, examining at a later stage whether those
diﬀerent names refer to diﬀerent things or to one and the same thing.
Now there are some acts we call ‘bodily’, such as size, shape, movement, and all those other things that cannot be conceived without
extension in space; and we call the substance in which they inhere a
‘body’. Nor can we imagine that there is one substance that is the
subject of shape, and another that is the subject of local motion, and
so forth, because all these acts come together under a single common
concept (ratio) of extension. Then there are other acts, which we call
‘cogitative’, such as understanding, willing, imagining, perceiving by
the senses, and so on, which all come together under a common concept of thought, or perception, or consciousness; and the substance
in which they inhere is called a ‘thinking thing’, or a ‘mind’, or any
other name we choose, as long as we do not confuse this substance
with bodily substance, since cogitative acts have no aﬃnity with
bodily acts, and thought, which is the common element in all of
them, diﬀers radically from extension, which is the common element

Third Objections

111

of the other kind. But after we have formed two distinct concepts of
these two substances, it is easy, from what is said in the Sixth
Meditation, to discover whether they are one and the same or two
diﬀerent substances.
Objection III
What therefore is there that can be distinguished from my thinking?
What is there that can be said to be separate from me? (p. 21)*
Someone might perhaps answer this question as follows: I myself, who
think, am to be distinguished from my thinking; and my thinking is not
separate from me, but diﬀerent from me, just as dancing is distinguished
from the dancer (as was pointed out above). But if M. Descartes has shown
that the one who understands and the understanding are one and the same,
we shall fall back into the scholastic way of talking: ‘the understanding
understands’, ‘the sight sees’, ‘the will wills’, and, to use an exact analogy,
‘the walk (or at least the faculty of walking) walks’. But all these expressions are obscure, inaccurate, and most unworthy of M. Descartes’s usual
perspicuity.

177

Reply
I do not deny that I, who think, am to be distinguished from my
thinking, as a thing from a mode; but when I ask ‘Is there any of them
that can be distinguished from my thinking?’, I am talking about the
various modes of thinking just listed, and not about my substance;
and, when I add ‘Is there any of them that can be said to be separate
from me?’, I mean only that all these modes of thinking are present
in me; and I cannot see what can be imagined to be doubtful or
obscure in any of this.
Objection IV
So I am left with no alternative, but to accept that I am not at all
imagining what this wax is, I am conceiving* it with my mind alone
(pp. 22–3).
There is a great diﬀerence between imagining, that is, having some
idea, and conceiving with the mind, that is, inferring that something is, or
exists, by a process of reasoning. But M. Descartes has not explained to
us in what the diﬀerence consists. The Peripatetics* of old also showed
quite clearly that substance is not perceived by the senses, but inferred by
reasoning.

178

112

Third Objections

But what if reasoning is nothing other than a coupling and attachment
of names or labels, by means of the word ‘is’?* It would follow that by reasoning we infer nothing at all about the nature of things but only about
their labels—that is, whether or not we are combining the names of things
according to the stipulations we have laid down about the meanings we
have decided to attach to the names. If this is so (and it may be), then
reasoning depends on names, names on the imagination, and the imagination perhaps (as I myself hold) on the motion of the bodily organs; and
thus the mind would be no more than a motion in certain parts of the
organic body.

179

Reply
I explained the diﬀerence between imagination and the pure concept
of the mind at this point, when I listed, using the example of the wax,
the things we imagine in it and those we conceive by the mind alone.
But I have also explained elsewhere the diﬀerence between how we
understand something, say, a pentagon, and how we imagine the
same thing.* Besides, in reasoning, there is a coupling not of names,
but of the things signiﬁed by the names; and I am amazed that
anyone can think the contrary. No one doubts that a Frenchman and
a German can both reason about the very same things, though the
words they conceive are utterly diﬀerent. And is not the Philosopher
condemning himself out of his own mouth when he speaks of the
stipulations we lay down about the meanings of words? For if he
admits that words mean something, why can he not accept that our
reasonings are about the thing that is signiﬁed, rather than about the
words alone? But as far as his conclusion that the mind is motion is
concerned, he might just as well conclude at the same time that the
earth is the sky, or anything he likes.
Objection V
On the Third Meditation: Of God
Some of these thoughts are apparently images of things, and to these
alone the name ‘idea’ is properly applied: for instance, when I think
of a human being, or a chimera, or the heavens, or an angel, or God.
(pp. 26 –7).
When I think of a human being, I recognize an idea, or an image
composed of shape and colour, about which I may ask myself whether it
is the likeness of a human being or not. The same applies when I think of

Third Objections

113

the heavens. When I think of a chimera, I recognize an idea, or an image,
about which I can ask myself whether or not it is the likeness of some
animal that does not exist, but that could exist, or that existed at some
earlier time.
But when someone is thinking of an angel, there comes to his mind
sometimes the image of a ﬂame, sometimes that of a beautiful boy with
wings, about which I think I can be certain that it is not the likeness of an
angel, and therefore that this is not the idea of an angel. But believing
that there are immaterial and invisible creatures that wait upon God, we
attach the name ‘angel’ to this thing we believe or suppose exists, although
the idea, by means of which I imagine an angel, is put together from the
ideas of visible things.
The same is true of the holy name of God of whom we have no image
or idea; and therefore we are forbidden to worship God in the form of an
image, in case we should think we can conceive him who is beyond our
conception.
It seems, then, that there is no idea of God in us. But just as a person
born blind, who has often come close to the ﬁre and felt himself grow hot,
recognizes that there is something by which he is heated, and hearing it
called a ‘ﬁre’, concludes that ﬁre exists, yet does not know what shape or
colour it is, nor has any idea or image of ﬁre arising in his mind; so man,
realizing that there must be some cause of his images or ideas, and that
this cause too must have another cause prior to it, and so on, is ﬁnally led
to an end-point, or to the supposition of some eternal cause that, since it
never began to be, can have no cause prior to itself. He necessarily concludes that something eternal exists.* Yet he has no idea that he could call
the idea of this eternal being, but gives this thing he believes in or
acknowledges the name or label ‘God’.
Now, since it is from this supposition, that we have the idea of God in
our soul, that M. Descartes proceeds to prove the theorem that God (that
is, a supremely wise and powerful creator of the world) exists, he should
have given a better explanation of this idea of God, and deduced from it
not only God’s existence but his creation of the world as well.
Reply
Here he intends the term ‘idea’ to be taken purely in the sense of the
images of material things that are depicted in the bodily imagination.
On this basis, it is easy for him to prove that there can be no proper
idea of an angel or of God. And yet throughout my work and

180

181

114

Third Objections

especially here, I make clear that I take the term ‘idea’ to signify
everything that is directly perceived by the mind.* This means that,
because, when I will or fear, I perceive at the same time that I am
willing or fearing, willing and fearing count for me as ideas. And I
used this term ‘ideas’, because it had already been very commonly
used by philosophers to denote the forms of perception of the divine
mind, although we recognize that there is no imagination in God;
and I had no more suitable term to hand. But I think I have
suﬃciently explained the idea of God to all who will take the trouble
to bear in mind the sense in which I use it; as for those, on the other
hand, who prefer to understand my terms in a diﬀerent sense from
me, I could never do enough to satisfy them. The concluding remarks
he adds about the creation of the world are entirely irrelevant.

182

Objection VI
But others have certain other forms as well; thus, when I will, or fear,
or aﬃrm, or deny, I am always in fact apprehending some thing as
the subject of this thought, but I am including something further
within the thought than the mere likeness of the thing; and of
thoughts of this kind some are called volitions, or aﬀects, whereas
others are called judgements (p. 27).
When someone wills or fears, he has, to be sure, an image of the thing
he fears and of the action he wills; but what he is further including within
his thought is not made clear. Even if fear is a thought, I do not see what
else it can be than the thought of the thing the person fears. For what is
the fear of a charging lion, but the idea of a charging lion, plus the eﬀect
(which such an idea produces in the heart) by which the person in fear is
impelled to the animal motion we call ﬂight? But this motion of ﬂight is
not a thought. Hence we can only conclude that there is no other thought
involved in fear beyond that which consists in the likeness of the thing.
The same applies to the will.
Besides, aﬃrmation and negation do not occur without words and
labels. This is why brute beasts cannot aﬃrm or deny, even in thought,
and therefore cannot judge. Yet a thought may be similar in a human
being and in an animal. For when we aﬃrm that a man is running, our
thought is no diﬀerent from that of a dog seeing his master running.
Aﬃrmation or negation therefore add nothing to the bare thought itself,
except perhaps the thought that the names in which the aﬃrmation consists are the names of the actual thing that is in the person who aﬃrms;

Third Objections

115

but this adds nothing besides the likeness of the thing to the thought, it
merely reproduces that likeness.
Reply
It is a thing directly known that there is a diﬀerence between, on the one
hand, seeing a lion and at the same time fearing it, and, on the other,
simply seeing it. Likewise it is one thing to see a man running, and
another to aﬃrm to oneself that one is seeing him, which process occurs
without speech. And I can see nothing here that requires an answer.

183

Objection VII
It remains for me only to examine in what fashion I received this idea
from God. For I did not derive it from the senses, nor did it ever
thrust itself spontaneously on my attention, as do the ideas of sensible things, when the things themselves make an impression on the
external sense-organs (or appear to do so). Nor is it a ﬁction, a
creation of my own, for I cannot subtract anything from it, or add
anything at all to it. It must therefore be that the idea is innate within
me, in the same way as the idea of myself is innate within me (pp. 36–7).
If there is no idea of God (and it has not been proved that there is),
and in fact there seems not to be one, this whole investigation collapses.
Besides, the idea of myself arises in me (from the point of view of the
body) from sight; from the point of view of the soul, there is no idea of the
soul at all, but we infer by reason that there is something inside the human
body that imparts animal motion to it, and in virtue of which it perceives
by the senses and is moved. And this, whatever it is, we call the soul: but
we have no idea of it.
Reply
If there is an idea of God (as there manifestly is) this whole objection
collapses. And when he adds that the idea of the soul is not given, but
it is inferred by reason, this is tantamount to saying that we do not
have an image of it represented in our imagination, but that we have
what I have called an idea of it.
Objection VIII
The other [idea of the sun], however, derives from astronomical
reasoning—that is to say, it is derived from some notions innate
within me (p. 28).

184

116

Third Objections

There seems to be only one idea of the sun at a given time, whether we
are actually looking at it, or whether we are understanding by a process
of reasoning that its real size is far greater than it appears. For in this
second case, we are dealing not with an idea of the sun, but with an inference on the basis of arguments that the idea of the sun would be many
times greater, if we were viewing it from much closer.
It is true that at diﬀerent times there may be diﬀerent ideas of the sun,
for instance, if at one time it is viewed with the naked eye and at another
through a telescope. But astronomical reasoning does not make the idea of
the sun bigger or smaller; rather, it shows that the sensible idea of the sun
is deceptive.
Reply
Here yet again what he says is not an idea of the sun, and yet
describes, is exactly the same as what I call an idea.*

185

Objection IX
For beyond doubt those ideas that represent substances to me are
something greater, and contain, if I may use the term, more ‘objective reality’ in themselves, than those that represent merely modes or
accidents. And by the same token the idea by which I conceive a
supreme God, eternal, inﬁnite, omniscient, all-powerful, and the
creator of all things that exist beside himself, certainly has more
objective reality in itself than those by which ﬁnite substances are
represented (p. 29).
I have already remarked several times that we have no idea either of
God or of the soul; I would add now, that there is none of substance either.
For substance (considered as matter subject to various accidents and alterations) is inferred by reasoning alone; it is not conceived nor does it represent any idea to us. If this is the case, how can it be asserted that the
ideas that represent substances to me are something greater, and contain
more objective reality, than those that represent accidents to me? Besides
M. Descartes should consider afresh what he means by ‘more reality’. Can
there be more or less reality? Or if he thinks that one thing is more of a
thing than another, he should consider how this notion can be explained to
us with the degree of clarity that is required in any demonstration, and
that he himself has achieved elsewhere.

Third Objections

117

Reply
I have remarked several times that by ‘idea’ I mean precisely what is
inferred by reason, as well as whatever else is perceived in any way.
And I have suﬃciently explained how there can be greater or lesser
degrees of reality. For instance, a substance is more of a thing than a
mode is; and if there are real qualities,* or incomplete substances,
they are things in a greater degree than modes, but less than complete substances; and ﬁnally if there is an inﬁnite and independent
substance, it is more of a thing than ﬁnite and dependent substance.
And all of this is manifestly known directly.
Objection X
And so there remains only the idea of God, in which I must consider
whether there is anything that could not derive from myself. By the
name ‘God’ I understand an inﬁnite, independent, supremely
intelligent, supremely powerful substance, by which I myself and
whatever else exists (if anything else does exist) was created. But
certainly all these advantages are so great that, the more carefully
I consider them, the less it seems possible that they can be derived
from me alone. And so I must conclude that it necessarily follows
from all that has been said up to now that God exists (p. 32).
Considering the attributes of God, in order that we may deduce the idea
of God from them, and discern whether there is anything in it that could
not have derived from ourselves, I ﬁnd, if I am not mistaken, both that
the things we think of in connection with the name of God do not derive
from ourselves, and that it is not necessary that they should come from
anywhere other than external objects. For by the name of God I mean a
‘substance’ (that is, I understand that God exists—not by means of an
idea, but by a process of reasoning); that is ‘inﬁnite’ (that is, I cannot
conceive or imagine him as having any boundaries or extremities, without
being able to imagine others still more remote: from this it follows that the
word ‘inﬁnite’ gives rise to an idea not of the divine inﬁnity, but of my
own boundaries or limitations); that is ‘independent’ (that is, I cannot
conceive of a cause by which God has been produced; from which it is
clear that the word ‘independent’ gives rise to no idea in me, beyond my
remembrance of my ideas as beginning at diﬀerent times, and thus as
dependent.

186

118
187

188

Third Objections

Therefore, to say that God is ‘independent’ is to say no more than
that God is one of those things the origin of which I cannot imagine.
Likewise, to say God is ‘inﬁnite’, is the same as saying that he is one of
those things the limits of which we cannot conceive. And thus any idea of
God is shown to be impossible: for what kind of idea can there be without
origin and without limits?
‘Supremely intelligent.’ Here I ask: By what idea does M. Descartes
understand the intellection of God?
‘Supremely powerful.’ Likewise, by what idea can we understand his
power, which relates to future things, that is, things that do not exist? It
is certain that I understand power on the basis of an image, or memory,
of past events, by reasoning as follows: he did this, therefore he was able
to do this; therefore the same being will be able to do the same thing again,
that is, he has the power of doing it. Now all of these are ideas that can
have arisen from external objects.
‘Creator of all that exists.’ I can form a certain image of creation in
my mind based on what I have seen, such as a human being being born or
growing as if from a tiny point into the shape and size it now has. That is
the only idea that can arise in anyone’s mind at the word ‘creator’. But
the fact that we can imagine the world being created is not suﬃcient proof
that creation took place. Therefore, even if it were proved that some being
inﬁnite, independent, supremely powerful, &c. exists, it does not
follow that there exists a creator. Unless someone were to think that from
the fact that there exists something we believe created everything else, we
can validly conclude that the world was therefore created at some time by
that being.
Besides, when he says that the idea of God and of our soul is innate
within us, I should like to know if the souls of people in a deep dreamless
sleep are thinking. If not, then they have no ideas at that time. Therefore
no idea is innate; for what is innate is always present.
Reply
None of the properties we ascribe to God can have been modelled on
properties of external objects, since there is nothing in God similar
to the properties of external—that is, bodily—objects. But whatever
we think that is dissimilar to them, clearly derives not from them, but
from a cause of this dissimilarity in our thought.*
And here I would ask how this philosopher deduces the intellection of God from external things. Whereas the idea I have of it, I can

Third Objections

119

readily explain, by saying that by an idea, I mean whatever is the
form of some perception. For anyone who understands something
perceives that he understands. He therefore has this form, or idea, of
intellection, by extending which indeﬁnitely he forms the idea of the
divine intellection. The same applies to the rest of God’s attributes.*
Since, indeed, I have used the idea of God that we have to demonstrate his existence, and since so much power is contained in this idea
that we understand that it is impossible, if God exists, for anything
else to exist alongside him, except what was created by him, it plainly
follows, from the fact that his existence has been demonstrated, that
it has also been demonstrated that the whole world, or in other words
every thing other than God, whatever it is, that exists, was created
by him.
Finally, when I say that some idea is innate within us, I do not
mean that that idea is always present to us—for in that sense certainly there would be no innate ideas; I mean only that we have in
ourselves the faculty of producing it.*

189

Objection XI
The whole force of the argument comes down to this, that I recognize that it cannot be that I should exist, with the nature I possess
(that is, having the idea of God within myself), unless in reality God
also exists—God, the same being whose idea is within me (p. 37).
Since, therefore, it has not been demonstrated that we have an idea of
God, and the Christian religion requires us to believe that God is inconceivable, which means, it seems to me, that we do not have an idea of him,
it follows that the existence of God has not been demonstrated, far less his
creation [of the world].
Reply
When God is stated to be inconceivable, what this means is that there
is no concept that grasps him adequately. But as for how we possess
the idea of God, I have said this again and again ad nauseam; and
nothing at all is asserted here that invalidates my demonstrations.
Objection XII
On the Fourth Meditation: Of True and False
And thus I can understand, quite certainly, that error, in so far as it
is error, is not something real dependent on God, but purely and

190

120

Third Objections

simply a deﬁciency; and therefore that, in order to make mistakes
I do not need a special faculty given me by God for this purpose
(p. 39).
It is certain that ignorance is nothing but a deﬁciency, nor do we need any
positive faculty to enable us to be ignorant. But this is not so clear as regards
error. For it seems that stones and inanimate things cannot make mistakes,
purely and simply because they do not have the faculty of reasoning, or of
imagining. Hence one is inclined to infer that in order to make mistakes we
need the faculty of reasoning, or at least imagining, and both of these are positive faculties, given to all those and only those who make mistakes.
Besides, M. Descartes says this: I realize that they [sc. my errors]
depend on two simultaneously operative causes, namely, the faculty
I possess of acquiring knowledge [cognoscendi] and the faculty of
choosing, or free will (p. 40). This seems to contradict the preceding passage. We should also note here that the freedom of the will is assumed
without proof, contrary to the opinion of the Calvinists.*

191

Reply
Even if in order to make mistakes the faculty of reasoning (or rather
judging, that is, aﬃrming or denying) is required, it does not follow
from the fact that error is a deﬁciency of this faculty that the
deﬁciency is something real; just as blindness is not something real,
even though stones are not said to be blind, purely and simply
because they are not capable of vision. And I am amazed that so
far I have not found a single valid inference in these objections.
Besides, I made no assumptions about freedom here, except what
we all experience in ourselves, and what is manifestly known by the
natural light. Nor can I understand why this is alleged to be contradictory to what has gone before.*
Even though perhaps that are many people who, when they consider God’s foreordaining [of all things], cannot grasp how it can
coexist with our freedom, no one, however, when he simply looks at
himself, does not realize in his own experience that will and freedom
are one and the same thing. And this is not the place to examine other
people’s opinions about the matter.*
Objection XIII
For example, when I was examining over these last few days,
whether anything existed in the world, and realized that, from the

Third Objections

121

very fact that I was examining this point, it clearly followed that I
existed, I could not indeed refrain from judging that what I so clearly
understood was true. It was not that I was compelled to this by some
external force, but that a great illumination of the understanding was
followed by a great inclination of the will; and in this way my belief
was all the freer and more spontaneous for my being less indiﬀerent
(p. 42).
This expression, ‘a great illumination of the understanding’, is
metaphorical, and therefore has no argumentative value. Besides, everyone who is free from doubt, lays claim to such an illumination, and his
inclination of the will to aﬃrm what he has no doubt is true is just as
strong as that of someone who really does have knowledge. Besides, not
only knowing something to be true, but also believing it or assenting to it,
are things that have nothing to do with the will. For if something is proved
by valid arguments, or credibly reported, we believe it whether we want to
or not. It is true that to aﬃrm and deny, and to defend and refute propositions, are acts of the will. But it does not therefore follow that our internal assent depends on the will.
Therefore there is no suﬃcient demonstration of the subsequent conclusion:
The privation in which the essence of error consists lies in this wrong
use of free choice (p. 43).
Reply
It is entirely pointless to ask whether the expression ‘a great illumination’ has any argumentative value or not, as long as it has explanatory value, which is certainly does. For no one is unaware that what
is meant by an ‘illumination of the understanding’ is perspicuity of
knowledge; and perhaps not all those who think they possess it, possess it in fact. But this does not mean that there is not a very great
diﬀerence between this illumination and an obstinate opinion formed
without an evident perception.
When it is said here that we assent to things we clearly grasp
whether we want to or not, that is like saying that we desire what is
clearly known to be good whether we want to or not. For the expression ‘whether we want to or not’ is quite out of place in such matters
as this, since it is self-contradictory to say that we want and do not
want the same thing.*

192

122
193

194

Third Objections

Objection XIV
On the Fifth Meditation: Of the Essence of Material Things
For instance, when I imagine a triangle, even if perhaps such a
ﬁgure does not exist, and has never existed, anywhere at all outside
my thought, it nonetheless certainly has a determinate nature, or
essence, or form, that is immutable and unchanging, which was not
invented by me, and does not depend on my mind. This is clear from
the fact that it is possible to demonstrate various properties of the
triangle (p. 46).
If a triangle exists nowhere at all, I cannot understand how it can have
a nature of any kind; for what is nowhere does not exist; therefore it has
no being, or nature of any kind. The triangle in the mind arises from a triangle seen, or from an image based on things seen. However, once we have
attached the name ‘triangle’ to the thing that we think has given rise to
the idea of the triangle, then although the triangle itself may cease to
exist, the name remains. Likewise, if we have once grasped in our thoughts
that the sum of all the angles of the triangle is equal to two right angles,
and we attach this other name to the triangle, ‘a shape having three angles
equal to two right angles’, then even if no angle actually existed in the
world, the name would still remain, and the corresponding proposition, ‘a
triangle is a shape having three angles equal to two right angles’, would
be eternally true. But the nature of the triangle would not be eternal, if it
came about that all triangles ceased to exist.
Likewise, the proposition ‘man is an animal’ will be true for all eternity, since the names are eternal; but if the human race were to perish,
then there would no longer be any human nature.
From this it is clear that essence, in so far as it is distinguished from
existence, is nothing other than a coupling of names by the word ‘is’. Thus
essence without existence is a ﬁction of our own creation. And it seems to
be that the relation of the image of a human being in our mind to the
actual human being is the same as the relation of essence to existence; or
in other words, the relation of the proposition ‘Socrates is a human
being’ to the proposition ‘Socrates is, or exists’ is the same as the relation
of Socrates’s essence to his existence. Now the proposition ‘Socrates is a
human being’, uttered at a time when Socrates does not exist, signiﬁes
simply a combination of names, and the word ‘is’ or ‘being’, involves
the underlying image of the unity of a thing referred to by two diﬀerent
names.

Third Objections

123

Reply
The distinction between essence and existence is known to everybody; and what is said here about eternal names, instead of concepts
and ideas that are eternally true, has been suﬃciently refuted already.*
Objection XV
On the Sixth Meditation: Of the Existence of Material Things
For since he has certainly given me no faculty by which I might realize this [that is to say, that God, by himself or by the intermediary of
some creature more noble than bodies, conveys to me the ideas of body]*
to be true, but has, on the contrary, endowed me with a strong
propensity to believe that these ideas are conveyed by bodily things,
I cannot see how, if they were in fact from some other source, it
would be possible to think of him except as a deceiver. And therefore
bodily things exist (p. 56).
There is a generally accepted view that doctors commit no sin who
deceive their patients for the good of their health, or fathers who deceive
their children for their own good; and that the wrongness of deception consists not in the falsity of what is said, but in the injustice done by deceivers.
Therefore M. Descartes should examine whether the proposition ‘God
cannot in any case deceive us’ is universally true; for if it is not universally
true, the conclusion does not follow that therefore bodily things exist.
Reply
It is not necessary to my conclusion that we can in no case be
deceived (for I have readily admitted that we are often deceived),
only that we are not deceived, when an error on our part would indicate the will on God’s part to deceive us, which it is impossible to
ascribe to him. Yet another faulty inference.
Final Objection
For now I realize that there is a massive diﬀerence between them
[waking and dreaming], inasmuch as dreams are never combined by
my memory with the rest of the actions of my life, as happens with
my waking experiences (p. 63).
I would ask whether it is certain that someone dreaming that he is
doubting whether he is dreaming or not cannot dream that his dream is
connected with ideas of a long chain of past events. If he can, then the

195

124

196

Third Objections

things that in his dream appear to him to be actions carried out in his past
life, can be deemed to be true, just as much as if he were awake. Besides,
since, as M. Descartes himself asserts, all certitude of knowledge and all
truth depend on the single knowledge of the true God, either an atheist
cannot infer from the memory of his past life that he is awake or someone
can know he is awake without the knowledge of the true God.
Reply
One who is dreaming cannot really connect his dreams with ideas of
past events, although he may dream that he is making the connection.
For who denies that a sleeper may be deceived? Yet when he subsequently awakes he will easily recognize his error.*
An atheist can certainly infer that he is awake from the memory of
his past life; but he cannot know that this sign is suﬃcient for him to
be certain he is not mistaken, unless he knows that he was created by
a God that is not a deceiver.

FOURTH OBJECTIONS

196

BY MONSIEUR ARNAULD, DOCTOR OF THEOLOGY

Letter from the above to Father Mersenne
You did not wish, most eminent sir, to confer on me a blessing unearned;
for you require a compensation for this supreme beneﬁt, and a signiﬁcant
one, since you decided that I should have access to this remarkable work
only on condition that I should disclose my judgements of it. This is indeed
a harsh condition, which the desire of learning some very ﬁne things, has
extorted from me, and from which I would gladly apply for an exemption,
if the praetor’s exception of ‘acts compelled by violence or fear’ could be
extended to cover ‘acts done at the persuasion of pleasure’.*
For what do you wish for yourself ? You do not expect me to pass judgement on this author, whose supreme intellectual power and remarkable
learning you have known for a long time how much I value. Nor are you
unaware of the troublesome commitments by which my time is taken up;*
and, even if you have a higher opinion of my powers than I deserve, it
does not follow that I myself am not conscious of my inadequacy. And yet
what you are putting forward for my examination requires not only an
exceptional intelligence but a mind blest with serenity, so that it can ﬁnd
space for itself away from the din of all external things. You know full
well that this cannot be achieved except by attentive meditation and by
ﬁxing the mind’s eye full on the mind itself. Yet I will nonetheless obey,
if indeed you require me to. Whatever errors I commit, you will be responsible for them, since you are compelling me to write. Although indeed
philosophy could claim that this whole work belongs to her alone, yet
since the author, like the very modest man that he is, has spontaneously
presented himself for the judgement of theologians, I shall play a twofold
role here; and I shall ﬁrst of all put forward the objections that I think
philosophers could raise against the author’s key positions on the nature of
our mind and on God; then indeed I shall explain the reservations a theologian might express about the work as a whole.
Of the nature of the human mind
What ﬁrst strikes me here is the fact that M. Descartes* adopts as the
starting-point of his whole philosophy what had been previously so

197

126

198

199

Fourth Objections and Replies

adopted by St Augustine, a man of the keenest intellect, altogether
remarkable not only in his theological insights but in his philosophical
insights as well. For in book II, chapter 3 of ‘On Free Choice’, where
Alypius is arguing with Evodius, and is about to prove the existence of
God, he says, I would ﬁrst of all ask you, so that we may start with
what is supremely evident, whether you yourself exist, or whether
you perhaps fear that you may be deceived even as to this point,
although in fact, if you did not exist, you could not be deceived at
all?* This is very like what our author says: But there is some deceiver
or other, supremely powerful and cunning, who is deliberately
deceiving me all the time.—Beyond doubt then, I also exist, if he is
deceiving me (p. 18). But let us go on, and, what is more relevant, let us
see how from this principle it can be deduced that our mind is separate
from the body.
I can doubt whether I have a body, and indeed whether any bodies exist
at all. But it is not possible for me to doubt that I am, or exist, as long as
I am doubting, or thinking.
I therefore who doubt and think, am not a body; otherwise, in doubting the existence of bodies, I would be doubting that of myself.
Indeed, even if I obstinately insist that no bodies exist at all, this
position nonetheless remains: I am something, therefore I am not a
body.
This is extremely subtle, but someone might raise the same objection as
the author puts to himself: the fact that I doubt the existence of the body,
or deny that the body exists, does not prove that the body does not exist.
For he says: But all the same it is perhaps still the case, that these very
things I am supposing to be nothing, are nevertheless not distinct
from this ‘me’ that I know.—Perhaps: I don’t know. But this is not
the point at issue at present. I can pass judgement only on those
things that are known to me. I have realized that I exist; I am trying
to ﬁnd out what this ‘I’ is, whose existence I have realized. It is
absolutely certain that the knowledge of this ‘me’, in the precise
sense in question here, does not depend on things of which I do not
yet know whether they exist (p. 20).
But since he himself admits that the argument put forward in the
‘Discourse on the Method’, enables us only to conclude that whatever is
bodily is excluded from the nature of the mind, not from the point of
view of the actual truth of the matter (with which in fact I was
not then concerned), but solely from the point of view of my own

Fourth Objections and Replies

127

perception, so that my meaning was that I was aware of nothing at all
that I knew to belong to my essence, except the fact that I was a
thinking thing, it appears from this answer that the argument is still
stuck at this same point and therefore that the question remains unanswered that he promised he would solve (how, from the fact that [he]
know[s] nothing else as belonging to [his] essence, it follows that
nothing else in fact belongs to it).* If he has provided this solution, I
have been unable (such is my slow-wittedness) to ﬁnd it anywhere in the
Second Meditation. But, as far as I can guess, he tackles the proof of this
proposition in the Sixth Meditation, because he judged that it depends on
a clear knowledge of God, which he had not yet obtained in the Second
Meditation.* This is how he proves it: Since I know that whatever I
clearly and distinctly understand can be produced by God such as
I understand it to be, then if I can clearly and distinctly understand
one thing without another, this is suﬃcient for me to be certain that
the one is distinct from the other, since they can at least be produced
separately by God. By what power this separation comes about makes
no diﬀerence to the judgement that the things are distinct. [. . .]
Because, on the one hand, I have a clear and distinct idea of myself,
in so far as I am a thinking and not an extended thing, and, on the
other hand, a distinct idea of the body, in so far as it is only an extended
and not a thinking thing, it is certain that I am really distinct from
my body, and can exist without it (p. 55).
We must linger a little over this point, since, to my mind, the whole
diﬃculty turns on these few words. First of all, indeed, for this syllogism
to be true, the major premise* must be understood to apply not to any
knowledge, not even to all clear and distinct knowledge, but only to
adequate knowledge of the thing. For M. Descartes admits, in his ‘First
Replies’, that only a formal, not a real distinction is required, for one
thing to be distinctly conceived as separate from another by an act of
abstraction on the part of the understanding conceiving the thing inadequately. Hence he adds in the same place: On the other hand I have a
complete understanding of what body is, by thinking of it purely as
having extension, shape, motion, and so forth, and by denying that it
has any of the properties that belong to the nature of mind. And on
the other hand I understand the mind to be a complete thing, which
doubts, understands, wills, and so forth, although I deny that there
is anything in it that is contained in the idea of body. Therefore there
is a real distinction between the mind and the body (p. 84).*

200

128

201

Fourth Objections and Replies

But in case someone were to question this minor premise, and maintain
that your conception of yourself is only an inadequate one, when you conceive yourself * as a thinking and not extended thing, and likewise when
you conceive yourself * as an extended, not a thinking, thing, we must see
how your position is proved earlier in the work. For I do not think that
the issue is so clear that your position has to be assumed as an indemonstrable principle, instead of being proved. And indeed, as far as the ﬁrst
part of the passage goes, that is, when you say that you have a complete
understanding of what body is, by thinking of it purely as having
extension, shape, motion, and so forth, and by denying that it has any
of the properties that belong to the nature of mind, this is not particularly helpful. For someone claiming that our mind is bodily, would not
therefore think that all bodies are mind. They would see the body as
standing in the same relationship to the mind, as the genus to the species.*
But the genus can be understood without the species, even when we deny
of the genus whatever is speciﬁc and particular to the species. Hence the
logicians’ maxim: ‘The denial of the species does not entail the denial
of the genus.’ Thus I can understand shape without understanding any of
the attributes that are speciﬁc to the circle. It therefore remains to be
proved that the mind can be understood completely and adequately without the body.
I cannot anywhere in the work ﬁnd an argument capable of proving
this, except the one I referred to at the beginning: I can deny that any
body, any extended thing, exists, and yet I know for certain that
I exist, as long as I deny this, or as long as I am thinking; I am therefore a thinking thing, not a body, and the body does not belong to
my knowledge of myself.* And from this I can see only that it can be
inferred that some knowledge of myself can be obtained without the
knowledge of the body; but that this knowledge is complete and adequate,
so that I can be certain that I am not deceived in excluding the body from
my essence—of that I am not yet so clear. I shall make the point clear by
an example.
Let us suppose that someone knows for certain that an angle in a semicircle is a right angle, and hence that a triangle formed from this angle
and the diameter of the circle is a right-angled triangle; but that he
doubts, and does not yet grasp with certainty (perhaps indeed, deceived by
some sophism, he denies) that the square of its base is equal to the squares
of the other two sides. Reasoning in the same way as M. Descartes has put
forward, it seems he will conﬁrm himself in his incorrect belief. ‘While I

Fourth Objections and Replies

129

clearly and distinctly perceive’, he says, ‘that this triangle is right-angled,
I doubt, on the other hand, whether the square of its base is equal to the
square of the sides. It does not therefore belong to the essence of the triangle that the square of its base should be equal to the square of the sides.
Then, even if I deny that the square of its base is equal to the square of
the other two sides, I still remain certain that it is a right-angled triangle,
and the knowledge remains clear and distinct in my mind that one of its
angles is a right angle; and this being so, not God himself can bring it
about that it is not a right-angled triangle.
Therefore the property about which I doubt, or that can be denied while
leaving the idea intact, does not belong to its essence.
Besides, since I know that whatever I clearly and distinctly understand can be produced by God such as I understand it to be, then if
I can clearly and distinctly understand one thing without another, this
is suﬃcient for me to be certain that the one is distinct from the other,
since they can at least be produced separately by God. But I clearly and
distinctly understand that this triangle is right-angled, even though I do
not understand whether the square of its base is equal to the square of the
other two sides. Therefore God can at least produce a right-angled triangle,
the square of the base of which is not equal to the square of the sides.’
I cannot see how this man can be answered, except by saying that he
does not clearly and distinctly perceive a right-angled triangle. But how
do I know I have a clearer perception of the nature of my mind than he has
of the nature of a triangle? For he is as certain that a triangle in a semicircle has one right angle, which is the concept of a right-angled triangle,
as I am that I exist, from the fact that I think.
Therefore just as he is deceived inasmuch as he thinks that it does not
belong to the nature of this triangle, which he clearly and distinctly knows
is right-angled, that the square of its base should be equal to the sum of the
squares of the other two sides; so likewise why should I not be deceived
inasmuch as I think that nothing belongs to my nature, which I clearly
and distinctly know to be that of a thinking thing, except my being a
thinking thing—when in fact perhaps it is also part of my nature to be an
extended thing?
And certainly, someone might say, it is not surprising if, when I infer
from the fact that I am thinking that I exist, the idea I form of myself,
whose existence I have thus discovered, represents nothing to my mind
except myself as a thinking thing, since it was derived purely and simply
from my thinking. Hence from this idea it seems impossible to derive any

202

203

130

204

Fourth Objections and Replies

proof that nothing belongs to the essence of myself beyond what is contained in the idea.
Moreover, this argument the author puts forward seems to prove too
much, and to bring us back to the Platonic view (which he, however,
rejects) that nothing bodily belongs to our essence, so that man is nothing
but a soul, and the body, in fact, is nothing but the vehicle of the soul.
That is why the Platonists deﬁne him as a soul using a body.
But if you reply that the body is not excluded from my essence
absolutely, but only in so far as I am strictly speaking a thinking thing,
then there seems to be a risk of someone’s suspecting that perhaps my
knowledge of myself, in so far as I am a thinking thing, is not the knowledge of a being completely and adequately conceived, but only of one conceived inadequately and by means of an act of abstraction on the part of
the understanding.
Hence, just as geometers conceive a line as a length without breadth,
and a surface as a combination of length and breadth without depth, even
though there can be no length without breadth, and no breadth without
depth, so someone might perhaps wonder whether every thinking thing is
not also an extended thing, but one in which, alongside the properties it
has in common with other extended things (having a shape, being mobile,
and so forth), there is a speciﬁc faculty of thinking. This would be how it
comes about that it can be apprehended, by means of an act of abstraction
on the part of the intellect, as possessing only this faculty, although in fact
the thinking thing possesses bodily properties as well: just as quantity can
be conceived as possessing length alone, although every quantity in fact
possesses breadth and depth as well.
What makes the diﬃculty more acute is the fact that this faculty of
thinking seems to be attached to bodily organs, since it can be judged to be
dormant in infants and extinct in the mad. This is the most powerful argument of those impious butchers of souls.*
So much for the real distinction between our mind and the body. But
since M. Descartes has undertaken to demonstrate the immortality of
souls, it is a fair question whether it clearly follows from the fact of this
separation. It does not follow at all according to the principles of the
established philosophy, since the souls of animals are commonly held to be
distinct from their bodies, even though they perish along with them.
I had got to this stage in my answer, and was minded to show how,
according to our author’s principles, which I thought I could infer from
his method of philosophizing, we could readily deduce, from the real

Fourth Objections and Replies

131

distinction between mind and body, that the mind is immortal, when I
received a synopsis of the six Meditations by the author himself, which
both throws a good deal of light on the work as a whole, and in this
context directs exactly the same arguments towards the solution of the
question proposed as I myself had been meaning to put forward.
As far as the souls of animals are concerned, he implies quite clearly in
other parts of his work that they have no soul, but only a body conﬁgured
in a certain way, and endowed with various organs disposed in such a
manner that all the activities we see can be accomplished in and through
this body.
But I rather doubt whether this view can carry conviction in readers’
minds, unless it is conﬁrmed by extremely solid reasons. For at ﬁrst sight
it appears impossible to believe that in some way, without any involvement of a soul, the light reﬂected from the body of a wolf onto the eyes of
a sheep moves the minute ﬁlaments of the optic nerves, and the transmission of this motion to the brain causes the animal spirits* to be dispatched
to the nerves in the manner necessary to cause the sheep to take ﬂight.
One thing here I shall add, that I warmly approve M. Descartes’s distinction between imagination and thought or understanding, as well as his
view that what we grasp by reason is more certain than what presents
itself to the bodily senses. For I learned a long time ago from St Augustine
(‘On the Quantity of the Soul’, ch. XV),* that we should have nothing to do with those who convince themselves that the things we perceive by our understanding are less certain than those we perceive by
the eyes, which are waging a constant war against rheum. This is why
he also says (‘Soliloquies’, I. 4)* that he had found the senses, in geometry, to be like a ship: for when, he says, they had carried me to the place
for which I was heading, where I took my leave of them, and, now on
my own, began to go over these matters with the aid of thought
alone, for a long time my legs were unsteady; which is why it seems
to me that it is easier to sail on land than to perceive geometrical
truths by means of the senses, although they seem to be of some help
when we are beginners in that science.
Of God
The author’s ﬁrst demonstration of the existence of God, in the Third
Meditation, has two parts. First, it shows that God exists, if in fact I have
an idea of him; secondly, it shows that I who have such an idea could not
exist unless my existence were derived from God.

205

206

132

207

Fourth Objections and Replies

As to the ﬁrst part, there is only one thing I cannot agree with: that
although M. Descartes has asserted that falsity, strictly speaking, can be
found only in judgements, he nonetheless shortly afterwards admits that
ideas can be false, not formally, but materially, which seems to me to
clash with his own principles (p. 31).
But I am afraid that in so obscure a matter as this, I may not be able
to explain what I mean suﬃciently clearly. An example will help. If, our
author says, it is true that cold is nothing other than the privation of
heat, the idea that represents it to me as something real and positive
will be materially false (p. 31).
However, if cold is only a privation, there can be no idea of cold that
represents it to me as something positive, and our author is here confusing
ideas and judgements.
For what is the idea of cold? Cold itself, in so far as it exists objectively
in the intellect. But if cold is a privation, it cannot exist in the intellect
through an idea the objective being of which is something positive. Therefore
if cold is only a privation, there can never be any positive idea of it, and
consequently none that is materially false.
This is conﬁrmed by the same argument by which M. Descartes proves
that the idea of an inﬁnite being cannot not be a true idea; for although
it can be imagined that no such being exists, it cannot be imagined that its
idea represents nothing real to me.
The same can certainly be said of every positive idea. For although it
can be imagined that cold, which I suppose to be represented by a positive
idea, is not a positive reality, it cannot be imagined that a positive idea
represents nothing real and positive to me; for an idea is not called positive in virtue of the existence it possesses as a mode of thinking, but in
virtue of the objective existence it contains and represents to our mind.
Therefore this idea may not be the idea of cold, but it cannot be false.
But, you will say,the idea is false, precisely because it is not the idea of
cold. No: your judgement will be false, if you judge it to be the idea of
cold; but the idea itself in you is quite true. Likewise, the idea of God
should not be said to be even materially false, although someone can
attach it to a thing that is not God, as the idolaters did.
Finally, what does this idea of cold, which you say is materially false,
represent to your mind? A privation? Then it is true. A positive entity?
Then it is not the idea of cold. And besides, what is the cause of this positive objective being, that, according to you, makes the idea materially
false?* Myself, you say, in so far as I derive from nothing. Therefore the

Fourth Objections and Replies

133

positive and objective existence of some idea can derive from nothing—
which runs counter to M. Descartes’s fundamental principles.
But let us go on to the later part of the demonstration, in which the
question is whether I myself, having the idea of an inﬁnite being,
can exist from any other cause than an inﬁnite being, and especially whether I can exist of myself (p. 48). M. Descartes contends that
I cannot exist of myself, for this reason, that if I myself gave myself
being, I would also give myself all the perfections the ideas of which
I am aware of within myself (p. 48). But the theologian* replies,
acutely, that ‘existing of oneself’ should be taken not in a positive
sense, but in a negative sense, as equivalent to ‘not deriving one’s
existence from any other being’ (p. 75). For now indeed, he says, if
something exists of itself, that is, does not derive its existence from
any other being, how could I prove that it contains all attributes in
itself and is an inﬁnite being? I will not be satisﬁed if you say ‘Being
of itself, it would have easily given itself all these attributes’; for it
does not derive its existence from itself as from a cause, nor did it
exist before itself, to choose beforehand what it should afterwards
be (p. 75).
To refute this argument, M. Descartes contends that ‘existing of
oneself’ should be taken not in a negative but in a positive sense,
and this even where God is concerned; so that God in a certain sense
stands in the same relationship to himself as the eﬃcient cause
stands to its eﬀect. This certainly comes across to me as audacious,
indeed as false.
Therefore I partly agree with M. Descartes, and partly disagree.
I confess that I myself could exist of myself only in a positive sense: but
I deny that we should say the same of God. Indeed I think the idea of
something existing of itself in the positive sense, as if it were caused by
itself, is a manifest contradiction. Therefore I reach the same conclusion
as our author, but by a quite diﬀerent path, as follows:
In order to exist of myself, I would have to exist of myself in the positive sense, and as if I were the eﬀect of myself as a cause. Therefore it
cannot be the case that I exist of myself.
The major premise of this syllogism is proved by the reasons given by
our author: namely, that since the parts of time can be separated from one
another, it does not follow, from the fact that I exist now, that
I shall exist at any future time, unless some cause produces me
afresh, so to speak, at each separate moment (p. 35).

208

209

134

210

Fourth Objections and Replies

As for the minor, that is, ‘I cannot exist of myself positively and as if
I were the eﬀect of myself as a cause’, I think it is so clear by the natural
light that it would be a waste of time to try to prove it, which could only
mean proving the known by the less well known. Indeed our author seems
to recognize its truth, since he did not dare to challenge it openly. For I
suggest we should consider these words from his reply to the First Objections:
I did not say that it is impossible that something should be the
eﬃcient cause of itself; for even if this is plainly true if the meaning
of ‘eﬃcient cause’ is limited to those causes that precede their eﬀects
in time, or that are distinct from them, this limitation does not seem
appropriate as regards the present issue [. . .] because the natural
light does not dictate that it is of the essence of an eﬃcient cause that
it should precede its eﬀect in time (AT 7. 108). Quite right, as regards
the ﬁrst part of the statement. But why does the latter part fail to add that
the same natural light does not dictate that it is of the essence of an
eﬃcient cause that it should be distinct from its eﬀect? Is it not because the
natural light does not in fact allow us to assert this?*
And surely, since all eﬀects depend upon a cause, and receive their existence from that cause, is it not clear that one and the same being cannot
depend on itself, or receive its existence from itself?
Besides, every cause is the cause of an eﬀect, and the eﬀect the eﬀect of
a cause, so that there is a mutual relationship between the cause and eﬀect.
But a mutual relationship requires two parties.
Besides, it would be absurd to conceive that a thing receives existence,
and yet also possesses it, before we conceive it to have received it. But this
would be the case, if we applied the notions of cause and eﬀect to one and
the same thing with respect to itself. For what is the notion of a cause? To
give existence. And of an eﬀect? To receive existence. Moreover, the
notion of cause is prior in nature to that of eﬀect.
Again, we cannot conceive any thing as a cause giving existence, unless
we conceive it as having existence; for no one can give what he does not
have. Therefore we ﬁrst conceive the thing as having existence, before we
conceive it as receiving existence; and yet, in the being that receives,
receiving comes before having.
This reason could be formulated in another way. No one gives what he
does not have. Therefore no one can give himself existence, unless he has
this existence already; but if he has it already, what would be the point of
his giving it to himself ?

Fourth Objections and Replies

135

Finally, he asserts that it is known by the natural light, that the distinction between conservation and creation exists purely in our
thought (p. 35). But by this same natural light it is known that nothing
can create itself; therefore it cannot conserve itself either.
Finally, moving from the general thesis to the particular thesis
concerning God, the thing appears to my mind to be even clearer: that
is, God cannot exist of himself in the positive sense, but only in the
negative sense, that is, he does not derive his existence from any
other being.
And ﬁrst of all, this is clear from the reason M. Descartes alleges in
order to prove that if a body exists of itself, it must so exist in the positive sense. For he says: The diﬀerent parts of time do not depend on
one another. Nor therefore, is the fact that this body is supposed to
have existed up to now of itself, that is, without a cause a suﬃcient
reason for its also existing in the future, unless there is some power
within it, so to speak, reproducing it continuously (AT 7. 110).
But it is far from being true that this analysis can apply to a supremely
perfect or inﬁnite being. Rather, the contrary can be evidently deduced
from contrary reasons. For it is intrinsic to the idea of the inﬁnite that its
duration should be inﬁnite, that is to say, not conﬁned by any limits; it is
rather indivisible, permanent, existing all at once; and it is a mistake, and
a mark of the imperfection of our understanding, to conceive of it as containing any ‘before’ or ‘after’.
Hence it plainly follows that we cannot conceive the inﬁnite Being as
existing, even for a moment, without conceiving at the same time both that
it has existed for ever and that it will exist for ever, as our author elsewhere maintains. Thus, it is futile to ask why it perseveres in being.
Indeed, as Augustine frequently teaches us (and, after the sacred
authors, no one has spoken more worthily or more loftily of God), there is
no past existence or future existence in God, but only eternal existence.
Hence it appears even more clearly that it is simply absurd to ask why
God perseveres in being, since this question manifestly presupposes the
ideas of ‘before’ and ‘after’, ‘past’ and ‘future’, which should be excluded
from the very notion of the inﬁnite Being.
Besides, God cannot be thought to exist of himself in the positive sense,
if this means he had previously produced himself; for he would then have
existed before existing. It could only mean (as the author frequently
proclaims) because he actually preserves himself in being.

211

212

136

213

Fourth Objections and Replies

But ‘preservation’ makes no more sense as applied to an inﬁnite being
than being produced in the ﬁrst place. For what is preservation, I ask, but
a certain continual reproduction of a thing? Thus all preservation presupposes an initial production; hence the very word ‘continuation’, like
‘preservation’, involves a certain potentiality. But the inﬁnite being is the
ultimate pure act without any potentiality.*
Let us then conclude that God cannot be conceived as existing of himself in the positive sense, except on account of the imperfection of our
understanding, which conceives God on the model of created things. This
can be conﬁrmed by yet another reason.
When we seek the eﬃcient cause of any thing, we are asking for the
reason for its existence, not for its essence. For instance, if I consider a triangle, I shall investigate the eﬃcient cause through which it has come
about that this triangle exists. But it would be absurd of me to look for the
eﬃcient cause of a triangle’s having three angles the sum of which is equal
to two right angles.* And if someone did ask why a triangle has three such
angles, the proper answer would not be to adduce an eﬃcient cause, but
simply to point out that this is the nature of a triangle. Thus mathematicians, who do not concern themselves with the existence of their objects,
never resort to eﬃcient or ﬁnal causes in their demonstrations. But it
belongs no less to the essence of an inﬁnite being that it exists, or indeed,
if you like, that it perseveres in being, than it belongs to the essence of a
triangle that it has three angles equal to two right angles. Thus, just as the
proper answer to someone who asks why a triangle has three angles equal
to two right angles is not to cite an eﬃcient cause but to say simply that
this is the eternal and unchangeable nature of a triangle; so, if someone
asks why God exists, or perseveres in being, we should not look, either in
God or outside him, for an eﬃcient cause (or for something that acts as an
eﬃcient cause, for I am arguing about things, not words): we should
simply cite this single reason, that such is the nature of the supremely perfect being.
Thus when M. Descartes says: The natural light teaches us that no
thing exists of which we may not ask why it exists, or, in other words,
inquire into its eﬃcient cause; or, if it does not have an eﬃcient
cause, ask why it does not (AT 7. 108), I reply that when someone asks
why God exists, we should not answer by citing an eﬃcient cause, but simply
by saying that he does so because he is God, or the supreme Being. And
if someone asks what is his eﬃcient cause, we should answer that he does
not need one. And if they go on to ask why he does not need one, we should

Fourth Objections and Replies

137

reply ‘Because he is the inﬁnite being, whose existence is his essence’; for
only things in which it is possible to distinguish their actual existence from
their essence require an eﬃcient cause.
On this showing, what he adds in the following words cannot stand up.
He says: So true is this, that even if I thought that no thing can stand
in the same relation to itself as the eﬃcient cause stands in relation to
its eﬀects, yet so far from concluding that there is some ﬁrst cause,
I should in turn inquire the cause of this so-called ﬁrst cause; and
thus I should never arrive at any ultimately ﬁrst cause (AT 7. 108–9).
On the contrary, if I thought that we must look for the eﬃcient (or
quasi-eﬃcient) cause of any thing whatever, I should always look for a
cause distinct from the thing itself, since it would be entirely clear to me
that nothing could in any way stand in the same relation to itself as the
eﬃcient cause stands in relation to its eﬀect.
I think, therefore, that our author would be well advised to consider
this matter closely and carefully, for I know for certain that one could
hardly ﬁnd a single theologian who would not be scandalized* by the
proposition that God exists of himself in the positive sense, as if he were
the cause of himself.
I have only one ﬁnal reservation: how can the author avoid arguing in
a circle, when he says we know for certain that the things we clearly
and distinctly perceive are true, only because God exists (p. 49)?
But we can only be certain God exists, because this is clearly and distinctly
perceived by us. Therefore before we can be certain God exists, we must be
certain, that whatever is clearly and distinctly perceived by us is true.*
I have forgotten to add one further point, that what M. Descartes
aﬃrms as certain, that there can be nothing in himself, in so far as he
is a thinking thing, of which he is not conscious (p. 35), seems to me
to be false. By himself, in so far as he is a thinking thing, he means
nothing other than his mind, in so far as it is distinct from his body. But
who does not see that there can be many things in the mind of which the
mind is not conscious? The mind of an infant in its mother’s womb has the
power of thinking; but it is not conscious of it. I pass over a great many
similar points.
On the points that might engage the attention of theologians
To cut short what is already a tedious disquisition, I prefer to be as brief
as possible here, and merely point to the issues rather than discussing them
in depth.

214

138
215

216

Fourth Objections and Replies

First of all, I am afraid that some may be scandalized by this rather
free manner of philosophizing, which involves calling all things into
doubt. Indeed the author himself acknowledges in his ‘Discourse on the
Method’ that this path is a dangerous one for people of ordinary intelligence.* I admit, however, that he has done something to allay these fears
in his synopsis of the First Meditation.
Nonetheless I wonder whether this First Meditation should not be preceded by some sort of short preface, pointing out that we should doubt such
things, not for real, but only so that, by putting aside for a while those
things that leave room for even minimal and hyperbolical doubt, as the
author himself calls it elsewhere (p. 63), we may be able to ﬁnd something
so ﬁrm and stable that even the most pig-headed person could not doubt it
in the slightest. For this reason I think it would be advisable to replace the
words since I was still ignorant of the author of my existence by since
I was pretending to be ignorant.*
In the Fourth Meditation, Of True and False, for many reasons
which it would be tedious to rehearse, I would strongly urge the author to
add two clariﬁcations either to the text of the Meditation or to the Synopsis.
First, that when he is investigating the cause of error, his concern is
especially with the mistakes we make in judgements of true and false,
rather than in the pursuit of good and evil.
For since, ﬁrst of all, this ﬁrst issue is suﬃcient for the purposes and
objects of the author, and what is said here of the cause of error would be
open to grave objections,* if it were applied also to the pursuit of good and
evil, then prudence, if I am not mistaken, dictates this course; so does a
concern for the proper order of exposition, to which our author is so
devoted, which involves leaving out whatever is not relevant to the issue,
or could oﬀer a handle to objectors. Otherwise, while the reader is wasting his time disputing over inessentials, he may be impeded from perceiving the really important points.
The second point to which I should like to draw the author’s attention
is that when he says that we should give our assent to nothing except what
we clearly and distinctly know, this applies only to matters that belong to
scientiﬁc disciplines and fall under the judgement of the understanding,
and not to those that pertain to faith, and to the conduct of one’s life; and
thus that what he is condemning is rashness in forming opinions, not the
conviction of those who believe in obedience to prudence.
For there are three things, as St Augustine so wisely points out (‘Of
the Utility of Believing’, ch. XV) that, though they are close to one

Fourth Objections and Replies

139

another, must be carefully distinguished in the human mind: understanding, believing, having opinions.*
To understand, is to grasp something that reason shows us to be
certainly true. To believe, is to think something is true, under the
inﬂuence of some weighty authority, even when we cannot grasp it by
reason. Having opinions, is thinking we know what we do not know.
Having opinions is highly shameful on two counts. First, whoever
has convinced himself he knows something already cannot learn it
properly (if indeed it can be learnt); secondly, rashness is in itself a
sign of an ill-constituted mind.
For what we understand, therefore, we are indebted to reason; for
what we believe, to authority; for the opinions we hold, to error. I say
this so that we can understand that, when we adhere to our faith even
in regard to things we do not yet understand, we cannot be accused
of the rashness of those who go by their opinions.
For the people who say that we should believe only what we know
are particularly anxious to escape the accusation of having opinions,
which, we must admit, is a shameful and highly damaging one. But
whoever carefully bears in mind the great diﬀerence between thinking
one knows something and believing something, under the inﬂuence of
some authority, that one understands one does not know, will certainly escape the charges of error, ignorance,* or arrogance.
Shortly afterwards, in ch. XII,* he adds this: Much evidence could
be adduced to show that human society would collapse altogether
if we decided to believe nothing but what we could not know for
certain. So much for Augustine.
M. Descartes’s own prudence will enable him to judge how important
it is to make these distinctions, for fear the many people nowadays inclined
to impiety might misuse his words in order to subvert the faith.
But what I foresee will be the major stumbling-block to theologians is
this: that, according to M. Descartes’s doctrines, it seems that the Church’s
teaching on the most holy mysteries of the altar cannot remain intact.
For we believe by faith that when the substance of bread is taken away
from the eucharistic wafer, only the accidents there remain: namely,
extension, shape, colour, smell, taste, and other sensible qualities.*
But M. Descartes holds that sensible qualities are nothing but various
motions of tiny bodies around us, as a result of which we perceive the
various impressions which we then call ‘colour’, ‘ﬂavour’, ‘smell’, and so
forth. This leaves shape, extension, and mobility. But the author denies

217

140

Fourth Objections and Replies

218

that these attributes can be conceived without a substance in which to
inhere, and therefore that they cannot exist without that substance. He
repeats this in the First Replies (p. 84).
Nor does he acknowledge any distinction between these attributes and
the substance except a purely formal one. But this distinction does not
seem to be suﬃcient for the things so distinguished to be separated even by
the divine power.
I have no doubt that one so pious as M. Descartes will consider this
matter carefully and thoroughly, and judge it worthy of his most urgent
attention, lest, while intending to defend the cause of God against the
impious, he should appear in any respect to have created a threat to the
faith founded by God’s authority, and in virtue of which he hopes to attain
the immortal life of which he has undertaken to convince his readers.

218

REPLY TO THE FOURTH OBJECTIONS

219

Letter from the author to the Revd Father Mersenne
I could not have wished for a more perspicacious or more helpful
examiner of my work than I ﬁnd the person to be whose observations
you have sent me. For he treats me so humanely, that I readily perceive that he favours both myself and my cause; and nonetheless he
has looked so carefully into the aspects of it he attacks, and his insight
is so deep, that I may hope that there is nothing in the rest of it that
has escaped his eye. Besides, he has been so acute in pointing out
what he has judged to be less worthy of approval, that I need not fear
that anyone could think that he has concealed anything out of bias in
my favour. Therefore I am less troubled by his objections than I am
glad that there are not more things that he objects to.
Reply to the ﬁrst part, on the nature of the human mind
I shall not dwell on my gratitude to M. Arnauld* for bringing the
authority of St Augustine to my support, and for formulating my
arguments in such a way that he seems to be afraid that they may not
appear suﬃciently convincing to others.
But ﬁrst of all I shall say where I begin to prove how, from the fact
that I know nothing else as belonging to my essence, (that is, to the
essence of my mind alone) except that I am a thinking thing, it follows
that nothing else in fact belongs to it (p. 127). It is where I have proved

Fourth Objections and Replies

141

that God exists—God, I mean, who can bring about all those things
I clearly and distinctly know to be possible.
For even if, perhaps, there are many properties in me of which
I am not yet aware (as, indeed, in this very place I supposed that
I was not yet aware that the mind has the power to move the body,
or that it is substantially united to it), nonetheless, because the properties I am aware of are suﬃcient for me to exist with these alone,
I am certain that I could have been created by God without those
other properties of which I am not aware, and therefore that these
latter do not belong to the essence of the mind.
For it seems to me that none of the properties without which a
given thing can exist is included in the essence of that thing; and
although the mind is of the essence of a human being, it is not, however, strictly speaking, of the essence of the mind that it should be
united to a human body.
But I must also say in what sense I mean that a real distinction
cannot be inferred from the fact that one thing can be conceived without
another by an act of abstraction based on the intellect’s inadequate conception of the thing, but only from the fact that the thing is understood
completely, or as a complete thing, in the absence of the other (p. 127).
For I do not think that an adequate knowledge of the thing is
required here, as M. Arnauld assumes; for the distinguishing feature
of adequate knowledge is that it contains each and every property
contained in the thing known; and therefore only God knows he has
adequate* knowledge of all things.
On the other hand, even if a created intellect perhaps does have
adequate knowledge of many things, it can never know it has it, except
by a particular revelation from God. But for it to have an adequate
knowledge of some thing, all that is required is that there should be a
match between the power of knowledge possessed by the intellect and
the thing itself. And this can easily come about. But for it to know that
it has adequate knowledge, or that God has put nothing in the thing
but what it knows to be there, its power of knowledge would have to
match the inﬁnite power of God; which is clearly impossible.
However, in order for us to know the real distinction between two
things, it is not necessary that our knowledge of them should be
adequate, unless we can know it to be adequate; but we can never
know this, as I just pointed out; therefore it is not necessary for it to
be adequate.*

220

142
221

222

Fourth Objections and Replies

Therefore, when I said, it is not enough that one thing can be understood without the other by means of an act of abstraction based on
the intellect’s inadequate conception of the thing (p. 127), I did not think
it could be inferred that we need adequate knowledge in order to
recognize a real distinction, only that we must not ourselves have
rendered our knowledge inadequate by an abstraction on the part of
the intellect.*
For there is a clear distinction between a given knowledge’s being
completely adequate (something we could never know for sure without divine revelation) and its being adequate to this extent, that we
perceive it has not been rendered inadequate by an abstraction on the
part of the intellect.
In the same way, when I said that the thing must be understood
completely, I did not mean that the act of understanding itself had to
be adequate, only that the thing had to be suﬃciently understood for
me to know it is complete.
I thought this was clear enough both from what comes before and
from what comes after. For I had just before drawn a distinction
between complete and incomplete entities, and I had stated that each of
two things between which we assert a real distinction, must be understood as a being in itself and distinct from any other (p. 84).
Afterwards, moreover, in the same sense as I said that I completely
understand what a body is, I immediately added that I also understood
the mind to be a complete thing. That is, I was using the words ‘to
understand something completely’ and ‘to understand it as being a
complete thing’ in one and the same sense.
But here it would be only fair to ask what I mean by a complete thing,
and how I prove that it is suﬃcient in order to establish a real distinction,
that two things should be understood as each complete without the other.
My reply to the ﬁrst point, is that by a complete thing, I mean nothing other than a substance endowed with forms or attributes
suﬃcient for me to recognize it as a substance.
For we do not know substances immediately, as I have elsewhere
remarked, but only because we perceive certain forms or attributes
that cannot exist without inhering in some thing; the thing in which
they inhere being what we call Substance.
But if subsequently we wished to strip this same substance of the
attributes on the basis of which we know it, we would destroy all our
knowledge of it; and in that case we could certainly utter various

Fourth Objections and Replies

143

words about it, but we would not clearly and distinctly perceive the
meaning of these words.
I am well aware that certain substances are commonly called incomplete. But if they are called incomplete, on the grounds that they
cannot exist by themselves, I must admit that there seems to me to
be a contradiction between, on the one hand, their being substances,
that is, things subsisting by themselves, and, on the other, incomplete,
that is, not capable of subsisting by themselves.* However, they can be
called incomplete substances in another sense. That is, in so far as
they are substances, they have nothing incomplete about them; they
are incomplete, purely in so far as they are related to some other substance, with which they compose what is a single entity in itself.
Thus a hand is an incomplete substance, when it is considered in
relation to the whole body of which it is part, but a complete substance, when considered by itself. And in exactly the same way, the
mind and the body are incomplete substances, when considered in
relation to the human being they make up; but, considered by themselves, they are complete.
For in the same way as being extended, being divisible, having
a shape, and so forth, are forms or attributes on the basis of which
I recognize the substance known as body, so understanding, willing,
doubting, and so forth are forms on the basis of which I recognize the
substance known as mind; and I understand that the thinking substance is a complete thing just as clearly as I understand this of the
extended substance.
And it is impossible to maintain what M. Arnauld adds here, that
perhaps the body stands in the same relationship to the mind, as the genus
to the species (p. 128); for even if the genus can be understood without this or that speciﬁc diﬀerence, the species cannot in any way be
thought without the genus.
For example, we can easily understand the notion of shape, without thinking at all about a circle (although this act of understanding
is not distinct, unless it is linked to some speciﬁc shape; nor does it
relate to a complete thing, unless it also includes bodily nature).* But
we cannot understand any speciﬁc property of the circle, without
also thinking of shape.
But the mind can be perceived distinctly and completely, or at
least suﬃciently so to be considered a complete thing, without any of
those forms or attributes on the basis of which we recognize that

223

144

224

225

Fourth Objections and Replies

body is a substance, as I think I showed suﬃciently clearly in the
Second Meditation; and the body is understood distinctly and as a
complete thing, without those attributes that pertain to the mind.
Here, however, M. Arnauld goes further, arguing that even if some
knowledge of myself can be obtained without the knowledge of the body,
it does not therefore follow that this knowledge is complete and adequate,
so that I can be certain that I am not deceived in excluding the body from
my essence (p. 128). And he makes his point clear by the example of a
triangle inscribed in a semicircle, which we can clearly and distinctly
understand is right-angled, even if we do not know, or even if we
deny, that the square of its base is equal to the sum of the squares of
the sides. Yet from that it would not be legitimate to infer that a triangle can exist without the square of its base equalling the sum of the
squares of the sides.
But this example diﬀers in many respects from the point at issue.
For, ﬁrst of all, although perhaps we could accept that in the concrete* a triangle is a substance having a triangular shape, certainly the
property of having a base of which the square is equal to the sum of the
squares of the sides, is not a substance. Hence neither of the two properties can be understood as a complete thing, in the way in which mind
and body are understood. Nor indeed can they be called ‘things’, in the
sense in which I used the word ‘thing’ when saying that it is suﬃcient that
I can understand one thing (that is, a complete thing) without the other
(p. 55). This becomes clear in the words that follow: Moreover, I ﬁnd in
myself faculties, etc. (p. 56). For I did not say that those faculties were
things, but took care to distinguish them from things or substances.*
Secondly, although we can clearly and distinctly understand that
the triangle in the semicircle is right-angled, without realizing that
the square of its base is equal to the sum of the squares of the sides,
we cannot, however, in the same way, clearly understand a triangle
the square of the base of which is equal to the sum of the sides, without at the same time realizing that it is right-angled. Yet we clearly
and distinctly perceive both the mind without the body, and the
body without the mind.
Thirdly, even if it were possible for there to be a concept of a triangle inscribed in a semicircle that did not contain the equality of the
square of the base and the sum of the squares of the sides, there could
never be such a concept in which the triangle was understood without a certain proportion between the square of the base and the sum

Fourth Objections and Replies

145

of the squares of the sides. And hence, as long as we do not know
what the proportion is, we cannot rule out any particular proportion,
unless we clearly understand that it does not belong to the triangle;
and this could never be the case as regards the proportion of equality.
But certainly nothing is contained in the concept of body that belongs
to the mind, and nothing in the concept of the mind that belongs to
the body.
Therefore, although I said, it is suﬃcient for me to be able clearly and
distinctly to understand one thing without another, it would not be legitimate to formulate the minor premise that I clearly and distinctly
understand that this triangle is right-angled, even though I doubt or deny
that the square of the base is equal to the sum of the other two sides
(pp. 128–9). First, because the proportion between the square of the
base and the squares of the sides is not a complete thing. Secondly,
because this proportion of equality can be clearly conceived only in a
right-angled triangle. Thirdly, because no triangle can in fact be distinctly understood, if the proportion between the squares of the sides
and that of the base is denied.
But now I need to say how it is that if I can clearly and distinctly
understand one thing without another, this is suﬃcient for me to be certain
that the one is excluded by the other.
Now the very notion of substance is this: that it can exist by itself,
that is without the aid of any other substance; and no one has ever
perceived two substances by means of two distinct concepts without
judging that they are distinct in reality.
Therefore, if I were not seeking a certainty greater than the
common variety, I would have been content with showing, in the
Second Meditation, that the mind is understood as a subsistent
thing, even though no properties at all that belong to the body are
ascribed to it; and that, by the same token, the body is also understood as a subsistent thing, even though no properties at all that
belong to the mind are ascribed to it. And I would have added nothing further in order to demonstrate the real distinction between mind
and body, because we commonly judge that all things stand in the
same relationship with respect to the truth as they stand in with
respect to our perception. But the hyperbolic doubts I put forward in
the First Meditation included this one, that I could not be certain
that things exist in truth as we perceive them, as long as I supposed
myself ignorant of the author of my being. Hence everything I wrote

226

146

227

228

Fourth Objections and Replies

in the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Meditations, about God and truth,
leads up to the conclusion that the mind is really distinct from the
body, which I ﬁnally established in the Sixth Meditation.
And yet, M. Arnauld says, I can understand a triangle inscribed in a
semicircle without knowing that the square of its base is equal to the sum
of the squares of the sides (p. 129). To be sure, this triangle can indeed
be understood, without our thinking about the proportion that
obtains between the squares of its base and sides. But we cannot
understand this proportion as needing to be denied of the triangle.
As regards the mind, on the other hand, we not only understand it as
existing without the body, but we also understand that we can deny
of it all properties that pertain to the body. For it is of the nature of
substances, that they mutually exclude one another.
What M. Arnauld goes on to say, that it is not surprising if, when I
infer from the fact that I am thinking that I exist, the idea I form of
myself in this way, represents me only as a thinking thing (p. 129), does
not aﬀect my argument. For in the same way when I examine the
nature of body, I ﬁnd nothing at all in it that smacks of thought. And
there can be no greater proof of the distinction between two things,
than the fact that, to whichever of them we turn our attention, we
discover nothing at all in it that is not distinct from the other.
Nor do I see why this argument is said to prove too much (p. 130).
For, if we are to show that one thing is really distinct from another,
the least we have to be able to say is that they can be separated by the
divine power. And I think I have taken suﬃcient care to forestall the
conclusion that man is nothing but a soul using a body (p. 130). For in
this same Sixth Meditation in which I dealt with the distinction
between mind and body, I also proved that the mind is substantially
united with the body. And I advanced reasons in support of this view
than which, to the best of my recollection, I have never encountered
any stronger in all my reading.
Someone who calls a human being’s arm a substance really distinct
from the rest of the body would not therefore be denying that it
belongs to the nature of a whole human being; nor does one who says
that the same arm belongs to the nature of a whole human being
therefore give any occasion for supposing that it cannot subsist by
itself. By the same token, I do not myself think that I have proved
too much, in showing that the mind can exist without the body, or
too little, in saying that it is substantially united to the body, because

Fourth Objections and Replies

147

this substantial union does not prevent our holding a clear and
distinct concept of the mind alone as a complete thing. Therefore
there is a great diﬀerence between this concept and that of a surface
or a line (p. 130), which cannot be understood as complete things in
this way, except by attributing depth to them as well as length and
breadth.
Finally, the fact that the faculty of thinking is dormant in infants,
and in the mad not indeed extinct but out of order (p. 130), is no
reason to conclude that it is so closely attached to the organs of the
body that it cannot exist without them. For from the fact that we
experience that it is often impeded by them, it by no means follows
that it is produced by them; which there is not even the slightest
reason for thinking.
However, I do not deny that this close conjunction of the mind
with the body that we constantly experience by our senses is the
reason why we do not realize its real distinction from the body except
by attentive meditation. But, in my opinion, those who frequently go
over in their minds the points made in the Second Meditation, will
readily convince themselves that the mind is not distinguished from
the body by a mere ﬁction, or an intellectual abstraction, but known
as a distinct thing, because it is indeed distinct in reality.
I say nothing in reply to the points M. Arnauld has added here
about the soul’s immortality, because they do not aﬀect my argument. But as for the souls of animals, even though this is not the
place to go into the question, and I could add nothing to the account
I gave in the ﬁfth part of A Discourse on the Method,* without giving
a full-scale exposition of physics, I shall not leave the matter aside
altogether. The key point to grasp, to my mind, is that no motions
can take place, whether in animals’ bodies or ours, unless these
bodies contain absolutely all the organs or instruments by means
of which the same motions could also be produced in a machine. So
true is this, that not even in ourselves does the mind move the external limbs directly: it only directs the animal spirits that ﬂow from the
heart through the brain into the muscles, and determines them to
speciﬁc movements, since of themselves the spirits are applied with
equal facility to many diﬀerent actions.* Indeed, most of the movements that occur in us do not depend on the mind at all: for instance,
the beating of the heart, the digestion of food, nutrition, breathing
when we are asleep, and even, when we are awake, walking, singing,

229

230

148

231

Fourth Objections and Replies

and so forth, when these take place without the mind’s attention.
And when a person falling thrusts out their hands to protect their head,
they certainly do this without any guidance from the reason, purely
because the sight of their impending impact is transmitted as far as
the brain, and sends animal spirits to the nerves, in such a way as
is required to produce this movement, even without the mind’s
consent—just as would occur in a machine. And since we experience
this for certain within ourselves, why should we be at all surprised
if the light reﬂected from the body of a wolf onto the eyes of a sheep
(p. 131) has the same power to produce the motion of ﬂight in the
sheep?
Now indeed, if we wish to use reason in order to distinguish
whether some of the motions of animals are like those that are performed in us with the help of the mind, or only like those that
depend on the ﬂow of animal spirits and the disposition of our
organs, we have to consider the diﬀerences that are found between
the two kinds of movement. I explained these in the ﬁfth part of the
Discourse on Method, and I do not think any others are to be found. It
will then readily appear that all actions performed by animals are like
only those that occur in us without any help from the mind. By this
we are forced to conclude that we know no source of movement in
them, besides the disposition of their organs and the continuous
ﬂows of animal spirits that are produced by the heat of the heart,
which thins out the blood. At the same time, we shall realize that
nothing previously gave us any reason to imagine any other source of
movement in them except this: that, failing to distinguish these two
sources of movement, when we observed that the ﬁrst source, which
depends purely on the animal spirits and the organs, is found in animals as well as in ourselves, we unthinkingly decided that the other
source, which involves mind and thought, was also in them. And certainly the convictions we have thus formed in our early years, however clearly they are later shown by arguments to be false, are not
easily uprooted from our opinions, unless we give prolonged and
repeated consideration to these arguments.
Reply to the other part, Of God
Up to now, I have sought to refute the arguments of M. Arnauld, and
to stand up against his attack. But from now on, like one faced with
a stronger opponent, I will not ﬁght back against him, but rather seek
to evade his blows.

Fourth Objections and Replies

149

There are only three points at issue in this part, and they can readily be conceded, in the sense in which he understands them. But I
intended my words to bear another sense, which also seems to me to
be true.
The ﬁrst point is that certain ideas are materially false (p. 132): by
which I mean, that they are such as oﬀer the judgement material for
error. But he, considering ideas in the formal sense, holds that there
can be no falsity in them.
The second is that God exists of himself, positively and as if he were
the cause of himself (p. 133). Here, I meant only this: that the reason
why God requires no eﬃcient cause for his existence is founded on
a positive reality, namely, God’s immensity, than which nothing can
be more positive. But he proves that God is not produced by himself
or conserved by some positive inﬂuence on the part of an eﬃcient
cause. To this I completely subscribe.
The third and last is that nothing can be in our minds of which we are
not conscious (p. 137). I meant this to apply to the mind’s operations;
he denies it applies to its faculties.
But I shall go into these points more carefully one by one. First,
where he says, if cold is only a privation, there can be no idea that represents it to me as something positive (p. 132), it is clear that he is talking only of ideas in the formal sense. For since ideas themselves are
certain forms, and are composed of nothing material, whenever they
are considered as representations of something, they are being taken
not in the material but in the formal sense. But if they were considered
not as representing this or that, but simply in so far as they are operations of the intellect, it could indeed be said that they are being taken
in the material sense. But in this case the truth or falsity of their
objects would not come into consideration. I do not therefore think
that they can be said to be materially false in any sense other than that
I have explained. For whether cold is a positive thing or a privation
does not aﬀect my idea of it, but the idea remains in me, the same as
it has always been.* And I say that this idea oﬀers me material for
error, if indeed cold is a privation and does not possess so much reality as heat; because, when I consider the ideas both of cold and of heat
in so far as I have received them both from the senses, I am not aware
of one as representing a greater degree of reality to me than the other.
Nor indeed did I confuse ideas and judgements (p. 132). For I said
that material falsity could be found in the former, but only formal falsity in the latter.

232

233

150

234

Fourth Objections and Replies

When, however, M. Arnauld states that the idea of cold is cold itself,
in so far as it exists objectively in the intellect (p. 132), I think a distinction needs to be drawn. It often happens with obscure and confused
ideas, among which those of heat and cold should be counted, that
we refer them to something other than that of which they are really
the idea. Thus, if cold is only a privation, the idea of cold is not cold
itself, in so far as it exists objectively in the intellect, but something
else for which this privation is mistaken. In fact, it is a certain sensation having no existence outside the intellect.
But this cannot apply to the idea of God, at least not to the clear
and distinct idea of him, because it cannot be said to be referring to
something to which it does not conform. But, as regards the confused
ideas of the gods imagined by idolaters, I do not see why they too
cannot be considered materially false, inasmuch as they provide the
material for their false judgements about them. Although, to be sure,
it seems that those ideas that give no or very little occasion to the
judgement to fall into error, are not so validly termed materially false
as those that give great occasion; for that some give greater occasion
than others, it is easy to show by giving examples. For the occasion
is less in the case of confused ideas produced by the imagination at
the whim of the mind (such as the ideas of false gods) than it is in the
case of the confused ideas arising from the senses, like the ideas of
colour and cold—if, that is, it is true, as I have said, that they represent nothing real. But the occasion is greatest in the case of the ideas
that arise from the sensitive appetite. For example the idea of thirst
in a person suﬀering from dropsy really does oﬀer him material for
error—does it not?—when it gives him occasion to judge that drink
would do him good, when in fact it would be bad for him.
But M. Arnauld asks what is represented to me by the idea of cold
that I have claimed to be materially false. For if, he says, it represents
a privation, then it is true; if it represents a positive entity, then it is not
the idea of cold (p. 132). Well and good: but I call it materially false
purely for this reason: that, since it is obscure and confused, I cannot
discern whether it is representing to me some positive entity existing
outside my senses, or not. Therefore it gives me an occasion to judge
that there is a positive entity out there, although perhaps in fact there
is only a privation.
Nor, therefore, is there any reason to ask the question what is the
cause of this positive objective being, that according to me makes the idea

Fourth Objections and Replies

151

materially false (p. 132)? Because I do not say that its material falsity
is caused by some positive entity, but only by the obscurity that does,
however, have some positive being as its subject, namely, the faculty
of sensation itself.
And indeed this positive being exists in me, in so far as I am myself
a true thing. But the obscurity, which alone gives me occasion to
judge that this idea of the sensation of cold represents some object
existing outside myself, and called ‘coldness’, has no real cause, but
arises purely from the fact that my nature is not perfect in all respects.
Nor does this at all aﬀect my fundamental principles. But I would
be inclined to fear that, since I have never devoted very much of my
time to reading books by philosophers, I was failing to follow their
customary manner of speaking, when I called ideas that oﬀer the
judgement material for error ‘materially false’, were it not for the fact
that I ﬁnd the word used in the same sense by the ﬁrst author whose
work I dipped into to check this: namely, Francisco Suárez,* in his
Metaphysical Disputations, IX. ii. 4.
But let us proceed to the point M. Arnauld ﬁnds especial fault
with, even though to me it seems the least open to criticism, I mean,
when I said that it is legitimate for us to think of God as standing in
a certain sense in the same relationship to himself as the eﬃcient
cause stands to its eﬀect (p. 133). For in these very words I denied what
M. Arnauld ﬁnds audacious and false: that is, that God is the eﬃcient
cause of himself, because when I said that in a certain sense he stands
in the same relationship I was making clear that I did not think the
relationship was exactly the same. And by putting at the beginning
the words it is altogether legitimate for us to think, I was making clear
that I was explaining the matter in this way only on account of the
imperfection of the human intellect. And I conﬁrmed this throughout the rest of the text. For immediately at the start of the discussion,
when I say that nothing exists into the eﬃcient cause of which we cannot
inquire, I added, or, if it has no eﬃcient cause, we can ask why it does not
need one (AT 7. 108). These words make it plain enough that I thought
something does exist that needs no eﬃcient cause. But what could that
something be, if not God? I said, shortly after, that in God there is
so much and such inexhaustible power that he neither needed the help of
any other being in order to exist, nor needs any now in order to be preserved,
and thus he is, in a certain sense, the cause of himself (AT 7. 109). Here
the expression cause of himself is by no means to be taken as meaning

235

236

152

237

Fourth Objections and Replies

‘eﬃcient cause’: it means simply that the inexhaustible power of God
is the cause or reason why he requires no cause. And since this inexhaustible power, or the immensity of his essence, is as positive as anything could be, this is why I said that there is a positive reason or
cause why God does not need a cause. But the same could not be said
of any ﬁnite being, however perfect in its own kind. If such a being
were said to exist ‘of itself ’, this could only be in the negative sense
since no reason deriving from its positive nature could be adduced to
explain why it needed no eﬃcient cause.
In the same way, whenever elsewhere in my work I have put
forward this comparison between the formal cause, or the reason
derived from God’s essence on account of which he needs no cause
to exist or to be preserved, and the eﬃcient cause without which
ﬁnite things cannot exist, I have always done so in such words as will
make quite clear that I regard the formal cause as diﬀerent from the
eﬃcient cause.* And I have never anywhere said that God preserves
himself in being by some positive inﬂuence, in the way that created
things are preserved by him in being, but only that the immensity of
his power, or essence, on account of which he needs no preserver, is
a positive thing.
Therefore I can wholeheartedly accept all M. Arnauld says in proving that God is not the eﬃcient cause of himself, and that he does not
preserve himself by any positive inﬂuence or by continually reproducing himself. This, but this only, he proves by his arguments. But
I hope he will not disagree that the immensity of the divine power, on
account of which God needs no cause for his existence, is a positive
reality in him; and that there is nothing positive of this kind that we
can attribute to any other thing, in virtue of which it would need no
eﬃcient cause for its existence. This is all I meant, when I said that
nothing can be understood as existing of itself save in the negative sense,
apart from God himself. Nor did I need to give any further explanation in order to resolve the diﬃculty that has been here raised.
But since M. Arnauld here warns me so seriously that one could
hardly ﬁnd a single theologian who would not be scandalized by the
proposition that God exists of himself in the positive sense, as if he were
the cause of himself (p. 137), I will explain in somewhat more detail
why it seems to me that this way of putting it is so helpful, and even
so necessary, when discussing this question; and why there is not the
slightest reason for scandal.

Fourth Objections and Replies

153

I know that Latin theologians do not use the word cause when talking about God, when they are dealing with the procession of the persons of the Most Holy Trinity, and that, where the Greeks used the
words ‘cause’ (aition) and ‘principle’ (archên) with equal readiness,
the Latins prefer to use only the word ‘principle’, as being the most
general term.* This they do so as not to give anyone occasion for
thinking the Son is inferior to the Father. But where there can be no
such risk of error, and we are dealing with God not as a Trinity, but
simply as a unity, I cannot see why the word ‘cause’ is so much to be
avoided, especially in a context where it seems both very helpful and
virtually necessary to use it.
But the word could not possibly be more helpful than in the
demonstration of the existence of God; or more necessary, if, without it, the demonstration could not be made clear.
And that the consideration of the eﬃcient cause is the ﬁrst and
most important means, if not the only means, we have of proving the
existence of God*—this, I think, is obvious to everyone. But we
cannot follow it through with the proper care unless we give our
minds permission to investigate the eﬃcient cause of all things, even
God himself. For why should we make an exception of God, if we
have not yet proved he exists? Therefore we must ask of every thing,
whether it exists of itself or from another being; and in fact by this
means we can conclude that God exists, even without making
explicit what it means for something to exist of itself. For everyone
who follows the guidance of the natural light alone, will at this point
spontaneously form for themselves a concept covering both the
formal and the eﬃcient cause, according to which what exists from
another being exists through the other being’s activity as an eﬃcient
cause; whereas, on the other hand, what exists of itself, exists in virtue
of a formal cause, that is, because its essence is such that it requires no
eﬃcient cause. I did not therefore make this explicit in my Meditations,
but passed over it as something known directly.
But when those who are accustomed to judge that nothing can
be the eﬃcient cause of itself, and to draw a careful distinction
between the eﬃcient and the formal cause, ﬁnd someone investigating whether anything exists of itself, it can easily happen, that, thinking only of the eﬃcient cause in the strict sense, they suppose that
the expression to exist of oneself should not be understood as meaning
to exist on account of a cause, but only in the negative sense, as meaning

238

239

154

240

Fourth Objections and Replies

to exist without a cause; so that they think that something exists of
which we are not supposed to inquire why it exists.* But if this interpretation of the expression to exist of oneself were allowed, we would
be unable to resort to any causal argument for the existence of God,
as has been proved by the author of the First Objections. Therefore
the interpretation must be disallowed.*
But to reply to it appropriately, I think it necessary to show that
between the eﬃcient cause in the strict sense and the absence of
cause, there is an intermediate term, namely the positive essence of a
thing. The concept of the eﬃcient cause can be extended to include
this in the same way as in geometry we customarily extend the
concept of a circular line as great as we can imagine so that it coincides with the concept of a straight line, or the concept of a straightsided polygon with an indeﬁnite number of sides, so that it coincides
with the concept of a circle. I do not think that this can be better
explained in any other way than I myself explained it when I said
the sense of the term ‘eﬃcient cause’ should not in this context be restricted
to those causes that exist before their eﬀects in time, or that are diﬀerent
from them; ﬁrst, because this would be superﬂuous since everybody knows
that one and the same thing cannot be prior to itself in time, or diﬀerent
from itself; secondly, because one of these conditions can be removed from
the concept, with the notion of an eﬃcient cause nonetheless remaining
intact (AT 7. 108).
That temporal priority is not essential to it is apparent from the
fact that something enjoys the status of a cause only for so long as it
is producing its eﬀect, as has already been pointed out.
But from the fact that the other condition cannot also be removed,
we must infer only that this [sc. the essence of a thing] is not an
eﬃcient cause in the strict sense; which I agree is true. But we cannot
conclude that it is in no way a positive cause, capable of being compared by analogy to an eﬃcient cause. And this is all that is required
for this purpose. For by the same natural light by which I perceive
that I would have given myself all the perfections of which I have
some idea in myself, if I had actually given myself existence, I perceive that nothing can give itself existence in the way we mean when
using the term ‘eﬃcient cause’ in the strict sense it usually bears. For
otherwise one and the same being, in so far as it gives itself being,
would be diﬀerent from itself, in so far as it receives it. But same and
not-same, or diﬀerent, are contradictories.

Fourth Objections and Replies

155

Therefore when we are asking if anything can give itself existence,
we should understand this as equivalent to asking whether there is
any thing of which the nature or essence is such, that it does not need
an eﬃcient cause in order to exist.
And when we add, if there is something of this kind, it would give
itself all the perfections of which there is some idea in itself, if indeed it
does not possess them yet (p. 133), what is meant is that it has to be the
case that it possesses in actuality all the perfections it knows, because
we perceive by the natural light that a being whose essence is so
immense that it requires no eﬃcient cause in order to exist, does not
need one either in order to possess all the perfections it knows, and
that its own essence gives it, in eminent form, everything we can
conceive as being given to other things by an eﬃcient cause.
And the words, if it does not yet possess them, it would give itself them,
are there simply to assist the explanation, since by the same natural
light we perceive that such a being cannot now have the power and
will to give itself something new, but that its essence is such that
from all eternity it has possessed everything that we, now, can think
it would give itself, if it did not yet have it.
Nonetheless, all these ways of speaking, derived from an analogy
with eﬃcient causality, are extremely necessary in order so to direct
the natural light that we can realize all this quite clearly. This is just
the same as when we ﬁnd in Archimedes the demonstration of several properties of the sphere and other curvilinear ﬁgures by means
of a comparison with rectilinear ﬁgures, without which these things
would have been virtually impossible to grasp. And in the same way
as these demonstrations are not to be criticized, even though they
involve considering the sphere as a polyhedron, so I think that I am
not open to criticism here, for using the analogy of eﬃcient causality
to explain properties of the formal cause, that is, the very essence
of God.
Nor is there any risk of error here, since the only property speciﬁc
to the eﬃcient cause, and that we cannot predicate of the formal
cause, involves a blatant self-contradiction, and no one could believe
it: I mean, that something could be diﬀerent from itself, or at the one
and the same time, the same and not the same.*
And we must note here that when we ascribe to God the dignity
of being a cause we do so in such a way as not thereby to impute to
him the indignity of being an eﬀect. For, in the same way as, when

241

242

156

243

Fourth Objections and Replies

theologians say that the Father is the principle of the Son, they do not
therefore concede that the Son is therefore principiated; so, although
I have admitted that God can in some sense be said to be the cause of
himself, I have nowhere termed him in the same way an eﬀect of himself, and this is because the eﬀect is usually subordinated to the cause,
the eﬃcient cause especially, and is less noble than it, although often
it is more noble than other causes.*
Besides when I here identify the whole essence of a thing as its
formal cause, I am merely following in the footsteps of Aristotle. For
in Posterior Analytics, II. 11, having omitted the material cause, the
ﬁrst cause he names is the aitian to ti ên einai, or, as Latin-language
philosophers generally term it, the formal cause; and he extends the
sense of this term to cover all essences of things.* This is because he
is not there dealing with the causes of composite beings existing in
nature (and the same is true of myself here), but more generally of
the causes from which some knowledge may be sought.
But to show that in the case under discussion, it would have been
diﬃcult to refrain from applying the term ‘cause’ to God, there can
be no better proof than this: although M. Arnauld has sought to
reach the same goal as myself, but by another path, he has not at all
fulﬁlled his aim—at least, so it seems to me. For he has shown at
great length that God is not the eﬃcient cause of himself, since it is
essential to the concept of an eﬃcient cause that it should be distinct
from its eﬀect; and therefore that he does not exist of himself in a positive sense, meaning by this expression on account of a positive inﬂuence
exerted by a cause; and also that he does not actually preserve himself
in being, taking preservation here in the sense of ‘the continuous production of a thing’. All of this I freely acknowledge. He goes on to
argue that God should not be said to be the eﬃcient cause of himself,
because, he says, when we investigate the eﬃcient cause of any given
thing, we are looking for a reason for its existence, but not at all for the
reason of its essence; but it is no less of the essence of an inﬁnite being to
exist than it is of the essence of a triangle to have three angles equal to two
right angles; therefore we can no more use the notion of an eﬃcient cause
to answer the question why God exists than we can to answer the question
why the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles (p. 136).
But this syllogism could readily be turned back on him like this: even
if we do not look for an eﬃcient cause of a thing’s having a certain
essence, we can nonetheless look for the eﬃcient cause of its existence;

Fourth Objections and Replies

157

but in God there is no distinction between essence and existence.
Therefore we can look for an eﬃcient cause in connection with God.
But to reconcile these two positions, what we should say is this: if
someone is enquiring why God exists, we should not indeed reply to
them by adducing an eﬃcient cause in the strict sense, but only with
reference to his very essence, or formal cause—and for the very
reason that existence and essence are not distinguished from another
in God, this formal cause bears a marked analogy to an eﬃcient
cause, and can therefore be termed a quasi-eﬃcient cause.
Finally, he adds that, if someone inquires about the eﬃcient cause of
God, we should answer that he does not need one. And if they go on to ask
why he does not need one, we should reply ‘Because he is the inﬁnite being,
whose existence is his essence’; for only things in which it is possible to distinguish their actual existence from their essence require an eﬃcient cause
(pp. 136–7). As a result, he argues that what I myself had said cannot
stand up: namely, if I thought that no thing can stand in the same relation to itself as the eﬃcient cause stands in relation to its eﬀects, I should
never arrive at any ultimately ﬁrst cause (p. 137). But it seems to me
that, so far from collapsing, my position is not in the slightest shaken
or weakened. And the principal force not only of my own demonstration but of any demonstration whatever that aims to prove the existence of God by tracing eﬀects to their cause depends on it. And in
fact almost all theologians contend that no other kind of demonstration, beside the argument from eﬀects to cause, is possible.
Therefore, so far from throwing light on the demonstration of
God’s existence, by refusing to allow us to think of him as standing in
a relation to himself analogous to that between the eﬃcient cause and
its eﬀect, he in fact makes it more diﬃcult for readers to follow the
argument, especially at the end, where he concludes: if I thought that
we must look for the eﬃcient (or quasi-eﬃcient) cause of any thing whatever, I should always look for a cause distinct from the thing itself (p. 137).
For how could those who do not yet know God investigate the eﬃcient
cause of other things in such a way that they can rise to the knowledge
of God, if they did not think that we can ask for the eﬃcient cause of
every thing? And how, I ask, could they end their search at God, considered as the ﬁrst cause, if they thought that the cause of any thing
must be looked for in something diﬀerent from that thing?
What M. Arnauld has done here may, it seems to me, be explained
by a comparison. Suppose that, speaking of those properties he had

244

245

158

246

Fourth Objections and Replies

demonstrated to belong to the sphere by analogy with rectilinear
ﬁgures inscribed within a sphere, Archimedes had said: ‘If I thought
that a sphere could not be considered as a rectilinear or quasirectilinear ﬁgure with an inﬁnite number of sides, I would give no
credence to this demonstration because it holds good not of the
sphere considered as a curvilinear ﬁgure but only in so far as it is considered as a rectilinear ﬁgure with an inﬁnite number of sides.’ It is
as if, reading these words, M. Arnauld, not wishing the sphere to be
called by that name, and yet wishing to hang on to Archimedes’s
demonstration, were to say: ‘If I thought that this conclusion should
be understood as applying to a rectilinear ﬁgure with an inﬁnite
number of sides, I would not admit that it could be applied to the
circle, because I know clearly and for a certainty that the circle is not
at all a rectilinear ﬁgure.’* Now, obviously, in saying this he would
not be doing the same as Archimedes: on the contrary, he would
certainly be placing obstacles to his own and other people’s proper
understanding of the demonstration.
I have gone into this issue, perhaps, at rather more length than was
necessary, in order to show that it is a major concern with me to
ensure that not the slightest thing can be found in my writings with
which theologians can justiﬁably ﬁnd fault.
Finally, that I did not argue in a circle when I said that we can be
certain that what we clearly and distinctly perceive is true, only if God
exists, and we can be certain that God exists, only because we clearly perceive it (p. 137), is already made suﬃciently clear in the Second
Replies, §§3–4 (p. 92), where I distinguished between what we
clearly perceive in actual fact and what we remember we once clearly
perceived. For ﬁrst of all, we are certain that God exists, since we
reﬂect on the reasons by which his existence is proved; but subsequently it is suﬃcient for us to remember that we have clearly perceived something, in order to be certain it is true; and this would not
be suﬃcient, unless we knew that God exists and does not deceive us.
Moreover, that there can be nothing in the mind, in so far as it is a
thinking thing, of which it is not conscious (p. 137), seems to me to be
self-evident, because we understand there to be nothing in the mind,
considered from this point of view, that is not a thought, or dependent on thought; for otherwise, it would not belong to the mind, inasmuch as it is a thinking thing; and there can be no thought in us
of which, at the moment at which it is in us, we are not conscious.

Fourth Objections and Replies

159

Hence I do not doubt that the mind, as soon as it is infused into the
body of an infant, begins to think, and is at the same time conscious
of its thinking, even if afterwards it does not remember what it has
thought, because the forms of these thoughts do not remain in the
memory.
But it is important to note that whereas, as far as the acts or operations of our mind are concerned, we are always actually conscious of
them, as regards its faculties or powers, this is not always true, except
in potentiality. What this means is that, when we apply ourselves to
make use of some faculty, we are always, if that faculty does indeed
exist in the mind, actually conscious of it; and therefore we can deny
that it exists in the mind, if we cannot become conscious of it.*
On the points that might engage the attention of theologians
I have combated M. Arnauld’s ﬁrst arguments, and attempted to
parry his second ones. With the arguments that follow I agree
altogether, apart from the closing one, and here I hope it will not
be diﬃcult to get him to agree with me.
Therefore, that the points contained in the First Meditation, and
even the rest as well, are not suitable for everyone or within the
capacity of everyone’s mind (p. 138), I frankly admit; and wherever
the occasion has arisen, I have borne witness to this, and will do so in
future. This was the only reason why I did not discuss the same
points in the Discourse on Method, which was written in French, but
held them over for these Meditations, which I have given advance
warning are to be read only by the intelligent and learned.* Nor
should it be said that I would have done better to refrain from writing things that a great many people should refrain from reading; for
I think they are so necessary, that without them, I am convinced that
nothing ﬁrm and stable can ever be established in philosophy. And
although ﬁre and iron cannot be handled by the careless or by children without danger, yet they are so useful to our lives that no one
thinks that we should do without them on that account.
That in the Fourth Meditation I was discussing only the mistakes
we make in judgements of true and false, rather than in the pursuit of good
and evil (p. 138); and that, when I have asserted that we should give
our assent to nothing except what we clearly know, I have always made
an exception for matters that pertain to faith and to the conduct of one’s
life (p. 138), is clear from the whole context of the Meditations; and

247

248

160

249

Fourth Objections and Replies

I stated it explicitly in my reply to the Second Objections, §5 (pp. 96–7).
I also made this clear in advance in the Synopsis; so that I may thus
bear witness to the esteem I have for M. Arnauld’s judgement and to
the seriousness with which I take his advice.*
There remains the sacrament of the Eucharist, with which
M. Arnauld judges that my opinions are not compatible, because he
says, that we believe by faith that when the substance of bread is taken
away from the eucharistic wafer, only the accidents there remain; he
thinks, however, that I admit no real accidents, but only modes that
cannot be conceived without a substance in which to inhere, and therefore
that cannot exist without that substance (pp. 139–40).
I could evade this objection very easily by pointing out that up
to now I have never denied the existence of real accidents; for
although I did not invoke them in the Dioptrics and the Meteorology*
to explain the matters I was there dealing with, I nonetheless said
in so many words that I do not deny their existence. In these
Meditations, indeed, I supposed that they were not yet known to me,
but not that they therefore did not exist; for the analytic method
of composition I was following allows us to make suppositions on
occasion that are not suﬃciently investigated at that point. This
was clear from the First Meditation, in which I made many assumptions that were subsequently refuted in later ones.* And in fact I
did not want here to establish a deﬁnite position on the nature of
accidents, but was only tentatively putting forward what appeared
to be the case on ﬁrst viewing. And ﬁnally, from the fact that I said
that modes cannot be understood without some substance in which
to inhere, it should not be inferred that I denied that they can be
separated from that substance by the divine power, for I plainly
declare and fully believe that God can do many things that we cannot
understand.
But, to deal with the matter in a fashion more beﬁtting a gentleman,* I shall not conceal my conviction that there is nothing at all by
which our senses can be aﬀected besides the surface that forms the
boundaries of the body that is perceived by them. For contact takes
place with the surface alone. And no sense is aﬀected except by contact:
I am not alone in saying this, but nearly all philosophers, including
Aristotle himself, say the same. Thus, for example, bread or wine is
not perceived, except in so far as its surface makes contact with the
sense-organ, either immediately or via the medium of the air and

Fourth Objections and Replies

161

other bodies, as I hold to be the case, or, as most philosophers would
have it, via the medium of intentional species.*
But it is important to note that this surface is not to be simply
equated with the bodies’ external shape that we can touch with our
ﬁngers, but that we must also take into account all the tiny gaps that
are found among the particles of ﬂour of which the bread is formed,
and among the particles of spirit, water, vinegar and dregs or tartar
of which wine is made up, and likewise between the little parts of
other bodies. For certainly, since these particles have diﬀerent
shapes and movements, whenever they are joined together, however
closely, they always leave many gaps between them, which are not
vacuums, but ﬁlled with air or other matter. Thus, with the naked
eye we can see that in bread there are quite sizeable gaps of this kind,
which can be ﬁlled not only with air but also with water, or wine,
or other liquids. Now since the bread still remains the same, even
though the air or other matter contained in these pores is changed, it
is clear that these do not belong to its substance as such. Therefore
its surface is not the one that encloses the whole loaf of bread in a
very small space, but the one that is immediately in contact with all
the individual particles.
We must also note that this surface can be moved not only in its
entirety, as when the whole loaf is transported from one place to
another, but also in part, when some particles of the bread are agitated by the air or other bodies entering its pores. So much so, that
if any bodies are of such a nature that some or all of their parts are
continually in motion (which I think applies to many of the parts of
the bread and all the parts of the wine), we should understand also
that their surface is in a kind of continual movement.
Finally, we must note that by the surface of the bread, or the wine,
or any other body, I do not here mean any part of the substance or
even of the quantity of the body in question, nor even a part of the
surrounding bodies, but only the boundary that is conceived as a
medium term between the individual particles of the body and the bodies
that surround it, and that has no existence except in a modal sense.*
Now, since contact takes place only at this boundary, and nothing
is perceived except by contact, it is plain, from the simple fact that
the substances of bread and wine are said to be changed into the substance of something else in such a way that this new substance is contained altogether within the same boundaries as the other substances

250

251

162

252

253

Fourth Objections and Replies

were contained in before, or that it exists in precisely the same place
as the bread and wine existed before (or rather, since their boundaries are in constant motion, in the same place as they would be existing if they were still present), it necessarily follows that the new
substance must aﬀect all our senses in exactly the same way as the
bread and wine would aﬀect them, if no transubstantiation had taken
place.
Beside the Church teaches (Council of Trent, session 13, canons 2
and 4) that the conversion takes place of the whole substance of the bread
into the substance of the body of Our Lord Jesus Christ, the appearance
of bread remaining all the while.* Here I cannot see what can be meant
by ‘the appearance of bread’, apart from the surface interposed
between the individual particles it comprises and the bodies surrounding them.
For as has already been said, contact takes place only at this
surface; and as Aristotle himself concedes, not only the sense particularly called ‘touch’, but the other senses as well perceive by touch*
(De anima, III. 13).
And there is no one who thinks that ‘appearance’ here means anything other than, speciﬁcally, what is required in order for the senses
to be aﬀected. Moreover, there is no one who believes that the bread
is converted into Christ’s body, who does not think at the same time
that this body of Christ is fully contained within the same surface as
the bread would be contained within, if it were still present; even if
it is not there exactly as if it were in a place, but in sacramental fashion, and existing in a way that, even if we can scarcely express it in words,
we can grasp, with a mind enlightened by faith, as being possible to GOD,
and that we must believe most faithfully.* All these points are so easily
and plainly explicable according to my principles, that I have no
reason here to be afraid of scandalizing orthodox theologians—on
the contrary, I trust that they will be very grateful to me, for putting
forward views in physics that are far more compatible with theology
than those that are commonly held. For certainly the Church has never
taught anywhere*—at least, to my knowledge—that the residual
appearances of bread and wine in the Sacrament of the Eucharist are
real accidents that, when the substance in which they inhered has
been removed, continue by a miracle to exist on their own.
But since, we may suppose, the ﬁrst theologians who tried to
explain this issue in philosophical terms, were so ﬁrmly convinced

Fourth Objections and Replies

163

that the accidents that aﬀect our senses were something real and distinct from the substance that they did not even realize that anyone
could ever doubt it, they supposed without any examination and
without good reason, that the appearance of the bread took the form
of real accidents of this sort. And they were then in a position where
they had to explain how these could exist without a subject. In this
business they found so many diﬃculties that this alone should have
led them to realize (like travellers when they have wandered into a
rugged and trackless waste) that they had strayed from the true path.
For, ﬁrst, they seem to contradict themselves (at least those who
admit that all sense-perception is based on contact), when they suppose that, in order for objects to aﬀect our senses, something more is
required than their surfaces, disposed in various ways—since it is
self-evident that surface is by itself suﬃcient for contact to take
place. But if there are any who do not admit sense-perception is
based on contact, they can say nothing about this question that has
the slightest appearance of truth.
Finally, the human mind cannot think that the accidents of
the bread are real and nonetheless that they exist without their
substance, without at the same time conceiving them as if they were
substances; so much so, that it seems self-contradictory to hold that
the whole substance of the bread is changed, as the Church believes,
and at the same time that something real, that was previously in the
bread, remains; because nothing real can be understood to remain
except what subsists, and although it is called an accident, is nonetheless conceived as a substance. Therefore in practice this is tantamount to saying that the whole substance of the bread is indeed
changed, but that nonetheless the part of its substance that is called
a real accident remains. And if this is not self-contradictory on the
level of words, it is certainly so on that of concepts.
And this seems to be a principal reason why many people have
parted company with the Roman Church about this issue.* For who
would deny that where our choice is free, and no theological or
indeed philosophical reason compels us to embrace any particular
opinion, that we should make a point of adopting those opinions that
give no opportunity or pretext to others for swerving away from the
truth of faith? But that the belief in real accidents does not ﬁt well
with theological considerations, I believe I have shown here pretty
plainly; and that it also clashes with philosophical considerations,

254

164

255

Fourth Objections and Replies

I hope to prove clearly in the treatise on the principles of philosophy
I am now working on.* There I shall show how colour, taste, weight,
and all the other qualities that aﬀect the senses depend only on the
outermost surface of bodies.*
Finally, we cannot postulate the existence of real accidents without complicating the miracle of transubstantiation—which alone can
be inferred from the words of consecration*—by the pointless
addition of a further and incomprehensible miracle, in virtue of
which these real accidents exist, in the absence of the substance of
bread, yet without, at the same time, becoming substances themselves. But this is contrary not only to human reason, but also to an
axiom of theologians, who say that these words of consecration bring
about nothing but what they signify; and who are reluctant to ascribe
to a miracle what can be explained by natural reasons. But all these
diﬃculties are altogether eliminated by my explanation of the matter.
For, according to my explanation, no miracle is needed for the conservation of the accidents after the removal of the substance—so
much so, that on the contrary they cannot be removed without a new
miracle (one, that is, that would change their dimensions). There are
accounts of this happening sometimes, when in the place of the consecrated wafer, living ﬂesh or a child has appeared in the hands of the
priest; but it has never been believed that this has happened by the
cessation of a miracle, but by an altogether new miracle.*
Besides, there is nothing diﬃcult or incomprehensible in God’s
being able—after all, he is the creator of all things—to change one
substance into another, in such a way that this latter substance remains
entirely within the same surface as the earlier one was contained in.
Nor is there anything more in keeping with reason, or more commonly accepted among philosophers, than the doctrine that not only
all sensation, but generally all action by one body upon another, takes
place by means of contact, and that this contact can occur only on the
surface. From this it evidently follows that one and the same surface,
however much the substance underlying it is changed, must always
act and be acted on in the same way.*
And therefore, if I may write this without causing oﬀence, I venture to hope that a time will come one day, when the belief in real
accidents is banished by theologians as contrary to reason, and incomprehensible, and dangerous from the point of view of faith, and my
view is accepted instead, as certain and indubitable. I thought it

Fourth Objections and Replies

165

would be wrong for me to conceal this here, so that, to the best of my
ability, I may forestall the calumnies of those who, since they wish to
seem more learned than other people, cannot endure anyone putting
forward a view in some scientiﬁc matter that they cannot pretend they
were aware of already. And often they rage against it all the more violently the truer and more signiﬁcant they think it is; and what they
cannot refute by argument, they claim, quite groundlessly that it is
contrary to holy scripture and to the truths of faith. Indeed they are
impious in this respect, that they wish to use the authority of the
Church to overthrow the truth. But I appeal from them to pious and
orthodox theologians, to whose judgements and censures I very freely
submit.

256

FIFTH OBJECTIONS

257

258

On the First Meditation
There is not much to detain me in the First Meditation: for I approve
your intention of stripping every prejudice away from your mind. One
thing alone I do not clearly grasp: why it is you did not think it suﬃcient
simply and succinctly to declare your previous knowledge uncertain, so
that you could subsequently pick out the beliefs that turned out to be true,
instead of declaring them all false, and thus not so much divesting yourself of an old prejudice, as espousing a new one. And note how you found
it necessary, in order to convince yourself of this, to imagine a deceiving
God, or some deluding evil genius, when it would have seemed suﬃcient
to invoke the darkness of the human mind, and the mere weakness of our
nature. Besides, you pretend that you are dreaming, so as to call everything into doubt, and consider everything that happens as a delusion. But
can you really compel yourself for this reason to believe that you are not
awake, and to consider whatever exists or occurs in your presence as uncertain and false? Whatever you say, no one will be convinced that you are
convinced that nothing you have ever known is true, and that you have
been perpetually deceived by your senses, or by dreams, or by God, or by
an evil spirit. Would it not have been more worthy both of a philosopher’s
sincerity and of the love of truth, to state matters as they are, in good faith
and straightforwardly, than (as one might object to you) to resort to contrivances, go in for conjuring tricks, and follow roundabout paths? But
since you decided on this approach I will contend with you no further.
On the Second Meditation
1. [258–60] You still seem to be under a delusion, but you aﬃrm your
existence, since it is you that is deluded.* But why all the eﬀort to establish something of which you were already certain, and which could,
anyway, have been inferred from any of your actions, since we know by the
natural light that whatever acts, exists?
You say, seriously, that you do not suﬃciently understand what you
are. This is what you should have been investigating directly, instead of
putting forward elaborate hypotheses.
In your examination of human nature, you ascribed nutrition, motion,
sensation, and thought to the soul: but does not this call into question your

Fifth Objections and Replies

167

distinction between soul and body? Your imagining the soul as something
like a wind, or ﬁre, or air, is a striking point, which should be borne in
mind. The features you ascribed to bodies you could still ascribe to them
today, though not all of them apply to all bodies, except that one cannot
see how you know that bodies cannot move themselves, as if their every
movement derived from an incorporeal source.
2. [260–1] You ﬁnd none of the properties of a body in yourself.

At this point you are not considering yourself as a whole human being,
but as an inner and secret part,* such as you thought the soul to be. But
I ask of you, O soul,* or whatever it is you wish to be known as, whether
you have yet corrected the view you had of yourself, when you imagined
yourself like a wind or something of the kind diﬀused throughout your
body? You certainly have not. So why could you not still be a wind,
or rather a very ﬁne vapour that is distilled by the heat of the heart
from the very purest part of the blood, or from somewhere else, or produced
by some other cause, and diﬀused through the limbs bringing them life,
seeing with the eyes, hearing with the ears, thinking with the brain, and
performing all the other functions that are commonly ascribed to you?
If this is so, why could you not have the same shape as the body as a
whole, as the air has the same shape as the vessel that contains it? Why
should we not think of you as surrounded by the same container as the
body or by the body’s outer skin? As occupying space, or at least the
parts of space not ﬁlled by the solid body or its parts? Indeed the solid
body has tiny pores, through which you yourself would be diﬀused, in
such a way, that where your parts are, its parts are not, in the same
way as, when water and wine are mixed, where there are parts of
one, there are no parts of the other, although the eye cannot distinguish
them.
Why do you think the soul incapable of occupying space or of motion?
How can you say in the light of this that there is nothing in you that pertains to the nature of body?
3. [261–3] You say that nutrition and motion, ascribed to the soul, do not
pertain to you. But there are bodies in which nutrition does not take place,
and a soul on the lines just described could be nourished by a subtle substance. Anyway, you, the soul, grow and decay with the body, and if you
move the body, you must move along with it. When you say you do not
have a body, you must be joking: but if you are serious, you have to prove
you have no body that you inform, and that you are not the type of being
that is nourished and moves.

260

261

168

Fifth Objections and Replies

You say you do not have sensations: but you do, and if, as you say, sensation requires a body, well, you do have one: in fact, you are possibly a
subtle body, operating through the sense-organs.
You have had false sensations in dreams, without the sense-organs
being involved, but you have not found all your sensations false, and you
have used your sense-organs in the past.
You do certainly think, but you have to prove that no kind of body,
however subtle, can think, before you can know you are not a body. You
would have to prove that animals have incorporeal souls, since they can
think, and that the solid body* contributes nothing to the process of thinking (though in fact you have never thought without it), if you are to show
you think independently of it. In that case, you could not be aﬀected by
vapours that aﬀect the brain.
4. [263–5] You reduce the soul, the principle of life, to the mind, whose
function is purely to think. But do you mean to say that the mind is thinking continuously?* How can this apply to people in a stupor, or to a baby
in the womb?
You say you are not something corporeal: an air dispersed through the
body, or a wind, or ﬁre, or vapour, or breath. Yet you admit that perhaps
these things may not be distinct from you. Why do you, then, assume they
are, without proof?
5. [265–6] You think you do not know yourself by means of the imagination. But if you were a body, is not that how you would know yourself?
What do you encounter when you contemplate yourself, but the image of
a subtle substance pervading the body or at least the brain? You say that
what you can grasp by the imagination has nothing to do with your knowledge of yourself. How can you say this when you have just said you do not
know whether the imagination belongs to your essence or not?
6. [266–8] To say you are a thinking thing tells us nothing new, and gives
us no knowledge of the kind of substance you are, how it is united to the
body, and how it works.
We cannot distinguish intellection from imagination, as if they were
distinct faculties or capacities. You yourself confess that you seem to know
bodies by the senses and the imagination more clearly than you know the
part of yourself you claim to know without the help of the imagination—
a mysterious entity the nature of which you do not know. All our knowledge is developed from what we know by the senses, and the existence of
bodies outside us is just as certain as our own existence. There is nothing
surprising in our knowing other things better than ourselves. The eye sees
other things, but not itself.
7. [268–71] You describe yourself as a thinking thing, and deﬁne this as
including sensation. But you said the opposite earlier. Perhaps you mean

Fifth Objections and Replies

169

that sensation begins in the sense-organs, and the mind then takes over.
But since animals have sensation, don’t they have thought, and therefore,
on your principles, minds? Any diﬀerences between us and the animals are
purely of degree. To prove yourself incorporeal, you would have to point
to some thinking that does not depend on the brain. But you cannot.
There is no reason to assert that sensation and passion work diﬀerently in
animals and in ourselves, and they are not altogether without choice,
reason, or language.
8. [271–3] You distinguish the substance of the wax from its accidents,
and hold that we know the substance by the intellect, not by sensation or
imagination. But everyone accepts that we can abstract the concept of the
wax and its substance from the concept of its accidents. However, this
does not mean that we have a clear idea of the substance beneath the accidents. Our idea of substance, such as it is, involves the imagination.
Your judging that you see people passing because you see their hats and
coats is not an act of pure intellection, because a dog can make the same
judgement, although you think it has no mind.
9. [273–7] You do not gain in knowledge of what you are from your
knowledge of the wax: it only conﬁrms the fact of your existence, which is
not in doubt. You say you have no sense-organs, but what you say about
your experience of the wax’s accidents, as visible and tactile, contradicts
this. The Meditation has not proved the mind is better known than the
body. Knowing that you are not a bodily entity like wind or air (if we grant
you know this) is merely negative knowledge. Knowing you are a thinking
thing is nugatory.

For who doubts that you are a thinking thing? What is hidden from us,
what we are looking for, is your inner substance, the characteristic property of which is to think. Therefore, what you should have been investigating and deciding was not that you are a thinking thing, but what kind
of thing you are that thinks. If we were asking you to give us a knowledge
of wine that goes beyond the common, it would not be enough for you to
say wine is a liquid extracted from grapes, white or red, sweet, intoxicating, and so forth: would you not try to investigate and discover its internal substance in whatever way you could, showing it to be a combination
of spirits, phlegm,* tartar,* and other parts, mixed together in the correct
proportions? By the same token, since the aim is to obtain a knowledge of
yourself greater than the common, greater, that is, than you have had up
to now, you surely see that it is not enough to keep harping on about being
a thing that thinks, doubts, understands, and so forth; but that it is your
duty to examine yourself, by some quasi-chemical procedure, so that you
can both discover and reveal to us your internal substance. If you can

276

277

170

Fifth Objections and Replies

achieve this, we ourselves shall examine whether or not you are better
known than the body, which is so fully displayed by anatomy, chemistry,
and by so many other arts, so many sense-perceptions and so many observations and experiments.*
On the Third Meditation
1. [277–9] You oﬀer clear and distinct perception as the criterion of truth.
But great minds, surely capable of clear and distinct perception, have
declared that the truth is hidden from us. As the sceptics argue, a clear and
distinct perception simply relates to how things appear to each of us.
I clearly and distinctly perceive the taste of melon to be pleasing, so it is
true it appears to me as pleasing. That does not prove the pleasant taste is
in the melon itself: melons tasted diﬀerent to me when I was younger, and
diﬀerent people disagree about their taste. Even of mathematics we may
clearly and distinctly perceive something, and then later clearly and distinctly perceive the opposite. Everyone thinks they clearly and distinctly
perceive their opinions to be true: some people would die for their beliefs,
though they see others ready to die for the contrary beliefs. In fact you
yourself, by your own confession, accepted things as certain and obvious
that you then came to doubt. Since you say you might be deceived about
such propositions as 2 + 3 = 5, your criterion is useless until you have
proved that God exists and cannot be a deceiver. The rule itself could in
fact be a source of error.* What you need to provide is some way of showing us whether we are in error or not, on those occasions we think we
clearly and distinctly perceive something.
2. [279–82] You distinguish innate, adventitious, and factitious ideas. But
all ideas seem to be adventitious, derived from things existing outside the
mind, and aﬀecting our senses. The mind has, or is, the faculty of working on these by abstraction, combination, division, and so forth. Certainly
there is no distinction between factitious and adventitious ideas: the idea
of a giant is simply an expanded idea of a human being. So-called innate
ideas are also adventitious. You place the idea of a thing in this category,
but this general idea is simply an abstraction from ideas of particular
things. You say you have an innate understanding of truth. But truth is the
conformity of a judgement to the thing to which the judgement refers. It
is a relation. So it is nothing distinct from the thing and the related idea.
The idea of truth is the idea of a thing, in so far as it conforms to the thing,
or represents it as it is. So if the idea of the thing is adventitious, so must
the idea of truth be.
The allegedly innate idea of thought might have been formed by analogy
with other actions, like sight or taste. What you need to show is that the
idea of the mind or soul is innate.

Fifth Objections and Replies

171

3. [282–4] You say that you do not perceive the earth, the sky, the stars,
merely ideas of them: they may not exist. If you really think that, why do
you walk on the earth, raise your eyes towards the sun, and so forth? If a
blind person has no idea of colour or a deaf person of sound, is this not
because the external bodies cannot produce the appropriate impression on
them, because the ways to their minds are blocked? You say you have two
ideas of the sun, one of it as small, which derives from the senses, and a
truer one of it as huge, derived from innate ideas. But they are both like
the sun, only one is more like it than the other. The idea of the sun as large
has been formed from the initial sensory perception (expanded to allow for
distance), not from innate ideas. This is clear because a person born blind
would not have it.
And in fact we cannot really form an idea of the sun that does justice to
its actual size: our only real idea of the sun is the common-or-garden one
deriving from the senses.
4. [284–8] We say that external objects exist formally and really in themselves, objectively and by representation in the mind. So when you speak
of the objective reality of an idea, you must mean its conformity to the
thing of which it is the idea,* its containing nothing, by representation,
that is not in the thing.
The objective reality of an idea is not to be measured by the formal reality the thing itself contains, but by the degree of our knowledge of the
thing. Thus an idea of a person based on careful and thorough examination is a perfect idea, whereas an imperfect idea is one based on a
superﬁcial and ﬂeeting impression.
Thus we can have a distinct and adequate idea of accidents, but only a
confused idea of the underlying substance. It cannot then be argued that
the idea of substance contains more objective reality than the idea of its
accidents, when any reality it contains comes from the ideas of the accidents themselves [dimensions, shape, colour, etc.].
Is not your idea of God as supreme, eternal, inﬁnite, all-powerful creator simply based on what you have heard of him?
You say there is more reality in the idea of the inﬁnite God than in
the idea of a ﬁnite thing. But: [i] the human intellect is not capable of conceiving inﬁnity, so we have no representative idea of God. ‘Inﬁnite’ is
a term we do not understand applied to a thing we do not understand;
[ii] The perfections attributed to God are all ampliﬁed versions of things
we admire in human beings. An idea representing them would have
no more objective reality than that of the ﬁnite things on which it is based.
God cannot be adequately represented by any idea of ours and any idea we
form of him by analogy contains no reality we do not perceive in other
things.

172

Fifth Objections and Replies

5. [288–91] You use the principle that there must be as much in the cause
as in the eﬀect to infer that there must be at least as much formal reality in
the cause of the idea as there is objective reality in the idea itself. This is
too great a leap.
The causal principle really applies to the material cause, not the eﬃcient
cause,* which can be of a very diﬀerent nature to the eﬀect and cannot be
said to give its own reality to the eﬀect: thus a house derives its reality from
the architect, but the architect is not giving it any of his own reality.
If you have an idea of me, the cause of the reality it contains is simply
myself, insofar as I emit ‘species’ that impact upon your eye* and so make
their way to your intellect. The same applies to all external bodies: the
reality contained in the idea of them derives simply from them.
You distinguish between the formal and the objective reality of an idea.
The cause of the formal reality of the idea of me is simply the subtle
substance emitted by me and causing your sight of me. The cause of its
objective reality is simply the likeness of your idea to me, the arrangement
of its parts in such a way as to create this likeness. But this is not something real, and hence standing in need of explanation, but simply a relationship between the parts of the idea and between the idea and me.
6. [291–4] You argue that if there is an idea in you of which the objective
reality is so great that you cannot contain it either eminently or formally,
you cannot be the cause of that idea, so something besides yourself must
exist. But you are not in any case the cause of your ideas of things: the
things themselves are. In any case, we do not need an argument to prove
that other things beside ourselves exist.
You say there is no diﬃculty about your idea of yourself and that you
might be the source of your idea of bodily things. In fact you have either
no idea of yourself or a very confused and imperfect one, as observed apropos of the previous Meditation.
A thing cannot act on itself (the sight does not see itself, nor the intellect understand itself, and the hand cannot beat itself). For knowledge to
take place the thing must act on the cognitive faculty by transmitting
species of itself. But the cognitive faculty cannot get outside itself to do
this. Thus knowledge of self is impossible, without some kind of mediating agent like the mirror that enables the eye to see itself: but what would this
agent be? Anyway, such knowledge could never be direct, only reﬂexive.
How could you have an idea of God, except, as suggested above, by
hearsay? The same applies to your idea of angels. You could have no idea of
animals if you had never seen any. (Thus all ideas come to us from outside.)
It is not at all clear how your idea of bodily things could have been derived
from yourself, if you know yourself only as an incorporeal substance.

Fifth Objections and Replies

173

7. [294–7] You argue that your idea of God alone cannot be derived from
you, and thus that God necessarily exists. But the idea comes from the
people around you! You can say that nothing exists but yourself as a pure
mind—but then where did you get the words to say so? Seriously speaking, you must have got them from other people, and, if the words, the
ideas as well. The perfections you attribute to God are perfections
observed in human beings and in other things, grasped, put together, and
expanded by the mind.
You say you could not have derived the idea of an inﬁnite substance
from yourself, because, though you are a substance, you are not inﬁnite.
But you have no real idea of an inﬁnite substance, which is beyond human
comprehension. Anyway, the idea of an inﬁnite substance could have been
formed from other ideas in the manner just described. Otherwise, you
would have to say that ancient philosophers’ idea of an inﬁnity of worlds
must have derived from an actually existing inﬁnity of worlds. Your socalled idea of the inﬁnite does not represent the inﬁnite as it is, only by the
negation of the ﬁnite. It is not enough to say you perceive more reality in
the inﬁnite than in the ﬁnite, when you do not perceive inﬁnite reality,
only an ampliﬁed version of ﬁnite reality.
You do not claim to grasp the inﬁnite fully, only to have a clear and distinct idea of some of its properties. But knowing a part of the inﬁnite is not
to know it, any more than you can know a human being by the tip of a
single hair.
8. [297–300] You say your consciousness of imperfection would be
impossible without the idea of a more perfect being. But these ideas simply
represent the facts of your limitation. And that we lack something does not
prove that something more perfect than us exists. We may feel the lack of
bread without its being more perfect than us. Your idea of perfection may
have come from the universe as a whole, which you see is more perfect
than its parts, and your sense of imperfection from your consciousness
that you are only a part of the whole, or from your experience of other
people superior to you.
You argue that your idea of God cannot derive from perfections latent
in yourself and capable of being developed, since the idea of God implies
total perfection, requiring no development. But though the properties we
perceive in an idea must be in the idea, this does not imply they are in the
thing to which the idea relates.*
Your judgements about God’s perfections arise from ignorance and are
based on assumptions. They are on a par with ancient philosophers’ ideas
of an inﬁnite number of universes: these do not prove that an inﬁnity of
universes exists.

174

Fifth Objections and Replies

9. [300–4] You argue that you yourself could not exist unless a perfect
being existed. But there was no need to prove that your existence does not
derive from yourself, or that you have not always existed. You argue that
your own existence from moment to moment must have a cause. But many
things, including yourself, are generated and produced in such a way that
they do not need the continuing activity of their cause in order to go on
existing: they can exist even when their cause has disappeared. Your idea
that the moments of time are not interconnected is incredible, but it is
also irrelevant to the question of your production or reproduction. A river
ﬂowing past a rock comprises separate parts of water: but this has nothing to do with the continued existence of the rock. Your existence in
one moment does not guarantee your existence in the next: true, but only
because you may be destroyed by an external cause or an internal
deﬁciency. You do not need to be created afresh every moment.
The identity of creation and conservation is something you have not
proved. Your continued existence is an eﬀect of your natural constitution,
though this is not proof against external or internal destructive agencies.
You depend on some other being for your existence only inasmuch as you
were produced at some time in the past. You exist because you were produced by your parents, and they by theirs, and this process could have
gone back in time to inﬁnity. For, although an inﬁnite regress is impossible in subordinated causes, where each cannot act without the activity of
a prior cause—as when a stone is driven by a stick moved by somebody’s
hand—it is possible in series where each member can continue to exist
and act, even when the cause that has produced it has perished.* You
argue that your idea of God as a unity requires a unitary cause: but it could
have been developed from your experience of diﬀerent perfections in
diﬀerent individuals. You could then have conceived these perfections as
existing in an ultimate degree, beyond what is possible for human nature,
and so formed the idea of a being possessing them all. Then you could
have investigated whether such a being exists. You could have found
arguments indicating it exists more probably than not. Then you could
have removed from it whatever implies limitation, such as body.* Your
conclusion that God exists is true, but you have not demonstrated it.
10. [304–7] Your idea of God could be partly derived from the senses,
and partly your own construction: there is no need to think it innate.
What do you mean when you say that the idea of God is imprinted in
you as the mark of your maker? How do you recognize this mark? But
if the mark is not distinct from the object itself, does this mean you are
the idea of God? Are you then simply a mode of thinking? the mark itself
and the subject in which it is made? That he made you in his image and
likeness is something believable by faith: but by the yardstick of human

Fifth Objections and Replies

175

reason, it seems to imply an anthropomorphic view of God. What likeness
can there be between you, the created, and the creator, any more than
between a house and a builder? You perceive the likeness through your
awareness of yourself as incomplete and dependent: this is a proof of
unlikeness. If the idea of God were innate, it would be universal, and all
would have the same idea of him and the same beliefs about him. But they
do not.

On the Fourth Meditation
1. [307–10] You do not want to make God responsible for our errors,
though your explanation in terms of our ‘participation in nothingness’ is
obscure, and does not show why God could not have given us a faculty of
judgement immune to error, even if limited.
You are right to say you do not understand the reasons for everything
God does. But you say you have a true idea of God as omniscient, omnipotent, and wholly good, yet you see that some of his works are imperfect.
This seems to imply he lacked the power or the will to make them better.
Your rejection of ﬁnal causes in physics is theologically dangerous, since
the best proof of God’s wisdom, power, providence, and indeed existence
is the order and interrelationship of parts in plants, animals, and the
human body: we cannot explain these except by a ﬁrst cause working for a
purpose. It cannot be wrong to investigate his purposes when these are
manifest, as here.
Your idea of God may be an alternative route to the knowledge of him
for you, but other people are not so fortunate as to possess it. In any case,
that idea comes from the knowledge of material things. What idea of God
do you suppose you would have achieved if all your life you had closed
your eyes and blocked up your ears, and ignored the other senses?*
2. [310–14] You explain the imperfection of human knowledge as contributing to the perfection of the universe. But would the universe not be
more perfect if all its parts were so—just as it would be better for a state
for all the citizens to be good? You say God was not obliged to allot you a
prominent and perfect role in the world, but what would we say of a ruler
who allocated some of his subjects shameful or wicked occupations? The
question is not whether God should have given you greater powers of
knowledge than you have, but why the powers he has given you are
subject to error. You say that error is in the operation of the faculty, not in
the faculty itself: but the faculty was created subject to error, and God
cooperates in the act of error.
3. [314–17] Why assert that the will has no boundaries, but that the intellect does? Surely their scope is equal: the will cannot be moved towards

176

Fifth Objections and Replies

something if the intellect has not ﬁrst perceived it. In fact, of the two, the
intellect has the greater range: we can understand things without choice or
judgement resulting. You say the will is inﬁnite, but the intellect, according to you, can attain an inﬁnite object. Error does not arise from the
greater range of the will, compared to that of the intellect, but because the
intellect does not perceive well, and so the will does not judge well.
You cannot seriously claim to doubt the existence of external things,
and if you could think of no reason why they should, or should not exist,
you would not be able to pass judgement on the matter—your will would
remain indiﬀerent.
You are exaggerating the will’s indiﬀerence.* The knowledge that the
reasons for a point of view are merely conjectural, although probable, may
lead you to adopt it with hesitation, but could not lead you to take up
the contrary view, unless there were equal or more conjectural reasons on
that side.
You cannot support this by appealing to your own experience of considering as false what you had once believed quite true, because you cannot
honestly claim to have been convinced that what your senses told you was
false.
Error, then, does not consist in the misuse of your free will but in
the non-correspondence of the judgement with the thing judged, which
the intellect has apprehended as other than it is.* The will is determined
by the intellect, and its judgement will be more or less deﬁnite as the intellect’s perception is more or less clear. We are less able to avoid error than
to avoid persevering in error, which we can achieve by concentrating on
obtaining clearer knowledge.
4. [317–18] You say you will attain the truth provided you suﬃciently
distinguish what you understand perfectly from what you apprehend more
confusedly and obscurely. This is true, but we didn’t need the whole of the
preceding Meditation to ﬁnd that out. What you need to provide is a
method of knowing when our clear and distinct understanding that something is so is to be relied on, since we can be mistaken even when we think
we understand something perfectly clearly and distinctly.

On the Fifth Meditation
1. [318–22] All you say of the essence of material things is that they have
extension, number, shape, place, motion, and duration. You say there are
eternal and unchangeable natures or essences, about which there are eternal truths. But it is diﬃcult to believe in any eternal and unchangeable
essence except that of God. If there were no human beings, there would
be no human nature, and ‘a rose is a ﬂower’ would not be true if there were
no roses.

Fifth Objections and Replies

177

There is no eternal human nature independent of God, no universal
‘human nature’ instantiated in particular beings. There is nothing in an
individual human being but what is singular. From the observation of
similar natures in diﬀerent individuals, the intellect abstracts a common
concept applicable to them all: this is ‘universal human nature’. But it does
not exist prior to individual human beings, or prior to the intellect’s act of
abstraction.
You cannot say, for example, ‘a human being is an animal’ was true
before there were human beings, and is thus eternally true. It can only
mean ‘if there ever is a human being, it will necessarily be an animal’. ‘A
human being is an animal’ means ‘human beings exist, and are animals’.*
The same applies to your example of the triangle. The triangle in the
mind serves as a yardstick for applying the name ‘triangle’: but it has no
reality outside the intellect, which formed it as a concept on the basis of
sense-perceptions of material triangles. The properties of a material triangle or an individual human being are not borrowed from the universals
‘triangle’ or ‘human nature’.
You say your idea of a triangle is independent of sense-perception: but
could you have formed it without sight and touch? Your ideas of bodies
you have never perceived were formed from those you have.
2. [322–6] You argue from the essence of God to his existence. But you
cannot treat existence as a property among others.

For you are right in comparing essence with essence, but thereafter you
are not comparing either existence with existence or a property with a
property, but existence with a property. Hence it seems you should have
said, either that, for example, omnipotence can no more be separated
from God’s existence than having angles equal to two right angles can be
separated from the essence of a triangle; or, indeed, that God’s existence
can no more be separated from his essence, than the existence of a triangle
from its essence. Both these comparisons would have been valid, and not
only the ﬁrst, but also the second, would have been accepted, although you
would not as a result have demonstrated that God necessarily exists,
because the triangle does not necessarily exist either, even though its
essence and existence cannot be separated in reality, however much they
are separated by the mind, or considered separately, as the divine essence
and existence can also be.
Then you should bear in mind that you include existence among the
divine perfections, yet do not include it among the perfections of the triangle or the mountain, although it would be no less fair to call it a perfection in them, each in their own way. But the truth is that existence is a

322

323

178

Fifth Objections and Replies

perfection neither in God nor in any other thing: it is that without which
there are no perfections.*
Indeed what does not exist has neither perfections nor imperfections;
and what exists and has several perfections does not have existence as a
speciﬁc perfection among the others, but as that in which both itself and
its perfections are existent, and without which the thing is said not to exist
and the perfections not to be possessed.* Hence existence is not said to exist
in a thing in the same way as its perfections do, and, moreover, if the thing
lacks existence, it is not said to be imperfect [or deprived of perfection] so
much as non-existent.
Hence, just as in listing the perfections of the triangle you did not
include existence, or conclude that the triangle exists; so, in listing the perfections of God, you should not have included existence, so as to conclude
that God exists, unless you were begging the question.*
You say existence and essence can be distinguished in everything besides
God. But this is not so in reality (if Plato ceased to exist, so would his
essence). The distinction can be drawn only in thought, but then it applies
to God as well.
You say that the objection, ‘I can think of a mountain with a valley and
a horse with wings, but it does not follow that they exist, and I can think
of God as existing without its following that he exists’ is based on a
sophism. Yes, because it is contradictory to think of God as existing and
not existing. But you have made things too easy for yourself. You have to
explain why we can think of a winged horse as not existing, but why we
cannot think of an omniscient and omnipotent God as not existing.
As you say, we are free to think of a horse with or without wings; but
we are equally free to think of God as having all perfections, without
regard to whether he exists or not. And if you insist that unless he has existence, he is not fully perfect, I could say the same of the winged horse
Pegasus: he would not be a perfect winged horse unless he had existence
as well as wings.*
You need to show that the ideas of God and of existence are compatible
in the ﬁrst place.* You ought to prove your assertions that there cannot be
more than one God and that God has existed and will exist for all eternity.
3. [326–8] You say there can be no true knowledge without the knowledge of God. Can you seriously mean this? Were you not equally sure of
the truth of geometrical proofs, before you began to argue for God’s existence? They gain our assent by their own force, and cannot be shaken by
the idea of the evil genius—just as you were convinced ‘I think therefore
I am’, despite the evil genius, even though you did not yet know God
existed. The proof God exists is less evident than those of geometry

Fifth Objections and Replies

179

(for everyone accepts the latter and some challenge the former), so how
can the latter depend on the former? Atheists can be convinced by geometrical proofs; and believers’ acceptance of them does not depend on their
belief in a non-deceiving God. The ancient mathematicians were certain
of their demonstrations, without ever thinking of God.

On the Sixth Meditation
1. [328–32] Material things, you say, can exist in so far as they are the
object of pure mathematics. But pure mathematical entities such as points,
lines, and surfaces, do not exist in reality. You are wrong to distinguish
intellection from imagination. Both are actions of a single faculty, and any
diﬀerence between them is of degree.
You say imagination, unlike intellection, involves an eﬀort to make a
body appear as if present. Thus you can understand a chiliogon without
any eﬀort of imagination. But some eﬀort of imagination is involved, even
though you can’t form a distinct picture of it; and simply understanding
what the word ‘chiliogon’ means is not, as you seem to imply, the same as
understanding, without imagination, the ﬁgure itself.
It would be all right if you called it both ‘imagination’ and ‘intellection’
when you know a ﬁgure distinctly and with an eﬀort on the part of the
senses, and ‘intellection’ alone when you conceive a ﬁgure confusedly and
with little or no eﬀort.* But there is only one kind of internal knowledge,
by means of which you grasp ﬁgures with greater or lesser degrees of
distinctness and eﬀort. Imagination in fact shades imperceptibly into intellection. And by associating eﬀort and distinctness with the imagination,
your distinction in fact degrades intellection.
If there is just the one faculty, with its diﬀerences of degree, you cannot
say that imagination is not essential to your essence.
You say that in the act of imagination the mind is directing itself to
bodies, and in that of intellection to itself and the ideas it has within itself.
But the mind cannot direct itself to itself or to any idea, without also
directing itself to something corporeal, or represented by a corporeal idea.
Ideas of geometrical ﬁgures are corporeal, and those of the immaterial
beings we believe in,* like God, angels, and the human soul, are also quasicorporeal, derived from the human form and other subtle and imperceptible things like air. When you say you conjecture that some bodies probably
exist, you can’t be serious.*
2. [332–4] You discuss the reliability of the senses, and the reasons you
came to doubt it. The senses faithfully reproduce things as they appear,
and as they have to appear, given the relationships between the senseorgan, the object, and the medium. The errors are really in the judgement or mind, when it overlooks, for example, the factor of distance.

180

Fifth Objections and Replies

However, we can be certain, for example, that a tower seen from close
up is square, even if it looks round from a distance. The amputee’s illusion
is due precisely to the loss of a limb: it is no reason to cast doubt on a
healthy person’s perception of pain in an injured limb. We are not always
dreaming, and when we are awake we cannot doubt that we are awake and
not dreaming. Our nature is subject to error but also capable of grasping
truth, beyond doubt. And we cannot doubt that things appear to us as they
do. Reason may be at odds with sense-perception, but the faculties can
help one another, as when the right hand comes to the aid of the left when
necessary.
3. [334–7] You conclude that you cannot accept all that the senses tell
you, but that you cannot doubt it all either. But you have probably always
believed this, so what have you found out that’s new?
You say that whatever you clearly and distinctly conceive can be produced by God as you conceive it; therefore, your clear and distinct perception of one thing without another proves that the two are really distinct,
because God could make them exist separately. You should ﬁrst have
proved that God exists, and that he can do whatever you can understand.
You can understand two properties of a triangle separately: does that mean
God could create a triangle with only one of those properties?
You conclude that, since you are aware of nothing but thinking as
belonging to your essence, your essence is simply that of a thinking thing.
This has already been commented on apropos of the Second Meditation.*
You conclude that, though closely linked to your body, you are really
separate from it, and can exist without it.
335

336

Because this is the hinge on which the whole diﬃculty turns, we need to
linger here a little, so that it becomes clear how you deal with it. The ﬁrst
issue is the distinction between yourself and your body. But which body do
you mean? It must be the solid body consisting of your limbs to which your
words apply. [. . .]
And yet, O mind, the diﬃculty is not about that body. It would be, if
I were objecting, as most philosophers would do, that you are the ‘entelechy’,* the perfection, the form, the species, and, to use the common term,
a mode, of the body. Certainly, these philosophers will no more acknowledge that you are distinct and separable from this body than shape or any
other mode; and this is true whether you are the whole soul, or if you are
also the nous dunamei, nous pathêtikos, ‘possible intellect’ or ‘passive
intellect’, as they term it. But I am willing to deal more generously with
you, by considering you, indeed, purely as nous poiêtikos, the ‘active intellect’, and indeed as chô̂riston, ‘separable’, even though in a diﬀerent sense
than they would admit.*

Fifth Objections and Replies

181

For they viewed this intellect as common to all human beings (if not to
all things), and as enabling the possible intellect to function, in the same
manner and by the same necessity as light enables the eye to see (hence
they were in the habit of comparing it with the light of the sun, and hence
to consider it as an external agent): but I will rather consider you, as you
yourself would like to be considered, as a special kind of intellect, in command of the body.
I repeat that the diﬃculty is not whether or not you are separable from
this body (which is why just now I suggested that there was no need to
bring in the power of God, by virtue of which those things are separable
that you understand separately), but about the body you yourself are: as
if you yourself might be a subtle body, diﬀused through the solid body, or
residing in some part of it. Besides, you have not yet proved convincingly
that you are something purely incorporeal. And when in the Second
Meditation you proclaimed that you were not a wind, not a ﬁre, not a
vapour, not a breath, I pointed out to you quite plainly that you had
proclaimed this without proof.
You said there But I am not discussing this at present. But you
haven’t discussed it anywhere else, or given any reason to prove that you
are not this kind of body. My hope was that you would give it here. But
if you are discussing or proving anything, it is that you are not the solid
body, which, as I have already said, is not the point at issue.

337

4. [337–43] You appeal to your clear and distinct ideas of yourself as a
thinking non-extended thing, and of the body as non-thinking and nonextended. But you have not proved that thinking is incompatible with the
nature of body, especially subtle body. Anyway, how could you have an
idea of body if you are without extension?

I ask you, how do you think that the species or idea of a body that is
extended can be received by you, an unextended subject?* For if such a
species proceeds from the body, it is certainly corporeal, and has various
parts, and is therefore extended; or if its impression comes from elsewhere,
because it still has to be representing an extended body, it still has to have
parts, and therefore it has to be extended. Otherwise, if it has no parts,
how can it represent parts? If it has no extension, how can it represent an
extended thing? [. . .]
Then, as far as your idea of yourself is concerned, there is nothing to add
to what I have already said, especially about the Second Meditation. For
I showed there that, so far from having a clear and distinct idea of yourself, you seem to have none at all.* Indeed, although you recognize that

337

338

182

Fifth Objections and Replies

you think, you still do not know what kind of thing you, who think, are;
so much so that, since only the operation of thinking is known to you,
you know nothing of what is most important, the substance, that is, that
carries out the operation. To use an analogy: you could be said to be like
a blind man who, feeling heat, and being informed that this comes from
the sun, thinks that he has a clear and distinct idea of the sun, inasmuch
as, if he were asked what the sun is, he could reply that it is a heating
thing.
Knowing, as you claim, that you are not just a thinking, but a nonextended thing, is not enough.
339

In order to have a clear and distinct idea, or what comes to the same thing,
a true and adequate idea of something, is it not necessary to know the
thing itself positively, and, so to speak, aﬃrmatively, and is it enough to
know that it is not some other thing? Or would we say that someone has a
clear and distinct idea of Bucephalus,* if all he knows is that Bucephalus
is not a ﬂy?
How can you, the mind, be united to the body—the whole body, or some
part of it, that is, the brain—without being extended?
If you are not a body, how can you impart motion to a body, when
motion can be transmitted only by contact? (You have said bodies cannot
move themselves.)
The burden of proof is still on you to demonstrate that you are nonextended and hence incorporeal. You cannot argue from the generallyaccepted view that man is composed of body and soul: this might mean
that he is composed of two bodies, a solid and a subtle one, the latter being
known as the soul. Anyway, we speak of animals as composed of body and
soul, though you seem to deny them a soul as well as a mind like yours. We
can grant that you are distinct from the solid body, but not that you are not
a subtle body.
You conclude that you can exist without the body. Yes, as a subtle
bodily substance you could exist without the solid body, as the smell of an
apple can remain in the air, though you would no longer be a thinking
thing, a mind, or a soul.

343

I say all this, not as one who doubts the conclusion you are aiming
at, but as one who is not convinced of the force of the arguments you have
set out.
5. [343–5] You are right to speak of yourself as closely conjoined with
your body. But how is this possible, if you are incorporeal, non-extended,
and indivisible? Doesn’t union require contact, and is there contact except
between bodies?

Fifth Objections and Replies

183

You speak of feeling pain: how could you, if you are incorporeal and
non-extended? Pain involves a separation of parts.

In a word, there is a general diﬃculty that refuses to go away: how what
is incorporeal can communicate with what is corporeal, and what relationship can be established between the two.

345

6. [345–6] (Gassendi sums up rapidly the concluding arguments, seeming
to imply that Descartes has taken a very roundabout way to come to some
very banal conclusions. He urges Descartes to regard their disagreement
as a diﬀerence of opinion similar to diﬀerences of taste, and professes his
aﬀection and admiration for him.)

THE AUTHOR’S REPLY TO THE
FIFTH OBJECTIONS
[347–8] Descartes thanks Gassendi for his dissertation, and Mersenne for
getting him to write it. He then goes on to criticize Gassendi’s approach:

Although, however, you have made use not so much of philosophical
arguments to refute my opinions, as of various rhetorical techniques
to evade them, this too is gratifying to me, for this reason, that I infer
that no arguments can be easily brought against me, apart from those
contained in the previous sets of objections from other writers, which
you have read. And indeed, if there were any, they would not have
escaped your intelligence and diligence, and I judge that your intention here was simply to point out to me how those people whose
minds are so immersed in their senses that they recoil from metaphysical arguments,* might evade them; and therefore you were
giving me an opportunity to come to grips with them. Hence I will
here be replying not to you, a most penetrating philosopher, but as if
I were dealing with one of these carnal characters.
On the Objections to the First Meditation
You say you approve my intention of stripping every prejudice away
from my mind, as, indeed, no one could ﬁnd fault with it. But you would
have wished me to do it simply and succinctly, that is, carelessly. As if it
were so easy to free ourselves of all the errors we have absorbed since
childhood; and as if we could be too careful about doing what everyone
agrees has to be done. But I expect you wanted to indicate that most
people admit, as far as words go, that prejudices should be avoided, but
nonetheless continually fail to avoid them, because they will not make

347

348

184

349

350

350

Fifth Objections and Replies

the necessary intellectual eﬀort for this purpose, and think that none of
the things they once accepted as true should be ranked as prejudices.
Certainly you are playing here the role of such people to perfection,
and you have failed to say nothing that might have been said by them;
but at the same time you say nothing that smacks of a philosopher.
When you say there is no need to imagine a deceiving God or pretend we
are dreaming (p. 166), and so forth, a philosopher would have thought
he had to give a reason why these cannot be called into question; or,
if he had no reason (and there is none), he would not have said what
you say. Nor would he have added that it would have seemed suﬃcient
here to invoke the darkness of the human mind, and the mere weakness of
our nature (p. 166). For it does not help us to correct our errors, to say
that we go astray because our mind is dark or our nature weak. That
would be simply like saying that we go astray because we are prone
to error; and it is obviously more useful to consider all the points in
which we can happen to be mistaken, as I did, in case we rashly give
our assent to them. Nor would a philosopher have said that in treating everything doubtful as false, I was not so much divesting myself of an
old prejudice, as espousing a new one (p. 166): or else he would have tried
ﬁrst of all to prove that this supposition could lead to error. But you,
on the contrary, state a little later, that I cannot really compel myself
to consider as uncertain and false the things I have supposed to be false
(p. 166): that is, you say I cannot espouse this new prejudice you were
afraid of my espousing. And a philosopher would not have been taken
aback by this kind of supposition, any more than by our bending a
curved stick back in the opposite direction to make it straight, as we
sometimes do. For he knows that it can often be useful to assume that
what is false is true, in order to throw light on the truth: as when
astronomers imagine an equator, or the zodiac, or other circles in the
heavens, or when geometers add new lines to given shapes. Philosophers
often do the same. Anyone who calls this resorting to contrivances, going
in for conjuring tricks, and following roundabout paths and to say it is
unworthy both of a philosopher’s sincerity and of the love of truth (p. 166) is
giving proof that he is neither living up to the sincerity of a philosopher
nor making use of any argument, only rhetorical ﬂavouring.*
On the Objections to the Second Meditation
1. You continue here making use of rhetorical pretences instead of reasoning: for you pretend that I am joking, when I am perfectly serious;*

Fifth Objections and Replies

185

and you take seriously, as if I were really saying and endorsing it, what
I simply put forward, in a tentative spirit and according to the common
opinion of other people, so that I might later investigate it further.
For when I said that all the testimony of the senses should be treated as
uncertain, indeed as false (p. 17), this was perfectly serious, and is so
essential to the understanding of my Meditations that whoever is
unwilling or unable to accept it, is incapable of raising any objection
worthy of a reply. But you must bear in mind the distinction I have
insisted on in various places, between the conduct of life and the investigation of the truth. For when it is a question of managing one’s life,
it would certainly be completely foolish not to believe in the senses,
and there has never been anything but ridicule for the sceptics who
neglected human interests to such an extent that their friends had to
look after them to stop them hurling themselves over precipices; and
therefore I have pointed out elsewhere that no one in their right mind
has ever seriously doubted such things (p. 12). But, when we are investigating what can be known with total certainty by the human mind,
it is wholly alien from reason to refuse to reject them seriously, as
doubtful, and indeed as false, in order to discover that other things
that cannot be so rejected are, for this very reason, more certain, and
in fact better known to us.
On the other hand, when I said that I did not yet understand who it
is that thinks, you took me to be speaking seriously, which you could
not do in good faith, since I explained this very point; and the same
applies to my saying that I did not doubt in what the nature of bodies
consists, and that I credited them with no power of moving themselves,
and that I imagined myself as a soul that was like a wind, or a ﬁre, and
so forth—in all of which statements I was simply reproducing the
common opinion, so that I might show them in due course to be false.

351

You misleadingly state that my attribution of motion, sensation, and nutrition to the soul does not square with my distinction between soul and
body.* But I later expressly attribute nutrition to the body alone, and
movement and sensation principally to the body, and only their mental
aspects to the soul.
Your own misunderstandings disprove your claim I could have proved
my existence more simply.

When you say I could have inferred it from any other of my actions
(p. 166), you are very wide of the mark, since I am completely certain of none of my actions (I am talking of metaphysical certainty,*

352

186

Fifth Objections and Replies

which is the only kind at issue here), apart from thinking. For
instance, the inference ‘I am walking, therefore I am’ is not legitimate, except in so far as the consciousness of walking is a thought. The
inference is certain purely as regards this thought, not as regards the
motion of the body, since in dreams when I seem to myself to be
walking the body is none the less not moving. Thus, from the fact
that I think I am walking, I can validly infer the existence of the mind
that thinks this, but not of the body that is walking. And the same
applies to other actions.

353

2. Henceforth you question me, no longer as a whole human being,
but, by a delightful prosopopoeia, as a separate soul; by which you
seem to be warning me that these objections were put forward, not
by the mind of a subtle philosopher, but by the ﬂesh alone. I ask you,
therefore, O ﬂesh,* or whatever else you wish to be called, whether
you have so little dealing with the mind that you failed to notice
when I did correct the commonplace illusion whereby what thinks is
imagined to be like a wind or some such body? I certainly corrected
it when I showed that we can suppose that no wind or any other body
exists in the world, and that none the less everything from which
I recognize myself as a thinking thing remains. And therefore all
your subsequent questions, why therefore I could not still be a wind,
why I could not occupy space, why I am not moved by various motions,
and so forth, are so pointless as to need no reply.
3. And what you add is no more convincing: if I am some subtle body,
why could I not receive nourishment, and so forth. For I am denying
that I am a body. So—to deal with the matter once and for all—
because you use the same style virtually all the time, and do not challenge my arguments, but, by glossing over them as if they were
non-existent, or by restating them in incomplete and mutilated form,
you heap up various diﬃculties that are commonly raised by the
ignorant against my conclusions, or others like them—or even unlike
them—and that are either irrelevant, or have been already eliminated or resolved by me in their proper place, it is not worth my
while troubling to answer your questions one by one: for this would
mean repeating things a hundred times over that I have already written.
But I will just brieﬂy deal with those points that, it seems, could
detain readers who are not completely incompetent. And as for those
who pay less attention to the strength of an argument than to a ﬂood

Fifth Objections and Replies

187

of words, I do not care enough for their approval to want to waste
words for the sake of extorting it.
Therefore, I shall ﬁrst point out here that what you say that the
mind grows and decays with the body is not credible, and you give no
proof of it. For, from the fact that it does not function so perfectly in
the body of a child as in that of an adult, and that its actions can often
be hampered by wine and other bodily causes, it follows only that, so
long as it is attached to the body, it uses it as an instrument for those
operations with which it is occupied most of the time, but not that it
is rendered more or less perfect by the body. And your inference
here is no sounder than if you were to infer that, from the fact that a
craftsman does not do his work well whenever he uses a faulty tool,
he derives his skill from the quality of the tool.*

354

Even though we do not always experience our senses deceiving us, the fact
that we sometimes do is suﬃcient reason for doubting them. The point
about error is that we are not always aware of it as such.
If we do not accept a view, because we do not know it is true, this does
not mean we have to prove it false. We have only to be very careful not to
admit anything as true that we cannot prove.

Thus, when I discover that I am a thinking substance and form a
clear and distinct concept of this thinking substance, containing
nothing that belongs to the concept of a bodily substance, this is
quite suﬃcient for me to assert that, in so far as I know myself, I am
nothing other than a thinking thing; and this is all I asserted in the
Second Meditation, which we are currently dealing with. Nor should
I have accepted that this thinking substance is some kind of body—
agile, pure, subtle, and so forth—since I had no reason to convince
me of this. And if you have such a reason, it is up to you to show it,
not to require me to prove that something is false that I rejected for
this reason alone, that it was unknown to me. [. . .] When you say that
I need to prove that animals’ souls are incorporeal and that the solid body
contributes nothing to our thoughts, you show that you are not only
ignorant of where the burden of proof lies, but of what each person
has to prove. For I think neither that animals’ souls are incorporeal,
nor that the solid body contributes nothing to thinking;* only that
this is not at all the proper place to consider these issues.
4. [355–7] We cannot change established terminology, but we can modify
how it is used. The ﬁrst human beings did not, perhaps, distinguish the
underlying principle* of the functions we have in common with animals

355

188

Fifth Objections and Replies

(nutrition, growth, etc.) and that do not involve thought from the underlying source of thought itself, and so called both of them the ‘soul’. Then
they realized that thought was a special case, and called the thinking part
of us the ‘mind’, which they believed was the dominant part of the soul.
Realizing that nutrition and thought should not be predicated of the same
agent, I ﬁnd ‘soul’ an ambiguous term, and thus tend to speak of the
‘mind’ instead: but this is coextensive with the soul, not a part of it.
356

357

You hesitate as to whether I believe the soul is always thinking. But why
should it not be always thinking, since it is a thinking substance?
Why is it surprising that we do not remember the thoughts we had
in our mother’s womb, or in a stupor, and so forth, when we cannot
even remember most of the thoughts we none the less know we have
had in adulthood, when in good health and awake? For us to remember the thoughts the mind has had, while it has been attached to the
body, some kind of trace of them has to be imprinted on the brain,
and the mind remembers by directing itself to these, or applying
itself to these. Why is it surprising if the brain of an infant or a
person in a stupor is unﬁt to receive those traces?
It is true that for all I know at this point the mind and the body may not
in fact be distinct. But I am not assuming that they are. It is because I do
not know the truth of the matter that I concentrate wholly on the mind,
and then, in the Sixth Meditation, I prove it is distinct from the body. You
are the one making unfounded assumptions.
5. [357] As to the imagination I am not contradicting myself. I can say that
something does not belong to my knowledge of myself while still being
uncertain whether it belongs to me.
6. [358] These are not objections deserving a reply.
7. [358] Animals are irrelevant at this point. The mind that meditates
experiences itself thinking within itself. It has no such experience of
whether animals think or not. This has to be investigated from their
behaviour, reasoning a posteriori from eﬀects to causes. You do not fairly
represent my position.

358

For I have often adduced a criterion whereby the mind can be recognized as distinct from the body: namely that its whole nature consists in thinking, whereas the whole nature of a body consists in its
being an extended thing, and that there is nothing whatever in
common between thought and extension. I have also frequently
shown quite clearly that the mind can operate independently of the
brain; for certainly the brain can be of no use in pure intellection,

Fifth Objections and Replies

189

only in imagination or sensation. And although, when the imagination or the senses are making a powerful impact on us (as happens
when the brain is disturbed), the mind cannot easily apply itself to
understanding anything else, we none the less know by frequent
experience that, when our imagination is less active, we can understand
something quite distinct from what we are imagining. Thus, when,
while we are asleep, we realize that we are dreaming, the imagination
has to be active in order for us to dream, but our awareness of dreaming requires the intellect alone.

359

8. [359] You do not understand what you are trying to criticize. I did not
abstract the concept of the wax from that of its accidents. I wanted to show
how the substance is manifested by the accidents, and to show how the
reﬂexive and distinct perception of it diﬀers from everyday confused perception.
What proof have you that a dog judges in the same way as we do? I
believe it has no mind, and nothing similar to the properties of mind.*
9. [359–61] You say that the consideration of the wax proves I exist, but
not what I am. But the two go together.

And I cannot see what further you expect from it, unless it were to
say what colour the human mind is, and what smell and taste it has;
or of what salt, sulphur, and mercury it is composed; for you want us
to examine it, as we would examine wine, by some chemical procedure.*
This is certainly worthy of you, O ﬂesh, and of all those who, since
they cannot conceive anything except in very confused fashion, do
not know the proper questions to ask about any particular thing. But
as for myself I have never thought that anything else is needed, in
order to manifest a substance, apart from its various attributes, so
that, the more attributes we know belong to any substance, the more
perfectly we understand its nature. And, just as we can distinguish
many and various attributes in the wax (one, that it is white; another,
that it is hard; another, that it can become liquid), so there are an
equal number in the mind as well, ﬁrst, that it has the power of
knowing the whiteness of the wax; next, that it has the power of
knowing its hardness, and then the conversion of its hardness into
liquidity; for someone might know its hardness, who does not therefore know its whiteness (I mean someone born blind), and so forth.
And the same applies to the rest. From this it can be clearly inferred
that there is nothing else of which we know so many attributes as we
do of our mind: for however many attributes are known in any other

359

360

190

Fifth Objections and Replies

thing, there must be an equivalent number in the mind, inasmuch as
it knows them. Thus its nature is better known than that of any other
thing. Finally in passing you criticize me because, although I admitted
nothing in myself but a mind, I nonetheless speak of the wax I see and
touch, which I could not do without eyes and hands. But you should
have realized what I took care to point out, that I was not talking
about the sight and touch that require the involvement of bodily
organs, but simply of the thought of seeing and touching;* and that the
organs are not essential to this, we know by the nightly experience of
our dreams.
On the Objections to the Third Meditation
1. [361–2] Finally, an argument! You say that the criterion of clarity and
distinctness cannot be true, because great minds, whom we would suppose
capable of clear and distinct perception, have believed the truth of things
is hidden. But arguments from authority cut no ice here: the mind withdrawn from bodily things cannot be swayed by authority, since it does not
even know that other human beings have existed. Arguments from sceptics or people who die for their false beliefs prove nothing, because it can
never be proved that they clearly and distinctly perceive what they assert.
You are right to say we need a method for distinguishing whether we are
mistaken or not, when we think we clearly perceive something: but this is
what I have provided, by, ﬁrst, eliminating prejudices and, then, sorting
out confused ideas from clear ones.
2. [362] You say all ideas are adventitious, and none factitious or produced by us. You might as well say a sculptor does not make statues,
because he does not make the marble he uses, or that you are not uttering
these objections, because you did not make up the words you use but had
to borrow them from other people.
My knowledge of the idea ‘thing’ is from my experience of myself as a
thinking thing, not from that of other kinds of thing. Likewise the idea of
truth was not derived from things outside me.
3. [363–4] Your argument for the existence of external things is begging
the question because it assumes they exist. How do you know a blind
person has no idea of colour? And supposing what you say is true, could
we not just as well say that their mind has no faculty of forming that idea
as that they cannot form it because they have no eyes?
When you say that astronomy gives us no idea of the sun, you are equating ‘idea’ with ‘mental image’: but I have made clear that they are not the
same.

Fifth Objections and Replies

191

4. [364–5] The same applies when you say we have no true idea of substance. It is perceived by the intellect, not the imagination.
The idea of substance is not patterned on that of its accidents; nor does
the former derive its reality from the latter. The reverse is true in both
cases.
If our idea of God simply comes from the people we have heard speak
of him, where did they get it from? If from themselves, so can we. If from
God, he exists.
You say we cannot grasp an inﬁnite being and do not understand the
term ‘inﬁnite’. You fail to distinguish the level of intellection proportionate to our limited understanding (and we do understand the inﬁnite in this
way) from an adequate concept of a thing (such as we perhaps do not possess of anything). We do not understand the inﬁnite by the negation of
limits, since limitation contains the negation of the inﬁnite.
The idea of God does contain more objective reality than that of ﬁnite
things. Even if it were formed by amplifying human perfections, the result
is a higher degree of perfection than is found in humans. How could we
amplify our ideas of created perfection so as to conceive something greater
than ourselves if we did not already have the idea of something greater—
God? You keep confusing intellection and imagination, as if our idea of
him were the image of him as a massive human being.
5. [366] Some of what you say, as if you were disagreeing with me, I agree
with. But I cannot agree that the axiom there is nothing in the eﬀect that has
not previously existed in the cause refers to the material cause, instead of the
eﬃcient cause. For the perfection of the form must exist in the eﬃcient
cause, not the material.*
6. [366–7] Your assertion of the existence of material things is mere
prejudice, else you would have oﬀered a proof here.
Your argument about ideas needs no reply, because you keep restricting
the term ‘idea’ to mental images of things, but I extend it to cover every
object of thought.
Your examples of the impossibility of reﬂexive action are faulty. It is not
the eye that sees the mirror rather than itself, but the mind that sees the
eye, and the mirror, and itself. Besides, some things can move themselves.*
I do not say that ideas of material things are derived from the mind. I afterwards show that they frequently derive from bodies (which is why they
prove the existence of bodies). I argue that we cannot use the causal principle to prove that they cannot have come from the mind.
7. [367–8] I have refuted all this already. I do not claim that my idea of
the inﬁnite is comprehensive: the inﬁnite is by deﬁnition incomprehensible.

192

Fifth Objections and Replies

But my idea represents not part of the inﬁnite but the inﬁnite as a whole,
so far as a human idea can grasp it. Likewise an ordinary person’s idea of
a triangle simply as a three-sided ﬁgure is an idea of the triangle as a whole,
even though it does not contain many properties that would be contained
in a geometer’s idea.
8. [368–9] Even though we do not know everything that is in God,
whatever we do know in him is nonetheless true.
The bread analogy does not work. The inference from someone’s desire
of bread is not that bread is more perfect than them, but that to need bread
is less perfect than not to need it. I do not infer from the fact that something exists in an idea that it exists in reality, except when no other cause
can be ascribed to an idea than the thing itself existing in reality. And this,
I have proved, applies to God alone, not to a plurality of worlds or anything else.
9. [369–71] All metaphysicians recognize, what the uneducated overlook,
that causes are of two types: some (relative to becoming) only bring their
eﬀects into being (as an architect makes a house), and their inﬂuence is
then no longer necessary; others (relative to being) are required in order
for their eﬀects to remain in being (as light cannot continue to exist in the
absence of the sun). God is cause of created things in this latter sense, and
they exist by his continued inﬂuence.*
Time in the abstract must be continuous: but the time of an existing
thing is composed of separable moments, else the thing could never cease
to exist.
We have no power of self-preservation. If we had, we would be independent like God, and we could not cease to exist without God choosing
to annihilate us.*
You say there can be an inﬁnite regress of causes, but you refute yourself when you concede that this cannot be so when the causes are subordinated one to another, as applies here, where we are dealing with causes
relative to being, not becoming.
The process you describe of conceiving human perfections as raised to
a level transcending human nature could not occur, I say, if we had not
been made by God; whose existence I have demonstrated, only you have
continually failed to grasp my arguments.
10. [371–4] You object to my saying that nothing can be added to or taken
away from the idea of God, forgetting what philosophers commonly say,
that the essences of things are indivisible: change the idea of a thing’s
essence in any way, and it becomes the idea of another thing. Once the idea
of the true God has been formed, we may discover new perfections in him,
but these make the idea more distinct and explicit, without adding to it,

Fifth Objections and Replies

193

since the newly-discovered perfections were already contained in it by
implication. The analogy with the idea of a triangle holds good.
As regards the idea of God being like the maker’s mark imprinted in us:
if I say ‘Only Apelles* could have painted a picture this good: the skill is
like a signature’, I do not mean either that the ‘signature’ is something distinct from the work itself, or that the picture is identical with Apelles’ skill,
as if it contained no material element.
The dissimilarities between human nature and divine nature do not
prevent us from saying we are made in his image. An image does not have
to resemble the original in every respect. Our imperfect power of thought
is a representation of God’s supreme power of thought. God’s creation has
more in common with procreation than with building, and anyway a
craftsman can make an object resembling himself: a sculptor could produce a self-portrait.
You quote me misleadingly. I said incompleteness and dependence
were signs of dissimilarity, through which I perceive my inferiority to
God. My aspiration towards the greater perfections that exist in God is a
sign of some similarity to him.
We all have an idea of God, as we all have an idea of a triangle, though
not everyone has the same understanding of it, and many reason incorrectly about it.

On the Objections to the Fourth Meditation
1. [374–5] I have explained what idea we have of nothing—it is a negative idea—and how we participate in non-being—we are not the supreme
being, and many things are lacking to us.
I do not say some of God’s works are imperfect, only that, considered
in isolation, and not as parts of the whole universe, they may appear so.
As to ﬁnal causes, we can indeed know and glorify God by considering
how the parts of a plant or an animal work together. But we know him then
as an eﬃcient, not as a ﬁnal cause, since this does not involve asking for
what purpose he made everything as he did.

Although in ethics, where it is often legitimate to make use of conjectures, it is sometimes pious to consider what purpose we may conjecture God has in mind in his government of the universe, certainly
this is pointless in physics, where everything has to be based on the
most solid reasons. Nor can it be imagined that some of God’s purposes are more plainly visible than others: for all are hidden in the
same way in the inscrutable abyss of his wisdom.
What you cite as a mystery* only comprehensible by an appeal to God’s
purposes is something perfectly well understood without it.

375

194

Fifth Objections and Replies

The mind could have formed the ideas of God and itself without sensory
input, and even more clearly and easily. The senses are a hindrance here.
2. [376] Our being subject to error is not a positive imperfection, as you
take it, but the negation of a higher degree of perfection. And this variation
in degrees of perfection contributes to the good of the whole of created
being. The analogy with the state does not hold. The wickedness of the
citizens is a positive reality, in relation to the state; the imperfection of
man is not such, in relation to the universe.
It is totally false to suppose that God destines us to evil deeds,* and
endows us with imperfections, or that he has given us a faulty cognitive
faculty.
3. [376–8] That the will’s range goes beyond the intellect’s is shown from
your view that the mind is a subtle body, and therefore an extended as well
as a thinking thing. You do not understand what you are saying yet you
want to go on saying it.
True, we will nothing without a degree of understanding. But the contribution of the two is not equal. We can will many things about something
of which we know very little.
377

378

Although what you go on to deny as regards the indiﬀerence of the
will is perfectly clear in itself, I do not intend to set about proving it
for you. It is the kind of thing a person has to experience in himself,
rather than being convinced by arguments; but you, O ﬂesh, seem to
pay no attention to what the mind experiences in itself. Then do not
be free, if you do not want to be; but for my part I will certainly
rejoice in my freedom, since, ﬁrst, I experience it in myself, and, secondly, it is challenged by you with no arguments, but merely with
bare denials. Perhaps others will be more convinced by what I say,
because I am asserting what I have myself experienced, and what
anyone can experience in himself, than you are, who deny what they
accept for the sole reason that you perhaps have never experienced it.
Although it could also be deduced from what you say that you
have experienced this very thing. For when denying that we can take
care to avoid error, because you do not accept that the will can be
moved towards any object to which it is not determined by the intellect, you concede at the same time that we can take care to avoid persevering in error (p. 176). Which is entirely impossible unless we have
what you say we do not have: the freedom of the will to move itself
in either direction, without being determined by the intellect. For if
the intellect has once determined the will to utter some false judgement, I ask you this question: when the will ﬁrst begins to make an

Fifth Objections and Replies

195

eﬀort not to persevere in its error, by what is it being determined to
do so? If by itself, then it can be moved towards some object, without being impelled towards it by the intellect. You said this was
impossible, and this is the only point at issue. But if it is determined
by the intellect, the will itself is not making an eﬀort. Rather, all that
is happening is that, just as before it was moved towards the falsity
put before it by the intellect, so it now just happens to be being
moved towards the truth,* because the intellect puts before it what is
true. But, besides, I would like to know how you conceive the nature
of falsity, and how you think it can be the object of the intellect. For
I understand falsity as nothing more than the privation of truth, and
thus am convinced it is self-contradictory to speak of the intellect
apprehending what is false in the guise of what is true; but this
would have to be the case if it ever determined the will to embrace
what is false.
4. [378-9] You suggest this Meditation has not achieved much. In the
Preface I pointed out that I did not expect readers to beneﬁt from the work
who argued about individual points, without grasping how the arguments
hang together. And I have given a method for distinguishing what we truly
clearly perceive from what we only think we clearly perceive: but readers
who do not try to get rid of their prejudices will not easily recognize it.

On the Objections to the Fifth Meditation
1. [379–82] When you say this is all I have to say about the issue [the
essence of material things], you are ignoring the coherence of my text.

The coherence is, I think, so great that the proof of every point draws
on everything that has gone before, and most of what follows: so
much so that you cannot in good faith give a full account of my position on a particular question, unless you go through everything
I have written about all the others.*
You object to the idea of anything being immutable and eternal apart from
God. You would be right if I were saying this of a thing’s existence, or if
its immutability were supposed to be independent of God. But I do not
think that the essences of things, or mathematical truths, are independent
of God: but that they are immutable and eternal because God so wished
them to be.*
Your criticism of ‘universals’* applies to the scholastic logicians’ idea of
them, not to mine. The ideas of essences that are clearly and distinctly
known, for example, a triangle, are not deduced from particular things.
You concede this implicitly in a later objection when you say that the

379

196

Fifth Objections and Replies

objects of pure mathematics (point, line, surface) do not exist in reality. In
other words no mathematical triangle has ever existed, and consequently
the idea of such a ﬁgure was not derived from actually existing things.*
You would say these essences are false because they do not conform to
the nature of things. But that is only your preconceived idea of the nature
of things. Geometrical truths can be rigorously proved, and they are
always true, and can thus be termed immutable and eternal. They may not
conform to your idea of the nature of things, or the atomistic theory of
Democritus and Epicurus, but they do conform to the fundamental nature
of things created by God. There are indeed no substances like geometrical
ﬁgures (having length without breadth, or breadth without depth), but
geometrical shapes are not considered as substances but as the boundaries
within which substances are contained.
The ideas of geometrical ﬁgures do not originate in sense-perception, as
everyone believes. We have never seen a really straight line and the drawings of triangles we saw in childhood could never have given us the geometrical concept of a triangle, if we did not interpret them in the light of
our prior idea of a true triangle: just as our prior idea of the human face
enables us to see a set of lines on paper as a face rather than a set of lines.
382
383

2. Here I cannot see what kind of thing you think existence is, or
why you think it cannot be called a property in the same way as
omnipotence can, as long as you take the term ‘property’ in the sense
of any attribute, or as referring to anything that can be predicated of
a thing, which is exactly how it should be taken here. But indeed,
necessary existence is in reality* a property in God in the strictest
possible sense of the term, because it belongs to him alone, and is
part of an essence in him alone. And therefore the existence of a triangle cannot be compared with the existence of God, because existence in God clearly has a diﬀerent relationship to essence than it does
in the triangle.
Nor is it begging the question to include existence when listing the
things that belong to the essence of God, any more than it is begging the
question to list ‘having three angles the sum of which is equal to two
right angles’ among the properties of a triangle.
Nor is it true that existence and essence can be thought separately in
God, just as they can in the triangle, because God is his being,* and
the triangle is not. But I do not deny that possible existence is a perfection in the idea of a triangle, as necessary existence is a perfection
in the idea of God; and it makes the idea of a triangle superior to the
ideas of those chimeras* that we suppose to be incapable of existing.

Fifth Objections and Replies

197

I have answered your other points suﬃciently already. You are completely
wrong to say that God’s existence is not demonstrated, as we can demonstrate that the sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles:
in fact the demonstration of God is simpler and clearer.
3. [384] You forget that the sceptics did doubt even geometrical demonstrations, and I say they would not have done so if they had known God as
he is. That one thing is better known than another has nothing to do with
whether it seems true to more people. What matters is which of them
appears prior in the order of knowledge, more evident, and more certain
to those who have a proper knowledge of both of them.

On the Objections to the Sixth Meditation
1. [384–5] I have already (p. 196) dealt with your denial that material
things exist in so far as they are the object of pure mathematics.
The understanding of the chiliogon is not confused, or limited to the
meaning of the name, otherwise we could not demonstrate many properties of the ﬁgure, as we can. That we can understand it simultaneously as
a whole but not imagine it simultaneously as a whole shows that the faculties of intellection and understanding are diﬀerent in kind, not in degree.
In intellection the mind alone is at work; in imagination it contemplates
the shape of a body. Geometrical shapes are corporeal, but their ideas,
when grasped by the intellect operating without the imagination, are not.
The ideas of God, angels, and the human mind are not corporeal or
quasi-corporeal. Someone who imagines God or the mind is imagining
what cannot be imagined: they conjure up a bodily idea, and then falsely
label it ‘God’ or ‘mind’. The true idea of the mind contains only thought
and its attributes, none of which are corporeal.
2. [385–6] You are still sunk in prejudice, when you say we should not
suspect falsity in things in which we have never detected it, like close-up
perception and the certainty, when we are awake, of being awake. You
have no reason to think you are aware of all possible sources of error.
When you say we cannot doubt that things appear as they appear, this is
exactly what I said in the Second Meditation. But that has nothing to do
with whether they really exist outside our minds.
3. [386–7] You keep on saying I have not proved things I have proved, or
that I have only discussed the solid body, not the subtle body, when what
I say applies to every kind of body, solid or subtle. I showed in the Second
Meditation that the mind can be understood as an existing substance, even
if we understand wind, ﬁre, vapour, breath, or any other kind of body,
however subtle, as non-existent. I was not there discussing whether the
mind is really distinct from all bodies: but here I do discuss it, and I have

198

Fifth Objections and Replies

shown that it is distinct. You keep on confusing two questions: what can
be understood? what actually exists? This shows a fundamental misunderstanding.*
4. [387–9] You ask how I think that the species or idea of a body that is
extended can be received by me, an unextended subject? The mind does not
receive any corporeal species.* Pure intellection, whether of a corporeal or
of an incorporeal substance, occurs without corporeal species. Imagination,
dealing with only corporeal things, needs a ‘species’ in the sense of a body
to which the mind applies itself. But this is not received into the mind.
A blind man can have a clear idea of the sun as a source of heat, even if
not as a source of light. Besides the analogy does not apply. Knowledge of
the thinking thing is far more extensive than knowledge of any other kind
of thing.*
Saying ‘the mind is not extended’ is not intended to show what the
mind is, but to point to the error of those who think it is extended, just as
it would be worth pointing out that ‘Bucephalus is not music’* if anyone
said he was.
The mind is united to the whole of the body, but this does not mean it
is extended throughout the body. Nor does its power to move the body
prove it must be a body.
5. [389–90] You keep repeating the same points. You do not challenge
my arguments, but simply raise doubts about my conclusions, all of
which originate from your insistence on thinking with the imagination
about what cannot be imagined. The fusion of mind and body cannot
be compared to that of two bodies. The mind can understand parts of
bodies without having parts in itself. You seem to think that whatever the
mind understands is somehow in it:* in that case, when it understands
the size of the earth, it would have to be bigger than the earth in order to
contain it.
6. What you say here does not contradict me at all, and your verbosity is
a clue to the reader to discount your arguments.
(In conclusion Descartes throws oﬀ the ﬁction of the mind as arguing with
the ﬂesh, and pays tribute to the real Gassendi as a philosopher and a man
of integrity, and hopes that he will not be oﬀended by the philosophical
frankness Descartes has made use of in replying to his objections.
Descartes is delighted to ﬁnd that in so long a critique there are no substantial counter-arguments to his own, and no objections to his conclusions to which he could not easily reply.)

SIXTH OBJECTIONS
[412 – 19] These objections remain, after a careful reading of the
Meditations and the foregoing objections and replies.
1. The Cogito is uncertain. For to be certain you think, and therefore
exist, you would have to know what thought and existence are. You do not.
So you do not know what ‘I think’ and ‘I exist’ mean. To know you are
thinking, you would have to know you know, and in fact know you know
you know, and so on till inﬁnity. So you cannot know whether you exist or
even whether you are thinking.
2. Your belief you are thinking may be erroneous. Your ‘thoughts’ might
be bodily motions, involving subtle matter. No one can follow your argument to the contrary. Can you make it clear, to attentive and perspicacious
readers, that thought cannot be reduced to bodily motion?
3. Some Fathers of the Church thought that angels and the rational soul
could be corporeal, and that soul was transmitted from father to son. This
seems to suggest they believed that thought was therefore virtually indistinguishable from bodily motion. Animals like dogs and monkeys, in
whom we acknowledge no soul distinct from the body, are able to think.
Dogs bark in their sleep, as if dreaming; they know, when awake, that they
are running, and, when dreaming, that they are barking. Perhaps they
think we cannot think! You cannot see their inner workings any more than
they can yours. Great men past and present have believed animals can
reason. We do not believe all their operations can be explained mechanically, without sensation, life, and a soul. Anyway, some would say, if animals’ behaviour can be explained mechanically, so can humans’ be: the
diﬀerence between their reason and ours is only of degree.
4. An atheist can experience total certainty, when he judges according to
your rule,* for example, of mathematical propositions. How could you
prove he does not enjoy such certainty?
5. You say God cannot deceive. But some theologians imply that he can.
They think that the damned clearly perceived they are being tortured by
ﬁre, when no actual ﬁre is present. Could not God similarly deceive us by
continual illusions into believing that the external world and our bodies
exist? He would be doing us no wrong in this: he might be aiming to lower
our pride, or punishing our sins, actual or original, or acting for reasons
hidden from us. Various passages of scripture cast doubt on our capacity
for knowledge.

200

Sixth Objections and Replies

6. You treat indiﬀerence of the will as an imperfection, a state that disappears whenever the mind has a clear perception of what to believe or how
to act. But the faith teaches us that God enjoys indiﬀerence: he could have
created a diﬀerent world from this or innumerable worlds or no world at
all. Thus, a supremely clear perception of everything, such as he has, is
compatible with indiﬀerence. The essence of freedom must be the same in
God and in us: therefore we too possess liberty of indiﬀerence.
7. You say all our sensations take place on surfaces. We do not understand
this. We do not see how there can be no real accidents, capable, by divine
aid of existing without a substance, as in the Eucharist.* You may make
these points clear in your Physics, although it is doubtful if you will argue
people into abandoning long-established beliefs.
8. As regards the Fifth Replies: how can geometrical or metaphysical
truths be immutable and eternal, yet not independent of God? Could he
have made it so that there was no such thing as a triangle? Could he have
made it true that 2 × 4 is not 8, or that a triangle does not have three sides?
Either these truths depend wholly on the human intellect, or on actually
existing things; or they are independent, and could not have been changed
even by God.
9. You say the intellect is more reliable than the senses. But any certainty
the intellect enjoys must derive from the senses (if they are in good order).
The intellect does not tell us a stick that looks bent in the water is straight:
it is touch that does that. What the senses, when in good order, constantly
report oﬀers the greatest certainty of which we are capable.*
We need some kind of criterion for knowing when we understand one
thing without another so clearly that it is certain they can exist separately;
in other words, we need to know how we can be certain that the distinction is not purely produced by the intellect, but derives from the things
themselves. For instance, suppose we think of God’s immensity, without
thinking of his justice; or of his existence, without thinking of the three
persons of the Trinity. We have a complete perception of God’s immensity or his existence. But these perceptions are inadequate. Otherwise an
unbeliever, relying on the idea of God as a unity, could deny that there are
three persons in one God. But is not this the same logic as you apply,*
when denying that the body has mind or thought?

Appendix
[419–21] Further points for clariﬁcation:
1. How I know for certain that I have a clear idea of my soul.
2. How I know for certain that this idea is quite distinct from any other
thing.
3. How I know for certain that it has no corporeal element whatever.

Sixth Objections and Replies

201

Further objections by other philosophers and geometers:
We simply cannot accept your insistence that thought cannot be a bodily
function. Some bodies, experience shows, can think, others not. You have
got to the point where you seem unable to realize that the properties and
operations of the soul depend on bodily motions.
We can clearly and distinctly perceive mathematical truths, but your
arguments do not give us the same kind of clear conviction that the soul is
distinct from the body or that God exists. This is not because we have
failed to meditate along with you: we have read your work very carefully,
we have a lifetime’s experience of metaphysical argument, and we have
made the eﬀort to lift ourselves above the body. We do not know what can
be performed by bodies in motion. Nor do you or anyone know with what
attributes God may endow a subject. So how do you know that God has
not endowed some bodies with the ability to think?*

SIXTH REPLIES
1. It is certainly true that no one can be certain he is thinking, or that
he exists, unless he knows what thought is, and what existence is. But
reﬂexive knowledge or knowledge acquired by means of demonstration is not required for this; still less, the knowledge of reﬂexive
knowledge, by which he knows that he knows, and again that he
knows that he knows that he knows, and so on to inﬁnity; we could
not have this kind of knowledge about anything. It is altogether
enough that he should know it by the internal kind of knowledge that
always precedes the reﬂexive kind, and that, as regards thought and
existence, is so innate in all human beings that, although perhaps if
we were sunk in prejudice, and attentive more to words than their
meaning, we could imagine that we do not have it, we cannot really
not have it. So when someone is aware that he is thinking, and that it
follows that he exists, although perhaps he has never asked what
thought is, or what existence is, he cannot, however, be without
suﬃcient knowledge of both to satisfy himself of this point.
2. Nor, when someone is aware that he is thinking, and understands what being moved means, can it happen that he thinks he is
deceived and is not thinking but only being moved. For since he has a
completely diﬀerent idea or notion of thought than of bodily motion,
he must understand one of them as distinct from the other: even if,
on account of the habit of attributing several various properties,

422

423

202

424

Sixth Objections and Replies

between which no connection is known to exist, to a single subject,
he may happen to wonder whether he is one and the same being that
thinks and that moves from one place to another; or even to aﬃrm
that he is. And we should note that there are two ways in which
things of which we have diﬀerent ideas may be taken as one and the
same thing: i. in respect of unity and identity of nature; ii. in respect
of unity of composition. Thus, for example, the idea we have of
shape is diﬀerent from the idea we have of motion; the idea we have
of intellection is diﬀerent from the idea we have of volition; likewise
we have diﬀerent ideas of bone and ﬂesh, and of thought and an
extended thing. Nonetheless, we clearly perceive that a substance of
which shape is a property has also the property of being capable of
motion, so that a thing that has shape and a thing that is mobile are
one and the same, in respect of unity of nature; and that likewise a
thinking thing and a willing thing are one and the same, in respect of
unity of nature. However, we do not perceive the same of a thing we
are considering in the form of bone, and a thing we are considering
in the form of ﬂesh.* Therefore, we cannot take them to be one and
the same in respect of unity of nature, only in respect of unity of
composition: that is, inasmuch as one and the same animal has bones
and ﬂesh. Now here the question is, whether we perceive a thinking
thing and an extended thing to be one and the same in respect of
unity of nature (which would mean ﬁnding some aﬃnity or connection between thought and extension, such as we found between shape
and motion, or intellect and volition); or rather whether they are to
be said to be one and the same only in respect of unity of composition, inasmuch as they are found in the same human being, just as
bones and ﬂesh are found in the same animal. I aﬃrm the latter,
because I realize that there is an utter distinction or diversity
between the nature of an extended thing and that of a thinking thing,
just as much as there is between bones and ﬂesh.
There is an appeal to authority here, in the claim that no one can understand my arguments. In fact several people claim to have done so. One witness who after sailing to America claimed to have seen the Antipodes*
would deserve to be believed more than a thousand people who say the
Antipodes do not exist simply because they do not know they do.
Likewise, one person who claims to have understood an argument properly is of more weight than a thousand who say without proof that no one
can understand it. Being unable to understand something oneself is no
grounds for concluding that no one else can understand it.

Sixth Objections and Replies

203

I am certain that thought cannot be reduced to bodily motion, but I cannot 425
answer for other people, however attentive and in their opinion perspicacious,
if they think only in terms of the imagination, instead of the intellect.
3. This view of souls and angels as corporeal has been rejected by the
Church, and by all philosophers, so there is no need to bother with it.
Supposing the soul were transmitted by one’s parents, this would not
make it corporeal.
If I conceded that dogs and monkeys could think, it would not follow 426
that the human mind was one with the body, but that minds and bodies
were distinct in the animals also.

But in fact I have not simply asserted, as is here assumed, that animals do not have thought:* I have proved it by very solid reasons,
which no one has yet refuted. And it is those who claim that dogs
know that they are running when they are awake, and even when they are
asleep that they are barking, as if they had access to their hearts, who
are doing so without proof. And even if they add that they do not
believe that the actions of animals can be explained without sensation,
life, and a soul (which, as I read it, means without thought: for I have
never denied that animals have what is commonly called life, or a
bodily soul, or organic senses)* by mechanical means, and would wager
any stake in support of their belief that this is an utterly impossible and
ridiculous idea, this does not count as an argument.
People used to laugh at the belief in the Antipodes: but such laughter is no
proof of falsity.
If there are people who believe human beings can be explained purely
mechanically, this proves only that there are some very confused human 427
beings out there.

Some people conceive everything in such confused fashion, and cling
so tenaciously to their existing opinions, which they understand
purely verbally, that, rather than changing them, they will deny of
themselves what they cannot help constantly experiencing in themselves. For there is no way we do not constantly experience in ourselves that we think.
Anyone who denies he thinks must be clinging to the belief that human
beings and beasts operate in the same way. Therefore:

When it is proved to him that beasts do not think, he prefers to strip
himself, as well, of thinking, of which he cannot not be conscious in
himself [sibi conscius], than change his opinion that he operates in the
same way as the beasts.

204

Sixth Objections and Replies

Such people are few, many fewer than those who take the more reasonable
line* that, if thought cannot be distinguished from bodily motion, it must
be found in the beasts as well as in us, and the diﬀerences between us and
them are only of degree.
428 4. The less powerful the supposed source of the atheist’s being, the more
reason he will have to doubt, since his nature may be so imperfect he will
be in error even when something appears most evident to him. Only the
recognition of a truthful God can rid him of this doubt.
5. God cannot deceive us. The form of deception is a privation, thus
incompatible with the supreme being. We could not believe in God’s
revelation, if we thought he might deceive us.
[428–31] Descartes proceeds to answer speciﬁc objections (the suﬀering
of the damned, the evidence of scripture passages) but only in so far
as they might be held to aﬀect his own positions. He points out that he
does not profess to be a theologian, but is content to repeat what others
have said.
431
432

6. As for the freedom of the will, its nature is very diﬀerent in
God and in us. For it is self-contradictory to say that God’s will has
not been from all eternity indiﬀerent to everything that has come to
pass or will ever come to pass, because we can imagine nothing good,
nothing true, nothing that is to be believed, or done, or not done, of
which the idea existed in the divine will before its nature was determined by the divine will to be what it is. Nor am I speaking here of
priority in time: there was no kind of priority in respect of order, or
nature, or of the reasoning reason, as they call it, such that this
idea of good impelled God to choose one alternative rather than the
other.* For example, he did not will to create the world in time
because he saw that this would be better than creating it from all
eternity. Nor did he will the three angles of a triangle to be equal to
two right angles because he saw that they had to be this way, and so
on. On the contrary, because he willed to create the world in time,
this is better than if it had been created from all eternity. And because
he wanted the three angles of a triangle to be necessarily equal to
two right angles, this is now true, and cannot be otherwise than true.
The same applies to everything else. And this does not mean we
cannot say that the merits of the saints are the cause of their obtaining eternal life;* for they do not cause this in the sense of determining God to will something, they are only the cause of the eﬀect of
which God willed from all eternity that they should be the cause.

Sixth Objections and Replies

205

And thus God’s supreme indiﬀerence is the supreme indication of
his omnipotence. But as to human beings, since they ﬁnd the nature
of all that is good and true already determined by God, and their will
cannot be moved towards anything else, it is obvious that they
embrace the true and the good all the more willingly, and therefore
all the more freely, the more clearly they see it; and they are never
indiﬀerent, except when they do not know what is better or truer, or
at least when they do not see it so clearly that there is no room for
doubt about it. And thus the indiﬀerence pertaining to the human
will is quite diﬀerent from that belonging to the divine will. Nor is it
relevant to say that the essences of things are indivisible: for, ﬁrstly,
no essence can belong univocally to God and to the creature; and,
ﬁnally, indiﬀerence does not pertain to the essence of human
freedom, since we are free, not only when ignorance of what is right
renders us indiﬀerent, but also and especially when clear perception
impels us to pursue something.*
7. I conceive the surface by which I think our senses are aﬀected
in exactly the same way as all mathematicians and philosophers usually conceive (or at least ought to conceive) the surface they distinguish from the body itself, and which they suppose to be without any
depth at all. But the name ‘surface’ is used by mathematicians in two
ways. They use it both for a body considered purely as having length
and breadth, and without depth, even if they are not denying it has
depth; and also for a mode of a body, that is, when it is said to be
without depth. And therefore to avoid ambiguity I said I was speaking of the [latter] kind of surface that, being only a mode, cannot be
part of a body; for a body is a substance, and a mode cannot be a part
of a substance. But I did not deny that it was the outer edge of the
body. On the contrary it can be very accurately called the outer edge
of both the body contained and of the container: in the same way as
two bodies are said to be contiguous of which the outer edges are
simultaneously present. For certainly, when two bodies touch each
other, there is one and the same outer edge of both, which is part of
neither, but the same mode of both, which can even remain if these
two bodies are removed, provided other bodies take their places
which are exactly of the same size and shape. Now the kind of place
that the Aristotelians say is the surface of a surrounding body can be
understood only as equivalent to this surface that is not a substance,
but a mode. For the place of a tower is not changed, even if the air

433

434

206

435

436

Sixth Objections and Replies

around it is changed, or another body takes the place of the tower,
and therefore the surface, which term is here used as equivalent to
place, is not a part of the surrounding air or of the tower.
To demolish the belief in real accidents, I think there is no need to
call for other reasons than those I have already advanced. For, ﬁrst,
since all sensations function by touch, nothing but the surface of
bodies can be perceived by the senses. But if there are real accidents,
they must be something diﬀerent from this surface, which is a mode.
Therefore, if they exist, they cannot be perceived by the senses. But
they were thought to exist only because it was thought they were
perceived by the senses. Moreover, the idea of ‘real accidents’ is
self-contradictory, because whatever is real can exist separately from
any other subject. But whatever can exist separately in this way is a
substance, not an accident. It makes no diﬀerence to say that real
accidents cannot be separated from their subjects naturally, but only
by the divine power. For what is produced naturally is produced
purely by the ordinary power of God, which does not diﬀer at all
from his extraordinary power, and does not add anything else to
things. Therefore if everything that can naturally exist without a
subject is a substance, whatever can exist without a subject through
some extraordinary manifestation of the divine power, should be
called a substance. Certainly, I admit that one substance can accidentally modify another.* But when this happens, it is not the substance
itself that has the form of an accident, but only the mode resulting
from the change. Thus, when a garment accidentally modiﬁes a
person, the accident is not the garment itself but only ‘being dressed’.
But the main reason that led philosophers to posit real accidents was
that they thought that without them sense perception could not be
explained; and this is why I promised to give a detailed account in my
Physics with respect to each of the senses in turn.* [. . .]
8. When we consider the immensity of God, it is manifest that
there can be nothing at all that does not depend on him: not only any
subsistent being, but no order, no law, no reason of truth and goodness. Otherwise, as has just been pointed out, he would not have
been fully indiﬀerent with regard to creating what he created. For if
any essence [ratio] of goodness had existed prior to his act of preordaining, that would have determined him to do what is best. On the
contrary, it is because he determined himself to make the things that
now exist, that they are, as Genesis says, ‘very good’.* That is, the

Sixth Objections and Replies

207

essence of their goodness depends on his having decided to make
them as they are. And there is no need to ask what kind of causal
relationship is involved in the dependence of this goodness, and of
other truths, both mathematical and metaphysical, on God: for since
the list of diﬀerent kinds of cause* was put together by people who
perhaps had never thought of this form of causality, it would be
hardly surprising, if they had not found a name for it. But they did
in fact: for we can talk of an eﬃcient cause here, in the same way as
the king is the eﬃcient cause of the law, even though the law itself
has no physical existence, but only, as they say, a moral existence.
Nor is there any need to ask how God could have made it true from
all eternity that 2 × 4 does not equal 8: for I confess we cannot understand this. Yet, since for other reasons I rightly understand that there
can be nothing in any category of being that does not depend on
God, and that he could easily have created certain things in such
a way that we human beings cannot understand that they could be
otherwise than they are,* it would be contrary to all reason to doubt
what we do rightly understand, just because there is something here
that we do not understand and that we are not aware of having to
understand. Therefore we should not think that the eternal truths
depend wholly on the human intellect, or on actually existing things: they
depend on God alone, who created them from all eternity, as the
supreme lawgiver.
9. To have an accurate idea of the certitude of sense-perception,
we need to distinguish three levels within it. The ﬁrst is a matter
purely of the bodily organ’s being aﬀected by external objects, and
this can be nothing other than the motion of the particles of this
organ, and the change of shape and place resulting from this motion.
The second contains everything that immediately results in the mind
on account of its being united to the bodily organ that is aﬀected in
this way. Of this kind are perceptions of pain, arousal, thirst, hunger,
colours, sound, ﬂavour, smell, heat, cold, and so forth, which arise,
as was stated in the Sixth Meditation, from the union and virtual
fusion of the mind and the body. The third level includes all the
judgements that, on the occasion of motions in the bodily organs, we
have been accustomed to make since childhood about things existing
outside us.
For instance, when I see a stick, we should not think that some
‘intentional species’ ﬂy from the stick into the eye,* but only that the

437

208

438

439

Sixth Objections and Replies

rays of light reﬂected from the stick stimulate certain motions in the
optic nerve, and, via the optic nerve, in the brain as well, as I explained
in considerable detail in the Dioptrics. It is in this cerebral motion
that the ﬁrst level of sensation, which we have in common with the
beasts, consists. But from it follows the second, which covers only
the perception of colour and light reﬂected from the stick, and arises
from the fact that the mind is so intimately conjoined with the brain
that it is aﬀected by the motions taking place within the brain. And
this would be all we should include in sense-perception, if we were
trying to distinguish it properly from intellection. For when I judge,
from this sensation of colour by which I am aﬀected, that the stick,
existing outside me, is coloured, and when I estimate its size, shape,
and distance from the extension and the boundaries of this colour
and from the relation of its position to the parts of the brain, even
though these activities are commonly ascribed to the senses, for
which reason I included them here in the third level of sensation, it
is nonetheless clear that they depend on the intellect alone. And I
proved in the Dioptrics that size, distance, and shape are perceived by
reasoning alone, deducing them from one another.* The only
diﬀerence is this: the judgements we make now, on the basis of some
new observation, we attribute to the intellect; but the judgements we
ﬁrst formed, or the conclusions we ﬁrst reached from reasoning, in
childhood, about things that aﬀected our senses, although made in
exactly the same way as now, we ascribe to the senses. This is because
in these cases habit has made the judging and reasoning so rapid (or,
rather, causes us to remember judgements once made by us about
similar things), that we fail to distinguish such judgements from pure
sense perception.
From this it is clear that when we say that the certainty of the intellect is far greater than that of the senses,* it means only that those
judgements that we form when we have reached maturity on the
basis of new observations, are more certain than those we formed in
our earliest infancy, and without thinking about them. This is
undoubtedly true. For it is clear that we are not dealing here with the
ﬁrst and second levels of sensation, because there can be no falsity in
them. So when it is said that the stick appears broken in the water on
account of refraction, this is tantamount to saying that it appears to us
in a way that would lead a child to judge it is broken, and that would
even lead us, on the basis of the prejudices to which we have grown

Sixth Objections and Replies

209

accustomed since childhood, to form the same judgement. But what
you add here, that this mistake is not corrected by the intellect, but by
touch, I cannot agree to, because even if we judge the stick to be
straight by means of touch, that is, by means of the same kind of
judgement to which we have grown accustomed since childhood and
which is therefore called sensation, this is not, however, suﬃcient for
correcting the visual error. We need, further, to take the trouble to
ﬁnd a reason to show us that in this case we should trust to the judgement based on touch rather than the judgement based on sight. And
since this reason has not been in us ever since childhood, it must be
attributed not to sensation, but to the intellect alone. And therefore
this very example shows that only the intellect can correct the errors
of the senses; nor can any example be found of error due to trusting
the operations of the mind rather than the senses.
10. Since the remaining points are put forward as doubts rather
than objections, I do not have so much conﬁdence in myself as to
venture to undertake to give a suﬃcient explanation of points on
which, as I see, several highly learned and intelligent men are still in
doubt. But nonetheless, I wish to do the best I can for my cause, and
will therefore frankly say by what means it has come about that
I have freed myself altogether from my doubts. For in this way, if the
same means are useful to other people, I shall be very pleased; but if
not, I shall at least not feel myself to be guilty of rashness.
When I ﬁrst, for the reasons set out in these Meditations, concluded that the human mind was really distinct from the body, and
was better known than the body, and so forth, I was indeed forced
to assent to these views: for I could discover nothing in them that
was incoherent or that was not inferred from evident principles,
according to the rules of logic. But I admit that I was not fully
convinced, and my experience was almost the same as that of
astronomers, who, when they have proved by reasoning that the sun
is several times larger than the earth, cannot help judging, while they
are looking at it, that it is smaller. However, having proceeded further, and, still relying on the same fundamental principles, moved on
to the consideration of physical things, I realized, ﬁrst, by attending
to the ideas or notions of all sorts of things that I found within
myself, and by carefully distinguishing them from one another, so
that all my judgements would fully agree with the things themselves,
that nothing at all belongs to the essence of body, except this: that it

440

210

441

442

Sixth Objections and Replies

is a thing having length, breadth, and depth, plus the capacity to take
on diﬀerent shapes and to move in various ways; and that these
shapes and motions are only modes that no power can make to exist
without the body itself; but that colours, smells, tastes, and so forth,
were only various sensations existing in my thought, and diﬀering
just as much from bodies as pain diﬀers from the shape and motion
of the weapon that inﬂicts pain; and ﬁnally that weight, hardness,
and the power of heating, attracting, purging, and all the other qualities we experience in bodies, consist solely in motion or the privation of motion, and in the conﬁguration and position of parts.
These opinions were very diﬀerent from those I had previously
held on these points, and so I began to consider the causes of my earlier beliefs. And I discovered that the key factor was that from my
childhood on I had formed judgements about various natural things,
inasmuch as these contributed to preserve the life I was just embarking on, and that I had later clung to these opinions I had formed at
that stage. And since at that age my mind used the bodily organs less
correctly, and, being more ﬁrmly attached to them, thought nothing
without their aid, it was aware of things only confusedly; and, although
it was conscious in itself of its own nature, and had within itself an
idea of thought, as well as one of extension, yet because it could not
understand anything without imagining something at the same time,
it took understanding and imagining to be one and the same, and
related all the notions it had of intellectual things to the body. And
since in my subsequent life I had never emancipated myself from
these prejudices, I knew nothing at all suﬃciently distinctly, and
nothing that I did not suppose to be corporeal—even though I often
formed such ideas or concepts of the things I supposed to be corporeal as related more to minds than to bodies.
For example, when I conceived weight as some kind of real quality present within solid bodies, even though I called it a quality, inasmuch as I related it to the bodies in which it was present, yet because
I added the word ‘real’ I was in fact thinking it was a substance: just
as a garment, considered in itself, is a substance, even though, when
considered in relation to the person wearing it, it is a quality. And
likewise the mind also, even though it is in reality a substance, can be
called a quality of the body to which it is attached. And even though
I imagined weight to be distributed all through the body that is
heavy, I did not believe it had the kind of extension that constitutes

Sixth Objections and Replies

211

the nature of bodies. For the true extension of a body is such that all
its parts are impossible to penetrate. And I thought that there was the
same weight in a piece of wood ten feet long as in a mass of gold or
some other metal one foot long. In fact I thought that the same quantity could be contracted within a mathematical point. Indeed, even
when the weight was thus distributed equally throughout the body,
I saw it could exert its whole force in any part of it, because by whatever part of itself it is attached to a rope, it pulled on the rope with its
whole weight, in exactly the same way as if the weight were
distributed only in the part in contact with the rope, and not in the
other parts. And indeed even today I understand the mind to be coextensive with the body in just this way, wholly present in the whole,
and wholly present in any one part. But that the idea I had of weight
was partly derived from the idea I had of mind appears above all from
this: I thought that weight carried bodies downwards towards the
centre of the earth, as if it contained some knowledge in itself of the
centre. For this certainly cannot happen without knowledge, nor can
there be any knowledge except in a mind. On the other hand, I
ascribed several other properties to weight that cannot be understood
of the mind in this way: such as divisibility, measurability, and so on.
But once I had suﬃciently reﬂected on all this, and drawn a careful distinction between the idea of the mind and the ideas of body
and bodily motion, and had realized that all the other ideas of real
qualities and substantial forms* I had previously held had been
formed and invented by me, by running these diﬀerent ideas [of
mind and body] together, I easily liberated myself from all the doubts
that are here put forward. For, ﬁrst of all, I did not doubt that I had
a clear idea of my mind, inasmuch as I was intimately conscious of it
in myself;* and that this idea was totally diﬀerent from the ideas of other
things, and contained nothing corporeal, because when I had investigated the true ideas of other things, and seemed to myself to have
acquired a knowledge of them in general, I found nothing at all in
them that did not diﬀer radically from the idea of the mind. And I
found there to be a far greater distinction between things that, however attentively I thought of both, nonetheless appeared as distinct,
such as mind and body, than there is between things of which,
indeed, we can understand one without thinking of the other, but of
which we see, when we are thinking of both, that one cannot exist
without the other. For instance, we can certainly understand the

443

212

444

445

Sixth Objections and Replies

immensity of God even though we are not considering his justice.
But it is completely impossible, when we are considering both, to
think him to be immense and yet not just. And indeed the existence
of God can be truly known, even if one is ignorant of the persons of
the Most Holy Trinity,* inasmuch as these cannot be perceived
except by a mind enlightened by faith. Even so, when they are perceived, I deny that we can understand there to be a real distinction
between them in respect of the divine essence, although one does
exist in respect of relationships.
And ﬁnally I ceased to fear that perhaps I had succumbed to preconceptions or error in my analysis, when, from the fact that I saw
that there are some bodies that do not think, or rather clearly understood that some bodies can exist without thought, I preferred to
argue that thought did not belong to the nature of bodies, rather than
concluding, from the fact that I saw that certain other bodies, namely
human ones, that do think, that thought is a mode of bodies. For in fact
I have never seen or perceived that human bodies think, but only that
the same human beings have both thought and a body. I realized that
this comes about through the combination of a thinking thing with a
bodily thing for this reason: by examining the thinking thing separately, I could discover nothing in it that belonged to a body, and
likewise could discover no thought in the nature of bodies, considered separately. But on the other hand, by examining all the modes
both of body and mind, I could discover none at all of which the concept did not depend on the concept of the thing of which it was a
mode. And from the fact that we often see two particular things
together we cannot rightly conclude that they are one and the same;
whereas from the fact that we sometimes discover one of them without the other, we can infer with certainty that they are distinct. Nor
should the power of God deter us from making this inference: for it
is no less repugnant to the understanding that two things that we
clearly perceive as distinct should be intrinsically and without composition one and the same, than that things that are in no way distinct
should be separated; and therefore, if God endowed certain bodies
with the power of thought* (as he has indeed endowed human
bodies), this power can be separated from them, and thus is nonetheless really distinct from them.
Nor is it any wonder that in the past, before I had liberated myself
from the prejudices of the senses, I rightly perceived that 2+3=5 and

Sixth Objections and Replies

213

that when equals are subtracted from equals, the remainder is equal,
and many things of that kind, although at that point I did not think
that the soul of man is distinct from his body. For I am well aware that
the reason why, when I was still altogether a child, I never made any
false judgements about generally accepted propositions is that I was
not then familiar with these, and children do not learn to count to
two and three before they are capable of judging whether they make
ﬁve or not. On the other hand, from earliest infancy I conceived
mind and body (I mean, the mind and the body of which I was confusedly aware of being composed) in some sense as one thing; and it
happens in virtually all imperfect knowledge that many things are
apprehended as if they were one and the same that subsequently have
to be distinguished by more careful examination.
Descartes professes himself surprised at the objectors’ suggestion that if
he were to reread his work in the same analytical spirit as he would read 446
the works of an adversary he would be less convinced that everyone should
agree with his arguments, since the objectors have not shown any ﬂaw in
these. He is less struck by the fact that learned men withhold assent from
his conclusions than by their failure to refute his assumptions and inferences. The refusal to accept the conclusions may be due to their holding
long-standing and deep-rooted alternative views.

Nor can I see any possible reason why neither these men nor any
others, to the best of my knowledge, have up to now found any fault
in my arguments, except that the arguments themselves are altogether true and certain, particularly since they do not start from any
obscure or unknown principles, but from an initial radical doubt of
everything, and then are gradually deduced from the notions that
appear most evident and most certain of all to a mind free of prejudices: from this it follows that there can be no errors at all in them
that could not be easily spotted by anyone of average intelligence.
And hence it seems to me at this point that I can fairly conclude not
that my writings are undermined by the authority of these most
learned men, who, having read them several times over, cannot yet
assent to them, but that, on the contrary, they are conﬁrmed by the
authority of the same men, since, after such long and careful examination, they have pointed out no errors or faulty reasoning in the course
of my demonstrations.

447

SEVENTH OBJECTIONS
WITH NOTES BY THE AUTHOR, OR DISSERTATION ON
FIRST PHILOSOPHY

Preamble by Bourdin
[451] (A) I agree to your request for comments on your method, (B) provided it does not involve discussion of any writings on the subject: instead,
you will question me about the diﬃculties involved in the search for a new
method.

Notes by Descartes
[452–4] (A) I never asked him for comments on my method, only for a
copy of his attack on the Meditations. I did ask other Jesuits to examine my
writings. I would have thought that the author of this dissertation was
acting as a spokesman for the Society of Jesus, but I cannot think that the
Society’s views could be represented by a text composed of quibbles,
sophisms, abuse, and verbosity. The positions he challenges are ﬁgments
of his own imagination: he distorts my views beyond all recognition.
(B) Your refusal to engage in textual discussion is simply a stratagem
to enable you to attack my Meditations without drawing readers’ attention to them by attacking them openly. You have produced a distorted
image of me, a mask, by clumsily stitching together fragments of my
Meditations.

Bourdin: Question 1: Whether and in what way doubtful
things should be considered as false
[454–9] You ask if your rule ‘Whatever is open to the slightest doubt
should be considered as false’ is a sound method of investigating truth.
This involves three questions:
1. What does ‘open to the slightest doubt’ mean?
2. What does ‘considered as false’ mean?
3. How far should this ‘considering as false’ extend?
(§1) (C) You distinguish between doubts based on valid reasons (e.g.
about the existence of the external world) and doubts relying on the evil
genius hypothesis (e.g. about mathematical truths).
(D) Nothing is exempt from the latter kind of doubt, until we are
certain there is a God.

Seventh Objections

215

(§2) (E): To treat a doubtful proposition as false, is to believe and aﬃrm
the contrary as true. So if it is not certain 2 + 3 = 5, I am supposed to say
2 + 3 ≠ 5. If it is not certain I am not dreaming, I should aﬃrm ‘I am
dreaming’. Likewise, if what appears clear and certain to one who doubts
whether he is dreaming or waking may not be clear and certain, I should
aﬃrm that it is false and obscure.
(F) You would say that some things are so certain, that they cannot
appear doubtful even to those who are dreaming or mad. But since they
can feel certain about things that are in fact absurd, why should things that
are certain in fact not appear to them as false and doubtful? There can be
no certainty that what appears certain to one doubting whether he is
dreaming or waking is in fact certain:* on your showing, it should be considered as false.
(§3) I am supposed to convince myself 2 + 3 ≠ 5 and that this has to be
certainly true. But you can’t mean to suggest it is certainly true. So it must
be as doubtful as 2 + 3 = 5. Therefore, I should treat it as false, that is,
aﬃrm that 2 + 3 = 5. Again, if I am uncertain whether bodies exist, I have
to treat ‘bodies exist’ as false, and aﬃrm ‘bodies do not exist’. But since
this is uncertain, I have to treat it as false, and say ‘bodies exist’ again. So
they exist and do not exist, and
(G) I am going round in circles.
Although now you tell me that I am supposed to treat both alternatives
as false and unreliable.
To answer the three questions above:
1. We can doubt everything, especially material things, as long as we
have no foundations of knowledge besides those we had previously.
2. To consider something as false is altogether to reverse one’s inclination to believe it, and to pretend one’s opinion about it is false.
3. What is doubtful should be considered as false to this extent, that its
opposite is also considered as doubtful and false.

Descartes: Notes on Question 1
[460–2] (C) His attempt to summarize my approach to doubt suggests
that I think we have good reasons to doubt the existence of the external
world, and omits the crucial point that my doubts are metaphysical, and
have nothing to do with practical life. Bourdin thus gives the unwary
reader the impression that I am so mad as to doubt, in ordinary life,
whether the earth exists, and whether I have a body.
(D) I do not say ‘nothing’ is exempt from hyperbolical doubt. I have
often explained that we cannot doubt what we clearly perceive when
we are attending to it. Doubt creeps in when we are no longer attending to
it, until we know that whatever we clearly perceive is true.* I doubted

216

Seventh Objections

everything in the First Meditation, because I supposed I was not attending to any clear perception. Bourdin implies that because I have once
doubted everything I can henceforth never be certain of anything.
(E) My method involves treating doubtful propositions with no more
respect than ones that are plainly false. No sensible person could really imagine it involves trying to believe the opposite of every doubtful proposition.
461

462

(F) He could indeed have concluded from my writings that whatever
is clearly and distinctly perceived by someone is true, even though the
someone may at the same time be doubting whether he is dreaming or
waking—even though, if you like, he is dreaming or delirious: because
nothing can be clearly and distinctly perceived, whoever is doing the
perceiving, that is not such as it is perceived, in other words, that is not
true.* But because only the prudent correctly distinguish between
what is so perceived, and what only seems or appears to be, I would
not be surprised at this good man’s here confusing the two.
(G) I said that we should have no greater regard for things that are
doubtful than we would if they were altogether false, so that my
thought could be withdrawn from them completely, but not so as to
aﬃrm one thing one minute and the contrary the next.
His summary of my position at the end of this question [points 1 to 3] contains none of the absurdities he attributes to me, so he was not serious
when he attributed them to me.

Bourdin: Answer to Question 1
[462–3] 1. If you mean only that, when seeking for certainty, we should
not rely on positions that are not certain, this is right, but there is nothing
new here: all philosophers would say the same.
2. If you mean we should not even give any consideration to doubtful
positions, this comes to much the same thing and every beginner in philosophy is taught it.
3. If you mean we should treat doubtful positions as false, and treat the
contrary positions as secure foundations, you are wrong, because one
cannot achieve certainty by starting from doubtful propositions,* or treat
doubtful propositions as certain.
4. Anyone who tries this method on a speciﬁc issue (e.g. whether bodies
exist) will end up going round in circles. (H)

Descartes: Notes on Bourdin’s Answer
[464–6] Concerning points 1 and 2 he agrees with me, but accuses me of
banality. Concerning 3 and 4 he attacks an opinion he wants people to

Seventh Objections

217

think is mine, but which no one in their right mind could hold. He is
trying to get people to think that my ideas are ludicrous or banal. I am not
interested in novelty for its own sake: my opinions are old, because they
have always been valid. If he really thought my opinions so absurd, why
would he bother refuting them?
(H) It is a complete misreading to think that my principles involve
asserting the contrary of what is found to be doubtful.

When I said in the First Meditation that I wanted to attempt for
some time to persuade myself of the opposite of my previous rashly
formed beliefs, I immediately added that the reason I wanted this
was so that, having, so to speak, balanced the weight of prejudice on
either side, I would not incline to one view more than to its opposite:
I was not intending to take one or other view to be true, or to establish
it as a foundation for certain knowledge.

465

(Descartes casts doubt on Bourdin’s honesty in attributing this view to
him.)

I marvel at the force of his imagination, because, although he is
ﬁghting only against this idle chimera conjured up out of his own
brain, he has adopted exactly the same stance and always used the
same words, as if he had me for an adversary, ready to ﬁght back face
to face.
Bourdin: Question 2: Whether the renunciation of all
doubtful beliefs is the right philosophical method
[466–7] (I) (Bourdin represents Descartes as summarizing his method.
He then proposes testing the method, and asks Descartes to guide him
through it, using the metaphor of a series of explorations. The titles of
each section are Bourdin’s.)
Bourdin: §1. The approach to the method is opened up*
[468–72] (K)* I am supposed to say that no earth, or bodies, or minds
exist, and
(L) to reject all my former beliefs. All, without exception?
(M) But why should I doubt them? What are your reasons for requiring this? You say: the senses deceive us sometimes; sometimes we are
dreaming; some people are mad, and think they see what is not there. But
these are doubtful views, and your rule suggests we should accept as true
only what is certain, what we can prove.
(N) In fact, since they are doubtful, by your rule, you should assert the
opposite: ‘the senses never deceive us’, and so on. How can you so
conﬁdently assert that you sometimes dream? Not knowing whether you

466

218

Seventh Objections

are waking or dreaming is no proof you do in fact dream: you may be being
deceived by the evil genius into thinking you do. The evil-genius hypothesis poses diﬃculties you cannot overcome.
(O) The evil genius may be making you doubt propositions that are
certain, so as to land you in diﬃculties you will never get out of. Before
renouncing any beliefs, you should have found some certain criterion to
indicate which beliefs ought to be renounced.
(P) Rejecting one’s former opinions is a very serious matter.
(Q) You say that doubt will not lead to danger or error (p. 16).
Is this itself beyond doubt? You are asking people to give up old certainties (2 + 3 = 5), because the genius might be deceiving them,
(R) and telling them to accept the shaky rule that doubt can never land
them in error—yet might the genius not be deceiving them here too?
(S) I would be afraid of being too distrustful if I were to give up old
truths* —do you have no similar fear?
(T) Do you really reject, as old beliefs, such propositions as; ‘I have a
clear and distinct idea of God’; ‘Whatever I clearly and distinctly perceive
is true’?;
(V) ‘Thought, nutrition, and sensation have nothing to do with the
body, only with the mind.’ Do you really aﬃrm the opposite of these?
(Bourdin then aﬀects to remember that he has promised to submit to
Descartes’s guidance, and agrees to continue the journey.)
Descartes: Notes on §1
[473–7] (I) The summary has me rejecting all I knew as doubtful: but that
would be self-contradictory. I rejected everything I thought I knew.
(K) Bourdin fails to see that at the start ‘mind’ is included among the
objects of doubt, but that I later discover that a thinking thing exists,
which I call a mind, so that I can say at that stage that the mind exists.
(L) He keeps pointlessly hammering away at the word ‘all’.
473

[He reacts as if] I should regard the things I denied at one stage
because I found them doubtful as for ever needing to be denied, as if
it were impossible for them subsequently to be rendered evident and
certain for me. And it should be noted that he himself everywhere
treats doubt and certainty not as relationships between our knowledge and objects, but as permanently inhering properties of the
objects, so that what we have once discovered to be doubtful can
never subsequently be rendered certain.*
(M) A reason for doubting may itself be open to doubt, and yet valid, as
long as we have not found a certain reason to set it aside.
(N) I assert nothing in the First Meditation: I merely put forward doubts.

Seventh Objections

219

(O) Again, Bourdin is considering doubt and certainty as qualities of
propositions. If a proposition is presented to me by the evil genius as
doubtful, it is doubtful. It looks as if the evil genius is disturbing Bourdin’s
thought processes.
(P) In the Fourth Replies and the preface to the Meditations, as well as
in the Discourse on the Method, I made clear that I do not think that rejecting all one’s former opinions is a ﬁt exercise for everyone.*
(Q) When I said there was no danger in doubt, I meant from the point
of view of practical life.*
(R) There is nothing shaky in my position: one who doubts does not
aﬃrm or deny, and therefore cannot err.
(S) He doesn’t give reasons why we should avoid being too distrustful.
His fear of being too distrustful is an index that he is not certain of his
position (he does not know we should not be distrustful), so that he should,
logically, take up a position of distrust.
(T) He fails to see that rejecting opinions applies only to those that
have not yet been clearly and distinctly perceived, unlike the propositions
he mentions here. He is trying to insinuate I have doubts about God—but
I have always made clear that doctrines of faith and morals are excepted
from this renunciation of opinions. Clear and distinct perception puts
an end to doubt and scepticism—but the best preparation for it is to
renounce one’s former opinions.
(V) I make it perfectly clear that nutrition is in fact a purely bodily
function: when I ascribed it to the soul in the Second Meditation (p. 19),
I was speaking with the voice of common opinion. This error alone shows
he does not understand the Meditations.
Bourdin: §2. An entry to the method is prepared
[477–9] (X) You begin by aﬃrming your existence.*
(Y) You talk about conceiving your existence in your mind (p. 18)—
but hadn’t you rejected the idea of ‘mind’? You go over your old beliefs
about yourself, but what is the point of this if you have rejected them as
doubtful? Can what is doubtful give access to what is certain?
(Z) You say you believed you were a human being—hadn’t you
rejected this? How would you answer a Pythagorean, who would say you
were once a rooster?* When you ask what a human being is (p. 18), you are
presumably speaking of the concept of human being we have now rejected—
a composite of soul and body.
Descartes: Notes on §2
[480–2] (X) This shows he admits I am right to start my philosophy with
the knowledge of my own existence, though elsewhere he talks of me as
beginning by rejecting all doubtful opinions.

220

Seventh Objections

(Y) To ‘conceive with the mind’ here means simply to think. I am not
working with a pre-existing concept of the mind as a part of the human
being. Believing doubtfulness is a quality of propositions, Bourdin fails to
see that I could legitimately doubt the concept of mind at one stage, and
revive it at another, when it becomes the object of a clear perception, just
as he fails to see that I do not imply that what I doubt at one stage must be
forever rejected as false.
(Z) Descartes explains his attitude to his prior beliefs:
481

Suppose he had a basket full of apples,* and was afraid that some of
the apples might be rotten, and wanted to remove them, so that they
did not spread their rottenness to the others, how would he do this?
Would he not ﬁrst of all empty the basket altogether, and then,
examining the apples one after the other, put back only those he
could see were unaﬀected, and throw the rest away? By the same
token, then, those who have never philosophized properly have various opinions in their mind, and since they began to accumulate these
in childhood, they are rightly afraid that most of them will be false,
and try to separate these from the rest, in case they all become uncertain from being jumbled up together. And there is no better way to
achieve this than to reject them all together and at the same time as
uncertain or false; and then, going through them one after the other,
to take back only those they discover to be true and indubitable. And
thus I was not wrong to reject everything to start with; then, realizing that nothing was known by me more certainly and evidently than
that I, since I thought, existed, I was not wrong to assert this ﬁrst of
all. And ﬁnally I was not wrong to investigate subsequently what I
had once thought I was, not so as to readopt all my former beliefs,
but so as to readopt any I perceived to be true, reject any I perceived
to be false, and set aside for later examination any I perceived to be
uncertain.
The rest of the objection is irrelevant. I was simply considering my former
beliefs, which coincide with those spontaneously formed by most other
people.
Bourdin: §3. What is a body?
[482–4] (Aa) What conception of body are you talking about? The old,
now supposedly faulty, one, which you sum up (p. 19)? What about more
recent philosophers’ views? There are deﬁnitions of body that make it
capable of sensation (found in dogs), thought (found in monkeys), and
imagination (found in mules). You are entitled to deﬁne it in your own

Seventh Objections

221

way, but your deﬁnition is only partial, and leaves many disputed points
unresolved.
Descartes: Notes on §3
[484] (Aa) Descartes protests that he is sticking to the accepted sense of
the words ‘mind’ and ‘body’.
Bourdin: §4. What is the soul?
[485–6] (Bb) Your investigation of the soul (p. 19) seems to rely on established beliefs about it. But philosophers disagree massively about the soul:
some think it a kind of subtle body dispersed through the solid body and
performing the functions of sensation, imagination, and thought. It is not
enough to protest that this is an impious atheistic view.
(Cc) Since you aim to prove that the soul is incorporeal and spiritual,
you should not take for granted that it is, but have a proper debate with
the rival views of the nature of body, soul, and mind.
Descartes: Notes on §4
[487] (Bb) This is not my approach at all.*
(Cc) I did not take it for granted that the soul is spiritual. What is
asserted (the corporeality of the soul) without supporting reasons requires
no answer. I did not begin with the words ‘body’, ‘soul’, ‘mind’, and then
discuss how to apply them. I distinguished two really distinct kinds of
substance, thinking and extended, and called one ‘mind’, the other ‘body’,
but the terms are unimportant.
Bourdin: §5. An entry into the method is attempted
[488–90] The Cogito is unshakeable.
(Dd) So now I ask what I am. I must be one of the things I thought I
was. I thought I was a human being comprising a body and a mind.
(Ee) I cannot be a body: I think I can see or touch myself, but this is
obviously false because I have renounced my former beliefs.
(Ff) So I am a mind, a thinking thing.
(Gg) But hadn’t I rejected all these former beliefs about what I was?
(Hh) You seem to be saying, though, that I am either a body or a mind.
So if there is something in me I once believed a property of body, I am a
body.* But I thought thinking was a bodily function. Therefore I am a body!
(Ii) If you tell me ‘thought is a mental function’, why did you not tell
me to stick to this belief when I was getting rid of all my other ones? But
why should we obey you, simply because you say so? Aren’t you simply
assuming what you are supposed to be proving? What about the philosophers who hold that the animals think, and that thought, in them and in

222

Seventh Objections

us, is the property of an extended, not a spiritual soul? How would you
convince them?
Descartes: Notes on §5
[491–2] (Dd) I never said that I must be one of the things I once thought
I was,
(Ee) or that I drew conclusions by putting things in doubt. I say the
contrary when I admit that the body, whose existence I call into question,
might indeed be identical with me (p. 20).
(Ff ) I never asked ‘Am I a mind?’ I begin with the discovery of myself
as a thinking thing, which then provides a content for the concept of
‘mind’.
(Gg) I never assumed that any of my former beliefs was true: I examine them to see if they are.
(Hh) I never said ‘I am either a body or a mind’.
(Ii) Nor have I assumed that mind is incorporeal. I demonstrate that it
is, in the Sixth Meditation.
Henceforth I will no longer engage in the tedious task of pointing out
his errors. It is embarrassing to see him play the clown in this way, passing himself oﬀ as apprehensive, slow-witted, unintelligent.*
Bourdin: §6. Another attempt to enter is made
[493–7] (Kk) You discuss what you believed in the past. But shouldn’t
you doubt that you ever believed these things, or that there was a past in
which you believed them? Besides, the Cogito now seems doubtful: am I
dreaming I am thinking? Can I make a distinction between thinking and
dreaming? Or might I simply be dreaming that such a distinction exists? It
looks as if thinking and dreaming are one and the same: so you are oﬀering
a method for dreaming.
Why do you not state your presupposition that (Ll) ‘I am one of those
things I once believed I was’, or ‘I am what I once believed I was’? Unless
you do, you might be wasting your time examining what you once thought
you were, because you might be something diﬀerent from that. In which
case this approach will get us no further.
Try another approach: ‘I am either a mind or a body.’ But how do you
know you are either a mind or a body, since you have rejected both these
concepts? You might be something else altogether. Try again: ‘I am either
a body or a non-body.’* You still have to assume that your prior idea of
body was correct and exhaustive.
(Mm) Otherwise you are in the same position as the peasant who,
seeing a wolf for the ﬁrst time and trying to ﬁt it into the list of animals he
knows, concludes, ﬁrst, that it is a donkey, and, then, that it is not an

Seventh Objections

223

animal. It could be that you are basing your argument on an inadequate
conception of body, which omits what could be in fact bodily functions
such as thought, sensation, imagination.
Bourdin: §7. A third attempt to enter is made
[498–502] (Nn) You cannot say you are thinking, only that you are
dreaming you are thinking. You are merely dreaming that the perception
of your existence is clear and evident. What is absolutely certain and
evident is one thing, what appears certain another, and the perception of
your existence only appears to you certain and evident.
You are certain of your existence only in the present: you can learn
nothing by turning back to the past because you are not certain of its existence.
(Oo) You argue that you have thought away everything, and no body or
mind exists, in fact nothing exists (antecedent). Therefore, if you exist,
you are not a body (consequent). But the argument cuts both ways: it also
proves you are not a mind. Again, the antecedent is ﬂawed, because you have
to be there to say ‘nothing exists’. The result is a logical paradox, such as
‘I am lying’. So the antecedent and the consequent undermine each other.
Perhaps you mean you are not certain of being a particular body, mind,
or thing. But you have an indeterminate certainty, immune to doubt, of
being a body, or a mind, or some other thing.
(Pp) Your approach to self-knowledge is ﬂawed. It cannot be derived
from your previous knowledge, which you have renounced. So it must be
based on what you do not yet know (which is absurd).
How can you move from saying you have no determinate knowledge of
yourself to later aﬃrming that you have such knowledge? The distinction
between determinate and indeterminate knowledge is crucial and you have
overlooked it.*
Bourdin: §8. A fourth attempt is made, and given up in despair
[503–7] (Qq) You said nothing exists: therefore you do not.
(Bourdin then gives a summary of Descartes’s argument for his existence as a thinking thing.)
But you could have said all this at the start, without going through the
circuitous route via universal rejection of prior beliefs.
(Rr) You now say you have a clear and distinct notion of thinking substance. Where did you get that from, or were you keeping it up your sleeve
up to now? What do you mean by having a clear and distinct concept of
thinking substance? Apparently, it is clear because you know certainly that
thinking substance exists, and distinct, because you know nothing else.
This thinking substance is not bodily or spiritual, or anything else.

224

Seventh Objections

But you fail to realize that we cannot infer the existence of anything
from our own knowledge of it.* You overlook crucial distinctions between
determinate and indeterminate, distinct and confused, explicit and
implicit. Your argument proves too much, and therefore proves nothing.
It could be reformulated to prove the thinking substance is a body: I am a
thinking thing, I do not know if minds exist, therefore no minds exist,
therefore my knowledge of my existence does not depend on my mind,
therefore I am not a mind, therefore I am a body.
Bourdin: §9. A retreat is executed in the traditional form
[507–8] (Ss) (Bourdin bears out this last point by putting (what he takes
to be) the argument into syllogistic form.)

No thing that is such that we can doubt whether it exists or not,
actually exists.
All bodies are such that we can doubt whether they exist or not.
Therefore no bodies actually exist.
No bodies actually exist.
Therefore nothing actually existing is a body. [. . .]
I (the thinking substance) actually exist.
Therefore I (the thinking substance) am not a body.
But we could perfectly well substitute ‘mind’ for ‘body’ in this argument,
and it would then prove I am not a mind. The argument is formally valid,
so the point of departure, the major premise, must be wrong.
(Tt) In fact the major premise, ‘No thing that is such that we can doubt
whether it exists or not, actually exists’, is far too doubtful to serve as a
foundation.
Descartes: Notes on §§6–9
[509–26] Much of what Bourdin says is frivolous,* especially what he
says about dreams.
509

(Kk) I expressly pointed out that when I was speaking of abandoned beliefs, I was not dealing with what existed, but only with
appearances, so that, in asking what I had once thought I was, I was
only asking what at the current time it seemed to me that I had once
thought. And when I said that I was thinking, I did not consider
whether I was thinking while awake or in my dreams.
(Ll) The assumptions he thinks I should have stated are ridiculous: he
must still be joking. It made perfect sense to examine former beliefs about
my nature, even if they were incorrect, to see if they could throw any light
on my nature now.

Seventh Objections

225

(Mm) Again, with his anecdote, Bourdin is acting the fool. My denial
that the thinking substance is a body was not based on the supposition that
my former ideas about bodies were correct, but on the incompatibility of
extended substance and thought.
(Nn) As regards dreaming, I refer the reader back to my answer to
point F: what is clearly and distinctly perceived is true, whatever the state
of the perceiver.
(Oo) The rest of Bourdin’s argument is directed against an imaginary
opponent, a ﬁgment of his own brain.* He fails to understand the method
of withdrawing assent from even true beliefs (the analogy of the apples is
used again) and has become obsessed with the idea that everything is
supposed to be rejected.*
(Pp) Bourdin fails to see (a) that:

There is no reason why someone should not learn from the things he
once knew, because, even if he had rejected them while they were
doubtful, he could go back to them, once they had turned out to be
true; and besides, even if it were conceded that nothing can be
learned from things known in the past, at least there is another way
lying wide open, via what is not yet known, but will be known by
study and attention. But our author here conjures up an imaginary
opponent, who not only concedes that the ﬁrst way is blocked, but
even closes oﬀ the second way himself by the few words: I do not
know that these things exist. As if no knowledge of the existence of
things could ever be acquired, and as if not knowing whether something exists prevented our having any knowledge of its essence.

514

(b) That his own distinction between determinate and indeterminate
knowledge backﬁres on him.

By meditation and attention we can bring it about that what at the
moment we know only indeterminately and confusedly, we presently
perceive clearly and determinately.
(Qq) (Descartes does not think this point worthy of a serious reply: again
Bourdin is refuting imaginary positions.)
(Rr) He has overlooked the process by which I formed the clear and
distinct perception of myself, listing the various properties of the thinking
thing as well as other properties that do not belong to it, so as to distinguish the two. I say that the thinking thing is not a body, but not that it is
not spiritual. He does not understand ‘clear’ and ‘distinct’. Clear conception is not the same thing as certain knowledge: we can have certain knowledge of what we do not clearly understand (revealed religious truths or

515

226

Seventh Objections

points we have clearly understood in the past). Knowledge of one thing
can be distinct even if we have knowledge of many others.
519
520

Besides, his statement that we cannot validly infer from knowledge to
being is downright false. For even if it does not follow, from the fact
that we know the essence of some thing, that the thing exists; and nor
does it follow from the fact that we think we know something that it
exists, if there is a possibility of our being mistaken, the inference from
knowledge to being is perfectly valid, because it simply cannot be the
case that we know something unless it is in fact as we know it: that is,
either existent, if we perceive it to exist, or possessing such and such
a nature, if only its nature is known to us.
He has given no proof that there is any thinking substance that is
divisible.* Such a notion is incomprehensible, and harmful to the
Christian religion, because it blurs the distinction between soul and body.
The terms he says I ignore (determinately, indeterminately; distinctly,
confusedly; explicitly, implicitly) are meaningless here.* It is not necessarily
the case that to prove too much is to prove nothing, because the more we
can prove the better, as long as it is properly proved. He keeps incorrectly
asserting that I have rejected the existence of mind.
By putting my argument in syllogistic form, he is trying to contrast
the syllogism, as a reliable method of reasoning, with mine. But I do use
syllogism when it is appropriate.*
(Ss) Bourdin’s syllogistic formulation of his argument is based on an
absurd major premise, itself based on a total misunderstanding of the
method of doubt set out in the First Meditation. I there explained I was
deliberately imagining my prior opinions, however probable, to be false: it
is not that I actually believed them to be false and asserted their contraries
to be true. What is intended as an antidote to prejudice is treated by
Bourdin as if it were meant as a metaphysical foundation, and at times
what he says shows he realizes this.
The minor premise (every body/mind is such that we can doubt
whether it exists) is also not a representation of my views. It is presented
as timeless.* In fact, I discovered at the start of the Second Meditation,
that a thinking thing (a ‘mind’) exists, and, in the Sixth, that bodies
exist too.
(Tt) Descartes objects to Bourdin’s misrepresentations of his position
and his tactic of trying to bully his readers into agreement by mere repetition; he objects to his arrogant schoolmasterly tone, but decides that
perhaps Bourdin is not altogether in his right mind.

Seventh Objections

227

Bourdin: Reply to Question 2
[527–35] 1. The starting point of the method is ﬂawed. It lacks clear and
evident principles to start from. It rejects old principles, but can only substitute their contraries, replacing the certain by the doubtful.
2. The means are defective. All traditional forms of argument, such as
the syllogism, are rejected, no new forms put in their place.
3. The end-result is defective. The method has blocked all the avenues
to truth: i. you are dreaming so your thoughts are worthless; ii. you should
have begun by looking for propositions immune to doubt instead of doubting everything; iii. you treat the contrary of every proposition open to the
slightest doubt as a fundamental principle: but you can build nothing on
such principles.

4. The method sins by excess. That is, it labours to achieve more than the
laws of prudence require of it, more than any mortal could demand of it.
Some indeed request the existence of God and the immortality of the
human mind to be demonstrated to them; but assuredly no one has been
found up to now who has not been satisﬁed by knowing that God exists,
and that the world is governed by him, and that human souls are spiritual
and immortal with the same certainty as he knows 2 + 3 = 5 or that
‘I have a head’, ‘I have a body’, so that to seek for some greater degree of
certainty is a waste of eﬀort. Besides just as in the practical sphere and the
conduct of life, there are deﬁnite limits to our certainty, which are however quite suﬃcient for everyone to govern himself prudently and safely,
so in the realms of meditation and speculation there are also deﬁnite
limits. He who has reached these is certain, and certain to such an extent
that he is entitled, putting no hope in or condemning any attempt to go
beyond them, to remain prudently and in tranquillity within the limits of
the precepts ‘thus far, and no further’, ‘nothing in excess’. [. . .]
5. It sins by defect. That is, pruning more ruthlessly than necessary,* it
still gathers no fruit. I call on you yourself as sole witness to and judge of
this. What have you achieved by all this splendid display? What have you
gained by this solemn renunciation of your former views, so wide-ranging
and high-minded that you do not spare even yourself, but leave intact
only this hackneyed refrain: I think, I am, I am a thinking thing? This,
I say, which is so familiar even to the common herd that no one, since the
creation of the world, has ever been found who doubted it even frivolously,
let alone seriously took it upon himself to prove to himself that he was,
that he existed, that he was a thinking thing.

530

531

228

Seventh Objections

6. It has the universal faults: it blames everyone else for over-conﬁdent
assertions and then makes similar assertions itself.
7. It has faults peculiar to itself, asserting positions (‘I do not have a
head’, ‘bodies do not exist’, ‘minds do not exist’) that no one else would
accept.
8. It sins by imprudence. Not realizing that the propositions (‘there are
no bodies’) with which it replaces those it doubts are themselves doubtful,
it imprudently relies on them.
9. It sins prudently, that is, knowingly, by depriving itself of everything
necessary in the search for truth.
10. It sins by commission, going back to the old positions it had supposedly rejected.
11. It sins by omission, failing to provide proof for its key assumptions
(e.g. the unreliability of the senses).
12. It has nothing new, or nothing good, and much that is superﬂuous.
(Bourdin aims to show that anything Descartes says that is true is not new,
and what he says that is new is false.)

534

If he is saying that he thinks, that is, that he understands, wills, imagines,
perceives by the senses; and thinks in such a way that he intuits and considers this thinking by means of a reﬂexive act; so that he thinks, or knows
and considers himself to be thinking (and this is what it really means to
be conscious, and to have a consciousness of some act); and that this is
truly the characteristic property of a faculty or thing that exists in a realm
that is above matter, and that is purely spiritual; and that for this reason
he is a mind or spirit; he will be saying what he has not yet said, and what
he should have said, and what I was waiting for him to say, and what I
have again and again wanted to suggest when I saw him labouring in vain
to give birth: he will be indeed be saying something good, but nothing new,
since we once learned this from our own teachers, and they from theirs,
and so on, I should think, until we get back to Adam.
But the rest of the work contains so much that is showy and superﬂuous,
especially the renunciation of old opinions.
To say that only human beings have thought, imagination, and sensation is new, but entirely false, and you give no proof of it.
No doubt, you will work further on your method and remove all its current ﬂaws.

Bourdin: Question 3: Can a new method be developed?
[535] (Only the title exists, and Bourdin either did not write any further
or did not send his material to Descartes.)

Seventh Objections

229

Descartes: Notes [on Answer to Question 2]
[536–7] It would be enough to quote this judgement of my method to
show its absurdity, except that the author’s position in the world lends it
authority, so I would ask readers to bear in mind that he has produced not
the slightest argument against me, but merely distorted my positions.

I have proclaimed everywhere in my writings that I have followed
the example of architects in this respect: that, in order to construct
solid buildings, in places where the rock, or clay, or any other ﬁrm
kind of soil is covered over with a surface of sand, they ﬁrst of all dig
trenches, and clear away all the sand and whatever else is resting on
or mixed up with the sand, so as then to lay the foundations on solid
earth. In the same way, I ﬁrst cleared away everything doubtful, like
the sand; and then realizing that I could not doubt that at least the
doubting or thinking substance existed, I used this as the rock on
which I set the foundations of my philosophy.

536
537

(Descartes then [537–56] goes through Bourdin’s twelve-point Answer to
Question 2, which had listed all the defects of the method, and translates
them into criticisms levelled by the builder at the architect.)

Descartes: On the Answer to Question 2, §4
[In response to the claim that speculation should be content to
remain within limits beyond which it cannot go:] It is entirely false,
when it comes to establishing a foundation for philosophy, that there
are such limits to doubt, falling short of supreme certainty, within
which we can remain prudently and in tranquillity. For since the
truth consists in an indivisible point, it can happen that what we do
not recognize to be supremely certain, however probable it appears,
is utterly false. And surely he would not be a prudent philosopher
who laid foundations for the whole of this science of his that he knew
might perhaps be false. And indeed what answer could he make to
the sceptics who push doubt beyond all limits? By what reason can
he refute them? He will write them oﬀ as hopeless cases, or deserving of condemnation. All very well and good, to be sure: but in the
meantime will they not write him oﬀ as well?* And we should not
think that their sect died out a long time ago. It is thriving today as
well as it ever did, and virtually everyone who thinks themselves
more intelligent than ordinary people, ﬁnding nothing in the established philosophy to satisfy them, and seeing no other that is truer,

548

549

230

Seventh Objections

is ﬂeeing to scepticism. And these are above all the ones who demand
demonstrations of God’s existence and of the immortality of the
human mind. So much so that in what he says here our author is setting a very bad example, especially since he is a reputed scholar: for
it shows that he does not think the errors of sceptical atheists can be
refuted, and he is thus doing all he can to shore up and reinforce their
position. In fact all the sceptics of today do not doubt in practice that
they have a head, that 2 + 3 = 5, and so forth. But they say that they
are only treating these things as if they were true, because that is how
they appear, but that they do not believe in them for certain, because
there are no certain reasons impelling them to do so. And because the
existence of God and the immortality of the human mind do not
appear to them to be true in the same way, they think that therefore
they should not even be treated in practice as if true, unless ﬁrst
proved by reasons more certain than any of those we have for accepting all appearances.* Now since these points have been so proved by
me, and, to the best of my knowledge, by no one before me, it seems
to me impossible to imagine a greater and more unworthy calumny
than this of our author’s, when, throughout his whole dissertation, he
hammers away constantly at the point—entirely his own invention—
that I have fallen into the error that is the sole point of departure of
the sceptical sect, namely excessive doubt.

559

Descartes: On the Answer to Question 2, §12, subsection 5*
Again, when he says that, in order for a substance to be purely spiritual
and to exist in a realm above matter (so as to deserve, he thinks, to be
called a mind) it is not suﬃcient for it to be a thinking substance, but
that, over and above this, it has to be thinking, by a reﬂexive act, that
it is thinking, or to have a consciousness of its thought, he is under
the same illusion as the builder, when he says that a skilled architect
has to consider, by a reﬂexive act, that he possesses this skill, before
he can be an architect. For even if no one is an architect who has not
often considered, or at least, may have considered, that he possesses
skill in building, it manifest that this consideration is not essential in
order to be an architect. No more is a similar consideration or reﬂection
required in order for a thinking substance to be raised above the level
of matter. In fact the ﬁrst thought, by which we become aware of
something, diﬀers no more from the second thought by which we
become aware that we have become aware of it, than this second

Seventh Objections

231

thought from the third thought by which we become aware that we
have become aware that we have become aware of it. And if the ﬁrst
kind of thinking is attributed to a corporeal thing, there is not the
slightest reason for not attributing the second as well. For this reason
we must note that our author’s error is far more dangerous than the
builder’s: for by suppressing the true and most readily intelligible
distinction between corporeal and incorporeal things, namely that
the latter think and the former do not, and substituting another distinction, which can in no way appear essential, namely that the latter
consider they are thinking, and the former do not consider it, he does
all he can to block the understanding of the real distinction between
the human mind and the body.*

560

EXPLANATORY NOTES
LETTER TO THE SORBONNE
3 how have they been so slow to ﬁnd its Master?: Wisdom 13: 8–9. The Book
of Wisdom is accepted by Roman Catholics as canonical, though not by
Protestants (who class it in the Apocrypha) or Jews. The translation
quoted is that of the New Jerusalem Bible.
plain in them: the New Jerusalem translation has ‘plain to them’, but the
Vulgate, which Descartes quotes, has in illis (‘in them’). Descartes seems
to be hinting that St Paul is authorizing his method of seeking to prove
God’s existence from our own minds rather than the external world.
4 Council of the Lateran: the Fifth Lateran Council of the Church sat from
1512 to 1517.
demonstrations: rigorous proofs yielding certain knowledge.
so clear and precise an order: the translation here follows the French text F,
with its emphasis on the order of the exposition (the rhetorical art of ‘disposition’ or arrangement): the Latin text L is less explicit (‘expound them
so carefully and clearly’).
5 argue on both sides of any question: Descartes is pointing to the scholastic
habit of investigating philosophical questions by disputations, in which
contrary views are asserted; a habit persisting in humanist rhetoric, which
urged the necessity of being able to argue on either side of a question.
PREFACE TO THE READER
7 so kind as to point it out to me: see Discourse, 61, AT 6. 75.
8 two quite long writings: see AT 3. 296, 300.
SYNOPSIS
11 the idea we possess of God can have only God as its cause: see First Replies,
p. 79.
12 I am not at all dealing with sin: in fact the reference to sin remains in the
text of the Fourth Meditation (p. 42). Descartes is responding to an
objection by the theologian Antoine Arnauld. See Fourth Objections
and Replies, pp. 138, 159–60, and the letter to Mersenne of 18 March
1641, AT 3. 334–5.
FIRST MEDITATION
13 from childhood onwards: the importance of childhood in the formation of
false beliefs (‘prejudices’) is stressed in the Principles of Philosophy (I. 47, 71).

Explanatory Notes

233

14 black bile: Descartes, perhaps ironically, cites the conventional explanation of melancholy madness, based on the theory of the four humours of
the body (blood, black bile, choler (yellow bile), phlegm).
Let us then suppose: Descartes shifts pronouns here from ﬁrst-person singular to plural, as if to draw the reader into his mental experiment.
15 to exist just as they do now: the question whether God could annihilate the
physical world, and yet leave us ‘perceiving’ it as we do now, had been
raised by the Franciscan philosopher-theologian William of Ockham
(c.1285–1347). It later becomes a key element in Malebranche’s formulation of his theory of perception.
16 that is certain: F’s addition, ‘in the sciences’, may be prompted by the
concern to avoid the suspicion that Descartes’s doubt extends to the
doctrines of Christianity.
not with action but only with the attainment of knowledge: Descartes always
strictly distinguishes between the necessities of practical life, where we
may have to commit ourselves resolutely to a doubtful course of action,
and the pursuit of knowledge, where we must reject all that is doubtful.
See Discourse, 22–3, AT 6. 24–5; Second Replies, §5, pp. 96–7; Fifth
Replies, II. 1, p. 185.
has devoted all his eﬀorts to deceiving me: Jorge Secada suggests that the
conception of the deceiving spirit comes from the scholastic metaphysician Francisco Suárez (Cartesian Metaphysics (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000), 44). Steven Nadler connects it suggestively with
the theme of magical deception in Cervantes’s Don Quixote (‘Descartes’s
Demon and the Madness of Don Quixote’, JHI, 58/1 (Jan. 1997), 41–55).
17 as falsely believing that I have all these: strikingly, Descartes omits arithmetical truths from this description of the deceiver’s possible activity.
The same applies to the summary of his doubts at the beginning of the
Second Meditation.
to discover any truth: F here adds, ‘it is at least in my power to suspend my
judgement’: an allusion to the principle of the Pyrrhonist sceptics that
since, on any question, the balance of argument or evidence will be equal,
we should opt for neither alternative.
SECOND MEDITATION
17 Archimedes: Greek mathematician and inventor, c.287–212 bc.
18 I can ﬁnally decide: the use of ‘decide’ here (L statuendum) hints at the
doctrine of the Fourth Meditation that judgement is an act of the will, as
well as the intellect.
what in fact this ‘I’ is that now necessarily exists: F and L diﬀer here, in that
L turns the pronoun ego (‘I’) into a noun, qualiﬁed by the demonstrative
adjective ille (this). F simply treats ‘I’ as a pronoun. Further on ‘this me
that I know’ (eo me quem novi) is rendered by F simply as ‘me, whom

234

18
19

20

21
22
23

Explanatory Notes
I know’. ‘Necessarily’ here means ‘certainly’: the implication is not that
the Meditator’s existence is intrinsically necessary (as God’s will turn out
to be). Descartes’s use of pronouns as nouns is carefully analysed by
Terence Cave, Pré-Histoires: Textes troublés au seuil de la modernité
(Geneva: Droz, 1999), 11–19, 111–27.
rational animal: a standard deﬁnition of ‘human being’, derived ultimately
from Aristotle. Unlike Aristotle, Descartes does not hold that deﬁnition
in itself contributes to knowledge.
these actions indeed I attributed to the soul: the Meditator’s apparently spontaneous preconceptions are in fact those of Aristotelian psychology, in
which the soul is what makes something a living thing. On this basis, all
distinctive functions of living things, such as nutrition and motion, must
be ascribed to the soul.
nonetheless I am still something: F, ‘I ﬁnd that I am still certain that I am
something’.
not distinct from this ‘me’ that I know: the Meditator is not talking about
what exists as such, but about what he knows to exist. He does not yet
think he has proved the real distinction between mind and body. What he
means is that, as far as he knows at the moment, he is a pure mind.
let us, once again, slacken its reins . . . back to obedience: the Meditator, that
is, is voluntarily relapsing into his familiar belief in the reality of bodies in
order to analyse our experience of sense-perception.
modes: attributes, qualities, or modiﬁcations of a substance: see Principles,
I. 56 for more exact distinctions between these terms.
which could be covering automata: F is more elaborate, ‘which could be covering spectres, or artiﬁcial human beings moved by springs’.
‘common sense’: in scholastic terminology, the ‘common sense’ is the faculty
that correlates the perceptions of the ﬁve external senses; the imagination
is the storehouse that preserves the ‘forms’ perceived by the external
senses and the common sense (see e.g. Aquinas, Summa theologiae, Ia,
q. 78, a. 4). Descartes runs the two together.
the lowest animals: strictly speaking, the Meditator does not know at this
stage that animals exist: this is a concession to common-sense views, the
more legitimate in that he will conclude that they do exist, along with the
rest of the physical world. But the passage suggests that animals do have
some kind of sensation.
THIRD MEDITATION

26 I seem unable ever to be certain of any other at all: there is debate among
specialists as to whether Descartes implies here that the propositions just
mentioned, including the Cogito itself, are not certain, until we have
proof of a veracious God. See e.g. Edwin Curley, ‘The Cogito’, BGDM,
40–1; Secada, Cartesian Metaphysics, 43–4. Others take a diﬀerent view.

Explanatory Notes

27

28

29
30

235

Anthony Kenny, Descartes, 182–6, gives a very nuanced analysis, as does
Van Cleve, ‘Foundationalism and the Cartesian Circle’, 111–14.
images of things: L, ‘imagines rerum’; F, ‘images des choses’. But
Descartes does not think that all ideas are mental pictures (as if the idea
of God were a picture of a giant old man with a white beard and a deep
voice). He makes this very clear in his reply to Hobbes apropos of this
passage (Third Objections, §5, pp. 113–14). The point is that these ideas
are representative of something.
the subject of this thought: the thing thought about, not the thinker.
adventitious: glossed by F as ‘originating outside me’.
hearing a noise, seeing the sun, feeling the heat of a ﬁre: this passage shows
clearly that for Descartes the term ‘idea’ has a far broader meaning than
‘concept’. ‘To have an idea of heat’ can mean, simply, to feel heat.
some natural light: the metaphor of light for knowledge goes back to Plato,
and was much used by Augustine. Descartes introduces the notion of the
natural light, a fundamental intuition of truth, of which he makes much
use in this Meditation, rather abruptly, without explaining how far we are
supposed to be able to trust it. See the article ‘Intuition’, in John
Cottingham, A Descartes Dictionary (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993), 94–6.
when it was a matter of choosing the good: F adds, ‘when it was a matter of
choosing between virtues and vices, and that they have inclined me to evil
as often as to good’. The assimilation of belief to ethical choice makes
sense in the light of the Fourth Meditation’s identiﬁcation of judgement
as an act of the will rather than the reason.
without any assistance from external things: the resistance of sensations to
my will was proﬀered as an indication that things actually exist outside
me. But, Descartes points out, I have inclinations that equally resist my
will (F, ‘ne s’accordent pas . . . avec ma volonté’), yet are inside me. The
source of sensations too, therefore, might be internal.
the one that seems to have ﬂowed directly from the sun itself: in the prevalent
Aristotelian theories of perception, our ideas of sensible objects come
from the object’s transmitting ‘species’, likenesses of itself, to the perceiver.
In this case the supposed ‘likeness’ is, in fact, nothing like the sun.
Descartes, it has been argued, presents a distorted picture of the ‘species’
theory. See Gary Hatﬁeld, ‘The Cognitive Faculties’, in CHSCP ii. 956–9.
eminently: see Deﬁnition IV, p. 103. God does not contain matter formally
(actually), since he is immaterial. But he is said to contain it eminently, in
that he can produce it.
it requires no other formal reality outside itself: the ‘formal’ reality of the idea
(its existence as a modiﬁcation of my thinking) derives from my thinking
it (from my formal reality as a thinking substance). In this sense I am a
suﬃcient explanation of the existence of my ideas. But this is not enough
to explain the ‘objective’ reality of the idea: the fact that it is an idea of this
object rather than that.

236

Explanatory Notes

30 no diﬃculty here: the Meditator’s actual existence is a suﬃcient explanation for his idea of himself (which contains exactly as much objective
reality as he possesses of formal reality).
32 why they might not derive from myself: in the Sixth Meditation, the
Meditator decides that he could not in fact have himself produced his
ideas of sensible things, for reasons already available to him (sensations
are not under the control of our will, and there is no intellectual dimension to their production, as distinct from their reception). But at this
stage, lacking the knowledge of a truthful God, and unsure of the value of
clear and distinct ideas as a criterion of truth, he cannot put these arguments forward with assurance.
that they can be derived from me alone: F is a little more precise, ‘that the
idea I have of them can be derived from me alone’.
33 I could recognize my own shortcomings: in other words, the discovery of
God’s existence is a kind of unfolding of the primary insight of the
Cogito.
I can neither comprehend, nor even perhaps apprehend: Descartes develops a
tactile metaphor, contrasting comprehendere (lit. to grasp, here ‘comprehend’) with attingere (lit. to touch, here ‘apprehend’). To comprehend
something would be to have a complete idea of it; to apprehend it to have
a partial yet true idea of it. The same doublet recurs below towards the
end of the Meditation.
been brought into actuality: for Aristotle actuality involves the fulﬁlling of
a potentiality. If someone is actually being a builder, this is because he has
a potentiality or capacity to build: Metaphysics, IX. iii. 1–4 (1046 6 –1047a),
IX. vi. 2–4 (1048 a–1048b). Descartes wants to forestall an objection
based on this distinction, viz. that my idea of the divine perfections might
be explained, without recourse to God, by supposing that I myself possess these perfections in potentiality.
34 whether I, who have this idea, could exist if no such being existed: the second
variety of the causal argument is thus not a totally independent argument,
but is designed to help the Meditator withstand the pressure of customary sense-dominated modes of thinking.
35 the distinction between conservation and creation exists purely in our thought:
more literally: ‘conservation diﬀers from creation purely in the reason’
(L), ‘from the point of view of our way of thinking’ (F). On the diﬀerent
kinds of distinction—real, modal, and (as here) ‘of reason’, see Principles,
I. 60–2.
this ‘I’: L, ‘ego ille’; F has simply ‘moi’ (myself ).
36 inﬁnite regress: a series of causes stretching back to inﬁnity.
37 created in his image and likeness: Descartes is alluding to Gen. 1: 27, where
God is said to have made man in his own image and likeness. This image
is not, as it were, a label attached to and hence distinct from the object: it
is the nature of man himself, as an entity created with the idea of God.

Explanatory Notes

237

FOURTH MEDITATION
39 not a pure negation but a privation: ‘negation’ usually denotes a form of
proposition not a quality of an object. Descartes uses it here to denote a
pure absence, as distinct from ‘privation’, which here has the sense of the
absence of some property in an entity capable of possessing it. Thus the
inability to ﬂy would be, in a human being, a pure negation; but an inability to think would be a privation. Descartes uses the distinction later to
explain how, from another point of view, error is a negation rather than a
privation. Privation has a more general explanatory function in
Aristotelian physics: see W. D. Ross, Aristotle, 3rd rev. edn (London:
Methuen, 1937), 63–6, and, on the early modern period, Roger Ariew
and Alan Gabbey, ‘The Scholastic Background’, in CHSCP i. 429–32.
40 by considering the purposes of things: the ﬁnal cause of a thing in Aristotelian
philosophy is the purpose or good to which it conduces (Metaphysics, I.
iii. 1 (983a)): so one could ask, for instance, why ﬁsh have scales, what purpose they serve or what good they are to them. Descartes’s mechanistic
philosophy of nature has no room for ﬁnal causes: but he does not deny that
they are relevant in ethics (see below, p.193, also Principles, III. 2–3; to
Hyperaspistes, §10, AT 3. 431). Moreover, the relation between the human
body and mind admits of analysis in terms of ﬁnal causes: the purpose of our
senses is to preserve the union of soul and body (Sixth Meditation, p. 62).
41 we are not being determined in that direction by any external force: cf. F: ‘in
order to aﬃrm or deny, pursue or avoid the things the intellect proposes
to us we are acting in such a way that we do not feel that any external force
is compelling us to do so.’ F does not quite convey the idea that volition
intrinsically involves movement (cf. L ‘feramur’, lit. we are carried)
towards or away from an object.
to be moved in either direction: cf. F, ‘in order for me to be free it is not
necessary that I should be indiﬀerent as regards the choice between two
contraries’. F uses the technical term ‘indiﬀerent’ which occurs later in L,
and which Descartes understands as the absence of an inner impulsion in
one direction or other. F’s use of ‘contraries’, though, is questionable.
Scholastic terminology distinguished ‘liberty of contradiction’ or of
‘exercise’ (I am free to perform a given action, or not to perform it) from
‘liberty of contrariety’ or of ‘speciﬁcation’ (I am free to choose either of
two contraries, say, good and bad). L makes clear that Descartes understands freedom ﬁrst and foremost in terms of contradiction (to do or not
to do), though his reference to ‘being moved in either direction’ might
suggest a choice between contrary alternatives. F makes the reference to
contraries explicit. There were theological dimensions in the distinction
that Descartes probably did not want opened up. See Robert Sleigh, Jr.,
Vere Chappell, and Michael Della Rocca, ‘Determinism and Human
Freedom’, in CHSCP ii. 1195–1216.
because God so disposes my innermost thoughts: a reference to the action of
divine grace, mentioned in the next sentence.

238

Explanatory Notes

41 a shortfall in my knowledge, or a certain negation: ‘shortfall’ (L defectum),
I take to be synonymous with ‘privation’, so that the distinction between
‘privation’ and ‘negation’ comes into play again. That is, it would be a
shortfall or privation in my knowledge, when I am capable of knowing the
truth, but fail to grasp it on account of e.g. intellectual laziness; a negation
when the knowledge is beyond human reach and consequently there are
no reasons on one side or the other.
42 even to matters I do not understand: the will is indiﬀerent in matters we do
not properly understand because no strong perception of truth exists to
attract it to one view or the other.
how I come to sin: the theologian Antoine Arnauld objected to the reference to sin here: see Fourth Objections and Replies, pp. 138, 159–60.
the thinking nature that is within me, or rather that I myself am: cf. F, ‘this
nature that thinks that is in me, or rather in virtue of which I am what
I am’. This passage conﬁrms that Descartes does not yet claim to know if
the mind is distinct from the body.
43 the operation in so far as that depends on him: an erroneous act of judgement, like a correct act of judgement, depends on God to the extent that
he preserves the judger in his or her existence and faculties (this is the
‘cooperation’ referred to below). But God is not responsible for the error
as such.
44 it should be classed, purely and simply, as a negation: here the privation/
negation distinction seems to function as follows. Privation, in the Aristotelian
sense, to which Descartes speciﬁcally adverts here, is not a complete
nothing: it is the absence of a speciﬁc form (the presence of the form of
steam implies the privation of the form of water). It might then be held to
require a positive cause (in this example, heat). If error is a privation,
then, it might be supposed that God is somehow responsible for making
it come to pass. That is why, from this point of view, Descartes regards it
not as, strictly speaking, a privation, but a negation, a pure absence.
FIFTH MEDITATION
46 clearly: F adds ‘and distinctly’.
47 the idea of a valley: we could of course imagine a mountain rising sheerly
from a plain. Lawrence Nolan and Alan Nelson suggest it makes more
sense to understand Descartes as saying that we cannot separate the idea
of an upslope from that of a downslope (‘Proofs for the Existence of God’,
BGDM 104–21 (p. 120)); and this is in fact how Descartes glosses it (to
Gibieuf, 19 Jan. 1642, AT 3. 476–7).
48 the original supposition was not itself necessary: the objection is that,
although existence follows from the nature of God, conceived as a
supremely perfect being, the original conception is not necessary, and
might in fact be intrinsically ﬂawed (like the idea that all quadrilaterals

Explanatory Notes

239

can be inscribed in a circle). The Meditator replies that the concept of
God, being clear and distinct, cannot be taken for an arbitrary or ﬂawed
supposition.
51 the whole of this bodily nature which is the object of pure mathematics: cf. F,
‘bodily nature, in so far as it can be the object of geometrical demonstrations, in which the existence of things is not taken into account’. So far
the Meditator has no reason for believing that bodies exist: but, like the
geometer, he can bracket this out, and consider simply the properties they
would have, supposing they did exist.
SIXTH MEDITATION
52 myriogon: a ﬁgure of ten thousand sides.
from me: cf. F, ‘from my mind’.
it understands itself: cf. F, ‘it has produced by itself ’. Imagination may be
directed at objects initially either conceived by the intellect or perceived
by the senses.
pure mathematics: cf. F, ‘geometry’.
53 emphatic: L, ‘expressae’; F, ‘expresses’. Descartes wants a word that will
do justice to the vividness and intensity, and in their own way clarity and
distinctness of sensations (after all, the sensations of heat or bitterness are
very diﬀerent from those of cold or sweetness), without leaving room for
confusion between this and the clarity and distinctness of intellectual
perceptions.
formed: L, ‘eﬃngebam’; F, ‘feindre’: these terms are usually associated by
Descartes with the work of the imagination.
from myself: cf. F, ‘from my mind’.
54 that I had not previously had in the senses: on this allusion to a standard doctrine of scholasticism see Introduction, pp. xx–xxi.
appeared from close up as square: the example of the square tower that looks
round from a distance is found in Lucretius, De rerum natura, IV. 501–2:
the passage is quoted in Montaigne, ‘Apologie de Raimond Sebond’,
Essais, II. 12, VS 591.
55 or at least was pretending to be so: Descartes, responding to a suggestion by
Arnauld (p. 138), is making clear that the method of doubt does not imply
abandoning one’s religious faith in God, but simply discounting it for the
purpose of philosophical investigation.
it is certain that I am really distinct from my body: cf. F, ‘it is certain that
this self [ce moi], that is to say my soul, by which I am what I am, is entirely
and truly distinct from my body’. The words in italics occur also in
A Discourse on the Method (IV. 29, AT 6. 33). Descartes does not claim
here to prove the immortality of the soul, since God could always annihilate it if he so chose, simply that there is no reason to believe that the soul
perishes just because the body has to.

240

Explanatory Notes

56 for they contain a certain degree of intellection in their formal concept: cf. F,
‘For in the notion we have of these faculties, or (to use the scholastic
term) in their formal concept, they include some kind of understanding’.
The intellectual element in sense-perception and imagination was established in the Second Meditation.
as modes are from a thing: cf. F, ‘I conceive that they are distinct from me
as shapes, movements and the other modes or accidents of bodies are distinct from the bodies themselves that underlie them’.
cannot . . . exist in myself: F adds, ‘in so far as I am purely a thing that
thinks’.
often even against my will: although there is an intellectual element in the
experience of sensation, inasmuch as I can become conscious of the sensation as such rather than its (apparent) object, the production of sensations is not an act of intellection. Since sensation is not under the control
of the will, then it cannot be understood in terms of the mind’s key operations of understanding and willing. It therefore presupposes a body.
as I have already pointed out above: in the Third Meditation, pp. 29–34.
57 pure mathematics: cf. F, ‘speculative geometry’.
as a pilot is present in a ship: Descartes is aware that his conception of the
soul, in which it is not, as in Aristotle, the form of the body, but an independent substance, will be read and criticized as a mere restatement of
Platonism. Summarizing the Platonic view, Aquinas uses Aristotle’s analogy
(De anima, II. i. 8–9 (413a)) of the pilot in the ship, who occupies it, but
is not part of it. Descartes mentions the analogy, as he does in the
Discourse (V. 48, AT 6. 59), to distance himself from the Platonic conception, and to show that he himself is not vulnerable to the Aristotelian
critique. See Discourse, 78 (p. 48 n.) and Discours de la méthode, ed. Étienne
Gilson, 6th edn. (Paris: Vrin, 1987 [1925]), 430–1.
58 a vacuum: Descartes, here in agreement with Aristotle, held that completely empty space was impossible (see Principles, II. 16–18). The experiments of Torricelli (1644) and then Pascal (1646–7) cast doubt on this
view. See Daniel C. Fouke, ‘Pascal’s Physics’, in Nicholas Hammond
(ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Pascal (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003), 75–101.
and so on and so forth: the qualities we perceive in sensation are, for
Descartes, simply eﬀects of movements in bodies (Principles, IV. 198):
e.g. ‘heat’ is an aspect of our perception, not, as in Aristotle’s physics, a
fundamental active quality inhering in matter.
it has a tendency to fall downwards: F refers instead to ‘the quality it has of
being heavy’.
59 the star is no bigger than the torch: cf. F, ‘there is no real or natural faculty
in me inclining me to believe that the star is no bigger than the blaze of
the torch’.

Explanatory Notes

60

61

62

64

241

for signifying to the mind: the conception of sense-perceptions as signs is
put forward in Le Monde, ch. I, using the analogy of language (AT 11.
4–5).
corrupted: the implied target here is Aristotle, who speaks of disease as a
privation or degeneration (for which ‘corruption’ is an equivalent term),
contrary to the body’s nature (Metaphysics, VIII. v. 2 (1044b)).
denomination: shorthand for ‘extrinsic denomination’, a technical term
used below. It here means a term, in this case, ‘nature’, the application of
which has no foundation in the thing to which it is applied, but purely in
the way we consider it. That is, when we say that the feeling of thirst in a
suﬀerer from dropsy is natural, in the sense that it results from physiological mechanisms, our use of ‘natural’ is grounded in the nature of the
body as a machine. But if we call it unnatural, because thirst ‘naturally’
indicates the body’s need to drink, we are imposing a normative concept
of nature from outside the body itself, and this will be an extrinsic denomination. See also First Objections, p. 74 and note.
a genuine error of nature: the teleological perspective, considering not how
a given eﬀect is produced but what purpose it serves, and which, contrary
to Aristotle, is irrelevant to the purely physical realm, is relevant on the
level of soul–body union.
in which the ‘common sense’ is said to reside: on the ‘common sense’ see
above, note to p. 23. The particular part of the brain in question is
identiﬁed as the pineal gland in The Passions of the Soul, §§31–2.
observations: see note to p. 170.
physics: the study of processes inside the body belongs to physics in the
traditional sense of the philosophy of nature.
it could have represented something else altogether: Descartes’s point is that
we do not directly experience the physiological process involved in
sensation (the transmission of a movement along the nerves to the brain)
that we know scientiﬁcally takes place, although God could have created
us in a such a way that we did experience it. Instead, we experience, in this
case, a pain that appears to be located directly in and conﬁned to the foot.
But although this experience obscures the intrinsic mechanism of sensation, it is particularly suited to serve the function of sensation: to prompt
us to take, as soon as possible, whatever actions are necessary to preserve
the body.
we must acknowledge the frailties of our nature: Descartes’s conclusion
reaﬃrms the distinction between practical life and speculation, and the ﬁnal
reference to the frailties of our nature strikes a reassuring religious note.
FIRST OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES

74 Euripus: the strait between Boeotia and Euboea in Greece, famous in the
ancient world for its turbulence. The allusion is fairly conventional, but
shows the inﬂuence of humanism in Caterus’ scholastic milieu.

242

Explanatory Notes

74 the thing itself that is thought, insofar as it exists objectively in the intellect: in
the scholastic view upheld by Caterus, there is no need for ideas as mediating entities between real objects and the mind. The thing itself is present in the mind in virtue of its form, divested of its matter. Hence the
question of the reality of our ideas, as distinct from that of the reality of
their objects, does not arise.
determining the act of the intellect in the manner of an object: ‘determine’
(L terminare, F terminer) does not have the sense of ‘causing’ or ‘producing’: what is meant is that the object makes the thought a thought of that
object. Caterus’ point is that this relationship of being thought about is
not something real, needing to be explained by the causal principle—any
more than my being seen by someone is something real, apart from their
act of vision. The relationship in both cases is external to the object,
which is why Caterus calls it an ‘extrinsic denomination’ (see above,
p. 60 and note, and following note below). The only kinds of reality
involved are (1) the actual reality of the thing and (2) the reality of the act
by which the thing is thought or known. We do not need to bring in (3),
the ‘reality’ supposedly contained in the idea of the object.
extrinsic denomination: when I am seen by someone, the predicate ‘being
seen’ is not in me: rather, the predicate ‘seeing’ is in the seer. My being
seen is not something real in me, so to speak of me ‘being seen’ is to apply
a denomination extrinsic to me. See Stephen Menn, ‘The Greatest
Stumbling Block: Descartes’ Denial of Real Qualities’, in Roger Ariew
and Marjorie Grene (eds.), Descartes and his Contemporaries: Meditations
Objections, and Replies (Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press), 182–207 (pp. 190–1).
no part of the thing: F, ‘and adds nothing real to the thing’.
75 ens rationis: lit. a ‘being of reason’: in Scholastic philosophy, a purely
conceptual or abstract entity, without real existence. Caterus here uses
‘imagined’ (L ‘ﬁctum’, F ‘feint’) and ‘conceived’ as synonymous, whereas
in the Sixth Meditation Descartes carefully distinguishes them.
76 Duns Scotus: John Duns Scotus (c.1266–1308), theologian and philosopher, of the Franciscan Order, known as the ‘Subtle Doctor’; probably
from Scotland, although in Descartes’s time he was commonly thought to
be Irish. He diﬀered from Aquinas in certain important respects, and his
thought exerted considerable inﬂuence in the early seventeenth century.
See Roger Ariew, Descartes and the Last Scholastics (Ithaca and London:
Cornell University Press, 1999), 39–57.
The idea is the thing itself that is thought about, in so far as it exists objectively
in the intellect: not an exact quotation but a paraphrase of what he says in
the Third Meditation, p. 30.
the theologian represents himself as understanding: Descartes courteously
refrains from accusing Caterus of misunderstanding—thereby, perhaps,
maliciously emphasizing the misunderstanding.

Explanatory Notes

243

78 complexity: L, ‘artiﬁcium’; F, ‘artiﬁce’, normally bearing the sense of
workmanship or skill. ‘Complexity’ has been chosen because, like
‘artiﬁcium’ here, it can denote a quality both of the actual machine (e.g.
the multiplicity of components) and of the intellectual operation required
to conceive it. This passage is important as an explanation of the diﬃcult
concept of objective reality. It is important to note the exact scope, and
hence the limitations, of the analogy. Descartes’s point is that the power
of the intellect in general cannot explain the particular content, the particular complexity, of the idea embodied in this machine (the concept,
say, of harnessing steam or electricity as a motive force). The speciﬁc conceptual content of the idea requires an explanation: it cannot come from
nothing. The same applies to the speciﬁc ontological content of the idea
of God. But the analogy cannot be taken too far. As Descartes admits, an
actually (‘formally’) existing cause outside the intellect (a real steam locomotive that the person holding the idea has seen) is only one possible
cause of the idea. The idea might have been invented by the individual
using his or her speciﬁc knowledge or intelligence. In the case of the idea
of God, however, Descartes denies it could have been invented, and only
a formally existing God can provide the explanation of the existence of
the idea of a supremely perfect being.
79 By this answer it seems he meant to show: again, Descartes professes to
believe that Caterus is voicing objections without subscribing to them.
80 there can be nothing in me of which I am in no way aware: this should not be
taken as implying that Descartes believes in the mind’s transparency or that
he leaves no room for any concept of unconscious or subconscious thoughts.
He denies that he can possess any faculty of which he is not aware, and any
thoughts of which he could not become aware. The issue is raised again in
the Fourth Objections. See above, Introduction, pp. xxxviii–xxxix.
we must ﬁrst understand what it is: Descartes’s ‘essentialism’ here
breaks with the dominant scholastic tradition, in which we must enquire
whether something exists before we can ask what it is (Secada, Cartesian
Metaphysics, 1–26).
and therefore that it is God: Descartes is implicitly criticizing St Thomas,
whose investigation of God’s nature follows the proof of his existence.
Descartes’s own proof from the idea of the perfect takes us straight to
God, as the supremely perfect being, the traditional proofs establishing
the existence only of a ﬁrst mover, a ﬁrst cause, a self-existent being,
without immediately showing that this is God.
81 we have to distinguish between possible and necessary existence: Leibniz was
in fact to argue that the failing of this proof, as presented by Descartes, is
that it fails to consider the possibility that the idea of God is contradictory, and not that of a possible being. Once it has been shown that the idea
is not contradictory, then, indeed, the proof is valid. See Discourse on
Metaphysics, §23, A Specimen of Discoveries about Marvellous Secrets of a
General Nature, and Monadology, §45, in Leibniz, Philosophical Writings,

244

Explanatory Notes

ed. G. H. R. Parkinson, trans. Mary Morris and G. H. R. Parkinson,
Everyman University Library (London: Dent, 1973 [1934]), 32–3, 76,
186. This passage is perhaps Descartes’s fullest approach to anticipating
this objection; see also Second Replies, §6 (pp. 97–8).
83 when we consider its immense power: this shows that Descartes’s formulation of the argument from God’s essence depends not so much on the idea
of existence as one perfection among others as on its being a function of
power. In the Fourth Replies he identiﬁes the divine power with the
divine essence (pp. 151–2).
only two ways of proving the existence of God: Descartes tacitly signals his
dissent from Aquinas, who advances ﬁve proofs of God. Descartes discards the ﬁrst, from motion to mover, and the ﬁfth, from the evidence of
purpose in the universe to a supreme guiding intelligence; he can be seen
as fusing together, in his own fashion, the second, from causality to a ﬁrst
cause, the third, from contingent being to necessary being, and the
fourth, from degrees of perfection to the supremely perfect being. He
adds the argument, rejected by Aquinas, from God’s essence to his existence. This passage helps explain why this argument is postponed to the
Fifth Meditation, instead of being included in the Third.
84 modal distinction: in Descartes’s terminology, a modal distinction is one
between a mode and the substance in which it inheres, or between two
modes of one and the same substance (Principles, I. 61). Thus there is a
modal distinction between a just person and his or her justice, or between
God’s justice and his mercy, though neither could justice exist without
the just person, nor could God’s justice exist in separation from his
mercy.
SECOND OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES
85 Flies and plants are produced by the sun, the rain, and the earth, which are
lifeless: the belief that living things could be generated from non-living
matter was still widely accepted in the seventeenth century.
Savages such as the Canadians and the Hurons do not possess it: travellers to
the New World reported that the inhabitants did not possess an idea of
God, contrary to the belief, voiced inﬂuentially in Cicero’s De natura
deorum (Of the Nature of the Gods) that belief in the gods is universal and
indeed natural to mankind (I. xvi. 43, II. xii. 12; though doubt is cast on
this argument in I. xxiii. 62–4, III. iv. 11).
generic unity: the unity of the members of a genus, such as ‘human beings’.
your conclusion was not certain: compare the classic objection that Descartes’s
claim that certainty depends on the knowledge of God involves him in
arguing in a circle. It occurs in the Fourth Objections.
86 there are biblical texts to the contrary: the particular references are to Jonah 3:
4, where God announces through the mouth of the prophet that Nineveh
will be destroyed in forty days, when in fact he spares the town when the

Explanatory Notes

87

89
90

91

245

citizens repent; and to Exodus, where there are frequent references to the
Lord hardening Pharaoh’s heart (e.g. 7: 3, 9: 12, 10: 2, 10: 20, 10: 27) so
that he fails to heed the warning signs and refuses to let the Israelites
depart from Egypt.
they do not have a clear and distinct knowledge of its truth: in other words,
Descartes’s theory is inimical to faith, since it encourages us to disbelieve
the mysteries we do not understand. ‘Turks’ here, as often in early
modern usage, is used as equivalent to ‘Muslims’.
although you claimed you would be proving this: the title of the ﬁrst edition
of the Meditations (selected by Mersenne: Descartes to Mersenne, 11
Nov. 1640, AT 3. 239) does indeed state that they demonstrate the existence of God and the immortality of the soul. The title of the second edition removes the mention of immortality: it is the distinction between
mind and body that is claimed to be demonstrated.
absolutely nothing in it except what he knew: Descartes here as elsewhere is
careful to distinguish accurate knowledge, which he says we can attain,
from absolute knowledge.
Academics: like the Sceptics, the Academics challenged claims to absolute
knowledge, but some of them at least accepted that we can regard some
views as more probable than others—which the radical Pyrrhonist sceptics denied.
requiring a really existent cause: this point is discussed much more fully in
the First Replies.
along with me: F adds: ‘But I cannot drive it into the minds of those who
read my Meditations like a romance (roman), merely to pass the time, and
without paying close attention.’ Whereas roman in modern French is
equivalent to ‘novel’ (and thus normally implies a certain degree of realism), in the seventeenth century it commonly refers to ‘romances’,
ﬁctions remote from the reader’s experience. In fact, Descartes himself
suggests that the reader of the Principles should read it for the ﬁrst time
like a ‘roman’, before rereading it more attentively (Letter from the
Author to the Translator, AT 9B. 11–12). But the Principles are a textbook, not a series of meditations, requiring quite diﬀerent reading habits.
The same applies to the rest of God’s individual attributes: the question
whether, when properties such as goodness or knowledge are predicated
of God and of ﬁnite beings, they are predicated in a diﬀerent sense (equivocally) or in the same sense (univocally) was much discussed by medieval
philosophers and theologians (Aquinas’s solution is that they are predicated analogically: Summa theologiae, Ia, q. 13, a. 5).
nothing more than a ﬁction: in the Third Meditation (p. 37) the idea of God
is stated to be inscribed within me as ‘the mark by which the craftsman
makes himself known in his handiwork’: i.e. in understanding
ourselves to be limited and dependent beings, who can aspire indeﬁnitely
to greater things, we understand the diﬀerence between ourselves and

246

91
92

94

96

98
99

Explanatory Notes
God, who actually enjoys in inﬁnite measure what we can only
indeﬁnitely aspire to. Descartes draws out some of the implications of the
earlier passage here, as regards the question of univocity: we realize that
knowledge or power in us (ﬁnite though indeﬁnitely augmentable) cannot
be the same as God’s inﬁnite knowledge and power.
denying the name and aﬃrming the thing: this seems to be a somewhat
belated answer to the argument from so-called savages’ lack of an idea of
God: they have an idea of him, but a very inadequate one.
the reasons on the basis of which we deduced them: not an exact quotation but
a paraphrase: see Fifth Meditation, p. 50.
scientiﬁc knowledge: L, ‘scientia’: knowledge resulting from convincing
proofs (‘demonstrations’), whereas principles are known directly. Here
Descartes is following Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, II. xix (100b). See the
Note on the Text and Translation.
known directly [per se notam]: see Note on the Text and Translation, s.v.
per se notum.
denying him the grace of conversion: a seventeenth-century theologian
would have seen that Descartes is here restating a traditional Catholic
interpretation, whereas Calvin had argued that God did positively act on
Pharaoh (Institution de la religion chrétienne, ed. Jean-Daniel Benoist,
5 vols. (Paris: Vrin, 1957–63), bk. I, ch. 18, bk. II, ch. 4 (i. 257, ii. 75–82).
a light more certain than the whole light of nature: Descartes’s point is that
his rule that we should give our assent only to clear and distinct ideas does
not rule out belief in the mysteries of the Christian religion such as the
Trinity (God is one, but in God there are three persons). These mysteries are indeed obscure. But we give our assent to them in virtue of a supernatural illumination akin to that by which we clearly and distinctly
perceive metaphysical truths such as the Cogito and the existence of God.
does not diminish our freedom: not a literal quotation, but cf. p. 41.
implicancy: F has ‘implicance’, a neologism corresponding to the Latin term
implicantia, which is used in L. Its meaning is ‘self-contradictoriness’.
a priori: the expression has caused some diﬃculty. In modern Englishlanguage philosophy, inspired by the usage of Kant, a priori denotes a
form of argument that does not depend on experience, whereas a posteriori argument does. This is not the sense in question here. Clerselier interprets a priori in the standard medieval and early modern sense of
‘proceeding from cause to eﬀect’, and a posteriori in the next paragraph as
‘proceeding from eﬀect to cause’. But this does not seem very helpful
either. Alquié’s suggestion (OP ii. 582, n. 1) seems plausible: the terms
are used in a very general sense, to denote diﬀerent phases in the process
of knowledge. The a priori phase is that of the actual discovery of truth,
in which the ultimate end-point may be invisible from the starting-point:
this is reproduced in the analytic order. Once truth has been discovered,
the material is organized, synthetically, in the light of the ultimate truths

Explanatory Notes

100

101

104

105

247

discovered, and this backward look over the path traversed is a perspective a posteriori. (On the other hand, Descartes says in the next paragraph
that the synthetic method makes more use of speciﬁc a priori arguments
than the analytic method. Here he may be using a priori in the other sense
of ‘proceeding from cause to eﬀect’.) See also Henri Gouhier, La Pensée
métaphysique de Descartes (Paris: Vrin, 1962), 108–11.
a posteriori: the translation here is based on the reading of a priori and
a posteriori given in the previous note. Literally, L says that ‘Synthesis . . .
following the opposite path, one sought so to speak a posteriori’; F means
‘following a quite diﬀerent path, and so to speak examining causes by
their eﬀects’.
even of the reluctant: synthesis, then, unlike analysis, works both for lazy
readers and for those reluctant to be convinced, because it does a lot of the
work of thinking for them. The translation of this last sentence draws on
the fuller version in F.
Meditations, rather than Disputations: see Introduction, pp. xiii–xv.
less capable of perceiving it: the rest of the discussion is missing from F,
which concludes with a brief paragraph indicating Descartes’s willingness
to set out some of his arguments in synthetic fashion.
Postulates: in the conventional sense, postulates are basic assumptions,
speciﬁc to a given science, on which the science is founded, e.g. that it is
possible, at least in theory, to draw straight lines and circles: unlike
axioms, which are self-evidently true, they are simply proposed for the
learner’s acceptance, though they may be contrary to his opinion. See
Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, I. 10 (76b), and also the discussion in The
Thirteen Books of Euclid’s Elements, ed. and trans. Sir Thomas Heath, 2nd
edn. (New York: Dover, 1956), 117–24. Descartes’s postulates, however,
clash with more than learners’ assumptions about a particular science:
they call on them to adopt habits of thought that run counter to the grain
of all prior experience, above all to learn to distrust their senses and focus
instead on their own awareness of their mind. On postulates, see Peter
Dear, ‘Mersenne’s Suggestion: Cartesian Meditation and the Mathematical
Model of Knowledge in the Seventeenth Century’, in Ariew and Grene
(eds.), Descartes and his Contemporaries, 44–62 (pp. 47–51), and Daniel
Garber, ‘Morin and the Second Objections’, ibid. 63–82 (pp. 78–80).
theorems rather than axioms: the diﬀerence between an axiom and a theorem is that the former is presented as self-evident, whereas the latter is
deduced. Descartes could, therefore, he says, have proved some of the
following propositions, which would thus have become theorems, which
in fact he presents baldly as axioms. This is in keeping with the remark he
has just made that what is directly known to one person, may need proof
in order for another to understand it.

248

Explanatory Notes
THIRD OBJECTIONS

107 with the author’s replies: Hobbes’s objections begin with quotations from
the Meditations (the page number is added in brackets), on which he then
comments; his comments are followed by Descartes’s replies.
criterion: Hobbes uses the Greek word kriterion, which F renders by ‘certain and evident mark’. The impossibility of ﬁnding a criterion of truth
was one of the key positions of Pyrrhonist scepticism.
phantasms: cf. F, ‘images of things’.
the Philosopher: this is how Descartes refers to Hobbes throughout.
metaphysical doubts: hyperbolical doubts (F, ‘so wide-ranging and extraordinary’).
108 the subject of any act: ‘act’ used here not only in the sense of ‘action, operation’ but in the sense of ‘quality, attribute’.
109 his method of combining a number of things together: on Hobbes’s method,
see p. 112 below.
the Sixth Meditation, in which I prove my view: Descartes has made the
same reply to the Second Objections, §1, p. 88.
110 only in bodily terms: Descartes is quoting Hobbes’s words back at him but
substituting ‘substance’ for ‘matter’; to be more precise, he allows the
word ‘matter’ in a ‘metaphysical’ sense, if it denotes simply the substance,
of whatever nature, underlying diﬀerent acts or qualities, as long as this is
not equated with matter in the ordinary sense of ‘body’.
Whoever, apart from himself, ever imagined this?: Hobbes argues that thought,
as an act, must have a subject. But this subject cannot be thought (which
he continues to interpret in the sense of an act of thinking): for all this
could mean is that a thought is being thought by another thought, resulting in an endless series: ‘I am thinking I am thinking I am thinking . . .’.
But if the subject of thought is not thought, it must be a body. Descartes
thinks it ridiculous that anyone should imagine that this is what is meant
by conceiving thought as the subject of thought: clearly it means that the
subject of the act of thought is thought in the sense of a thinking substance.
only inasmuch as it is the subject of certain acts: this passage shows that
Descartes does not suppose the mind to be immediately present to itself.
111 What is there that can be said to be separate from me?: the translation given
here has been modiﬁed from that given in the text of the Second
Meditation (‘Is there any of them that can be distinguished from my
thinking? Is there any that can be said to be separate from me?’) in order
to bring out Hobbes’s objection more clearly. It seems that he thinks that
Descartes is still failing to distinguish the subject from its acts, the thinker
from thinking. But Descartes is not implying that there is nothing in general apart from his thinking. His question follows on from the previous
sentence, in which he is talking about the various activities (doubting,
understanding, desiring, and so on) of which he is aware. His point is that

Explanatory Notes

112

113
114
116
117

118
119

120

249

none of these cannot be distinguished from his thinking, because they are
all forms of thinking (see Alquié’s note in OP ii. 606, n. 2).
conceiving: Hobbes has ‘concipere’ (conceive). Descartes’s text has
‘percipere’ (to perceive).
Peripatetics: followers of Aristotle.
a coupling and attachment of names or labels, by means of the word ‘is’:
Hobbes here sketches out the conception of reasoning he will develop in
Leviathan, I. 4–5 (see Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Richard Tuck
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 24–37).
the same thing: F adds: ‘That is, when we imagine a pentagon we need a
particular eﬀort of the mind that makes the ﬁgure (its ﬁve sides and the
space they enclose) appear to be present, and this is not required in the
act of conceiving.’ See Sixth Meditation, AT 7. 72–3, for the distinction
between imagination and intellection or ‘conceiving’.
something eternal exists: cf. the argument for the existence of a ﬁrst cause
in Leviathan, I. 12, pp. 77–8.
everything that is directly perceived by the mind: cf. the deﬁnition given at
the end of the Second Replies, Deﬁnition II, pp. 102–3.
I call an idea: F adds: ‘And as long as this philosopher refuses to agree with
me about the meaning of words, he can oﬀer none but frivolous objections.’
real qualities: for Aristotle, heat, cold, wetness, dryness are fundamental
entities, exercising a real causal inﬂuence. This basic list of what they
called ‘real qualities’ was lengthened by the later scholastics to include all
properties (sensible and insensible) of bodies. See Steven Nadler,
‘Doctrines of Explanation in Late Scholasticism and in the Mechanical
Philosophy’, in CHSCP i. 513–52 (esp. 514–18). Descartes rejects the
concept: see Le Monde, V (AT 11. 25–6), but, rather than engage in controversy about it here, he indicates the place that real qualities (assuming
they existed) would occupy on the scale of reality. On complete and
incomplete substances, see Fourth Objections and Replies below.
in our thought: F adds, ‘that is, God’.
The same applies to the rest of God’s attributes: this might seem problematic,
because Descartes appears to be implying that we form the idea of God’s
attributes by an extension of our ideas derived from ﬁnite substance,
which would negate the priority of the idea of God argued for elsewhere.
He would doubtless reply that it is only the prior idea of the inﬁnite that
prompts us to extend our ideas of ﬁnite qualities.
the faculty of producing it: producing it, that is, from ourselves, without
requiring prompting from external objects. Descartes therefore does not
suppose e.g. that a newborn baby has an actual concept of God.
contrary to the opinion of the Calvinists: Calvin’s theology of predestination
makes human actions dependent on a divinely established necessity.

250

Explanatory Notes

120 contradictory to what has gone before: the contradiction alleged by Hobbes
does not bear, as Descartes supposes, on his reference to free will. Hobbes
thinks that Descartes is contradicting himself because he has just said that
we do not need to invoke any faculty to explain the existence of error, and
is now invoking the faculties of knowing and choosing. But Hobbes has
misunderstood Descartes’s point, which is that we do not need to invoke
a special ‘mistake-making’ faculty to explain error: he agrees with Hobbes
that it derives from a misuse of the same faculty as we use to obtain
knowledge, though he adds that the will is also involved. So he is not contradicting himself. In any case, Descartes says, Hobbes has missed the
essential point that error, like blindness, is not a positive entity. (If it
were, its reality would have to be derived from God, the source of all reality, which would make God responsible for our errors; as he would be, if
he had given us a special faculty for making mistakes.)
other people’s opinions about the matter: a Calvinist would not deny that
some actions are voluntary: X gets drunk and ﬁghts because he wants
to. But he would deny that such actions are free: X, he would say, is
predestined to sin. Descartes’s point is that introspection dissolves such
distinctions, for it shows that to do what we want and to be free are one
and the same.
121 it is self-contradictory to say that we want and do not want the same thing:
Hobbes is clearly right to argue, what Descartes seems reluctant to
acknowledge, that our assent to truth can be reluctant, e.g. when we perceive it clashes with a cherished belief. Descartes’s later discussion of
freedom in the letters to Mesland of 1645 is more subtle.
123 suﬃciently refuted already: see the reply to Objection IV above.
conveys to me the ideas of body: the explanatory note in parentheses is taken
from F. L has ‘whether ideas are conveyed by bodily things’. F’s statement
of the point at issue is more accurate.
124 he will easily recognize his error: Hobbes’s point is that if you make coherence and a sense of continuing identity a suﬃcient test of the diﬀerence
between genuine and illusory experience, you have to admit the possibility of dream-experiences that, on this showing, would count as real.
FOURTH OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES
125 acts done at the persuasion of pleasure: Arnauld, who had initially trained in
the law before devoting himself to theology, invokes a legal analogy: the
magistrate (‘praetor’, a Roman term) does not hold people responsible for
acts performed under the inﬂuence of violence or fear. If the same applied
to acts performed under the inﬂuence of pleasure, the pleasure that had
kept him reading Descartes’s work would excuse him from the responsibility of writing about it.
the troublesome commitments by which my time is taken up: the preparation
of the doctorate in theology, which he had not yet been awarded despite
the reference to him in the title as a ‘doctor’.

Explanatory Notes

127

128

130
131

251

M. Descartes: L refers to Descartes throughout not by name but as
‘Vir Clarissimus’ (this most illustrious man), often abbreviated to ‘V.C.’.
F usually refers to him by name, and I follow that usage here. But it is
worth noting that Arnauld observes the formalities of humanist politeness
throughout, and Descartes reciprocates. There is none of the aggression
evident in the confrontations with Hobbes, Gassendi, and Bourdin.
if you did not exist, you could not be deceived at all: Augustine, De libero
arbitrio, II. iii. 7 (PL xxxii. 1243). Cf. The City of God, XI. 26, where a
similar argument appears. Descartes’s possible debts to Augustine have
been examined afresh in recent scholarship: see e.g. Stephen Menn,
Descartes and Augustine (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
it follows that nothing else in fact belongs to it: the passages quoted by
Arnauld are in the Preface to the Reader, p. 7.
which he had not yet obtained in the Second Meditation: Arnauld is perfectly
correct in this: he is the only one of the objectors who raise this point to
grasp the order of Descartes’s argumentation here.
major premise: the technical terms ‘major’ and (below) ‘minor premise’
appear only in F. The major premise is a general statement, the minor a
particular statement that can be subsumed under the general assertion, so
as to yield a particular conclusion. Here the major may be summarized as:
‘Whatever I clearly and distinctly understand without another thing, is
really distinct from that thing.’ The minor is: ‘I clearly and distinctly
understand the mind without the body, and the body without the mind.’
between the mind and the body: Arnauld has slightly simpliﬁed the last
sentence: he sometimes paraphrases Descartes rather than quoting him
verbatim.
when you conceive yourself: ‘that is, your mind’ (F).
and likewise when you conceive yourself: ‘that is, your body’ (F).
as the genus to the species: such people would consider the mind as a particular kind of body, diﬀerentiated by its capacity for rational thought. In
that case, we could have a complete idea of what is meant by body, which
excluded rational thought, since this is speciﬁc only to one kind of body;
and this idea could not be used to prove the non-identity of mind and
body.
my knowledge of myself: not an exact quotation but a summary of
Descartes’s argument.
butchers of souls: the impious are called ‘butchers of souls’ because they
deny the existence of the soul: perhaps also because this teaching leads to
spiritual death in those who accept it.
animal spirits: physical, not spiritual, entities: the more subtle and rareﬁed
parts of the blood which, in Descartes’s theory, pass through the brain
and thence to the nerves and the muscles. They thus allow him to explain
the movement of the body without invoking, in Aristotelian fashion, the
notion of soul. See The Passions of the Soul, §§10–13. The concept derives

252

131

132

133
134

136

Explanatory Notes
from the medical theories of Galen: see Ian Maclean, Logic, Signs and
Nature in the Renaissance: The Case of Learned Medicine (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002), 242–4, for an account of diﬀerent
early modern versions of it.
ch. XV: Arnauld is paraphrasing Augustine, De quantitate animi, XV. 25
(PL xxxii, 1049–50).
‘Soliloquies’, I. 4: Arnauld is quoting Augustine, Soliloquiorum libri duo, I.
iv. 9 (PL xxxii, 874).
materially false: Arnauld thinks that the only authentic idea of cold is the
idea that is correct: cold is a privation. The idea of cold as a positive entity
is a non-idea, because it is an idea of what is not. Descartes’s concept of
the material falsity of the idea of cold implies that the idea of cold has
some positive content: it represents cold as a positive entity. But if this is
so, and Descartes’s concept of ideas as containing a certain objective being
is valid, then the idea of cold contains a certain objective being, which,
like the objective being of all other representative ideas, requires an explanation in terms of some ‘formal’ (really existing) cause. Descartes either
has to specify this cause (which Arnauld thinks he has failed to do) or to
admit that an idea’s objective reality can derive from nothing, in which
case his whole proof of the existence of God collapses.
the theologian: Caterus, author of the First Objections.
the natural light does not in fact allow us to assert this: Descartes has discussed two possible restrictions of the term ‘eﬃcient cause’. The ﬁrst
would limit it to causes that precede their eﬀects in time; the second to
causes distinct from their eﬀects. He then argues that the natural light
shows us that the ﬁrst restriction is inappropriate here. Arnauld shrewdly
points out that he says nothing about the second restriction, as if, in fact,
it is diﬃcult to sustain the notion of a cause identical to its eﬀect.
without any potentiality: F is fuller: ‘Thus the terms “continuation” and
“preservation”, denote potentialities rather than acts, and involve a certain capacity or disposition to receive; but the inﬁnite being is an utterly
pure act, incapable of possessing such dispositions.’ Arnauld here invokes
the Aristotelian distinction between act and potentiality. For the purposes
of this argument, a potentiality can be understood to denote an entity’s
capacity to become something other than it currently is (e.g. the capacity
of water to become steam). If something is preserved or continued in
being, the implication is it has a capacity, or potentiality, of not being. But
God is all that he can be and his nature admits of no potentiality. See
Aquinas, Summa theologiae, Ia, q. 3, a. 1.
the sum of which is equal to two right angles: this is not absurd, however, in
the light of Descartes’s distinctive doctrine that eternal and necessary
truths, such as those of geometry, are true because God has willed them
so. He could have decided that the sum of the angles of a triangle would
not be equal to two right angles. In other words, God is the eﬃcient cause

Explanatory Notes

137

138

139

140
141

253

of such truths: he has made the laws of nature as a king makes the laws of
his kingdom (letter to Mersenne, 15 Apr. 1630, AT 1, 145–6).
be scandalized: L, ‘oﬀendatur’; F, ‘oﬀensent’. Arnauld is not talking about
subjective reactions of anxiety or indignation. He means that theologians
would ﬁnd this view ‘scandalous’ in the sense of providing a stumblingblock (Gk. skandalon, L oﬀendiculum: see below, p. 139) to others; i.e. it
would be, ultimately, a threat to their faith.
whatever is clearly and distinctly perceived by us is true: this is a wonderfully
succinct formulation of a classic diﬃculty in Descartes’s system (that it
involves arguing in a circle).
for people of ordinary intelligence: see Discourse on the Method, II. 15, AT 6. 15.
since I was pretending to be ignorant: as the text of the Sixth Meditation
shows (p. 55), Descartes accepted this suggestion.
grave objections: the ‘objections’ Arnauld has in mind involve the doctrines of original sin and grace, especially as taught by Augustine and his
followers. For if Descartes is right in tracing sin to the same root as error
(the faulty use of the judgement), then he is, seemingly, implying it can
be avoided by the same method. This would smack of the Pelagian heresy,
which holds that all human beings have the power to do God’s will,
whereas Augustine held that only some human beings, those in receipt of
divine grace, possess it. Here Descartes does not act on Arnauld’s advice,
since the text continues to make mention of sin as well as error.
understanding, believing, having opinions: Augustine, De utilitate credendi,
XI. 25 (not ‘XV’ as Arnauld says), PL xlii, 83.
ignorance: L, ‘inhumanitatis’. Despite the reading in F (‘peu [. . .] d’humanité’), the accusation is presumably of lack of education (cf. L inhumanus, which can bear the sense of ‘uncultured’) rather than lack of
humanity.
in ch. XII: Augustine, De utilitate credendi, XII. 26 (PL xlii, 84).
other sensible qualities: Arnauld’s point of reference is the Roman Catholic
doctrine of transubstantiation, restated by the Council of Trent
(1545–63): when the bread and wine are consecrated, their substance is
replaced by that of the body and blood of Christ, although the accidents,
or appearances, of bread and wine remain.
M. Arnauld: as in F; L has ‘Vir Clarissimus’ (this most distinguished
man) throughout.
adequate: cf. F: ‘entire and perfect’.
for it to be adequate: we may have adequate knowledge of some things, but
we can never know we do. If we could have (and know we have) adequate
knowledge of the things in question, then it would be reasonable to
require such knowledge as the basis of the assertion of a real distinction
between them. But, because we can never know we have such knowledge,
this requirement, Descartes says, is unnecessarily stiﬀ.

254

Explanatory Notes

142 by an abstraction on the part of the intellect: we can establish a formal distinction between two attributes (shape and motion, say) and can think of
each in abstraction from a particular body: but if we took this as evidence
of a real distinction, as if motion could exist independently of a moving
body, or independently of shape, we should, by an intellectual abstraction, be producing an inadequate ‘knowledge’ of motion. See First
Replies, p. 84.
143 subsisting by themselves: existing as things in their own right, not as attributes or modiﬁcations of some other thing. It does not mean that such
things exist independently of God. Spinoza, however, was to suggest that
if ﬁnite entities cannot exist without an inﬁnite substance, it makes no
sense to speak of them as ‘existing by themselves’ even in the ﬁrst sense,
and consequently that they should be seen not as substances but as
modiﬁcations of a single substance, God or nature.
bodily nature: L, ‘naturam corporis’; F, ‘la nature du corps’. Descartes
means that the concept of shape is that of a complete thing only when
combined with the notion of body.
144 in the concrete: as opposed to ‘in the abstract’. If we thought of a triangle
not as a mathematical idea, but as an object in the real world (a triangular
piece of paper, say), Descartes concedes that it could then be thought of
as a substance. His point is that, although we can erroneously conceive a
property as existing in one and the same substance without another property with which it is necessarily linked, this does not cast doubt on our
ability to distinguish two separate substances on the basis of their distinct
properties.
things or substances: cf. F, ‘I tried to distinguish explicitly between, on the
one hand, things, that is, substances, and, on the other, the modes of these
things, that is, the faculties of those substances’.
147 in the ﬁfth part of A Discourse on the Method: V. 46–8, AT 6. 56–9.
to many diﬀerent actions: on the relations between the brain, the animal
spirits, the nerves, and the muscles, see The Passions of the Soul, §§7–16.
149 the idea remains in me, the same as it has always been: it seems that the fundamental diﬀerence between Arnauld and Descartes is in the understanding of the term ‘idea’. Arnauld takes it in the sense of ‘concept’. But for
Descartes the actual sensation of cold counts as an idea of cold. And when
I feel cold, I do not simply feel not-hot: I may feel the cold as an active
aggressive force. This might, however, lead me to assume, erroneously,
that cold in itself is a positive reality, whereas, however I feel it, it can only
be understood scientiﬁcally as an absence of heat, which is something positive, an eﬀect of certain kinds of motion (see Principles, IV. 198). Hence
the sensation can be termed materially false. The confused perception of
the absence of heat is ‘referred to’ (experienced as if due to) a positive
presence of cold. But if, Descartes goes on to explain, our idea of God
is clear and distinct, we know it conforms to its object: it is not a
pseudo-idea ‘referred’ by us incorrectly to something else that is not God

Explanatory Notes

151
152
153

154

155

156

255

(as would be the case if, thinking we have an idea of God, we conceived
him as limited in power or knowledge).
Francisco Suárez: Spanish theologian and philosopher (1548–1617), a
member of the Society of Jesus, whose Metaphysical Disputations (1597)
enjoyed a European inﬂuence.
I regard the formal cause as diﬀerent from the eﬃcient cause: ‘formal cause’,
the essence of a thing considered as explaining its attributes, is a scholastic term, derived, as Descartes presently points out, from Aristotle.
as being the most general term: in the Christian theology of the Trinity, the
Son and the Holy Spirit can be said to ‘proceed’ from the Father (in Latin
Christianity the Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, which the
Greeks deny). But the Son and the Spirit are not caused or produced by
the Father, in the way that creatures distinct from God are caused or produced (that is, out of nothing). Hence the word ‘principle’ (in the sense
of ‘source’) is used of the Father, as distinct from ‘cause’.
the ﬁrst and most important means . . . of proving the existence of God: if this
is so, why does Descartes put forward the so-called ontological argument
for God’s existence as well? Alquié suggests that this argument too is, for
Descartes, a causal argument: God’s essence implying his existence, he
can be considered in this sense as the cause of himself (OP ii. 681, n. 1).
to inquire why it exists: Descartes implies that those who follow the natural light alone are better able to grasp his demonstration than those
whose minds are cluttered with scholastic concepts.
the interpretation must be disallowed: Descartes’s point is that, if ‘to exist of
itself ’ means no more than ‘to exist without a cause’, we are admitting the
concept of a being existing without a cause. In that case, we might end up
saying that ﬁnite creatures, as distinct from God, exist without a cause:
they just exist (as Sartre, say, would have it) and no causal connection to
a creator need, or can, be traced.
the same and not the same: Descartes acknowledges that the analogy by
which God’s essence is considered as if it were the eﬃcient cause of his
existence can only go so far: for an eﬃcient cause in the strict sense must
be distinct from its eﬀect (as Arnauld has shown, a thing cannot be the
eﬃcient cause of itself ); and so to make God the eﬃcient cause of himself
would be to say that he is distinct from himself. But this is so plainly
self-contradictory that we can all see the limits of the analogy.
more noble than other causes: Descartes is still using hierarchical language.
The eﬀect is considered, within scholastic metaphysics, as less ‘noble’
than the cause, because it depends on it. Hence Descartes is reluctant to
speak of God as the ‘eﬀect’ of himself, though logic would seem to imply
that he should. But he is simply, he claims, following the example of
theologians, who speak of God the Father as the principle or source of
God the Son, but do not speak of the Son as ‘principiated’ (i.e. standing
in the same relationship to a principle as an eﬀect to its cause) less this
appear to render him inferior to the Father.

256

Explanatory Notes

156 to cover all essences of things: Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, II. 11 (94a), in
Posterior Analytics, ed. and trans. Hugh Tredennick, Topica, ed. and
trans. E. S. Forster, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, Mass. and
London: Harvard University Press, 1960), 208–9. ‘Essence’ is indeed the
translation there oﬀered for to ti ên einai.
158 not at all a rectilinear ﬁgure: the syntax of both L and F here is so tortuous that the translation is freer than usual. The analogy is as follows.
Archimedes has demonstrated properties of the sphere by conceiving it,
paradoxically, as a straight-sided ﬁgure (albeit with an inﬁnite number of
sides). Descartes has demonstrated the existence of God by applying the
causal principle (everything that exists must have a cause), with God thus
being viewed, paradoxically, as the cause of himself. Arnauld wants to
keep the demonstration of God as ﬁrst cause, but to abandon the concept
of God as self-causing. This is like wanting to keep Archimedes’ demonstration but treating it as if it applied only to a rectilinear ﬁgure with an
inﬁnite number of sides, and asserting a distinction between this concept
and that of the sphere, on the grounds that a sphere is not rectilinear.
159 if we cannot become conscious of it: we know in this way that we have no faculty of reproducing our existence from moment to moment, and thus
depend on some other being. See the Third Meditation, p. 35.
read only by the intelligent and learned: see the ‘Preface to the Reader’,
pp. 7–9.
160 I take his advice: nonetheless, as noted above, the text of the Fourth
Meditation retains the reference to sin as well as error (p. 42).
Dioptrics and the Meteorology: the Dioptrics (La Dioptrique), on light and
vision, and the Meteorology (Les Météores), about weather, are two of the
essays appended to Discourse on the Method, as examples of the author’s
method. The reference is to Les Météores, I, AT 6. 239. It seems that
Descartes is being a triﬂe disingenuous here, as he goes on to acknowledge.
He says in Les Météores that he is not denying the existence of real qualities
because he wants to avoid quarrels with philosophers, but he implies that
his own mode of explanation, which makes no reference to such qualities,
is suﬃcient and preferable because more economical.
assumptions that were subsequently refuted in later ones: the possible existence of the evil genius is an obvious case in point. On the distinction
between analytic and synthetic methods, see Second Replies, pp. 99–102.
more beﬁtting a gentleman: L, ‘liberalius’. F has ‘avec plus de franchise’
(more frankly). ‘Liberalis’ in Latin means freeborn and often gently or
nobly born. The social connotations of the word are part of Descartes’s
self-presentation: a gentleman should candidly declare his views and not
hide behind the letter of his statements.
161 intentional species: the orthodox Aristotelian theory of perception held
by the late scholastics was that we perceive objects not directly, but
via ‘intentional species’, representations of the qualities (such as colour)

Explanatory Notes

257

perceived in external objects and in some sense like those qualities. This
did not involve the belief that the object emits, as it were, little copies of
itself, though Descartes characterizes it as if it did (La Dioptrique, I, AT
6. 85). See Gary Hatﬁeld, ‘The Cognitive Faculties’, CHSCP ii.
952–1002 (pp. 957–9). On Descartes’s own theory of perception, see La
Dioptrique.
has no existence except in a modal sense: the surface is not a body or a distinct part of a body in its own right: it exists purely as a modiﬁcation of a
body. Descartes explains his concept of surface in letters to Mersenne
(23 June 1641, AT 3. 387) and Mesland (9 Feb. 1645, AT 4. 164).
162 the appearance of bread remaining all the while: Descartes is summarizing
the decree of the Council of Trent, session 13, canons 2 and 4: Enchiridion
symbolorum, deﬁnitionem et declarationum de rebus ﬁdei et morum, ed.
Heinrich Denzinger, rev. Adolf Schönmetzer, 35th edn. (Barcelona,
Freiburg-im-Breisgau, Rome, New York: Herder, 1973), paras. 1652,
1654. A full English translation of the decree can be found at: http://
history.hanover.edu/texts/trent/ct13.html.
but the other senses as well perceive by touch: Descartes quotes the text in
Greek: ‘kai ta alla aisthêtêria haphê aisthanetai’ (the other sense organs
perceive by contact too) (Aristotle, De anima, III. 13, 435a, in On the Soul,
Parva Naturalia, On Breath, ed. and trans. W. S. Hett, Loeb Classical
Library (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, and London:
Heinemann, 1986 [1936]).
and that we must believe most faithfully: again, Descartes is quoting the
decree of the Council of Trent, Session XIII, ch. 1, Enchiridion symbolorum, para. 1636.
the Church has never taught anywhere: Descartes insists on the distinction
between the doctrine of transubstantiation itself, as deﬁned by the Church,
and conventional theological explanations of it. What follows is contained
only in the second edition, having being withdrawn, on Mersenne’s
advice, from the ﬁrst, so as not to alienate theologians (to Huygens,
26 Apr. 1642, AT 3. 785). It has been noted that at the Council of Trent
‘care was taken to avoid any formal deﬁnition of transubstantiation in
terms of accidents and substance’: E. L. Cross and E. A. Livingstone
(eds.), The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, 3rd edn. revd
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 570b, s.v. ‘Eucharist’.
163 parted company with the Roman Church about this issue: Lutherans, for
instance, taught that the bread remains, although Christ is really present
within it (‘consubstantiation’ or ‘impanation’). Calvinists held that
although no change in the bread and wine took place, the faithful received
the power or virtue of the Body and Blood of Christ.
164 the treatise on the principles of philosophy I am now working on: the Principles
of Philosophy, published in 1644.
depend only on the outermost surface of bodies: see Principles, IV. 191–8.

258

Explanatory Notes

164 the words of consecration: the words of Christ, ‘This is my body’, ‘This is
my blood’, repeated by the priest in the service of the Mass. Descartes’s
point is that the words of the consecration make the bread into Christ’s
body, but cannot be taken to produce any other eﬀect (in this case that the
‘accidents’ of the bread should exist in the absence of its substance).
an altogether new miracle: the conventional explanation requires, in addition to the miraculous transformation of the substance of bread into that
of Christ’s body, the miraculous preservation of the accidents of bread in
the absence of its substance. On some occasions, it would seem, the body
of Christ has actually appeared in the sacrament: the accidents themselves
have been replaced by those of Christ’s own ﬂesh. In theory, this should
have been explained by the cessation of the miraculous preservation of the
accidents. In practice, it was taken to be a new miracle. And this spontaneous religious sentiment accords with Descartes’s theory. He requires no
miracle for the preservation of the accidents, though their exceptional
replacement by Christ’s ﬂesh would need a miracle. Thus his explanation
is both more economical and more in keeping with spontaneous religious
sentiment.
must always act and be acted on in the same way: since the surface of the new
substance remains our senses will be aﬀected in the same way as by the
old one: we shall continue to perceive it with the old appearances (white,
round, etc.).
FIFTH OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES
166 deluded: ludiﬁcatio in Latin can mean either ‘ridiculing’ or ‘fooling’. As a
summary of Descartes’s argument, the latter reading seems more natural:
you may be being fooled about everything else by the deceiver, but you,
who are being fooled, must exist. Descartes, however, reads Gassendi as
saying ‘you are persisting in your joke’, which sense the Latin words
could also bear, and, as we shall see, vehemently objects.
167 as an inner and secret part: cf. F: ‘the innermost and most secret part of
yourself’.
O soul: Gassendi ironically addresses Descartes as ‘O soul’ (‘ô Anima’),
since he identiﬁes himself with the soul as distinct from the body. Later
(II. 4) he notes that for Descartes ‘soul’ refers only to the intellectual faculty, the mind (‘mens’). Henceforth he addresses him only as ‘Mens’.
168 the solid body: for Gassendi there is a key distinction between two kinds of
body: solid (crassum) and subtle (tenue). The human body, as a set of limbs
and organs, would be an example of the former; air, breath, ﬁre, vapour,
of the latter. Whether or not the soul is, as Gassendi suggests, a ‘subtle’
body, he argues that it needs the help of the solid body in order to think.
Descartes thinks the distinction between ‘solid’ and ‘subtle’ bodies unimportant when it comes to distinguishing between kinds of substance
(thinking and extended).

Explanatory Notes

169

170

171

172

173
174

175
176

259

do you mean to say that the mind is thinking continuously?: Hobbes and
Arnauld also raise the question.
phlegm: in the chemistry of the time, the watery part released from bodies
by distillation, from which the alcohol is then extracted (see Alquié’s
note, OP ii. 723, n. 1).
tartar: ‘a brownish-red substance consisting mainly of potassium hydrogen tartrate, present in grape juice and deposited during the fermentation
of wine’ (Collins English Dictionary).
observations and experiments: I follow Ian Maclean, Discourse, 73 (p. 26, n.
1) in translating experimenta as ‘observations and experiments’ since the
word at this period can bear either sense and the context here does not
determine in favour of one or the other. Note Gassendi’s assumption that
all knowledge conforms to the model of scientiﬁc observation of an object.
a source of error: because it might lead us to assert what is false, thinking
we clearly and distinctly perceive it to be true. See Alquié, OP ii. 726, n.
1.
you must mean its conformity to the thing of which it is the idea: Gassendi is
oﬀ target here: the ‘objective’ reality of an idea, as conceived by
Descartes, is not a matter of its accuracy as a representation of a really
existing thing. The idea of a thing has a certain quota of ‘objective reality’, proportionate to the formal reality the thing would have if it existed,
as a substance (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) or an attribute.
the material cause, not the eﬃcient cause: Gassendi here mobilizes the
Aristotelian taxonomy of causes (Metaphysics, V. ii. 1–3 (1013a–b) ). The
material cause is the matter from which the eﬀect is made (say, the wood
used by a carpenter to make a table). The eﬃcient cause is the agent that
brings the eﬀect about (the carpenter himself). He does not here mention
the other two kinds of cause: formal (what gives the eﬀect its form—here,
the carpenter’s idea of a table), and ﬁnal (that for the sake of which the
eﬀect is produced, the purpose the table will fulﬁl). Final causes are discussed later.
‘species’ that impact upon your eye: on ‘species’ see above, note to p. 161.
in the thing to which the idea relates: Gassendi seems to anticipate here his
critique of the ‘ontological’ argument of the Fifth Meditation.
even when the cause that has produced it has perished: Descartes agrees: see
Fifth Replies, p. 192.
whatever implies limitation, such as body: Gassendi is sketching out what he
takes to be a sounder approach to arguing for the existence of God.
you had closed your eyes . . . and ignored the other senses: an allusion to the
opening of the Third Meditation.
the will’s indiﬀerence: see Fourth Meditation pp. 41–3 and notes.
which the intellect has apprehended as other than it is: on this passage, see the
Introduction, p. xxxix.

260

Explanatory Notes

177 human beings exist, and are animals: thus all propositions about essences
involve an implicit assertion of existence. In the light of this view, it is not
surprising that Gassendi does not accept the ontological argument for
God’s existence, which holds that the link between essence and existence
applies to God alone. See below.
178 it is that without which there are no perfections: cf. F, ‘it is a form or an act
without which there can be no perfections’.
but as that in which both itself and its perfections are existent . . . and the perfections not to be possessed: cf. F, ‘but as a form or an act by which the thing
itself and its perfections are existent and without which neither it nor its
perfections would exist’.
begging the question: (L, principium petere), in the technical sense of putting
forward a proof that assumes what it purports to prove. Descartes, says
Gassendi, is trying to prove God’s existence from his perfections: but if
he did not exist in the ﬁrst place, one could not speak of him having any
perfections. Gassendi’s objection (existence is not a property among
others) will be restated by Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 502 (A 594–5/
B 622–3).
unless he had existence as well as wings: a familiar (and faulty) objection to
the ontological argument, dating back to Gaunilo, the critic of St Anselm,
who ﬁrst propounded a version of it. The concept of a ‘supremely perfect
horse’ is self-contradictory, since a horse is a ﬁnite substance.
compatible in the ﬁrst place: as noted above (note to p. 81), a similar objection is urged by Leibniz.
179 confusedly and with little or no eﬀort: clearly Descartes would not be prepared to accept this reformulation of his position.
those of the immaterial beings we believe in: or, possibly, ‘ideas of things
believed to be immaterial’ (which is closer to F). However, Gassendi is
most likely implying not that these beliefs are erroneous (as if God were
really a body), but that immaterial beings are objects of religious faith, not
philosophical understanding.
you can’t be serious: Gassendi thinks it absurd to say we conjecture something to be probably true (that bodies exist) when we know it is true. As
usual, he refuses to take Descartes’s doubt seriously or to follow his logic.
180 apropos of the Second Meditation: Gassendi does not see that the knowledge of myself as a thinking thing has a completely diﬀerent signiﬁcance
in the Second Meditation and in the Sixth. In the latter it is supported by
the knowledge of a non-deceiving God.
‘entelechy’: Gassendi uses the Greek word entelecheia, a term of
Aristotle’s, which can be translated ‘actuality’. He is presupposing the
Aristotelian theory of matter and form. Matter, for Aristotle, is by itself
pure potentiality or possibility: it can only exist when actualized in
some form, that of a branch, say, or a table-leg. Soul is a particular kind
of form that actualizes matter as a living body of a particular species.

Explanatory Notes

181

182
183

184

185

261

See Aristotle, De anima, II. 1 (412a–413a). Gassendi is using ‘perfection’
in much the same sense as ‘actuality’, and ‘species’ and ‘form’ as more or
less synonymous.
though in a diﬀerent sense than they would admit: Gassendi’s critique is twopronged. First, he mobilizes the Aristotelian model of the soul, still dominant among seventeenth-century scholastic philosophers. If the soul, as
in this theory, is what makes the body a living human body, it is not separable from the ‘solid’ body. This is so whether or not we factor in the
Aristotelian concepts of the possible, or passive, intellect and the active
intellect. To summarize one of the most diﬃcult areas of Aristotle’s philosophy, the active intellect enables the passive intellect to realize its
capacity, by uniting it, so to speak, with the object of knowledge. See
De anima, III. 5 (430a) and Ross, Aristotle, 148–53 (where the term ‘reason’
is used instead of ‘intellect’). Gassendi claims not to be endorsing these
philosophers’ views. But he is arguably using the rhetorical ﬁgure of
preteritio, where the speaker aﬀects not to say something he nonetheless
is saying (‘I will say nothing of his disastrous performance as Minister
for Social Aﬀairs’). That is to say, he is not so much reaﬃrming the
Aristotelian categories as valid as pointing out that they provide a complex alternative model to Descartes’s dualism, which Descartes does not
even trouble to discuss. He then passes on to his second critique:
Descartes fails to consider that he himself may be a ‘subtle’ body.
subject: Gassendi uses ‘subject’ here, like Descartes himself, to mean anything of which certain attributes are posited.
so far from having a clear and distinct idea of yourself, you seem to have none
at all: the objection that we have no clear idea of ourselves will be emphasized by Descartes’s most important and original follower, Malebranche.
Bucephalus: Alexander the Great’s horse.
those people whose minds are so immersed in their senses that they recoil from
metaphysical arguments: Descartes will be criticizing the objections
harshly, and so to make it seem that he is not criticizing Gassendi, he
aﬀects to believe that Gassendi is not speaking for himself, but for a certain category of incompetent readers. He adopts no such subterfuge with
Hobbes.
rhetorical ﬂavouring: the disparaging comparison of rhetoric with cookery
goes back to Plato.
when I am perfectly serious: it is possible that Descartes has misunderstood
Gassendi’s words here. See the notes on the corresponding passage in the
Fifth Objections above, p. 166.
my distinction between soul and body: Gassendi seems to ﬁnd it diﬃcult to
distinguish when Descartes is speaking provisionally and when deﬁnitively,
and which of his former beliefs he has abandoned and which he would
maintain. Here in particular he seems not to realize that Descartes is talking about his former beliefs, corresponding to the general view of scholastic philosophers, and that he has since redistributed various supposed

262

185

186

187

189

190
191

Explanatory Notes
functions of the soul between soul and body. Thus the physical process of
walking or touching now belongs to the body alone, the consciousness of
them to the soul. Not all the original beliefs were false, for in the original
passage Descartes includes the belief that bodies are incapable of thought.
But some of his former beliefs about the nature of bodies (e.g. that they
cannot move themselves) turn out to be false (as is plain from the example
of the spinning-top: see below).
metaphysical certainty: absolute certainty, which we aim at in the search
for truth, distinguished implicitly from ‘moral’ certainty, which is
suﬃcient for the conduct of life (it would be ridiculous to distrust our
oldest and best friends because we cannot logically prove their friendship
is genuine).
O ﬂesh: Descartes sarcastically copies Gassendi’s strategy of addressing
him as a separate mind, closely echoing his words. Again he restates the
accusation that Gassendi is substituting rhetoric for philosophy.
Prosopopoeia is a rhetorical ﬁgure, which can operate in two ways: i. the
speaker addresses not his or her actual audience but an imaginary or
absent listener: thus Gassendi is addressing not René Descartes but his
mind; ii. the speaker speaks not in his or her own person, but in someone
else’s (‘if Winston Churchill were alive, he would be saying “You have
betrayed everything I fought for” ’). Descartes pretends to read
Gassendi’s discourse as a prosopopoeia in this latter sense as well:
this cannot be Gassendi himself talking, he must be speaking for the
materially minded and hence metaphysically incompetent reader. See
Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, ed. and trans. H. E. Butler, 4 vols., Loeb
Classical Library (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, and
London: Heinemann, 1920–2), III. viii. 49–52, VI. i. 25, IX. ii. 29–37,
XI. i. 39–41.
the quality of the tool: it is fair to say that this notion of the soul using the
body as a tool or instrument, which has been inﬂuential on modern perceptions of Descartes, is hard to square with the account of body–soul
union in the Sixth Meditation, the letters to Elisabeth, and The Passions
of the Soul.
nor that the solid body contributes nothing to thinking: the ‘solid body’ plays
a role in certain kinds of thinking, e.g. sensation.
principle: here in the sense of an underlying source or agency.
nothing similar to the properties of mind: as Alquié observes, this is a hasty
answer to a perfectly serious point (OP ii. 802, n. 2).
by some chemical procedure: Gassendi’s words were ‘by some quasichemical procedure’ or ‘by, so to speak, a chemical procedure’.
the thought of seeing and touching: ‘thought’ (L cogitatio, F pensée) here
refers to the conscious experience of seeing, touching, etc.
the eﬃcient cause, not the material: on the distinction between diﬀerent
kinds of causality, see above, note to p. 172.

Explanatory Notes

192

193

194

195

263

some things can move themselves: Descartes’s example here is a spinningtop, which once set in motion continues moving.
they exist by his continued inﬂuence: otherwise they would owe their existence to nothing, or to themselves. But a ﬁnite being, Descartes argues,
cannot be self-existent.
without God choosing to annihilate us: a positive will on God’s part to annihilate us would be incompatible with his goodness (Alquié, OP ii. 815, n. 2).
Apelles: a famous Greek painter of the 4th century bc. The second part of
the sentence refers to Gassendi’s suggestion that if you assert that the
mark of God’s handiwork (the idea of God) is identical with the work
itself, you are implying that you are identical with the idea.
What you cite as a mystery: Gassendi’s example is the valves of the heart.
Descartes argues that there is nothing mysterious in their workings.
God destines us to evil deeds: Gassendi did not in fact say that God destines
us to evil deeds (a view Descartes would recognize as hardline Calvinism).
He accepts that for God to distribute cognitive powers unequally is no
more unfair than for a ruler to allocate higher functions to some citizens
than to others. But if a ruler allocated some citizens degrading or immoral
tasks, we should think him at fault. Likewise, we can wonder why the
cognitive powers God has given us are not simply limited but faulty.
Descartes conﬂates the analogy and the reality it is intended to illuminate.
so it now just happens to be being moved towards the truth: in other words, we
are not really involved in correcting our views: we are simply responding
blindly to the changes of our understanding. It does seem here that
Descartes has bought excessively into the scholastic tendency to reify the
diﬀerent activities of the soul, treating them as separate agencies within
the psyche.
everything I have written about all the others: Descartes does not mean that
the proof of one point in the argument depends on a later point, because
in that case he could well be accused of arguing in a circle: he must mean
that the development of the argument throws light retrospectively on its
earlier stages.
they are immutable and eternal because God so wished them to be: Descartes’s
view that the eternal truths are such only because God chose to create
them as such is set out in the letters to Mersenne of 15 April 1630 and
6 May 1630 (AT 1. 145–6, 149–50).
‘universals’: Gassendi was attacking the view (known as ‘realism’ in one
use of this term) upheld by some scholastics that the properties we
attribute to particular things exist as ‘universal’ realities above and
beyond particulars and outside the human mind. Thus, Plato is human
because he has a share in a universal human nature existing above and
beyond individual human beings. Descartes, however, points out that he
is not talking of properties in general but of things that are clearly and distinctly known.

264

Explanatory Notes

196 not derived from actually existing things: see Fifth Objections, VI. 1, p. 179.
in reality: L, ‘revera’, here used with the implication that necessary existence does not belong merely to the abstract idea of God, but to God himself existing in reality; it is a property ‘in the strictest possible sense’ of
being an exclusive property, not one he might share with other beings.
God is his being: what God is, is being (esse): his nature is (his) existence.
The same cannot be said of anything else.
chimeras: imaginary beings of Greek mythology, part-lion, part-goat, and
part-snake.
198 This shows a fundamental misunderstanding: Descartes’s reply here does not
engage with Gassendi’s use of Aristotelian theory, in keeping with his
tactic of avoiding direct confrontation with Aristotle. He would think the
Aristotelian categories confusing and superﬂuous.
species: on the sense of ‘species’ here, see above, note to p. 161.
knowledge of any other kind of thing: see above, Fifth Replies, II. 9
(pp. 189–90).
Bucephalus is not music: Descartes misreads Gassendi’s ‘musca’ (ﬂy) as
‘musica’ (music), and then, in rather surreal fashion, suggests that
Gassendi’s arguments that the mind must be extended are like arguments
for calling a horse music, because of the sounds it makes.
whatever the mind understands is somehow in it: Descartes has got to the root
of the matter here, in identifying his target (implicitly) as the Aristotelian
view of knowledge in which the object is in the mind, instead of being
represented by an idea.
SIXTH OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES
199 your rule: the rule that whatever we clearly and distinctly perceive to be
true, is true.
200 the Eucharist: see Fourth Objections and Replies, pp. 139–40, 160–5, and
notes.
of which we are capable: the numbering of the objections stops at this point
in the original.
the same logic as you apply: that is to say, we think we can form a clear and
distinct idea of God’s immensity, without his justice: but they cannot in
fact exist separately. Likewise, our clear and distinct idea of a unitary God
belies his existence as Three in One. An unbeliever applying your rule
(‘what I can clearly and distinctly conceive separately from another thing,
can exist without that thing’) would conclude that God is not essentially
Three in One, since he can conceive him as purely unitary. So such clear
and distinct ideas of the separateness of two things can be at variance with
reality. ‘Unbeliever’ here (L, ‘inﬁdelis’; F, ‘inﬁdèle’) must mean a believer
in one God but not in the Trinity, such as a Jew or a Muslim.

Explanatory Notes

265

201 how do you know that God has not endowed some bodies with the ability to
think?: arguments later put forward by Spinoza, Ethics, III. 2, scholium;
Locke, An Essay concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter H. Nidditch
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979 [1975]), IV. 3, pp. 541–2.
202 in the form of ﬂesh: we understand that a thing that has bones does not
necessarily have ﬂesh, although in many creatures the two are combined.
claimed to have seen the Antipodes: to us this example may look odd, as if
Descartes were saying we can believe someone who has been to America
and claims to have been to Australia. But ‘Antipodes’ here is used in its
old sense, and probably refers to the inhabitants of a region rather than
the region itself. An image of the earth popularized in antiquity by Cicero
represented our hemisphere as cut oﬀ by an impassable torrid zone from
the southern hemisphere inhabited by ‘Antipodes’ (see C. S. Lewis, The
Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964), 28, 31, 61). A Church
Council of the eighth century denied the existence of the Antipodes, and
Descartes alludes to this in a letter to Mersenne of 1634 (AT 1. 288: see
Discourse, p. xxxvii). Thus it would be perfectly possible to travel to
southern America and meet ‘Antipodes’, but someone who reported
doing so would be challenging authorities to the contrary.
203 animals do not have thought: ‘animals’ here renders L brutis, and later
belluarum: strictly speaking, the ‘brute beasts’, as distinct from human
animals.
animals have what is commonly called life, or a bodily soul, or organic senses:
this is a crucial passage, for it shows that Descartes does not believe that
animals are purely and simply machines, which would imply that they are
incapable, for instance, of feeling. See the letter to the Marquess of
Newcastle, 23 Nov. 1646, AT 4. 573–6, which credits them with passions
such as hope and fear, and even a kind of thought linked to the organs. See
also Introduction, p. xxxvii, for recent discussions of the problem. But
among the followers of Descartes, Malebranche, for instance, endorses the
radical conclusion that animals are incapable of feeling (Entretiens sur
la mort, I, in Œuvres, ed. Geneviève Rodis-Lewis and Germain Malbreil,
2 vols., Bibliothèque de la Pléiade (Paris: Gallimard, 1979–92), ii. 984–5).
204 those who take the more reasonable line: Descartes is not implying that this
view (such as Gassendi would subscribe to) is intrinsically rational, still
less a tenable alternative to his. It is, however, a rational deduction from
a faulty initial position, and incorporates a degree of observation, whereas
the view that sees humans also as mechanical ﬂies in the facts of our most
immediate experience.
to choose one alternative rather than the other: it is not that God sees intellectually that something is good or true, and approves or endorses it by
an act of his will: his will makes it good or true. The ‘reasoning reason’
(L, ‘ratio ratiocinata’; F, ‘raison raisonnée’) is the reason that proceeds by

266

204

205

206

207

Explanatory Notes
steps, by applying e.g. general laws to particular instances, rather than
grasping truth through intuition.
the merits of the saints are the cause of their obtaining eternal life: Descartes
has been arguing that God’s will cannot be determined by anything outside himself. But this might be held to imply that human actions cannot
contribute to salvation, and that salvation or damnation depends wholly
on God’s predestination—a Calvinist position. Descartes therefore
points out that his theory is entirely compatible with the Catholic belief
that human eﬀorts can earn ‘merit’, that is, that they have a role, subordinate to God’s grace, in bringing about salvation.
when clear perception impels us to pursue something: this view of human freedom develops the line of argument of the Fourth Meditation. Whether
Descartes’s later writings on freedom (in particular the letters to Mesland
of 2 May 1644 and 9 Feb. 1645 (AT 4. 115–18, 173–5) involve a change
of view is much debated. See Étienne Gilson, La Liberté chez Descartes
et la théologie (Paris: Alcan, 1913) and Ferdinand Alquié, La Découverte
métaphysique de l’homme chez Descartes (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1950), 280–99, who argue that there is a change; and, for the
alternative view, Jean Laporte, ‘La Liberté selon Descartes’, in Études
d’histoire de la philosophie française du XVIIe siècle (Paris: Vrin, 1951),
37–87, and Anthony Kenny, ‘Descartes on the Will’, in Cottingham
(ed.), Descartes (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 132–59.
can accidentally modify another: cf. F, ‘can be applied to another’. A coat
is a substance, yet when a person (also a substance) puts it on, it modiﬁes
their substance by endowing it with a new quality or accident. But the
coat has not become an accident; rather, it is the means by which the
person acquires the accident ‘wearing a coat’.
with respect to each of the senses in turn: see Principles, IV. 189–95.
as Genesis says, ‘very good’: Gen. 1: 31.
the list of diﬀerent kinds of cause: Descartes is referring to the Aristotelian
taxonomy of causes discussed above, note to p. 172.
they could be otherwise than they are: the Aristotelian conception of knowledge includes the requirement that we know that the fact in question
cannot be otherwise than it is (Posterior Analytics, I. 2 (71b)). But from
Descartes’s point of view, we can know in the abstract that e.g. 2 × 4 might
not have been equal to 8, if God had so ordained. Yet this does not,
he implies, undermine our claims to knowledge: for we cannot understand 2 × 4 as not being equal to 8. Within the limits of our understanding, then, we can be said to know that 2 × 4 = 8, and that this cannot be
otherwise. Thus the essence of the Aristotelian requirement is retained.
But one can see why it has been argued that the doctrine of the createdness of the eternal truths bears, in its implications, a certain aﬃnity to
Kantianism. See Alquié, La Découverte, 87–109, esp. pp. 108–9.
some ‘intentional species’ ﬂy from the stick into the eye: F explains the term
‘intentional species’: ‘we should not imagine that the stick sends tiny

Explanatory Notes

267

images of itself (what are commonly called “intentional species”) ﬂying
through the air to the eye.’ See above, note to p. 161.
208 deducing them from one another: La Dioptrique, VI, AT 6. 130–47; see esp.
pp. 140–1.
the certainty of the intellect is far greater than that of the senses: the certainty
that derives from the intellect ranges, of course, far wider than the correction of sense-perceptions. Descartes’ point is relative to the context of
sense-perception.
211 substantial forms: in Aristotelian metaphysics all substances are composed
of matter and form. So, in any existing thing, e.g. a table, it is the form
‘table’ that makes it what it is (not a chair), but this could not happen
without the matter (wood or metal) through which the form is realized
(Metaphysics, VII. iii. 2 (1029a) for the second part). Each substance, then,
must have a ‘substantial form’ that makes it what it is. In the process of
change, say, from water to ice, the ‘substantial form’ of water is superseded by the ‘substantial form’ of ice, the underlying matter remaining
the same. Descartes dispenses with the concept of substantial forms in
general but allows that the soul can be referred to as the ‘true substantial
form of the human being’ (to Regius, Jan. 1642, AT 3. 505). (In this particular case, he is, however, urging Regius, his follower, to retain traditional terminology as much as possible so as to defuse attacks by critics:
see Desmond M. Clarke, Descartes: A Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2006), 218–26.) But diﬀerent material substances are
simply diﬀerent combinations of matter. On the rejection of substantial
forms, see Daniel Garber, ‘Descartes’ Physics’, CCD, 286–334 (esp.
pp. 287, 301–3), and Desmond M. Clarke, Descartes’s Theory of Mind
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 16–23. On real qualities, see
above, pp. 160–4.
I did not doubt that I had ‘a clear idea of my mind’ . . . conscious of it in
myself: cf. F, ‘I no longer doubted that I had a clear idea of my own mind,
of which I could not deny that I had knowledge, since it was so present to
me and so conjoined with me’.
212 the Most Holy Trinity: Descartes is careful to mark his adherence to the
orthodox doctrine of the Trinity: the three persons participate equally in
the divine essence (each is as much God as the other two), yet diﬀer as to
their relationships (the Father, the Son begotten by the Father, and the
Holy Spirit who proceeds from both). See above, Fourth Replies, p. 153.
if God endowed certain bodies with the power of thought: Descartes is considering the objection that we cannot set limits to God’s power: for all we
know, he could endow bodies with the ability to think. Relying on the
presupposition that God cannot do what is intrinsically contradictory,
Descartes is implying that the only sense in which God can be said to
endow bodies with thought is that he combines them with a separate and
separable thinking substance.

268

Explanatory Notes
SEVENTH OBJECTIONS

215 no certainty that what appears certain . . . is in fact certain: a recurring
theme of Bourdin’s critique, and perhaps the only telling point he makes.
See Alquié, OP ii. 955, n. 1–3.
until we know that whatever we clearly perceive is true: Descartes is restating the point he made in answer to the accusation of arguing in a circle
(Second and Fourth Objections and Replies).
216 in other words, that is not true: Descartes restates the same point in similar
words on p. 225.
one cannot achieve certainty by starting from doubtful propositions: Bourdin’s
objection is sound from the point of view of traditional logic: one cannot
draw a conclusion that is certain from doubtful premises. But in Descartes’s
philosophy doubt is not a quality of propositions: it is a mental exercise,
designed to open our minds to the experience of certainty.
217 The approach to the method is opened up: Bourdin here actually quotes at
length from the text of the First Meditation (pp. 16–17).
(K): there is no point (J), the letters I and J being equivalent in the Latin
alphabet. Ditto for U and V. The Latin alphabet does not contain W.
218 old truths: as examples of such truths, Bourdin cites ‘An argument in
Barbara is sound’, and ‘I am a thing composed of body and soul’.
‘Barbara’ is the name for the classic form of the syllogism, whereby from
two universal aﬃrmative premises (‘All mammals are warm-blooded’,
‘All human beings are mammals’) a universal aﬃrmative conclusion is
drawn (‘All human beings are warm-blooded’).
can never subsequently be rendered certain: the same point is made at
pp. 219, 220. It is a restatement of what Descartes says at the end of the
Fifth Meditation (pp. 50–1).
219 a ﬁt exercise for everyone: Fourth Replies, p. 159; Preface to the Reader,
pp. 8–9; A Discourse on the Method, II. 15, AT 6. 15.
from the point of view of practical life: on the distinction between practical
life and the search for truth, see above, note to p. 16.
by aﬃrming your existence: Bourdin proceeds to ironize over Descartes’s
reference to Archimedes (p. 17).
once a rooster: Pythagoras, the Greek mathematician and philosopher
(6th century bc), is said to have taught the doctrine of metempsychosis
(the transmigration of souls from one creature, e.g. an animal, to another,
e.g. a human being).
220 a basket full of apples: Cf. p. 225, where the image recurs. It has been criticized, since it seems to imply that Descartes can simply examine each of
his former beliefs in isolation and decide whether they are true, whereas
they have in fact to be inserted into a system of deductions from the fundamental certainty of the Cogito, which is therefore something other than

Explanatory Notes

221

222

223

224

269

one belief (one apple, so to speak) among others (Alquié, OP ii. 982 n.); or
because Descartes presupposes without proof that having some false
beliefs should prevent my being certain about any (Anthony Kenny,
Descartes: A Study of His Philosophy (New York: Random House, 1968),
18–19).
This is not my approach at all: Bourdin seems indeed to be taking
Descartes’s exposition of his former beliefs as simply a restatement of
them as true. See also Dd (pp. 221, 222).
I am a body: Bourdin continues to interpret Descartes’s argumentation as
simply based on his old beliefs—but if the beliefs were false, as Descartes
himself stated, how can they lead to truth? Besides, as in this example,
from a former (false) belief, he can reach a quite opposite conclusion to
Descartes’s.
apprehensive, slow-witted, unintelligent: this ironic self-depreciation is
indeed part of Bourdin’s rhetorical strategy. Descartes’s theatrical allusion is interesting: he compares Bourdin not to the comic slaves of ancient
comedy, but to the low clowns of contemporary theatre. On his discussion of drama, see Henry Phillips, ‘Descartes and the Dramatic
Experience’, French Studies, 39 (1985), 408–22.
I am either a body or a non-body: the contraries ‘mind’ and ‘body’ cannot
provide a foundation for the argument. Bourdin imagines Descartes
trying afresh with the contradictories ‘body’ and ‘non-body’.
you have overlooked it: Bourdin’s fundamental point is this. Descartes’s
argument depends on the contrast between my lack of certainty as to what
I am (e.g. a body) and my certainty that I exist. Consequently, he suggests, it collapses if we recognize that we have an indeterminate certainty
of being something. This is why the indeterminate–determinate distinction is (he thinks) so crucial.
we cannot infer the existence of anything from our own knowledge of it:
Bourdin quotes the scholastic adage a nosse ad esse non valet consequentia
(‘from knowledge to being there is no valid inference’). He here adds a
diagram, a logical matrix, of the type known as the ‘Porphyrian tree’,
mapping out the possible variations of thinking substance. It is either corporeal (i.e. having and using a body) or incorporeal. The ﬁrst division
subdivides into extended and divisible substances, like the soul of a horse
or a dog, and non-extended indivisible substances, like the mind of
Socrates or Plato. The second subdivision contains God and the angels.
The point is to suggest that Descartes should have measured his alleged
self-knowledge against the categories in the diagram, so as to have a more
accurate idea of his own nature.
Much of what Bourdin says is frivolous: Descartes does not take seriously
Bourdin’s question whether there was in fact a past time in which he held
various beliefs. Bourdin makes the same point at Nn (p. 223).

270

Explanatory Notes

225 a ﬁgment of his own brain: the passage, too long to quote here, is a splendid satirical portrayal of Bourdin as a stage performer acting out a battle
against an invisible adversary.
that everything is supposed to be rejected: more literally, that nothing is not
supposed to be rejected. That is to say, he fails to see how a preliminary
rejection of all beliefs can lead to later aﬃrmations.
226 any thinking substance that is divisible: the reference is to the category of
extended and divisible souls, like that of a horse or a dog, in Bourdin’s
diagram (see note to p. 224).
are meaningless here: this is not entirely fair. Bourdin wants Descartes to
acknowledge indeterminate, confused, implicit forms of knowledge, cutting across his too rigid distinction between ignorance or doubt and actual
certainty. However, the very notion of innate ideas, as used by Descartes,
shows that he is well aware that not all knowledge is actual.
I do use syllogism when it is appropriate: for example, the ontological argument for the existence of God has the structure of a syllogism, but it is
noteworthy that in the body of the Fifth Meditation he does not set it out
in an explicitly syllogistic form. He does so in reply to objections, where
the objectors appeal to the syllogistic model to disclose alleged fallacies in
the argument (see First Replies, p. 81; Second Replies, §6, pp. 97–8).
It is presented as timeless: the proposition is in fact only temporarily true,
true, that is, for the duration of the doubting process that takes place in
the First Meditation. The syllogistic form is in fact ill suited to represent
the process of thought over time.
227 pruning more ruthlessly than necessary: cf. F, ‘seeking to incorporate more
than it can’. The translator (Clerselier) reads L stringit (of which the fundamental sense is ‘to strip, clip, prune’) as meaning something like ‘grips’
or ‘grasps at’: i.e. the method attempts great things but achieves nothing.
I think the context implies the alternative reading given in the translation
here (which draws on the etymological sense of the Latin verb): you make
tremendous eﬀorts to reject what is uncertain, in the hope of achieving
certainty, but nothing results.
229 will they not write him oﬀ as well?: more literally: ‘He will add them to the
list of hopeless or condemned cases: but in the meantime to what list will
they add him?’
230 reasons more certain than any of those we have for accepting all appearances:
the sceptics’ logic, as reconstructed by Descartes, is this. It certainly
appears to us—we can’t help thinking—that e.g. bodies exist, that a
London bus is red, and so forth. So we accept this in practice. But we
have no certain reason to believe that appearances correspond to reality.
But since e.g. the existence of God is not so apparent as that of bodies,
we would require even stronger arguments in order to believe in it than
those (by which we are not convinced) in favour of accepting the reality
of appearances.

Explanatory Notes

271

subsection 5: The subsections here refer to Descartes’s rewriting of sec. 12
of Bourdin’s critique of the method in his Answer to Question 2 (see
p. 228).
231 to block the understanding of the real distinction between the human mind and
the body: this is an important but diﬃcult passage. It is important to recognize that Descartes is not discussing the nature of thinking in general,
but purely what kind of thinking constitutes the diﬀerence between
immaterial and material substance. From this point of view Bourdin’s
focus on reﬂexivity is disastrous, because it implies that immaterial substances can think, albeit non-reﬂexively, and so undermines the argument
for the real distinction between thinking and extended substances. On the
other hand, if reﬂexivity is not essential to thinking, it might, after all,
appear that animals can think, since Descartes does not deny that they
have sensations, merely that they are aware of their sensations in the same
way as we are or can be. The solution would have to be something like
this: thought involves a capacity to become aware of itself (the presence
of a ﬁre near me causes a physical sensation of heat, such as an animal can
have, but of which, as a human, I can become aware (‘I’m feeling hot’)),
without this awareness being the result of a quite distinct reﬂexive act, a
conscious attention to the sensation of heat, of the kind Bourdin seems to
require. (For an important treatment of the concept of consciousness in
Descartes, see Gordon Baker and Katherine J. Morris, Descartes’ Dualism
(London: Routledge, 1996). In any case, this passage, as Jean-Luc Marion
points out (Questions cartésiennes: méthode et métaphysique (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1991), 165–6) militates against the view,
inﬂuentially propagated by Heidegger, that for Descartes thinking is
intrinsically reﬂexive, cogito always meaning cogito me cogitare (‘I am
thinking that I am thinking’): that thinking is an act by which I represent
myself to myself as thinking. See Martin Heidegger, Nietzsche, trans.
Frank A. Capuzzi, ed. David Farrell Krell (San Francisco: Harper &
Row, 1979–87), vol. 4: Nihilism (1982), 106–10.

This page intentionally left blank

INDEX
a priori, a posteriori 246
abstraction 141–2, 254
Academics (philosophers) 87, 245
accidents, xxix–xxxi, 11, 34, 106, 110,
163, 206, 266; see also mode, real
accident, substance
act/potentiality 236, 252, 260
acts and subject 107–11
Alexander the Great 261
Alquié, Ferdinand xiv n. 12, xxvi n. 45,
xxxv, 71 n. 10, 246, 249, 255, 259, 262,
263, 266, 268, 269
America 265
Amsterdam xvi
analogical 245
analytic method 99–102, 160, 246–7, 256
angels 85, 91, 94–5, 112–13, 172, 179,
197, 199, 203
animal spirits 131, 147, 148, 251, 254
animals xxxvii, 69, 114, 130, 131, 147,
148, 168, 169, 172, 175, 182, 187, 188,
199, 203, 221, 234, 265, 271
Anselm, St xxxii, 76, 81, 260
Antipodes 265
Apelles 263
Apollonius 5
Aquinas, St Thomas xx n. 29, xxxi, xlii
n. 3, 67, 75, 76, 79, 81, 234, 240, 242,
244, 245, 252
Archimedes 5, 17, 155, 158, 233, 256, 268
Ariew, Roger xiv n. 12, xx n. 26, xxx
n. 54, 67 n. 1, 70 n. 9, 237, 242
Ariew, Roger and Marjorie Grene xiv
n. 12, xxx n. 54, 67 n. 1, 242, 247
Aristotle, Aristotelianism xiii, xix–xxi,
xxv, xxix–xxx, xxxviii, xxxix, 75, 156,
160, 162, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 240,
241, 246, 247, 249, 251, 252, 255, 256,
257, 259, 260, 261, 264, 266, 267
Armogathe, Jean-Robert xv n. 14, 67
Arnauld, Antoine xvi, xxxiii n. 56,
xxxiv–xxxv, 68, 125–64, 232, 238,
239, 250–8, 259
atheists xliii, 8, 85–6, 92–3, 124, 179
Augustine of Hippo, St xvi n. 18, xxi,
68, 126, 131, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140,
235, 251, 252, 253

authority 139, 140, 165, 190, 202,
213, 229
axiom 247
Ayers, Michael xi n. 3
Baker, Gordon xxxvii n. 65, 271
Bannius, Johannes Albertus 67
Barker, Francis xxxvii n. 63
Beeckman, Isaac x
Bible 3–4, 93–4, 232, 244–5
Bloch, Olivier René 69 n. 7
Bloemart, Augustine 67
body, bodies (in general) xxix,
xxxii–xxxiv, 19, 20, 22, 24, 31–2,
45–7, 51–64, 250, 257, 259, 260
body (human) xxviii, xxxii–xxxiv, 14,
17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 51–63, 233, 241,
248, 261
Bourdin, Pierre xvi, xxvi, 69–73,
268–71
Boyle, Robert xi n. 3
brain xxxiv, 61–3, 89, 103, 131, 147–8,
167–9, 182, 188–9, 208
Bucephalus 261, 264
Calvin, Jean (Calvinists, Calvinism) xvi
n. 18, 120, 246, 249–50, 257, 263, 266
Canadians 85, 244
Carraud, Vincent 68 n. 6
Carriero, John xlii n. 2
Caterus, Johannes 67, 74–84,
241–4, 252
causal principle xxx, 29–30, 35, 85, 89,
172, 191
cause, causation 35–6, 232, 238, 243,
244, 249, 255, 259; eﬃcient 75, 104,
133–7, 149, 151–7, 172, 191, 193, 207,
252, 255, 259, 262; ﬁnal 40, 175, 193,
237, 259; formal 156, 255, 259;
material 156, 172, 191, 259
Cave, Terence 234
certainty xxv, xxix, xxxiv–xxxv, 94–5,
232, 234, 239, 244, 246, 262, 267,
268–9, 270
Châtellerault ix
children, childhood 13, 59, 130, 147, 232
Christina, Queen of Sweden x

274

Index

Churchill, Winston 261
Cicero 244, 265
circle, arguing in a xxxiv–xxxv, 85, 92,
137, 158, 235, 239, 244, 253, 263, 268
Clarke, Desmond M. ix n. 1, xvi n. 16,
xix n. 24, xxxvii n. 65, xli n. 267
Clerselier, Claude xvi, xvii, 246, 270
Cogito xii, xxvi–xxviii, 18, 92, 107–8,
234, 236, 246, 268, 271
cognitio xlii–xliv
‘common sense’ 23, 61, 234, 241
conduct of life 12, 96, 138, 159, 185, 227
conscious, consciousness 80, 137, 158–9,
240, 256, 262, 267, 271
conservation: identical with creation
35–6, 135, 174, 192
‘Conversation with Burman’ xxvii
Cottingham, John xiii n. 10, xx nn.
26–7, xxxiii n. 56, xxxv n. 60, xxxvii
nn. 64–5, 235, 246
criterion 236, 248
Curley, Edwin M. xix n. 25, xxv n. 43,
xxxv n. 60, xliv, 234
custom xxviii, 16, 17, 23, 38, 47, 51,
52, 59
Dear, Peter xiv n. 12, 247
deceiver hypothesis xxvi, xxix, 15–19,
26, 37, 166, 184
deception: can God deceive us? xxxiii,
xliii, 37, 38–42, 86, 94, 123, 199, 204
degrees of reality 106, 116–17
demonstration 232
denomination (extrinsic) 74, 77, 241, 242
Derrida, Jacques xxiv n. 39
Descartes, works by: Dioptrics (La
Dioptrique) xi, 160, 256, 257, 267;
A Discourse on the Method (Discours
de la méthode) ix n. 2, x, xi, xii, xiii,
xiv n. 12, xx n. 29, xxiv, xlii, 7–8, 72,
97, 126, 127, 138, 147, 148, 159, 219,
232, 233, 239, 240, 253, 254, 256, 259,
265, 268; Geometry (La Géométrie) xi;
Meteorology (Les Météores) xi, 160,
256; Passions of the Soul, The (Les
Passions de l’âme) xi, xxxvii, xli, 241,
251, 254, 262, 265; Principles of
Philosophy xi, xiii n. 10, xx n. 27, xli,
70, 232, 234, 236, 237, 240, 244, 245,
254, 257, 266; Rules for the Direction of
the Mind xxvii; The World (Le Monde)
xi, xxxiii, 241, 249

Dicker, Georges xxv n. 43, xxxv n. 60
Dinet, Jacques xvi, xvii, xli, 70
distinction, kinds of 236; formal 76,
83–4; modal 84; real 55, 84, 141–4;
see also mind
Don Quixote 233
doubt xii, xxvi, xxxiii, 10, 12, 13–18, 19,
20, 21, 23, 25–6, 28, 33, 34, 38, 40,
42–3, 45, 50, 55, 57, 63–4, 87, 107,
138, 145, 159–60, 233, 239, 248, 260,
267, 268, 270
dreams, dreaming xxv, xxxiv 14–15, 16,
17, 20, 63–4, 72, 107, 123–4, 166,
168, 180, 184, 186, 189, 190, 199,
215–16, 217–18, 222, 223, 224–5,
227, 250
dualism xxxvi–xxxviii
Duns Scotus 76, 83, 242
eﬃcient cause, see cause
Elisabeth of Bohemia x, xxxvi, xxxvii
Elzevier (publishers) xvi
eminent 29, 30, 32, 33, 56, 235
Empiricus, Sextus xviii
entelechy 260
Epicureanism 69
equivocal, equivocity 245
error xxxi–xxxii, xxxiv, 12, 38–45,
119–21, 175–6, 194, 237, 238, 241,
250, 253, 256, 259
essence 45–51, 52, 55, 59, 74–5, 76, 78,
81, 83, 86, 108, 110, 122–3, 127–30,
136–7, 140–1, 144, 152–5, 168, 176,
177–8, 179–80, 192, 195–6, 205,
206–7, 209, 212, 225, 226, 244, 255,
256, 260; and existence 81, 86, 122–3,
176–7, 195–6
eternal truths 263, 266
Eucharist 139–40, 160–5, 253,
257–8
Euripus 241
evil genius 166, 178, 214, 218, 219, 256;
see also deceiver hypothesis
experiments 240, 259
extended substance 258, 264, 269,
270, 271
extended thing 104, 127–30, 181, 182,
188, 202
extended, extension xxxii, xxxvi, 15, 17,
22, 31, 32, 45, 53, 55, 56, 61
extrinsic denomination, see
denomination

Index
faith 3, 138–9, 140, 159
falsity 26–7, 31, 33, 38–45, 195
falsity, material 31, 33, 132–3,
149–51, 252
formal cause, see cause
formal reality 29–30, 32, 33, 34, 56,
171–2, 235–6, 243, 252, 259
Foucault, Michel xxiv n. 39
Francine (Descartes’s daughter) x
Frankfurt, Harry G. xxv n. 43, xxxv
nn. 59–60
free will, freedom 40–4, 120, 176, 194,
237, 246, 250, 266
Gabbey, Alan 237
Galen 252
Galileo xi
Garber, Daniel xi n. 3, xx n. 27, xxxvi
n. 62, 67, 247, 267
Gassendi, Pierre xi n. 3, xvi, xvii,
xxii, xxvi, xxxix, 69, 70, 166–98,
258–64, 265
Gaukroger, Stephen ix n. 1, xi n. 4,
xix nn. 24–5, xx n. 27, xxi n. 32,
xxvi n. 44
Gaunilo 260
gender xxxvii
geometrical method 86, 99–102
geometry 5, 10, 12
Germany x
Gibieuf, Guillaume xi, xxxix, 238
Gilson, Étienne 240, 266
God: cause of himself 67, 80, 133–7,
151–8, 252, 255–6; existence of
xii, xvi n. 17, xxxiv–xxxv, 25–37,
45–51; proofs of 4–6; causal proof
xxix–xxxi, 7–8, 25–37, 67, 75,
76–80, 89–91, 131–7, 171–4,
191–3, 235–6, 242, 243, 252, 255,
259; ontological proof xxxii, 45–51,
67, 75, 81–3, 86, 97–8, 177–8,
196–7, 238–9, 243–4, 255, 259–60;
incomprehensible 86, 92, 118–19,
171, 191–2; see also idea of God,
knowledge of God
Gouhier, Henri xv n. 13, xvi n. 18, 247
grace 3, 41, 96, 237, 246, 253, 266
Grayling, A. C. ix n. 1
Grene, Marjorie, see Ariew, Roger
habit 16, 24, 40, 44, 58
Hallyn, Fernand xiv n. 12

275

Hatﬁeld, Gary xiv n. 12, xv n. 15, xxi
n. 27, xxii nn. 36–7, xxv n. 43, xxxiv,
xxxv nn. 59–60, 235, 257
Hegel, G. W. F. xxxix
Heidegger, Martin xxxviii, 271
Helena (Descartes’s partner) x
heliocentrism xi
Hobbes, Thomas xvi, xxii, 68, 69, 70,
107–24, 235, 248–50, 251, 259, 261;
Leviathan 249
Hoﬀman, Paul xlii n. 2
Hume, David xxxix
humour theory 233
Hurons 85, 244
Husserl, Edmund xxvii–xxix, xxxviii,
xxxix
Huygens, Constantijn xiv n. 11
Hyperaspistes 237
idea, ideas (in general) xxix–xxxi,
xxxix, 26–34, 36, 38, 40, 41, 42,
45–8, 52, 53–6, 58, 60, 77–9,
112–19, 170–5, 190–3, 235, 236,
238, 242–3, 244, 249, 252, 254–5,
259; not mental images 106, 113–14,
115, 191; clear and distinct xxxii,
55, 127, 150, 173, 181–2, 261, 264;
kinds of: adventitious 27–8, 170,
190; factitious 27, 170, 190; innate
27, 37, 118, 119, 270; of body 42,
52, 82, 84, 127, 172, 181, 222, 250,
251; of God 32–5, 37, 39, 47, 48,
78–9, 80, 85, 89–90, 112–19, 132,
150, 171–5, 191–3, 196, 200, 218,
232, 235, 236, 243, 244, 245, 246, 249,
254–5, 263, 264; of the inﬁnite 249;
of one’s self, mind, or soul 32, 37,
55, 115, 116, 127, 172, 181, 225, 236,
261, 267
imagination xxxiii, 12, 19–24, 25, 27, 38,
41, 45–6, 47–8, 51–3, 56, 102, 103,
112–15, 150, 169, 188, 189, 198, 203,
220, 221, 223, 228
immortality xvi n. 17, 4, 10, 86,
99, 130–1, 147, 227, 230, 239,
245, 251
imperfect, imperfection 16, 30, 34, 38,
40, 44, 75, 79, 135, 136, 151, 173, 175,
178, 194, 200
indiﬀerence 237, 238, 259
inﬁnite regress 36–7, 174, 192, 236
inﬁnity 80–1, 86, 91–2

276

Index

intellect xxxi, 19, 24, 40–5, 51–2, 54,
58, 74, 76–9, 80, 81–3, 85, 88, 90–1,
95, 98, 102, 104, 105, 130, 141–2,
149–50, 151, 169, 171, 172, 175–6,
177, 180–1, 189, 191, 194–5, 197,
200, 202, 203, 207–8, 208–9, 233,
237, 239, 242–3, 254, 259, 261, 267;
see also will
intellection (distinguished from
imagination) 24, 51–2, 131, 168,
179, 191, 197–8
intuition 235, 266
Italy x
James, Susan xxxvii n. 66
Jansenists, Jansenism xvi, 68
Jansenius, Cornelius xvi n. 18
Jesuits (Society of Jesus) ix, xvi, xli, 70
Judowitz, Dalia xxviii n. 50
Kant, Immanuel xxvii–xxix, xxxii,
xxxix, 246, 260, 266
Kenny, Anthony xxxv n. 60, 235, 266,
269
knowledge xii, xviii–xxi, xxiv, xxv,
xxvi–xxxi, xxxix, xlii–xliv, 12, 16, 18,
20, 24, 25, 33–4, 38, 39–40, 41, 42,
44, 49–51, 54, 58, 67, 71, 86, 92–3,
95, 97, 98, 106, 120, 121, 124, 129,
141–2, 156, 166, 168, 171, 172. 175,
176, 178–9, 190, 197, 199, 201, 211,
213, 215, 217, 218, 223, 224, 225–6,
232, 233, 234, 235, 238, 245, 246, 250,
253, 254, 255, 259, 261, 264, 266, 267,
269, 270; of God 3–4, 75–6, 80–1, 87,
92, 126, 127, 157, 175, 236, 244, 260; of
one’s own existence 108–9, 199, 201,
219, 224 (see also Cogito); of one’s self
87, 126, 128, 130, 144, 168–70, 172,
188, 189–90, 198, 223, 225, 251, 260,
269; of substance 110, 116, 142, 171
Kretzmann, Norman xlii n. 3
La Flèche ix, xvi
La Haye ix
Laporte, Jean 266
Larmore, Charles xxvi n. 44
Lateran, Council of the 4
Le Dœuﬀ, Michèle xxii n. 38
Le Mans ix
Leibniz xxxvi, xxxix, 68, 243, 260
Lennon, Thomas M. 69 n. 7

Leo X, Pope 4
Levinas, Emmanuel xl
Lewis, C. S. 265
Lewis, Geneviève xxxix n. 69; see also
Rodis-Lewis
Lichtenberg, C. G. xxvii
Lloyd, Genevieve xxxvii n. 63
Locke, John xxxix, 265
Loeb, Louis E. xxxv nn. 59–60, 72
logic 80
Louis XIV 68
Lucretius 239
Luther, Lutheran 257
Luynes, duc de xvi
MacDonald, Scott xlii n. 3
Maclean, Ian ix, xlii, 252, 259
madness, mad people xxiv, 14, 130, 147
Malebranche, Nicolas xvi n. 18, xxxvi,
xxxix, 68, 233, 261, 265
Marion, Jean-Luc 72, 271
material things: essence of 45–7;
existence of 51–7
mathematics 15, 26, 47, 51–2, 57, 67,
136, 170, 179, 195–6, 197, 199, 201,
205, 207, 211, 214, 239, 240, 247, 254
matter x–xi, xx; see also body
Maurice of Nassau x
Maximilian, duke of Bavaria x
mechanism (theory) x–xi
meditation xiii–xv, xxi–xxv, 101, 147
memory xxxiii, xxxiv, xxxv, 17, 24, 44,
49–50, 53, 63–4, 92, 95, 100, 118,
123–4, 158, 159, 188
Menn, Stephen xv n. 13, xxi n. 30, xxx
n. 54, xlii n. 3, 242, 251
Mersenne, Marin xi, xi–xii, xiii n. 10,
xv, xvi, xxxix, 67, 68, 69, 127, 140,
183, 232, 245, 247, 253, 257, 263, 265
Mesland 250, 257, 266
metaphor xxii, xxiv–xxv, 121
mind 10–11, 17–24, 51–63; always
thinking 118, 130, 159, 168, 188, 259;
really distinct from body (or not) xvi
n. 17, xxxiii, xxxvi–xxxviii, 4, 6, 12,
51–63, 76, 83–4, 85, 86–9, 125–31,
140–8, 166–9, 180–3, 185–90,
197–8, 201–3, 209–13, 221, 225–6,
234, 239, 240, 251–2, 258–9, 263, 267,
268, 269–70, 271; united with body
xxxiii–xxxiv, xxxvi–xxxviii, 12, 57–63,
147, 182, 202, 207, 237, 241, 262

Index
miracle 164
Montaigne, Michel de xviii–xix, xxi n.
35, xxiv n. 40, xxv n. 42, 239
Moriarty, Michael xxxvii n. 66,
xxxix n. 69
Morin, Jean-Baptiste 67
Morris, Katherine J. xxxvii n. 65, 271
Muslims 245, 264
Nadler, Steven xi n. 3, 68 n. 5,
233, 249
natural light 12, 28, 29, 30, 31, 34, 35,
37, 43, 58, 80, 83, 89, 90, 96, 103, 120,
134, 135, 136, 153, 154, 155, 166, 235,
252, 255
nature 19, 57–63
negation 32–3, 39, 41, 44, 114, 173, 191,
194, 237–8
Nelson, Alan 238
Netherlands (United Provinces) x
Neuburg x
Newcastle, Marquess of 265
Nicole, Pierre 68
Nietzsche, Friedrich xxvii
Nolan, Lawrence 238
nutrition xxviii, 147, 166, 167, 185, 188,
218, 219
Objections and Replies xv–xvi, 9,
67–73
objective reality xxx–xxxi, 29–30, 33–4,
56, 67, 74–5, 76–9, 116–17, 171, 235,
236, 243, 252, 259
observations 259
Ockham, William of 68, 233
Odysseus xxx
opinion 13, 15, 16, 24, 26, 50, 57,
138–9
original sin 253
Osler, Margaret J. 69 n. 7
Pappus 5
Paris xv, xvi, xxi
Pascal, Blaise 68 n. 4
Pelagian heresy 253
perception xliv–xlv
perception, clear and distinct xxix,
xxxii, xxxiv–xxxv, 11, 25–6,
30, 31, 33, 43–4, 47, 48–50, 51,
55–7, 95, 170, 190, 216, 225–6;
questioned 86, 170, 176, 201,
215, 223

277

perfect, perfection 29–31, 33–6, 38, 39,
40, 41–3, 44, 45, 47–8, 59, 75, 76, 80,
81, 82–3, 85, 90, 92, 93, 103, 105, 106,
133, 154–5, 171, 173–5, 177–8, 180,
191–2, 193, 194, 196, 236, 244, 260,
261; existence as a 244, 260
Phillips, Henry 269
philosophical and religious language
93–4
pineal gland 241
Plato 107, 130, 178, 235, 240, 261
Poitiers x
Poitou ix
Popkin, Richard xix n. 25
Porphyrian tree 269
Port-Royal 68
postulates 247
practical life 233, 241, 268
Prague x
prejudice 10, 80, 89, 95, 99, 100–1, 105,
166, 183–4, 190, 191, 195, 197, 201,
208, 210, 212, 213, 217, 226, 232
primary notions 89, 100
privation 31, 39, 43, 121, 132, 149–50,
195, 204, 210, 237–8, 241, 252
prosopopoeia 261
Protestants ix, x
Providence 175
psychoanalysis xxxviii
Pyrrhonism xviii, xxi, 233, 245, 248
Pythagoras 268
Quintilian 261
real accidents 160, 200, 206; see also
sensible qualities
real qualities 249, 256, 267
reasoning 112
Regius x, 267
rhetoric xxii, xxiii, 183, 184–5, 186, 232,
261, 269,
Rodis-Lewis, Geneviève ix n. 1, xvi
n. 18, xxi n. 33
romance 245
Rorty, Amelie Oksenberg xiv n. 12,
xxxvii n. 66
Ross, W. D. xx n. 26, 237, 261
Rozemond, Marleen xxxvii n. 65
salvation 266
Sartre, Jean-Paul xl, 255
savages 85, 244, 246

278

Index

scandal 253
sceptics, scepticism xii-xiii, xviii–xix,
xxv–xxvi, 69, 72, 87, 107, 170, 190,
197, 219, 229–30, 233, 245, 248, 270
Schmaltz, Tad M. xvi n. 18
scholastics, scholasticism xiii–xiv, xxi,
xxx n. 54, xxxviii, 70, 71, 232, 233,
234, 237, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 249,
255, 256, 261, 263, 269
scientia, scientiﬁc knowledge xlii–xliv,
92, 246; depends on knowledge
of God 12, 49–51, 67, 92–3, 95, 124,
178–9, 197
Scotus, see Duns Scotus
Secada, Jorge xx n. 29, xxi, xxx n. 54,
233, 234, 243
Seigel, Jerrold xxxviii n. 68
sensation xxviii, xxxii–xxxiv, xlv, 21,
22–4, 25, 27, 53–5, 56–63, 160–4,
234, 235, 236, 239, 240, 241, 254,
262, 271
senses, the xiv–xv, xx–xxi, xxiii–xxiv,
xxvi, xxx, xxxiii, 18–25, 28, 29, 36, 37,
38, 46, 52–6, 58–9, 61, 63, 64, 90,
100, 102, 147, 149, 171, 174, 175, 176,
179, 183, 189, 203, 228; conceived as
source of knowledge xx, 13, 54, 169,
200; denied to be source of knowledge
88, 95, 101, 104, 131, 194, 208–9;
reliable 57–8, 166, 168, 170, 179–80,
228; unreliable 13–18, 54–5, 88,
94–5, 104, 107, 166, 185, 187
sense perception xxix, 19, 55, 58–9, 94,
106, 110, 111, 115, 160, 162–4,
205–6, 208–9
sensible qualities xxviii, xxxii–xxxiii,
139–40
seriousness 166, 167, 176, 178, 179,
184–5, 222, 225, 227
sin 12, 138, 159, 232, 238, 250, 253
Skinner, Quentin xviii n. 22
Soly, Michel xvi
Sorbonne, the xv, xli, 3–6
Sorell, Tom xxxvii n. 64, xlii n. 3
soul: Aristotelian theory of 234, 251,
260–1; equivalent for Descartes to
‘mind’ xxviii, 19–20, 168, 258; really
distinct from body, see mind
species (intentional) 172, 181, 198, 207,
235, 256, 259, 266–7
Spinoza, Benedict (Baruch) xxxvi,
xxxviii, xxxix, 254, 265

Stalin, Josef Visarionovich xxx
Stockholm x
Stump, Eleonore xlii n. 3
Suárez, Francisco 151, 233, 255
subject: the ‘Cartesian subject’
xxxviii–xxxix
substance (in general) xxix–xxxi, xxxiii,
32–4, 56, 99, 103, 106, 107–11, 116,
117, 139–40, 142–4, 145–6, 160,
160–4, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173,
182, 187, 188, 189, 191, 196, 197, 198,
200, 202, 205–6, 210, 221, 223,
224–6, 229, 230, 234, 240, 244, 248,
249, 253, 254, 257–8, 259 260, 266,
267, 269, 271; complete and
incomplete 142–3
substantial form 267
surface 160–4, 200, 205–6, 257–8
syllogism 72, 268, 270
synthetic method 99–102, 246–7, 256;
see also analytic method
Taylor, Charles xxi
The Search for Truth xxiii
theorem 247
thinking (act) xxviii, 19–21, 25, 27, 29,
27, 47, 50, 51–3, 56, 57, 60, 67, 85, 93,
95, 98, 108–9, 110, 111, 113, 118, 126,
129, 130, 132, 137, 143, 146, 147, 159,
167–9, 174, 180, 181, 182, 186, 187,
188, 198, 199, 201, 203, 211, 221, 222,
223, 224, 228, 230–1, 248–9, 262,
271; role of body in 67, 85, 93, 167–9,
181, 187, 248
thinking substance xxxvi, 143, 187, 188,
223–6, 229, 230, 235, 248, 258, 267,
269, 270, 271
thinking thing xxviii, xxxiii, 7, 19, 20,
25, 32, 34, 35, 36, 38, 42, 55, 57, 61,
80, 85, 87, 92, 106, 107–11, 112, 127,
128, 129, 130, 137, 140, 146, 158, 168,
169, 180, 182, 186, 187, 190, 194, 198,
202, 212, 218, 221, 222, 223–4,
225–6, 227, 260
Thirty Years’ War x
Thomas Aquinas, see Aquinas
Thomism xxv
thought and language 112, 114
time 134–5, 174, 192
Touraine ix
transubstantiation 253, 257; see also
Eucharist

Index
Trent, Council of 162, 253, 257
Trinity 153, 155–6, 246, 255, 264, 267
truth 25, 38–45, 170, 195
Turks 86, 96, 245
unbelievers xxi, 3–4, 86, 96, 130
unconscious 243
understanding, clear and distinct xxxiii
universals 263
univocal, univocity 245, 266
vacuum 240
Van Cleve, James xxxv n. 60, 235
Vatier, Antoine xiii n. 8, xv n. 13

279

wax experiment 22–4, 88, 108, 169
White Mountain, battle of the x
will xxxi, 40–5, 175–6, 194–5; and
intellect 40–5, 175–6, 194–5; see also
free will, freedom
Williams, Bernard xviii n. 21, xxvii
n. 49, xxxv n. 60
Wilson, Catherine xviii n. 21, xxii
nn. 36–7
Wilson, Margaret Dauler xxi n. 33,
xxii n. 37, xxv n. 43, xxxiii n. 56,
xxxvi n. 62
withdrawal of mind from senses 5, 8, 10,
11, 25, 87–8, 89, 100, 190

