The Order of Things
‘The Order of Things sold out within a month after it ﬁrst
appeared – or so goes the advertising legend. The work numbers among those outward signs of culture the trained eye
should ﬁnd on prominent display in every private library. Have
you read it? One’s social and intellectual standing depends on
the response . . . Foucault is brilliant (a little too brilliant). His
writing sparkles with incisive formulations. He is amusing.
Stimulating. Dazzling. His erudition confounds us; his skill
compels assent; his art seduces.’
Michel de Certeau
‘Foucault’s most important work.’
Hayden V. White
‘One is left with a sense of real and original force.’
George Steiner
‘The Order of Things studies the ways in which people accept
the taxonomies of an epoch without questioning their arbitrariness . . . Even scholars who are in a position to scold Foucault
. . . admit his brilliant ingenuity and scholarly resource.’
Frank Kermode
‘In The Order of Things, Foucault investigates the modern
forms of knowledge (or epistemes) that establish for the
sciences their unsurpassable horizons of basic concepts.’
Jürgen Habermas

Velasquez: Las Meninas, reproduced by courtesy of the Museo del Prado.

Michel

Foucault
The Order of Things
An archaeology of the human sciences

London and New York

Les mots et les choses ﬁrst published 1966
by Editions Gallimard, Paris
English edition ﬁrst published in the United Kingdom 1970
by Tavistock Publications
First published by Routledge 1989
First published in Routledge Classics 2002
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor and Francis e-Library, 2005.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
© 1966 Editions Gallimard
English translation © 1970 Tavistock/Routledge
Foreword to the English edition © 1970 Michel Foucault
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0-203-99664-X Master e-book ISBN

ISBN 0–415–26736–6 (hbk)
ISBN 0–415–26737–4 (pbk)

C ONTENTS

Publisher’s Note
Foreword to the English Edition
Preface

viii
ix
xvi

PART I
1
2

Las Meninas
The Prose of the World
I The Four Similitudes
II Signatures
III The Limits of the World
IV The Writing of Things
V The Being of Language

3
19
19
28
33
38
46

3

Representing
I Don Quixote
II Order
III The Representation of the Sign
IV Duplicated Representation
V The Imagination of Resemblance
VI Mathesis and ‘Taxinomia’

51
51
55
64
70
74
79

vi

contents

4

Speaking
I Criticism and Commentary
II General Grammar
III The Theory of the Verb
IV Articulation
V Designation
VI Derivation
VII The Quadrilateral of Language

86
86
90
101
106
114
121
127

5

Classifying
I What the Historians Say
II Natural History
III Structure
IV Character
V Continuity and Catastrophe
VI Monsters and Fossils
VII The Discourse of Nature

136
136
139
144
150
158
164
171

6

Exchanging
I The Analysis of Wealth
II Money and Prices
III Mercantilism
IV The Pledge and the Price
V The Creation of Value
VI Utility
VII General Table
VIII Desire and Representation

180
180
183
189
196
206
213
218
226

PART II
7

The Limits of Representation
I The Age of History
II The Measure of Labour
III The Organic Structure of Beings
IV Word Inﬂection
V Ideology and Criticism
VI Objective Syntheses

235
235
240
245
252
257
264

contents

8

Labour, Life, Language
I The New Empiricities
II Ricardo
III Cuvier
IV Bopp
V Language Become Object

272
272
275
287
305
321

9

Man and His Doubles
I The Return of Language
II The Place of the King
III The Analytic of Finitude
IV The Empirical and the Transcendental
V The ‘Cogito’ and the Unthought
VI The Retreat and Return of the Origin
VII Discourse and Man’s Being
VIII The Anthropological Sleep

330
330
335
340
347
351
358
366
371

The Human Sciences
I The Three Faces of Knowledge
II The Form of the Human Sciences
III The Three Models
IV History
V Psychoanalysis and Ethnology
VI In Conclusion

375
375
380
387
400
407
421

10

vii

P UBLISHER’S N OTE

A literal translation of the title of the French edition of this work (Les
Mots et les choses) would have given rise to confusion with two other
books that have already appeared under the title Words and things. The
publisher therefore agreed with the author on the alternative title The
order of things, which was, in fact, M. Foucault’s original preference.
In view of the range of literature referred to in the text, it has not
proved feasible in every case to undertake the bibliographical task of
tracing English translations of works originating in other languages
and locating the passages quoted by M. Foucault. The publisher has
accordingly retained the author’s references to French works and to
French translations of Latin and German works, for example, but has, as
far as possible, cited English editions of works originally written in that
language.

F OREWORD TO THE E NGLISH E DITION

This foreword should perhaps be headed ‘Directions for Use’. Not
because I feel that the reader cannot be trusted – he is, of course, free to
make what he will of the book he has been kind enough to read. What
right have I, then, to suggest that it should be used in one way rather
than another? When I was writing it there were many things that were
not clear to me: some of these seemed too obvious, others too obscure.
So I said to myself: this is how my ideal reader would have approached
my book, if my intentions had been clearer and my project more ready
to take form.
1. He would recognize that it was a study of a relatively neglected
ﬁeld. In France at least, the history of science and thought gives pride
of place to mathematics, cosmology, and physics – noble sciences,
rigorous sciences, sciences of the necessary, all close to philosophy:
one can observe in their history the almost uninterrupted emergence
of truth and pure reason. The other disciplines, however – those, for
example, that concern living beings, languages, or economic facts – are
considered too tinged with empirical thought, too exposed to the
vagaries of chance or imagery, to age-old traditions and external
events, for it to be supposed that their history could be anything other
than irregular. At most, they are expected to provide evidence of a state
of mind, an intellectual fashion, a mixture of archaism and bold

x

foreword to the english edition

conjecture, of intuition and blindness. But what if empirical knowledge, at a given time and in a given culture, did possess a well-deﬁned
regularity? If the very possibility of recording facts, of allowing oneself
to be convinced by them, of distorting them in traditions or of making
purely speculative use of them, if even this was not at the mercy of
chance? If errors (and truths), the practice of old beliefs, including not
only genuine discoveries, but also the most naïve notions, obeyed, at a
given moment, the laws of a certain code of knowledge? If, in short,
the history of non-formal knowledge had itself a system? That was my
initial hypothesis – the ﬁrst risk I took.
2. This book must be read as a comparative, and not a symptomatological, study. It was not my intention, on the basis of a particular type
of knowledge or body of ideas, to draw up a picture of a period, or to
reconstitute the spirit of a century. What I wished to do was to present,
side by side, a deﬁnite number of elements: the knowledge of living
beings, the knowledge of the laws of language, and the knowledge of
economic facts, and to relate them to the philosophical discourse that
was contemporary with them during a period extending from the
seventeenth to the nineteenth century. It was to be not an analysis of
Classicism in general, nor a search for a Weltanschauung, but a strictly
‘regional’ study.1
But, among other things, this comparative method produces results
that are often strikingly diﬀerent from those to be found in singlediscipline studies. (So the reader must not expect to ﬁnd here a history
of biology juxtaposed with a history of linguistics, a history of political
economy, and a history of philosophy.) There are shifts of emphasis:
the calendar of saints and heroes is somewhat altered (Linnaeus is
given more space than Buﬀon, Destutt de Tracy than Rousseau; the
Physiocrats are opposed single-handed by Cantillon). Frontiers are
redrawn and things usually far apart are brought closer, and vice versa:
instead of relating the biological taxonomies to other knowledge of the
living being (the theory of germination, or the physiology of animal
movement, or the statics of plants), I have compared them with what
might have been said at the same time about linguistic signs, the forma1
I sometimes use terms like ‘thought’ or ‘Classical science’, but they refer practically
always to the particular discipline under consideration.

foreword to the english edition

tion of general ideas, the language of action, the hierarchy of needs,
and the exchange of goods.
This had two consequences: I was led to abandon the great divisions
that are now familiar to us all. I did not look in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries for the beginnings of nineteenth-century biology
(or philosophy or economics). What I saw was the appearance of
ﬁgures peculiar to the Classical age: a ‘taxonomy’ or ‘natural history’
that was relatively unaﬀected by the knowledge that then existed in
animal or plant physiology; an ‘analysis of wealth’ that took little
account of the assumptions of the ‘political arithmetic’ that was contemporary with it; and a ‘general grammar’ that was quite alien to the
historical analyses and works of exegesis then being carried out.
Epistemological ﬁgures, that is, that were not superimposed on the
sciences as they were individualized and named in the nineteenth century. Moreover, I saw the emergence, between these diﬀerent ﬁgures,
of a network of analogies that transcended the traditional proximities:
between the classiﬁcation of plants and the theory of coinage, between
the notion of generic character and the analysis of trade, one ﬁnds in
the Classical sciences isomorphisms that appear to ignore the extreme
diversity of the objects under consideration. The space of knowledge
was then arranged in a totally diﬀerent way from that systematized in
the nineteenth century by Comte or Spencer. The second risk I took
was in having wished to describe not so much the genesis of our
sciences as an epistemological space speciﬁc to a particular period.
3. I did not operate, therefore, at the level that is usually that of the
historian of science – I should say at the two levels that are usually his.
For, on the one hand, the history of science traces the progress of
discovery, the formulation of problems, and the clash of controversy; it
also analyses theories in their internal economy; in short, it describes
the processes and products of the scientiﬁc consciousness. But, on the
other hand, it tries to restore what eluded that consciousness: the inﬂuences that aﬀected it, the implicit philosophies that were subjacent to
it, the unformulated thematics, the unseen obstacles; it describes the
unconscious of science. This unconscious is always the negative side of
science – that which resists it, deﬂects it, or disturbs it. What I would
like to do, however, is to reveal a positive unconscious of knowledge: a level
that eludes the consciousness of the scientist and yet is part of scientiﬁc

xi

xii

foreword to the english edition

discourse, instead of disputing its validity and seeking to diminish
its scientiﬁc nature. What was common to the natural history, the
economics, and the grammar of the Classical period was certainly
not present to the consciousness of the scientist; or that part of it
that was conscious was superﬁcial, limited, and almost fanciful
(Adanson, for example, wished to draw up an artiﬁcial denomination for plants; Turgot compared coinage with language); but, unknown to themselves, the naturalists, economists, and grammarians
employed the same rules to deﬁne the objects proper to their own
study, to form their concepts, to build their theories. It is these
rules of formation, which were never formulated in their own right,
but are to be found only in widely diﬀering theories, concepts, and
objects of study, that I have tried to reveal, by isolating, as their
speciﬁc locus, a level that I have called, somewhat arbitrarily perhaps, archaeological. Taking as an example the period covered in this
book, I have tried to determine the basis or archaeological system
common to a whole series of scientiﬁc ‘representations’ or ‘products’
dispersed throughout the natural history, economics, and philosophy
of the Classical period.
4. I should like this work to be read as an open site. Many questions
are laid out on it that have not yet found answers; and many of the
gaps refer either to earlier works or to others that have not yet been
completed, or even begun. But I should like to mention three
problems.
The problem of change. It has been said that this work denies the
very possibility of change. And yet my main concern has been with
changes. In fact, two things in particular struck me: the suddenness and
thoroughness with which certain sciences were sometimes reorganized; and the fact that at the same time similar changes occurred in
apparently very diﬀerent disciplines. Within a few years (around
1800), the tradition of general grammar was replaced by an essentially
historical philology; natural classiﬁcations were ordered according to
the analyses of comparative anatomy; and a political economy was
founded whose main themes were labour and production. Confronted
by such a curious combination of phenomena, it occurred to me that
these changes should be examined more closely, without being
reduced, in the name of continuity, in either abruptness or scope. It

foreword to the english edition

seemed to me at the outset that diﬀerent kinds of change were taking
place in scientiﬁc discourse – changes that did not occur at the same
level, proceed at the same pace, or obey the same laws; the way in
which, within a particular science, new propositions were produced,
new facts isolated, or new concepts built up (the events that make up
the everyday life of a science) did not, in all probability, follow the
same model as the appearance of new ﬁelds of study (and the frequently corresponding disappearance of old ones); but the appearance
of new ﬁelds of study must not, in turn, be confused with those
overall redistributions that alter not only the general form of a science, but also its relations with other areas of knowledge. It seemed to
me, therefore, that all these changes should not be treated at the same
level, or be made to culminate at a single point, as is sometimes done,
or be attributed to the genius of an individual, or a new collective
spirit, or even to the fecundity of a single discovery; that it would be
better to respect such diﬀerences, and even to try to grasp them in
their speciﬁcity. In this way I tried to describe the combination of
corresponding transformations that characterized the appearance of
biology, political economy, philology, a number of human sciences,
and a new type of philosophy, at the threshold of the nineteenth
century.
The problem of causality. It is not always easy to determine what has
caused a speciﬁc change in a science. What made such a discovery
possible? Why did this new concept appear? Where did this or that
theory come from? Questions like these are often highly embarrassing
because there are no deﬁnite methodological principles on which to
base such an analysis. The embarrassment is much greater in the case of
those general changes that alter a science as a whole. It is greater still in
the case of several corresponding changes. But it probably reaches its
highest point in the case of the empirical sciences: for the role of
instruments, techniques, institutions, events, ideologies, and interests
is very much in evidence; but one does not know how an articulation
so complex and so diverse in composition actually operates. It seemed
to me that it would not be prudent for the moment to force a solution
I felt incapable, I admit, of oﬀering: the traditional explanations –
spirit of the time, technological or social changes, inﬂuences of
various kinds – struck me for the most part as being more magical than

xiii

xiv foreword to the english edition
eﬀective. In this work, then, I left the problem of causes to one side;1 I
chose instead to conﬁne myself to describing the transformations
themselves, thinking that this would be an indispensable step if, one
day, a theory of scientiﬁc change and epistemological causality was to
be constructed.
The problem of the subject. In distinguishing between the epistemological level of knowledge (or scientiﬁc consciousness) and the
archaeological level of knowledge, I am aware that I am advancing in a
direction that is fraught with diﬃculty. Can one speak of science and its
history (and therefore of its conditions of existence, its changes, the
errors it has perpetrated, the sudden advances that have sent it oﬀ on a
new course) without reference to the scientist himself – and I am
speaking not merely of the concrete individual represented by a proper
name, but of his work and the particular form of his thought? Can a
valid history of science be attempted that would retrace from beginning to end the whole spontaneous movement of an anonymous body
of knowledge? Is it legitimate, is it even useful, to replace the traditional ‘X thought that . . . ’ by a ‘it was known that . . . ’? But this is not
exactly what I set out to do. I do not wish to deny the validity of
intellectual biographies, or the possibility of a history of theories, concepts, or themes. It is simply that I wonder whether such descriptions
are themselves enough, whether they do justice to the immense density of scientiﬁc discourse, whether there do not exist, outside their
customary boundaries, systems of regularities that have a decisive role
in the history of the sciences. I should like to know whether the subjects responsible for scientiﬁc discourse are not determined in their
situation, their function, their perceptive capacity, and their practical
possibilities by conditions that dominate and even overwhelm them. In
short, I tried to explore scientiﬁc discourse not from the point of view
of the individuals who are speaking, nor from the point of view of the
formal structures of what they are saying, but from the point of view of
the rules that come into play in the very existence of such discourse:
what conditions did Linnaeus (or Petty, or Arnauld) have to fulﬁl, not
to make his discourse coherent and true in general, but to give it, at the
1
I had approached this question in connection with psychiatry and clinical medicine in
two earlier works.

foreword to the english edition

time when it was written and accepted, value and practical application
as scientiﬁc discourse – or, more exactly, as naturalist, economic, or
grammatical discourse?
On this point, too, I am well aware that I have not made much
progress. But I should not like the eﬀort I have made in one direction to
be taken as a rejection of any other possible approach. Discourse in
general, and scientiﬁc discourse in particular, is so complex a reality
that we not only can, but should, approach it at diﬀerent levels and
with diﬀerent methods. If there is one approach that I do reject,
however, it is that (one might call it, broadly speaking, the phenomenological approach) which gives absolute priority to the observing
subject, which attributes a constituent role to an act, which places its
own point of view at the origin of all historicity – which, in short,
leads to a transcendental consciousness. It seems to me that the historical analysis of scientiﬁc discourse should, in the last resort, be subject,
not to a theory of the knowing subject, but rather to a theory of
discursive practice.
5. This last point is a request to the English-speaking reader. In
France, certain half-witted ‘commentators’ persist in labelling me a
‘structuralist’. I have been unable to get it into their tiny minds
that I have used none of the methods, concepts, or key terms that
characterize structural analysis.
I should be grateful if a more serious public would free me from a
connection that certainly does me honour, but that I have not deserved.
There may well be certain similarities between the works of the structuralists and my own work. It would hardly behove me, of all people, to
claim that my discourse is independent of conditions and rules of
which I am very largely unaware, and which determine other work that
is being done today. But it is only too easy to avoid the trouble of
analysing such work by giving it an admittedly impressive-sounding,
but inaccurate, label.

xv

P REFACE

This book ﬁrst arose out of a passage in Borges, out of the laughter that
shattered, as I read the passage, all the familiar landmarks of my
thought – our thought, the thought that bears the stamp of our age and
our geography – breaking up all the ordered surfaces and all the planes
with which we are accustomed to tame the wild profusion of existing
things, and continuing long afterwards to disturb and threaten with
collapse our age-old distinction between the Same and the Other. This
passage quotes a ‘certain Chinese encyclopaedia’ in which it is written
that ‘animals are divided into: (a) belonging to the Emperor, (b)
embalmed, (c) tame, (d) sucking pigs, (e) sirens, (f) fabulous, (g)
stray dogs, (h) included in the present classiﬁcation, (i) frenzied, (j)
innumerable, (k) drawn with a very ﬁne camelhair brush, (l) et cetera,
(m) having just broken the water pitcher, (n) that from a long way oﬀ
look like ﬂies’. In the wonderment of this taxonomy, the thing we
apprehend in one great leap, the thing that, by means of the fable, is
demonstrated as the exotic charm of another system of thought, is the
limitation of our own, the stark impossibility of thinking that.
But what is it impossible to think, and what kind of impossibility are
we faced with here? Each of these strange categories can be assigned a
precise meaning and a demonstrable content; some of them do
certainly involve fantastic entities – fabulous animals or sirens – but,

preface

precisely because it puts them into categories of their own, the Chinese
encyclopaedia localizes their powers of contagion; it distinguishes carefully between the very real animals (those that are frenzied or have just
broken the water pitcher) and those that reside solely in the realm of
imagination. The possibility of dangerous mixtures has been exorcized,
heraldry and fable have been relegated to their own exalted peaks: no
inconceivable amphibious maidens, no clawed wings, no disgusting,
squamous epidermis, none of those polymorphous and demoniacal
faces, no creatures breathing ﬁre. The quality of monstrosity here does
not aﬀect any real body, nor does it produce modiﬁcations of any kind
in the bestiary of the imagination; it does not lurk in the depths of any
strange power. It would not even be present at all in this classiﬁcation
had it not insinuated itself into the empty space, the interstitial blanks
separating all these entities from one another. It is not the ‘fabulous’
animals that are impossible, since they are designated as such, but the
narrowness of the distance separating them from (and juxtaposing
them to) the stray dogs, or the animals that from a long way oﬀ look
like ﬂies. What transgresses the boundaries of all imagination, of all
possible thought, is simply that alphabetical series (a, b, c, d) which
links each of those categories to all the others.
Moreover, it is not simply the oddity of unusual juxtapositions that
we are faced with here. We are all familiar with the disconcerting eﬀect
of the proximity of extremes, or, quite simply, with the sudden vicinity
of things that have no relation to each other; the mere act of enumeration that heaps them all together has a power of enchantment all its
own: ‘I am no longer hungry,’ Eusthenes said. ‘Until the morrow, safe
from my saliva all the following shall be: Aspics, Acalephs, Acanthocephalates, Amoebocytes, Ammonites, Axolotls, Amblystomas,
Aphislions, Anacondas, Ascarids, Amphisbaenas, Angleworms,
Amphipods, Anaerobes, Annelids, Anthozoans. . . .’ But all these
worms and snakes, all these creatures redolent of decay and slime are
slithering, like the syllables which designate them, in Eusthenes’ saliva:
that is where they all have their common locus, like the umbrella and the
sewing-machine on the operating table; startling though their propinquity may be, it is nevertheless warranted by that and, by that in, by that
on whose solidity provides proof of the possibility of juxtaposition. It
was certainly improbable that arachnids, ammonites, and annelids

xvii

xviii preface
should one day mingle on Eusthenes’ tongue, but, after all, that welcoming and voracious mouth certainly provided them with a feasible
lodging, a roof under which to coexist.
The monstrous quality that runs through Borges’s enumeration consists, on the contrary, in the fact that the common ground on which
such meetings are possible has itself been destroyed. What is impossible is not the propinquity of the things listed, but the very site on
which their propinquity would be possible. The animals ‘(i) frenzied,
(j) innumerable, (k) drawn with a very ﬁne camelhair brush’ – where
could they ever meet, except in the immaterial sound of the voice
pronouncing their enumeration, or on the page transcribing it? Where
else could they be juxtaposed except in the non-place of language? Yet,
though language can spread them before us, it can do so only in an
unthinkable space. The central category of animals ‘included in the
present classiﬁcation’, with its explicit reference to paradoxes we are
familiar with, is indication enough that we shall never succeed in deﬁning a stable relation of contained to container between each of these
categories and that which includes them all: if all the animals divided
up here can be placed without exception in one of the divisions of this
list, then aren’t all the other divisions to be found in that one division
too? And then again, in what space would that single, inclusive division
have its existence? Absurdity destroys the and of the enumeration by
making impossible the in where the things enumerated would be divided up. Borges adds no ﬁgure to the atlas of the impossible; nowhere
does he strike the spark of poetic confrontation; he simply dispenses
with the least obvious, but most compelling, of necessities; he does
away with the site, the mute ground upon which it is possible for
entities to be juxtaposed. A vanishing trick that is masked or, rather,
laughably indicated by our alphabetical order, which is to be taken as
the clue (the only visible one) to the enumerations of a Chinese
encyclopaedia. . . . What has been removed, in short, is the famous
‘operating table’; and rendering to Roussel1 a small part of what is still
his due, I use that word ‘table’ in two superimposed senses: the nickelplated, rubbery table swathed in white, glittering beneath a glass sun
1
Raymond Roussel, the French novelist. Cf. Michel Foucault’s Raymond Roussel (Paris,
1963). [Translator’s note.]

preface

devouring all shadow – the table where, for an instant, perhaps forever,
the umbrella encounters the sewing-machine; and also a table, a tabula,
that enables thought to operate upon the entities of our world, to put
them in order, to divide them into classes, to group them according to
names that designate their similarities and their diﬀerences – the table
upon which, since the beginning of time, language has intersected space.
That passage from Borges kept me laughing a long time, though not
without a certain uneasiness that I found hard to shake oﬀ. Perhaps
because there arose in its wake the suspicion that there is a worse kind
of disorder than that of the incongruous, the linking together of things
that are inappropriate; I mean the disorder in which fragments of a
large number of possible orders glitter separately in the dimension,
without law or geometry, of the heteroclite; and that word should be
taken in its most literal, etymological sense: in such a state, things are
‘laid’, ‘placed’, ‘arranged’ in sites so very diﬀerent from one another
that it is impossible to ﬁnd a place of residence for them, to deﬁne a
common locus beneath them all. Utopias aﬀord consolation: although they
have no real locality there is nevertheless a fantastic, untroubled region
in which they are able to unfold; they open up cities with vast avenues,
superbly planted gardens, countries where life is easy, even though the
road to them is chimerical. Heterotopias are disturbing, probably because
they secretly undermine language, because they make it impossible to
name this and that, because they shatter or tangle common names,
because they destroy ‘syntax’ in advance, and not only the syntax with
which we construct sentences but also that less apparent syntax which
causes words and things (next to and also opposite one another) to
‘hold together’. This is why utopias permit fables and discourse: they
run with the very grain of language and are part of the fundamental
dimension of the fabula; heterotopias (such as those to be found so
often in Borges) desiccate speech, stop words in their tracks, contest
the very possibility of grammar at its source; they dissolve our myths
and sterilize the lyricism of our sentences.
It appears that certain aphasiacs, when shown various diﬀerently
coloured skeins of wool on a table top, are consistently unable to
arrange them into any coherent pattern; as though that simple rectangle were unable to serve in their case as a homogeneous and neutral
space in which things could be placed so as to display at the same time

xix

xx

preface

the continuous order of their identities or diﬀerences as well as the
semantic ﬁeld of their denomination. Within this simple space in
which things are normally arranged and given names, the aphasiac will
create a multiplicity of tiny, fragmented regions in which nameless
resemblances agglutinate things into unconnected islets; in one corner,
they will place the lightest-coloured skeins, in another the red ones,
somewhere else those that are softest in texture, in yet another place
the longest, or those that have a tinge of purple or those that have been
wound up into a ball. But no sooner have they been adumbrated than
all these groupings dissolve again, for the ﬁeld of identity that sustains
them, however limited it may be, is still too wide not to be unstable;
and so the sick mind continues to inﬁnity, creating groups then dispersing them again, heaping up diverse similarities, destroying those that
seem clearest, splitting up things that are identical, superimposing different criteria, frenziedly beginning all over again, becoming more and
more disturbed, and teetering ﬁnally on the brink of anxiety.
The uneasiness that makes us laugh when we read Borges is certainly
related to the profound distress of those whose language has been
destroyed: loss of what is ‘common’ to place and name. Atopia, aphasia. Yet our text from Borges proceeds in another direction; the mythical homeland Borges assigns to that distortion of classiﬁcation that
prevents us from applying it, to that picture that lacks all spatial coherence, is a precise region whose name alone constitutes for the West a
vast reservoir of utopias. In our dreamworld, is not China precisely this
privileged site of space? In our traditional imagery, the Chinese culture is
the most meticulous, the most rigidly ordered, the one most deaf to
temporal events, most attached to the pure delineation of space; we
think of it as a civilization of dikes and dams beneath the eternal face of
the sky; we see it, spread and frozen, over the entire surface of a
continent surrounded by walls. Even its writing does not reproduce the
fugitive ﬂight of the voice in horizontal lines; it erects the motionless
and still-recognizeable images of things themselves in vertical columns.
So much so that the Chinese encyclopaedia quoted by Borges, and the
taxonomy it proposes, lead to a kind of thought without space, to
words and categories that lack all life and place, but are rooted in a
ceremonial space, overburdened with complex ﬁgures, with tangled
paths, strange places, secret passages, and unexpected communications.

preface

There would appear to be, then, at the other extremity of the earth we
inhabit, a culture entirely devoted to the ordering of space, but one that
does not distribute the multiplicity of existing things into any of the
categories that make it possible for us to name, speak, and think.
When we establish a considered classiﬁcation, when we say that a cat
and a dog resemble each other less than two greyhounds do, even if
both are tame or embalmed, even if both are frenzied, even if both have
just broken the water pitcher, what is the ground on which we are able
to establish the validity of this classiﬁcation with complete certainty?
On what ‘table’, according to what grid of identities, similitudes, analogies, have we become accustomed to sort out so many diﬀerent and
similar things? What is this coherence – which, as is immediately
apparent, is neither determined by an a priori and necessary concatenation, nor imposed on us by immediately perceptible contents? For it is
not a question of linking consequences, but of grouping and isolating,
of analysing, of matching and pigeon-holing concrete contents; there
is nothing more tentative, nothing more empirical (superﬁcially, at
least) than the process of establishing an order among things; nothing
that demands a sharper eye or a surer, better-articulated language;
nothing that more insistently requires that one allow oneself to be
carried along by the proliferation of qualities and forms. And yet an eye
not consciously prepared might well group together certain similar
ﬁgures and distinguish between others on the basis of such and such a
diﬀerence: in fact, there is no similitude and no distinction, even for
the wholly untrained perception, that is not the result of a precise
operation and of the application of a preliminary criterion. A ‘system
of elements’ – a deﬁnition of the segments by which the resemblances
and diﬀerences can be shown, the types of variation by which those
segments can be aﬀected, and, lastly, the threshold above which there
is a diﬀerence and below which there is a similitude – is indispensable
for the establishment of even the simplest form of order. Order is, at
one and the same time, that which is given in things as their inner law,
the hidden network that determines the way they confront one
another, and also that which has no existence except in the grid created
by a glance, an examination, a language; and it is only in the blank
spaces of this grid that order manifests itself in depth as though already
there, waiting in silence for the moment of its expression.

xxi

xxii preface
The fundamental codes of a culture – those governing its language,
its schemas of perception, its exchanges, its techniques, its values, the
hierarchy of its practices – establish for every man, from the very ﬁrst,
the empirical orders with which he will be dealing and within which
he will be at home. At the other extremity of thought, there are the
scientiﬁc theories or the philosophical interpretations which explain
why order exists in general, what universal law it obeys, what principle
can account for it, and why this particular order has been established
and not some other. But between these two regions, so distant from
one another, lies a domain which, even though its role is mainly an
intermediary one, is nonetheless fundamental: it is more confused,
more obscure, and probably less easy to analyse. It is here that a culture,
imperceptibly deviating from the empirical orders prescribed for it by
its primary codes, instituting an initial separation from them, causes
them to lose their original transparency, relinquishes its immediate
and invisible powers, frees itself suﬃciently to discover that these
orders are perhaps not the only possible ones or the best ones; this
culture then ﬁnds itself faced with the stark fact that there exists, below
the level of its spontaneous orders, things that are in themselves capable
of being ordered, that belong to a certain unspoken order; the fact, in
short, that order exists. As though emancipating itself to some extent
from its linguistic, perceptual, and practical grids, the culture superimposed on them another kind of grid which neutralized them, which
by this superimposition both revealed and excluded them at the same
time, so that the culture, by this very process, came face to face with
order in its primary state. It is on the basis of this newly perceived
order that the codes of language, perception, and practice are criticized
and rendered partially invalid. It is on the basis of this order, taken as a
ﬁrm foundation, that general theories as to the ordering of things, and
the interpretation that such an ordering involves, will be constructed.
Thus, between the already ‘encoded’ eye and reﬂexive knowledge there
is a middle region which liberates order itself: it is here that it appears,
according to the culture and the age in question, continuous and
graduated or discontinuous and piecemeal, linked to space or constituted anew at each instant by the driving force of time, related to a
series of variables or deﬁned by separate systems of coherences, composed of resemblances which are either successive or corresponding,

preface

organized around increasing diﬀerences, etc. This middle region, then,
in so far as it makes manifest the modes of being of order, can be
posited as the most fundamental of all: anterior to words, perceptions,
and gestures, which are then taken to be more or less exact, more or
less happy, expressions of it (which is why this experience of order in
its pure primary state always plays a critical role); more solid, more
archaic, less dubious, always more ‘true’ than the theories that attempt
to give those expressions explicit form, exhaustive application, or
philosophical foundation. Thus, in every culture, between the use of
what one might call the ordering codes and reﬂections upon order
itself, there is the pure experience of order and of its modes of being.
The present study is an attempt to analyse that experience. I am
concerned to show its developments, since the sixteenth century, in the
mainstream of a culture such as ours: in what way, as one traces –
against the current, as it were – language as it has been spoken, natural
creatures as they have been perceived and grouped together, and
exchanges as they have been practised; in what way, then, our culture
has made manifest the existence of order, and how, to the modalities of
that order, the exchanges owed their laws, the living beings their constants, the words their sequence and their representative value; what
modalities of order have been recognized, posited, linked with space
and time, in order to create the positive basis of knowledge as we ﬁnd
it employed in grammar and philology, in natural history and biology,
in the study of wealth and political economy. Quite obviously, such an
analysis does not belong to the history of ideas or of science: it is rather
an inquiry whose aim is to rediscover on what basis knowledge and
theory became possible; within what space of order knowledge was
constituted; on the basis of what historical a priori, and in the element of
what positivity, ideas could appear, sciences be established, experience
be reﬂected in philosophies, rationalities be formed, only, perhaps, to
dissolve and vanish soon afterwards. I am not concerned, therefore, to
describe the progress of knowledge towards an objectivity in which
today’s science can ﬁnally be recognized; what I am attempting to
bring to light is the epistemological ﬁeld, the episteme in which knowledge, envisaged apart from all criteria having reference to its rational
value or to its objective forms, grounds its positivity and thereby manifests a history which is not that of its growing perfection, but rather

xxiii

xxiv preface
that of its conditions of possibility; in this account, what should appear
are those conﬁgurations within the space of knowledge which have
given rise to the diverse forms of empirical science. Such an enterprise
is not so much a history, in the traditional meaning of that word, as an
‘archaeology’.1
Now, this archaeological inquiry has revealed two great discontinuities in the episteme of Western culture: the ﬁrst inaugurates the Classical
age (roughly half-way through the seventeenth century) and the second, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, marks the beginning
of the modern age. The order on the basis of which we think today
does not have the same mode of being as that of the Classical thinkers.
Despite the impression we may have of an almost uninterrupted development of the European ratio from the Renaissance to our own day,
despite our possible belief that the classiﬁcations of Linnaeus, modiﬁed
to a greater or lesser degree, can still lay claim to some sort of validity,
that Condillac’s theory of value can be recognized to some extent in
nineteenth-century marginalism, that Keynes was well aware of the
aﬃnities between his own analyses and those of Cantillon, that the
language of general grammar (as exempliﬁed in the authors of Port-Royal
or in Bauzée) is not so very far removed from our own – all this quasicontinuity on the level of ideas and themes is doubtless only a surface
appearance; on the archaeological level, we see that the system of positivities was transformed in a wholesale fashion at the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century. Not that reason made
any progress: it was simply that the mode of being of things, and of the
order that divided them up before presenting them to the understanding, was profoundly altered. If the natural history of Tournefort,
Linnaeus, and Buﬀon can be related to anything at all other than itself,
it is not to biology, to Cuvier’s comparative anatomy, or to Darwin’s
theory of evolution, but to Bauzée’s general grammar, to the analysis
of money and wealth as found in the works of Law, or Véron de
Fortbonnais, or Turgot. Perhaps knowledge succeeds in engendering
knowledge, ideas in transforming themselves and actively modifying
one another (but how? – historians have not yet enlightened us on this
1
The problems of method raised by such an ‘archaeology’ will be examined in a later
work.

preface

point); one thing, in any case, is certain: archaeology, addressing
itself to the general space of knowledge, to its conﬁgurations, and to
the mode of being of the things that appear in it, deﬁnes systems of
simultaneity, as well as the series of mutations necessary and suﬃcient
to circumscribe the threshold of a new positivity.
In this way, analysis has been able to show the coherence that
existed, throughout the Classical age, between the theory of representation and the theories of language, of the natural orders, and of wealth
and value. It is this conﬁguration that, from the nineteenth century
onward, changes entirely; the theory of representation disappears as
the universal foundation of all possible orders; language as the spontaneous tabula, the primary grid of things, as an indispensable link
between representation and things, is eclipsed in its turn; a profound
historicity penetrates into the heart of things, isolates and deﬁnes them
in their own coherence, imposes upon them the forms of order
implied by the continuity of time; the analysis of exchange and money
gives way to the study of production, that of the organism takes precedence over the search for taxonomic characteristics, and, above all,
language loses its privileged position and becomes, in its turn, a historical form coherent with the density of its own past. But as things
become increasingly reﬂexive, seeking the principle of their intelligibility only in their own development, and abandoning the space of
representation, man enters in his turn, and for the ﬁrst time, the ﬁeld of
Western knowledge. Strangely enough, man – the study of whom is
supposed by the naïve to be the oldest investigation since Socrates – is
probably no more than a kind of rift in the order of things, or, in any
case, a conﬁguration whose outlines are determined by the new position he has so recently taken up in the ﬁeld of knowledge. Whence all
the chimeras of the new humanisms, all the facile solutions of an
‘anthropology’ understood as a universal reﬂection on man, halfempirical, half-philosophical. It is comforting, however, and a source of
profound relief to think that man is only a recent invention, a ﬁgure not
yet two centuries old, a new wrinkle in our knowledge, and that he will
disappear again as soon as that knowledge has discovered a new form.
It is evident that the present study is, in a sense, an echo of my
undertaking to write a history of madness in the Classical age; it has the
same articulations in time, taking the end of the Renaissance as its

xxv

xxvi preface
starting-point, then encountering, at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, just as my history of madness did, the threshold of a modernity that we have not yet left behind. But whereas in the history of
madness I was investigating the way in which a culture can determine
in a massive, general form the diﬀerence that limits it, I am concerned
here with observing how a culture experiences the propinquity of
things, how it establishes the tabula of their relationships and the order
by which they must be considered. I am concerned, in short, with a
history of resemblance: on what conditions was Classical thought able
to reﬂect relations of similarity or equivalence between things, relations that would provide a foundation and a justiﬁcation for their
words, their classiﬁcations, their systems of exchange? What historical
a priori provided the starting-point from which it was possible to deﬁne
the great checkerboard of distinct identities established against the confused, undeﬁned, faceless, and, as it were, indiﬀerent background of
diﬀerences? The history of madness would be the history of the Other –
of that which, for a given culture, is at once interior and foreign,
therefore to be excluded (so as to exorcize the interior danger) but by
being shut away (in order to reduce its otherness); whereas the history
of the order imposed on things would be the history of the Same – of
that which, for a given culture, is both dispersed and related, therefore
to be distinguished by kinds and to be collected together into identities.
And if one considers that disease is at one and the same time disorder – the existence of a perilous otherness within the human body, at
the very heart of life – and a natural phenomenon with its own constants, resemblances, and types, one can see what scope there would be
for an archaeology of the medical point of view. From the limitexperience of the Other to the constituent forms of medical knowledge,
and from the latter to the order of things and the conceptions of
the Same, what is available to archaeological analysis is the whole of
Classical knowledge, or rather the threshold that separates us from
Classical thought and constitutes our modernity. It was upon this
threshold that the strange ﬁgure of knowledge called man ﬁrst appeared
and revealed a space proper to the human sciences. In attempting to
uncover the deepest strata of Western culture, I am restoring to our
silent and apparently immobile soil its rifts, its instability, its ﬂaws; and
it is the same ground that is once more stirring under our feet.

Part I

1
LAS MENINAS
I
The painter is standing a little back from his canvas.1 He is glancing
at his model; perhaps he is considering whether to add some ﬁnishing
touch, though it is also possible that the ﬁrst stroke has not yet
been made. The arm holding the brush is bent to the left, towards
the palette; it is motionless, for an instant, between canvas and paints.
The skilled hand is suspended in mid-air, arrested in rapt attention
on the painter’s gaze; and the gaze, in return, waits upon the arrested
gesture. Between the ﬁne point of the brush and the steely gaze, the
scene is about to yield up its volume.
But not without a subtle system of feints. By standing back a little,
the painter has placed himself to one side of the painting on which he
is working. That is, for the spectator at present observing him he is to
the right of his canvas, while the latter, the canvas, takes up the whole
of the extreme left. And the canvas has its back turned to that spectator:
he can see nothing of it but the reverse side, together with the huge
frame on which it is stretched. The painter, on the other hand, is
perfectly visible in his full height; or at any rate, he is not masked by
the tall canvas which may soon absorb him, when, taking a step
towards it again, he returns to his task; he has no doubt just appeared,
at this very instant, before the eyes of the spectator, emerging from

4

the order of things

what is virtually a sort of vast cage projected backwards by the surface
he is painting. Now he can be seen, caught in a moment of stillness, at
the neutral centre of this oscillation. His dark torso and bright face are
half-way between the visible and the invisible: emerging from that
canvas beyond our view, he moves into our gaze; but when, in a
moment, he makes a step to the right, removing himself from our gaze,
he will be standing exactly in front of the canvas he is painting; he will
enter that region where his painting, neglected for an instant, will, for
him, become visible once more, free of shadow and free of reticence.
As though the painter could not at the same time be seen on the picture
where he is represented and also see that upon which he is representing something. He rules at the threshold of those two incompatible
visibilities.
The painter is looking, his face turned slightly and his head leaning
towards one shoulder. He is staring at a point to which, even though it
is invisible, we, the spectators, can easily assign an object, since it is we,
ourselves, who are that point: our bodies, our faces, our eyes. The
spectacle he is observing is thus doubly invisible: ﬁrst, because it is not
represented within the space of the painting, and, second, because it is
situated precisely in that blind point, in that essential hiding-place into
which our gaze disappears from ourselves at the moment of our actual
looking. And yet, how could we fail to see that invisibility, there in
front of our eyes, since it has its own perceptible equivalent, its sealedin ﬁgure, in the painting itself? We could, in eﬀect, guess what it is the
painter is looking at if it were possible for us to glance for a moment at
the canvas he is working on; but all we can see of that canvas is its
texture, the horizontal and vertical bars of the stretcher, and the
obliquely rising foot of the easel. The tall, monotonous rectangle
occupying the whole left portion of the real picture, and representing
the back of the canvas within the picture, reconstitutes in the form of a
surface the invisibility in depth of what the artist is observing: that
space in which we are, and which we are. From the eyes of the painter
to what he is observing there runs a compelling line that we, the
onlookers, have no power of evading: it runs through the real picture
and emerges from its surface to join the place from which we see the
painter observing us; this dotted line reaches out to us ineluctably, and
links us to the representation of the picture.

las meninas

In appearance, this locus is a simple one; a matter of pure reciprocity: we are looking at a picture in which the painter is in turn
looking out at us. A mere confrontation, eyes catching one another’s
glance, direct looks superimposing themselves upon one another as
they cross. And yet this slender line of reciprocal visibility embraces a
whole complex network of uncertainties, exchanges, and feints. The
painter is turning his eyes towards us only in so far as we happen to
occupy the same position as his subject. We, the spectators, are an
additional factor. Though greeted by that gaze, we are also dismissed by
it, replaced by that which was always there before we were: the model
itself. But, inversely, the painter’s gaze, addressed to the void confronting him outside the picture, accepts as many models as there are spectators; in this precise but neutral place, the observer and the observed
take part in a ceaseless exchange. No gaze is stable, or rather, in the
neutral furrow of the gaze piercing at a right angle through the canvas,
subject and object, the spectator and the model, reverse their roles to
inﬁnity. And here the great canvas with its back to us on the extreme
left of the picture exercises its second function: stubbornly invisible, it
prevents the relation of these gazes from ever being discoverable or
deﬁnitely established. The opaque ﬁxity that it establishes on one side
renders forever unstable the play of metamorphoses established in the
centre between spectator and model. Because we can see only that
reverse side, we do not know who we are, or what we are doing. Seen
or seeing? The painter is observing a place which, from moment to
moment, never ceases to change its content, its form, its face, its identity. But the attentive immobility of his eyes refers us back to another
direction which they have often followed already, and which soon,
there can be no doubt, they will take again: that of the motionless
canvas upon which is being traced, has already been traced perhaps, for
a long time and forever, a portrait that will never again be erased. So
that the painter’s sovereign gaze commands a virtual triangle whose
outline deﬁnes this picture of a picture: at the top – the only visible
corner – the painter’s eyes; at one of the base angles, the invisible place
occupied by the model; at the other base angle, the ﬁgure probably
sketched out on the invisible surface of the canvas.
As soon as they place the spectator in the ﬁeld of their gaze, the
painter’s eyes seize hold of him, force him to enter the picture, assign

5

6

the order of things

him a place at once privileged and inescapable, levy their luminous and
visible tribute from him, and project it upon the inaccessible surface of
the canvas within the picture. He sees his invisibility made visible to the
painter and transposed into an image forever invisible to himself. A
shock that is augmented and made more inevitable still by a marginal
trap. At the extreme right, the picture is lit by a window represented in
very sharp perspective; so sharp that we can see scarcely more than the
embrasure; so that the ﬂood of light streaming through it bathes at the
same time, and with equal generosity, two neighbouring spaces, overlapping but irreducible: the surface of the painting, together with the
volume it represents (which is to say, the painter’s studio, or the salon
in which his easel is now set up), and, in front of that surface, the real
volume occupied by the spectator (or again, the unreal site of the
model). And as it passes through the room from right to left, this vast
ﬂood of golden light carries both the spectator towards the painter and
the model towards the canvas; it is this light too, which, washing over
the painter, makes him visible to the spectator and turns into golden
lines, in the model’s eyes, the frame of that enigmatic canvas on which
his image, once transported there, is to be imprisoned. This extreme,
partial, scarcely indicated window frees a whole ﬂow of daylight which
serves as the common locus of the representation. It balances the invisible canvas on the other side of the picture: just as that canvas, by
turning its back to the spectators, folds itself in against the picture
representing it, and forms, by the superimposition of its reverse and
visible side upon the surface of the picture depicting it, the ground,
inaccessible to us, on which there shimmers the Image par excellence, so
does the window, a pure aperture, establish a space as manifest as the
other is hidden; as much the common ground of painter, ﬁgures,
models, and spectators, as the other is solitary (for no one is looking at
it, not even the painter). From the right, there streams in through an
invisible window the pure volume of a light that renders all representation visible; to the left extends the surface that conceals, on the other
side of its all too visible woven texture, the representation it bears. The
light, by ﬂooding the scene (I mean the room as well as the canvas, the
room represented on the canvas, and the room in which the canvas
stands), envelops the ﬁgures and the spectators and carries them with
it, under the painter’s gaze, towards the place where his brush will

las meninas

represent them. But that place is concealed from us. We are observing
ourselves being observed by the painter, and made visible to his eyes by
the same light that enables us to see him. And just as we are about to
apprehend ourselves, transcribed by his hand as though in a mirror,
we ﬁnd that we can in fact apprehend nothing of that mirror but its
lustreless back. The other side of a psyche.
Now, as it happens, exactly opposite the spectators – ourselves – on
the wall forming the far end of the room, Velázquez has represented a
series of pictures; and we see that among all those hanging canvases
there is one that shines with particular brightness. Its frame is wider
and darker than those of the others; yet there is a ﬁne white line around
its inner edge diﬀusing over its whole surface a light whose source is
not easy to determine; for it comes from nowhere, unless it be from a
space within itself. In this strange light, two silhouettes are apparent,
while above them, and a little behind them, is a heavy purple curtain.
The other pictures reveal little more than a few paler patches buried in
a darkness without depth. This particular one, on the other hand, opens
onto a perspective of space in which recognizable forms recede from
us in a light that belongs only to itself. Among all these elements
intended to provide representations, while impeding them, hiding
them, concealing them because of their position or their distance from
us, this is the only one that fulﬁls its function in all honesty and enables
us to see what it is supposed to show. Despite its distance from us,
despite the shadows all around it. But it isn’t a picture: it is a mirror. It
oﬀers us at last that enchantment of the double that until now has been
denied us, not only by the distant paintings but also by the light in the
foreground with its ironic canvas.
Of all the representations represented in the picture this is the only
one visible; but no one is looking at it. Upright beside his canvas, his
attention entirely taken up by his model, the painter is unable to see
this looking-glass shining so softly behind him. The other ﬁgures in
the picture are also, for the most part, turned to face what must be
taking place in front – towards the bright invisibility bordering the
canvas, towards that balcony of light where their eyes can gaze at those
who are gazing back at them, and not towards that dark recess which
marks the far end of the room in which they are represented. There are,
it is true, some heads turned away from us in proﬁle: but not one of

7

8

the order of things

them is turned far enough to see, at the back of the room, that solitary
mirror, that tiny glowing rectangle which is nothing other than visibility, yet without any gaze able to grasp it, to render it actual, and to
enjoy the suddenly ripe fruit of the spectacle it oﬀers.
It must be admitted that this indiﬀerence is equalled only by the
mirror’s own. It is reﬂecting nothing, in fact, of all that is there in the
same space as itself: neither the painter with his back to it, nor
the ﬁgures in the centre of the room. It is not the visible it reﬂects, in
those bright depths. In Dutch painting it was traditional for mirrors to
play a duplicating role: they repeated the original contents of the picture, only inside an unreal, modiﬁed, contracted, concave space. One
saw in them the same things as one saw in the ﬁrst instance in the
painting, but decomposed and recomposed according to a diﬀerent
law. Here, the mirror is saying nothing that has already been said
before. Yet its position is more or less completely central: its upper
edge is exactly on an imaginary line running half-way between the top
and the bottom of the painting, it hangs right in the middle of the far
wall (or at least in the middle of the portion we can see); it ought,
therefore, to be governed by the same lines of perspective as the picture
itself; we might well expect the same studio, the same painter, the same
canvas to be arranged within it according to an identical space; it could
be the perfect duplication.
In fact, it shows us nothing of what is represented in the picture
itself. Its motionless gaze extends out in front of the picture, into that
necessarily invisible region which forms its exterior face, to apprehend
the ﬁgures arranged in that space. Instead of surrounding visible
objects, this mirror cuts straight through the whole ﬁeld of the representation, ignoring all it might apprehend within that ﬁeld, and
restores visibility to that which resides outside all view. But the invisibility that it overcomes in this way is not the invisibility of what is
hidden: it does not make its way around any obstacle, it is not distorting any perspective, it is addressing itself to what is invisible both
because of the picture’s structure and because of its existence as painting. What it is reﬂecting is that which all the ﬁgures within the painting
are looking at so ﬁxedly, or at least those who are looking straight
ahead; it is therefore what the spectator would be able to see if the
painting extended further forward, if its bottom edge were brought

las meninas

lower until it included the ﬁgures the painter is using as models. But it
is also, since the picture does stop there, displaying only the painter and
his studio, what is exterior to the picture, in so far as it is a picture – in
other words, a rectangular fragment of lines and colours intended to
represent something to the eyes of any possible spectator. At the far end
of the room, ignored by all, the unexpected mirror holds in its glow
the ﬁgures that the painter is looking at (the painter in his represented,
objective reality, the reality of the painter at his work); but also the
ﬁgures that are looking at the painter (in that material reality which the
lines and the colours have laid out upon the canvas). These two groups
of ﬁgures are both equally inaccessible, but in diﬀerent ways: the ﬁrst
because of an eﬀect of composition peculiar to the painting; the second
because of the law that presides over the very existence of all pictures in
general. Here, the action of representation consists in bringing one of
these two forms of invisibility into the place of the other, in an unstable
superimposition – and in rendering them both, at the same moment, at
the other extremity of the picture – at that pole which is the very
height of its representation: that of a reﬂected depth in the far recess of
the painting’s depth. The mirror provides a metathesis of visibility that
aﬀects both the space represented in the picture and its nature as representation; it allows us to see, in the centre of the canvas, what in the
painting is of necessity doubly invisible.
A strangely literal, though inverted, application of the advice given,
so it is said, to his pupil by the old Pachero when the former was
working in his studio in Seville: ‘The image should stand out from the
frame.’

II
But perhaps it is time to give a name at last to that image which appears
in the depths of the mirror, and which the painter is contemplating in
front of the picture. Perhaps it would be better, once and for all, to
determine the identities of all the ﬁgures presented or indicated here,
so as to avoid embroiling ourselves forever in those vague, rather
abstract designations, so constantly prone to misunderstanding and
duplication, ‘the painter’, ‘the characters’, ‘the models’, ‘the spectators’, ‘the images’. Rather than pursue to inﬁnity a language inevitably

9

10

the order of things

inadequate to the visible fact, it would be better to say that Velázquez
composed a picture; that in this picture he represented himself, in his
studio or in a room of the Escurial, in the act of painting two ﬁgures
whom the Infanta Margarita has come there to watch, together with an
entourage of duennas, maids of honour, courtiers, and dwarfs; that we
can attribute names to this group of people with great precision: tradition recognizes that here we have Doña Maria Agustina Sarmiente,
over there Nieto, in the foreground Nicolaso Pertusato, an Italian jester.
We could then add that the two personages serving as models to the
painter are not visible, at least directly; but that we can see them in a
mirror; and that they are, without any doubt, King Philip IV and his
wife, Mariana.
These proper names would form useful landmarks and avoid
ambiguous designations; they would tell us in any case what the
painter is looking at, and the majority of the characters in the picture
along with him. But the relation of language to painting is an inﬁnite
relation. It is not that words are imperfect, or that, when confronted by
the visible, they prove insuperably inadequate. Neither can be reduced
to the other’s terms: it is in vain that we say what we see; what we see
never resides in what we say. And it is in vain that we attempt to show,
by the use of images, metaphors, or similes, what we are saying; the
space where they achieve their splendour is not that deployed by our
eyes but that deﬁned by the sequential elements of syntax. And the
proper name, in this particular context, is merely an artiﬁce: it gives us
a ﬁnger to point with, in other words, to pass surreptitiously from the
space where one speaks to the space where one looks; in other words,
to fold one over the other as though they were equivalents. But if one
wishes to keep the relation of language to vision open, if one wishes to
treat their incompatibility as a starting-point for speech instead of as an
obstacle to be avoided, so as to stay as close as possible to both, then
one must erase those proper names and preserve the inﬁnity of the task.
It is perhaps through the medium of this grey, anonymous language,
always over-meticulous and repetitive because too broad, that the
painting may, little by little, release its illuminations.
We must therefore pretend not to know who is to be reﬂected in the
depths of that mirror, and interrogate that reﬂection in its own terms.
First, it is the reverse of the great canvas represented on the left. The

las meninas

reverse, or rather the right side, since it displays in full face what the
canvas, by its position, is hiding from us. Furthermore, it is both in
opposition to the window and a reinforcement of it. Like the window,
it provides a ground which is common to the painting and to what lies
outside it. But the window operates by the continuous movement of an
eﬀusion which, ﬂowing from right to left, unites the attentive ﬁgures,
the painter, and the canvas, with the spectacle they are observing;
whereas the mirror, on the other hand, by means of a violent, instantaneous movement, a movement of pure surprise, leaps out from the
picture in order to reach that which is observed yet invisible in front of
it, and then, at the far end of its ﬁctitious depth, to render it visible yet
indiﬀerent to every gaze. The compelling tracer line, joining the reﬂection to that which it is reﬂecting, cuts perpendicularly through the
lateral ﬂood of light. Lastly – and this is the mirror’s third function – it
stands adjacent to a doorway which forms an opening, like the mirror
itself, in the far wall of the room. This doorway too forms a bright and
sharply deﬁned rectangle whose soft light does not shine through into
the room. It would be nothing but a gilded panel if it were not recessed
out from the room by means of one leaf of a carved door, the curve of a
curtain, and the shadows of several steps. Beyond the steps, a corridor
begins; but instead of losing itself in obscurity, it is dissipated in a
yellow dazzle where the light, without coming in, whirls around on
itself in dynamic repose. Against this background, at once near and
limitless, a man stands out in full-length silhouette; he is seen in proﬁle; with one hand he is holding back the weight of a curtain; his feet
are placed on diﬀerent steps; one knee is bent. He may be about to
enter the room; or he may be merely observing what is going on inside
it, content to surprise those within without being seen himself. Like
the mirror, his eyes are directed towards the other side of the scene; nor
is anyone paying any more attention to him than to the mirror. We do
not know where he has come from: it could be that by following
uncertain corridors he has just made his way around the outside of the
room in which these characters are collected and the painter is at work;
perhaps he too, a short while ago, was there in the forefront of the
scene, in the invisible region still being contemplated by all those eyes
in the picture. Like the images perceived in the looking-glass, it is
possible that he too is an emissary from that evident yet hidden space.

11

12

the order of things

Even so, there is a diﬀerence: he is there in ﬂesh and blood; he has
appeared from the outside, on the threshold of the area represented; he
is indubitable – not a probable reﬂection but an irruption. The mirror,
by making visible, beyond even the walls of the studio itself, what is
happening in front of the picture, creates, in its sagittal dimension, an
oscillation between the interior and the exterior. One foot only on the
lower step, his body entirely in proﬁle, the ambiguous visitor is coming in and going out at the same time, like a pendulum caught at the
bottom of its swing. He repeats on the spot, but in the dark reality of
his body, the instantaneous movement of those images ﬂashing across
the room, plunging into the mirror, being reﬂected there, and springing out from it again like visible, new, and identical species. Pale,
minuscule, those silhouetted ﬁgures in the mirror are challenged by
the tall, solid stature of the man appearing in the doorway.
But we must move down again from the back of the picture towards
the front of the stage; we must leave that periphery whose volute we
have just been following. Starting from the painter’s gaze, which constitutes an oﬀ-centre centre to the left, we perceive ﬁrst of all the back
of the canvas, then the paintings hung on the wall, with the mirror in
their centre, then the open doorway, then more pictures, of which,
because of the sharpness of the perspective, we can see no more than
the edges of the frames, and ﬁnally, at the extreme right, the window,
or rather the groove in the wall from which the light is pouring. This
spiral shell presents us with the entire cycle of representation: the gaze,
the palette and brush, the canvas innocent of signs (these are the
material tools of representation), the paintings, the reﬂections, the real
man (the completed representation, but as it were freed from its illusory or truthful contents, which are juxtaposed to it); then the representation dissolves again: we can see only the frames, and the light that
is ﬂooding the pictures from outside, but that they, in return, must
reconstitute in their own kind, as though it were coming from elsewhere, passing through their dark wooden frames. And we do, in fact,
see this light on the painting, apparently welling out from the crack of
the frame; and from there it moves over to touch the brow, the cheekbones, the eyes, the gaze of the painter, who is holding a palette in one
hand and in the other a ﬁne brush . . . And so the spiral is closed, or
rather, by means of that light, is opened.

las meninas

This opening is not, like the one in the back wall, made by pulling
back a door; it is the whole breadth of the picture itself, and the looks
that pass across it are not those of a distant visitor. The frieze that
occupies the foreground and the middle ground of the picture represents – if we include the painter – eight characters. Five of these, their
heads more or less bent, turned or inclined, are looking straight out at
right angles to the surface of the picture. The centre of the group is
occupied by the little Infanta, with her ﬂared pink and grey dress. The
princess is turning her head towards the right side of the picture, while
her torso and the big panniers of her dress slant away slightly towards
the left; but her gaze is directed absolutely straight towards the spectator standing in front of the painting. A vertical line dividing the canvas
into two equal halves would pass between the child’s eyes. Her face is a
third of the total height of the picture above the lower frame. So that
here, beyond all question, resides the principal theme of the composition; this is the very object of this painting. As though to prove this
and to emphasize it even more, Velázquez has made use of a traditional
visual device: beside the principal ﬁgure he has placed a secondary one,
kneeling and looking in towards the central one. Like a donor in prayer,
like an angel greeting the Virgin, a maid of honour on her knees is
stretching out her hands towards the princess. Her face stands out in
perfect proﬁle against the background. It is at the same height as that of
the child. This attendant is looking at the princess and only at the
princess. A little to the right, there stands another maid of honour, also
turned towards the Infanta, leaning slightly over her, but with her eyes
clearly directed towards the front, towards the same spot already being
gazed at by the painter and the princess. Lastly, two other groups made
up of two ﬁgures each: one of these groups is further away; the other,
made up of the two dwarfs, is right in the foreground. One character in
each of these pairs is looking straight out, the other to the left or the
right. Because of their positions and their size, these two groups correspond and themselves form a pair: behind, the courtiers (the woman,
to the left, looks to the right); in front, the dwarfs (the boy, who is at
the extreme right, looks in towards the centre of the picture). This
group of characters, arranged in this manner, can be taken to constitute, according to the way one looks at the picture and the centre of
reference chosen, two diﬀerent ﬁgures. The ﬁrst would be a large X: the

13

14

the order of things

top left-hand point of this X would be the painter’s eyes; the top righthand one, the male courtier’s eyes; at the bottom left-hand corner there
is the corner of the canvas represented with its back towards us (or,
more exactly, the foot of the easel); at the bottom right-hand corner,
the dwarf (his foot on the dog’s back). Where these two lines intersect,
at the centre of the X, are the eyes of the Infanta. The second ﬁgure
would be more that of a vast curve, its two ends determined by the
painter on the left and the male courtier on the right – both these
extremities occurring high up in the picture and set back from its
surface; the centre of the curve, much nearer to us, would coincide
with the princess’s face and the look her maid of honour is directing
towards her. This curve describes a shallow hollow across the centre of
the picture which at once contains and sets oﬀ the position of the
mirror at the back.
There are thus two centres around which the picture may be organized, according to whether the ﬂuttering attention of the spectator
decides to settle in this place or in that. The princess is standing upright
in the centre of a St Andrew’s cross, which is revolving around her with
its eddies of courtiers, maids of honour, animals, and fools. But this
pivoting movement is frozen. Frozen by a spectacle that would be
absolutely invisible if those same characters, suddenly motionless, were
not oﬀering us, as though in the hollow of a goblet, the possibility of
seeing in the depths of a mirror the unforeseen double of what they are
observing. In depth, it is the princess who is superimposed on the
mirror; vertically, it is the reﬂection that is superimposed on the face.
But, because of the perspective, they are very close to one another.
Moreover, from each of them there springs an ineluctable line: the line
issuing from the mirror crosses the whole of the depth represented
(and even more, since the mirror forms a hole in the back wall and
brings a further space into being behind it); the other line is shorter: it
comes from the child’s eyes and crosses only the foreground. These
two sagittal lines converge at a very sharp angle, and the point where
they meet, springing out from the painted surface, occurs in front of
the picture, more or less exactly at the spot from which we are observing it. It is an uncertain point because we cannot see it; yet it is an
inevitable and perfectly deﬁned point too, since it is determined by
those two dominating ﬁgures and conﬁrmed further by other, adjacent

las meninas

dotted lines which also have their origin inside the picture and emerge
from it in a similar fashion.
What is there, then, we ask at last, in that place which is completely
inaccessible because it is exterior to the picture, yet is prescribed by all
the lines of its composition? What is the spectacle, what are the faces
that are reﬂected ﬁrst of all in the depths of the Infanta’s eyes, then in
the courtiers’ and the painter’s, and ﬁnally in the distant glow of the
mirror? But the question immediately becomes a double one: the face
reﬂected in the mirror is also the face that is contemplating it; what all
the ﬁgures in the picture are looking at are the two ﬁgures to whose
eyes they too present a scene to be observed. The entire picture is
looking out at a scene for which it is itself a scene. A condition of pure
reciprocity manifested by the observing and observed mirror, the two
stages of which are uncoupled at the two lower corners of the picture:
on the left the canvas with its back to us, by means of which the
exterior point is made into pure spectacle; to the right the dog lying on
the ﬂoor, the only element in the picture that is neither looking at
anything nor moving, because it is not intended, with its deep reliefs
and the light playing on its silky hair, to be anything but an object to be
seen.
Our ﬁrst glance at the painting told us what it is that creates this
spectacle-as-observation. It is the two sovereigns. One can sense their
presence already in the respectful gaze of the ﬁgures in the picture, in
the astonishment of the child and the dwarfs. We recognize them, at
the far end of the picture, in the two tiny silhouettes gleaming out from
the looking-glass. In the midst of all those attentive faces, all those
richly dressed bodies, they are the palest, the most unreal, the most
compromised of all the painting’s images: a movement, a little light,
would be suﬃcient to eclipse them. Of all these ﬁgures represented
before us, they are also the most ignored, since no one is paying the
slightest attention to that reﬂection which has slipped into the room
behind them all, silently occupying its unsuspected space; in so far as
they are visible, they are the frailest and the most distant form of all
reality. Inversely, in so far as they stand outside the picture and are
therefore withdrawn from it in an essential invisibility, they provide
the centre around which the entire representation is ordered: it is they
who are being faced, it is towards them that everyone is turned, it is to

15

16

the order of things

their eyes that the princess is being presented in her holiday clothes;
from the canvas with its back to us to the Infanta, and from the Infanta
to the dwarf playing on the extreme right, there runs a curve (or again,
the lower fork of the X opens) that orders the whole arrangement of
the picture to their gaze and thus makes apparent the true centre of the
composition, to which the Infanta’s gaze and the image in the mirror
are both ﬁnally subject.
In the realm of the anecdote, this centre is symbolically sovereign,
since it is occupied by King Philip IV and his wife. But it is so above all
because of the triple function it fulﬁls in relation to the picture. For in it
there occurs an exact superimposition of the model’s gaze as it is being
painted, of the spectator’s as he contemplates the painting, and of the
painter’s as he is composing his picture (not the one represented, but
the one in front of us which we are discussing). These three ‘observing’ functions come together in a point exterior to the picture: that is,
an ideal point in relation to what is represented, but a perfectly real one
too, since it is also the starting-point that makes the representation
possible. Within that reality itself, it cannot not be invisible. And yet,
that reality is projected within the picture – projected and diﬀracted in
three forms which correspond to the three functions of that ideal and
real point. They are: on the left, the painter with his palette in his hand
(a self-portrait of Velázquez); to the right, the visitor, one foot on the
step, ready to enter the room; he is taking in the scene from the back,
but he can see the royal couple, who are the spectacle itself, from the
front; and lastly, in the centre, the reﬂection of the king and the queen,
richly dressed, motionless, in the attitude of patient models.
A reﬂection that shows us quite simply, and in shadow, what all
those in the foreground are looking at. It restores, as if by magic, what
is lacking in every gaze: in the painter’s, the model, which his represented double is duplicating over there in the picture; in the king’s, his
portrait, which is being ﬁnished oﬀ on that slope of the canvas that he
cannot perceive from where he stands; in that of the spectator, the real
centre of the scene, whose place he himself has taken as though by
usurpation. But perhaps this generosity on the part of the mirror is
feigned; perhaps it is hiding as much as and even more than it reveals.
That space where the king and his wife hold sway belongs equally well
to the artist and to the spectator: in the depths of the mirror there could

las meninas

also appear – there ought to appear – the anonymous face of the passerby and that of Velázquez. For the function of that reﬂection is to draw
into the interior of the picture what is intimately foreign to it: the gaze
which has organized it and the gaze for which it is displayed. But
because they are present within the picture, to the right and to the left,
the artist and the visitor cannot be given a place in the mirror: just as
the king appears in the depths of the looking-glass precisely because he
does not belong to the picture.
In the great volute that runs around the perimeter of the studio,
from the gaze of the painter, with his motionless hand and palette,
right round to the ﬁnished paintings, representation came into being,
reached completion, only to dissolve once more into the light; the
cycle was complete. The lines that run through the depth of the picture,
on the other hand, are not complete; they all lack a segment of their
trajectories. This gap is caused by the absence of the king – an absence
that is an artiﬁce on the part of the painter. But this artiﬁce both
conceals and indicates another vacancy which is, on the contrary,
immediate; that of the painter and the spectator when they are looking
at or composing the picture. It may be that, in this picture, as in all the
representations of which it is, as it were, the manifest essence, the
profound invisibility of what one sees is inseparable from the invisibility of the person seeing – despite all mirrors, reﬂections, imitations,
and portraits. Around the scene are arranged all the signs and successive forms of representation; but the double relation of the representation to its model and to its sovereign, to its author as well as to the
person to whom it is being oﬀered, this relation is necessarily interrupted. It can never be present without some residuum, even in a
representation that oﬀers itself as a spectacle. In the depth that traverses
the picture, hollowing it into a ﬁctitious recess and projecting it forward in front of itself, it is not possible for the pure felicity of the image
ever to present in a full light both the master who is representing and
the sovereign who is being represented.
Perhaps there exists, in this painting by Velàzquez, the representation
as it were, of Classical representation, and the deﬁnition of the space it
opens up to us. And, indeed, representation undertakes to represent
itself here in all its elements, with its images, the eyes to which it is
oﬀered, the faces it makes visible, the gestures that call it into being. But

17

18

the order of things

there, in the midst of this dispersion which it is simultaneously grouping together and spreading out before us, indicated compellingly from
every side, is an essential void: the necessary disappearance of that
which is its foundation – of the person it resembles and the person in
whose eyes it is only a resemblance. This very subject – which is the
same – has been elided. And representation, freed ﬁnally from the
relation that was impeding it, can oﬀer itself as representation in its
pure form.

NOTES
1 See frontispiece.

2
THE PROSE OF THE WORLD
I THE FOUR SIMILITUDES
Up to the end of the sixteenth century, resemblance played a constructive role in the knowledge of Western culture. It was resemblance that
largely guided exegesis and the interpretation of texts; it was resemblance that organized the play of symbols, made possible knowledge of
things visible and invisible, and controlled the art of representing them.
The universe was folded in upon itself: the earth echoing the sky, faces
seeing themselves reﬂected in the stars, and plants holding within their
stems the secrets that were of use to man. Painting imitated space. And
representation – whether in the service of pleasure or of knowledge –
was posited as a form of repetition: the theatre of life or the mirror
of nature, that was the claim made by all language, its manner of
declaring its existence and of formulating its right of speech.
We must pause here for a while, at this moment in time when
resemblance was about to relinquish its relation with knowledge and
disappear, in part at least, from the sphere of cognition. How, at the end
of the sixteenth century, and even in the early seventeenth century, was
similitude conceived? How did it organize the ﬁgures of knowledge?
And if the things that resembled one another were indeed inﬁnite in
number, can one, at least, establish the forms according to which they
might resemble one another?

20

the order of things

The semantic web of resemblance in the sixteenth century is
extremely rich: Amicitia, Aequalitas (contractus, consensus, matrimonium, societas,
pax, et similia), Consonantia, Concertus, Continuum, Paritas, Proportio, Similitudo, Conjunctio, Copula.1 And there are a great many other notions that intersect,
overlap, reinforce, or limit one another on the surface of thought. It is
enough for the moment to indicate the principal ﬁgures that determine
the knowledge of resemblance with their articulations. There are four
of these that are, beyond doubt, essential.
First of all, convenientia. This word really denotes the adjacency of
places more strongly than it does similitude. Those things are ‘convenient’ which come suﬃciently close to one another to be in
juxtaposition; their edges touch, their fringes intermingle, the
extremity of the one also denotes the beginning of the other. In this
way, movement, inﬂuences, passions, and properties too, are communicated. So that in this hinge between two things a resemblance
appears. A resemblance that becomes double as soon as one attempts
to unravel it: a resemblance of the place, the site upon which nature
has placed the two things, and thus a similitude of properties; for in
this natural container, the world, adjacency is not an exterior relation between things, but the sign of a relationship, obscure though
it may be. And then, from this contact, by exchange, there arise new
resemblances; a common regimen becomes necessary; upon the
similitude that was the hidden reason for their propinquity is superimposed a resemblance that is the visible eﬀect of that proximity.
Body and soul, for example, are doubly ‘convenient’: the soul had to
be made dense, heavy, and terrestrial for God to place it in the very
heart of matter. But through this propinquity, the soul receives the
movements of the body and assimilates itself to that body, while
‘the body is altered and corrupted by the passions of the soul’.2 In
the vast syntax of the world, the diﬀerent beings adjust themselves
to one another; the plant communicates with the animal, the earth
with the sea, man with everything around him. Resemblance
imposes adjacencies that in their turn guarantee further resemblances. Place and similitude become entangled: we see mosses
growing on the outsides of shells, plants in the antlers of stags, a
sort of grass on the faces of men; and the strange zoophyte, by
mingling together the properties that make it similar to the plants as

the prose of the world

well as to the animals, also juxtaposes them.3 All so many signs of
‘convenience’.
Convenientia is a resemblance connected with space in the form of a
graduated scale of proximity. It is of the same order as conjunction and
adjustment. This is why it pertains less to the things themselves than to
the world in which they exist. The world is simply the universal ‘convenience’ of things; there are the same number of ﬁshes in the water as
there are animals, or objects produced by nature or man, on the land
(are there not ﬁshes called Episcopus, others called Catena, and others
called Priapus?); the same number of beings in the water and on the
surface of the earth as there are in the sky, the inhabitants of the former
corresponding with those of the latter; and lastly, there are the same
number of beings in the whole of creation as may be found eminently
contained in God himself, ‘the Sower of Existence, of Power, of Knowledge and of Love’.4 Thus, by this linking of resemblance with space,
this ‘convenience’ that brings like things together and makes adjacent
things similar, the world is linked together like a chain. At each point of
contact there begins and ends a link that resembles the one before it
and the one after it; and from circle to circle, these similitudes continue, holding the extremes apart (God and matter), yet bringing them
together in such a way that the will of the Almighty may penetrate into
the most unawakened corners. It is this immense, taut, and vibrating
chain, this rope of ‘convenience’, that Porta evokes in a passage from
his Magie naturelle:
As with respect to its vegetation the plant stands convenient to the
brute beast, so through feeling does the brutish animal to man, who is
conformable to the rest of the stars by his intelligence; these links
proceed so strictly that they appear as a rope stretched from the ﬁrst
cause as far as the lowest and smallest of things, by a reciprocal and
continuous connection; in such wise that the superior virtue, spreading its beams, reaches so far that if we touch one extremity of that cord
it will make tremble and move all the rest.5

The second form of similitude is aemulatio: a sort of ‘convenience’
that has been freed from the law of place and is able to function,
without motion, from a distance. Rather as though the spatial collusion

21

22

the order of things

of convenientia had been broken, so that the links of the chain, no longer
connected, reproduced their circles at a distance from one another in
accordance with a resemblance that needs no contact. There is something in emulation of the reﬂection and the mirror: it is the means
whereby things scattered through the universe can answer one another.
The human face, from afar, emulates the sky, and just as man’s intellect
is an imperfect reﬂection of God’s wisdom, so his two eyes, with their
limited brightness, are a reﬂection of the vast illumination spread
across the sky by sun and moon; the mouth is Venus, since it gives
passage to kisses and words of love; the nose provides an image in
miniature of Jove’s sceptre and Mercury’s staﬀ.6 The relation of emulation enables things to imitate one another from one end of the universe to the other without connection or proximity: by duplicating
itself in a mirror the world abolishes the distance proper to it; in this
way it overcomes the place alloted to each thing. But which of these
reﬂections coursing through space are the original images? Which is
the reality and which the projection? It is often not possible to say, for
emulation is a sort of natural twinship existing in things; it arises from
a fold in being, the two sides of which stand immediately opposite to
one another. Paracelsus compares this fundamental duplication of the
world to the image of two twins ‘who resemble one another completely, without its being possible for anyone to say which of them
brought its similitude to the other’.7
However, emulation does not leave the two reﬂected ﬁgures it has
confronted in a merely inert state of opposition. One may be weaker,
and therefore receptive to the stronger inﬂuence of the other, which is
thus reﬂected in his passive mirror. Are not the stars, for example,
dominant over the plants of the earth, of which they are the unchanged
model, the unalterable form, and over which they have been secretly
empowered to pour the whole dynasty of their inﬂuences? The dark
earth is the mirror of the star-sown sky, but the two rivals are neither
of equal value nor of equal dignity in that tournament. The bright
colours of the ﬂowers reproduce, without violence, the pure form of
the sky. As Crollius says:
The stars are the matrix of all the plants and every star in the sky is
only the spiritual preﬁguration of a plant, such that it represents that

the prose of the world
plant, and just as each herb or plant is a terrestrial star looking up at
the sky, so also each star is a celestial plant in spiritual form, which
differs from the terrestrial plants in matter alone . . . , the celestial
plants and herbs are turned towards the earth and look directly down
upon the plants they have procreated, imbuing them with some particular virtue.8

But the lists may remain open, and the untroubled mirror reﬂect
only the image of ‘two wrathful soldiers’. Similitude then becomes the
combat of one form against another – or rather of one and the same
form separated from itself by the weight of matter or distance in space.
Man as Paracelsus describes him is, like the ﬁrmament, ‘constellated
with stars’, but he is not bound to it like ‘the thief to his galley-oar, the
murderer to the wheel, the ﬁsh to the ﬁsherman, the quarry to the
huntsman’. It pertains to the ﬁrmament of man to be ‘free and powerful’, to ‘bow to no order’, and ‘not to be ruled by any other created
beings’. His inner sky may remain autonomous and depend only upon
itself, but on condition that by means of his wisdom, which is also
knowledge, he comes to resemble the order of the world, takes it back
into himself and thus recreates in his inner ﬁrmament the sway of that
other ﬁrmament in which he sees the glitter of the visible stars. If he
does this, then the wisdom of the mirror will in turn be reﬂected back
to envelop the world in which it has been placed; its great ring will
spin out into the depths of the heavens, and beyond; man will discover
that he contains ‘the stars within himself . . . , and that he is thus the
bearer of the ﬁrmament with all its inﬂuences’.9
Emulation is posited in the ﬁrst place in the form of a mere reﬂection, furtive and distant; it traverses the spaces of the universe in
silence. But the distance it crosses is not annulled by the subtle metaphor of emulation; it remains open to the eye. And in this duel, the two
confronting ﬁgures seize upon one another. Like envelops like, which
in turn surrounds the other, perhaps to be enveloped once more in a
duplication which can continue ad inﬁnitum. The links of emulation,
unlike the elements of convenientia, do not form a chain but rather a
series of concentric circles reﬂecting and rivalling one another.
The third form of similitude is analogy. An old concept already familiar to Greek science and medieval thought, but one whose use has

23

24

the order of things

probably become diﬀerent now. In this analogy, convenientia and aemulatio
are superimposed. Like the latter, it makes possible the marvellous
confrontation of resemblances across space; but it also speaks, like the
former, of adjacencies, of bonds and joints. Its power is immense, for
the similitudes of which it treats are not the visible, substantial ones
between things themselves; they need only be the more subtle resemblances of relations. Disencumbered thus, it can extend, from a single
given point, to an endless number of relationships. For example, the
relation of the stars to the sky in which they shine may also be found:
between plants and the earth, between living beings and the globe they
inhabit, between minerals such as diamonds and the rocks in which
they are buried, between sense organs and the face they animate,
between skin moles and the body of which they are the secret marks.
An analogy may also be turned around upon itself without thereby
rendering itself open to dispute. The old analogy of plant to animal
(the vegetable is an animal living head down, its mouth – or roots –
buried in the earth), is neither criticized nor disposed of by Cesalpino;
on the contrary, he gives it added force, he multiplies it by itself when
he makes the discovery that a plant is an upright animal, whose nutritive principles rise from the base up to the summit, channelled along a
stem that stretches upwards like a body and is topped by a head –
spreading ﬂowers and leaves: a relation that inverts but does not contradict the initial analogy, since it places ‘the root in the lower part of
the plant and the stem in the upper part, for the venous network in
animals also begins in the lower part of the belly, and the principal vein
rises up to the heart and head’.10
This reversibility and this polyvalency endow analogy with a universal ﬁeld of application. Through it, all the ﬁgures in the whole
universe can be drawn together. There does exist, however, in this
space, furrowed in every direction, one particularly privileged point: it
is saturated with analogies (all analogies can ﬁnd one of their necessary
terms there), and as they pass through it, their relations may be
inverted without losing any of their force. This point is man: he stands
in proportion to the heavens, just as he does to animals and plants, and
as he does also to the earth, to metals, to stalactites or storms. Upright
between the surfaces of the universe, he stands in relation to the
ﬁrmament (his face is to his body what the face of heaven is to the

the prose of the world

ether; his pulse beats in his veins as the stars circle the sky according to
their own ﬁxed paths; the seven oriﬁces in his head are to his face what
the seven planets are to the sky); but he is also the fulcrum upon which
all these relations turn, so that we ﬁnd them again, their similarity
unimpaired, in the analogy of the human animal to the earth it
inhabits: his ﬂesh is a glebe, his bones are rocks, his veins great rivers,
his bladder is the sea, and his seven principal organs are the metals
hidden in the shafts of mines.11 Man’s body is always the possible
half of a universal atlas. It is well known how Pierre Belon drew, and
drew in the greatest detail, the ﬁrst comparative illustration of the
human skeleton and that of birds: in it, we see
the pinion called the appendix which is in proportion to the wing and
in the same place as the thumb on the hand; the extremity of the
pinion which is like the ﬁngers in us . . . ; the bone given as legs to the
bird corresponding to our heel; just as we have four toes on our feet,
so the birds have four ﬁngers of which the one behind is proportionate
to the big toe in us.12

So much precision is not, however, comparative anatomy except to an
eye armed with nineteenth-century knowledge. It is merely that the
grid through which we permit the ﬁgures of resemblance to enter our
knowledge happens to coincide at this point (and at almost no other)
with that which sixteenth-century learning had laid over things.
In fact, Belon’s description has no connection with anything but the
positivity which, in his day, made it possible. It is neither more rational
nor more scientiﬁc than an observation such as Aldrovandi’s comparison of man’s baser parts to the fouler parts of the world, to Hell, to
the darkness of Hell, to the damned souls who are like the excrement of
the Universe;13 it belongs to the same analogical cosmography as the
comparison, classic in Crollius’s time, between apoplexy and tempests:
the storm begins when the air becomes heavy and agitated, the apoplectic attack at the moment when our thoughts become heavy and
disturbed; then the clouds pile up, the belly swells, the thunder
explodes and the bladder bursts; the lightning ﬂashes and the eyes
glitter with a terrible brightness, the rain falls, the mouth foams, the
thunderbolt is unleashed and the spirits burst open breaches in the

25

26

the order of things

skin; but then the sky becomes clear again, and in the sick man reason
regains ascendancy.14 The space occupied by analogies is really a
space of radiation. Man is surrounded by it on every side; but,
inversely, he transmits these resemblances back into the world from
which he receives them. He is the great fulcrum of proportions – the
centre upon which relations are concentrated and from which they are
once again reﬂected.
Lastly, the fourth form of resemblance is provided by the play of
sympathies. And here, no path has been determined in advance, no distance laid down, no links prescribed. Sympathy plays through the
depths of the universe in a free state. It can traverse the vastest spaces in
an instant: it falls like a thunderbolt from the distant planet upon the
man ruled by that planet; on the other hand, it can be brought into
being by a simple contact – as with those ‘mourning roses that have
been used at obsequies’ which, simply from their former adjacency
with death, will render all persons who smell them ‘sad and moribund’.15 But such is its power that sympathy is not content to spring
from a single contact and speed through space; it excites the things of
the world to movement and can draw even the most distant of them
together. It is a principle of mobility: it attracts what is heavy to the
heaviness of the earth, what is light up towards the weightless ether; it
drives the root towards the water, and it makes the great yellow disk of
the sunﬂower turn to follow the curving path of the sun. Moreover, by
drawing things towards one another in an exterior and visible movement, it also gives rise to a hidden interior movement – a displacement
of qualities that take over from one another in a series of relays: ﬁre,
because it is warm and light, rises up into the air, towards which its
ﬂames untiringly strive; but in doing so it loses its dryness (which
made it akin to the earth) and so acquires humidity (which links it to
water and air); it disappears therefore into light vapour, into blue
smoke, into clouds: it has become air. Sympathy is an instance of the
Same so strong and so insistent that it will not rest content to be merely
one of the forms of likeness; it has the dangerous power of assimilating,
of rendering things identical to one another, of mingling them, of
causing their individuality to disappear – and thus of rendering them
foreign to what they were before. Sympathy transforms. It alters, but in
the direction of identity, so that if its power were not counterbalanced

the prose of the world

it would reduce the world to a point, to a homogeneous mass, to the
featureless form of the Same: all its parts would hold together and
communicate with one another without a break, with no distance
between them, like those metal chains held suspended by sympathy to
the attraction of a single magnet.16
This is why sympathy is compensated for by its twin, antipathy.
Antipathy maintains the isolation of things and prevents their assimilation; it encloses every species within its impenetrable diﬀerence and its
propensity to continue being what it is:
It is fairly widely known that the plants have hatreds between themselves . . . it is said that the olive and the vine hate the cabbage; the
cucumber ﬂies from the olive . . . Since they grow by means of the
sun’s warmth and the earth’s humour, it is inevitable that any thick
and opaque tree should be pernicious to the others, and also the tree
that has several roots.17

And so to inﬁnity, through all time, the world’s beings will hate one
another and preserve their ferocious appetites in opposition to all
sympathy.
The rat of India is pernicious to the crocodile, since Nature has created them enemies; in such wise that when that violent reptile takes
his pleasure in the sun, the rat lays an ambush for it of mortal subtlety;
perceiving that the crocodile, lying unaware for delight, is sleeping
with its jaws agape, it makes its way through them and slips down the
wide throat into the crocodile’s belly, gnawing through the entrails of
which, it emerges at last from the slain beast’s bowel.

But the rat’s enemies are lying in wait for it in their turn: for it lives in
discord with the spider, and ‘battling with the aspic it oft so dies’.
Through this play of antipathy, which disperses them, yet draws them
with equal force into mutual combat, makes them into murderers and
then exposes them to death in their turn, things and animals and all the
forms of the world remain what they are.
The identity of things, the fact that they can resemble others and be
drawn to them, though without being swallowed up or losing their

27

28

the order of things

singularity – this is what is assured by the constant counterbalancing
of sympathy and antipathy. It explains how things grow, develop,
intermingle, disappear, die, yet endlessly ﬁnd themselves again; in
short, how there can be space (which is nevertheless not without landmarks or repetitions, not without havens of similitude) and time
(which nevertheless allows the same forms, the same species, the same
elements to reappear indeﬁnitely).
Though yet of themselves the four bodies (water, air, ﬁre, earth) be
simple and possessed of their distinct qualities, yet forasmuch as the
Creator has ordained that the elementary bodies shall be composed of
mingled elements, therefore are their harmonies and discordancies
remarkable, as we may know from their qualities. The element of ﬁre is
hot and dry; it has therefore an antipathy to those of water, which is
cold and damp. Hot air is humid, cold earth is dry, which is an
antipathy. That they may be brought into harmony, air has been placed
between ﬁre and water, water between earth and air. Inasmuch as the
air is hot, it marches well with ﬁre and its humidity goes well with that
of water. The humidity of water is heated by the heat of the air and
brings relief to the cold dryness of the earth.18

Because of the movement and the dispersion created by its laws, the
sovereignty of the sympathy–antipathy pair gives rise to all the forms of
resemblance. The ﬁrst three similitudes are thus all resumed and
explained by it. The whole volume of the world, all the adjacencies of
‘convenience’, all the echoes of emulation, all the linkages of analogy,
are supported, maintained, and doubled by this space governed by
sympathy and antipathy, which are ceaselessly drawing things together
and holding them apart. By means of this interplay, the world remains
identical; resemblances continue to be what they are, and to resemble
one another. The same remains the same, riveted onto itself.

II SIGNATURES
And yet the system is not closed. One aperture remains: and through it
the whole interplay of resemblances would be in danger of escaping
from itself, or of remaining hidden in darkness, if there were not a

the prose of the world

further form of similitude to close the circle – to render it at once
perfect and manifest.
Convenientia, aemulatio, analogy, and sympathy tell us how the world must
fold in upon itself, duplicate itself, reﬂect itself, or form a chain with
itself so that things can resemble one another. They tell us what the
paths of similitude are and the directions they take; but not where it is,
how one sees it, or by what mark it may be recognized. Now there is a
possibility that we might make our way through all this marvellous
teeming abundance of resemblances without even suspecting that it
has long been prepared by the order of the world, for our greater
beneﬁt. In order that we may know that aconite will cure our eye
disease, or that ground walnut mixed with spirits of wine will ease a
headache, there must of course be some mark that will make us aware
of these things: otherwise, the secret would remain indeﬁnitely dormant. Would we ever know that there is a relation of twinship or
rivalry between a man and his planet, if there were no sign upon his
body or among the wrinkles on his face that he is an emulator of Mars
or akin to Saturn? These buried similitudes must be indicated on the
surface of things; there must be visible marks for the invisible analogies. Is not any resemblance, after all, both the most obvious and the
most hidden of things? Because it is not made up of juxtaposed fragments, some identical and others diﬀerent, it is all of a piece, a similitude that can be seen and yet not seen. It would thus lack any criterion
if it did not have within it – or above it or beside it – a decisive element
to transform its uncertain glimmer into bright certainty.
There are no resemblances without signatures. The world of
similarity can only be a world of signs. Paracelsus says:
It is not God’s will that what he creates for man’s beneﬁt and what he
has given us should remain hidden . . . And even though he has hidden certain things, he has allowed nothing to remain without exterior
and visible signs in the form of special marks – just as a man who has
buried a hoard of treasure marks the spot that he may ﬁnd it again.19

A knowledge of similitudes is founded upon the unearthing and
decipherment of these signatures. It is useless to go no further than the
skin or bark of plants if you wish to know their nature; you must go

29

30

the order of things

straight to their marks – ‘to the shadow and image of God that they
bear or to their internal virtue, which has been given to them by
heaven as a natural dowry, . . . a virtue, I say, that is to be recognized
rather by its signature’.20 The system of signatures reverses the relation of the visible to the invisible. Resemblance was the invisible form
of that which, from the depths of the world, made things visible; but in
order that this form may be brought out into the light in its turn there
must be a visible ﬁgure that will draw it out from its profound invisibility. This is why the face of the world is covered with blazons, with
characters, with ciphers and obscure words – with ‘hieroglyphics’, as
Turner called them. And the space inhabited by immediate resemblances becomes like a vast open book; it bristles with written signs;
every page is seen to be ﬁlled with strange ﬁgures that intertwine and
in some places repeat themselves. All that remains is to decipher them:
‘Is it not true that all herbs, plants, trees and other things issuing from
the bowels of the earth are so many magic books and signs?’21 The
great untroubled mirror in whose depths things gazed at themselves
and reﬂected their own images back to one another is, in reality, ﬁlled
with the murmur of words. The mute reﬂections all have corresponding words which indicate them. And by the grace of one ﬁnal form of
resemblance, which envelops all the others and encloses them within a
single circle, the world may be compared to a man with the power of
speech:
Just as the secret movements of his understanding are manifested
by his voice, so it would seem that the herbs speak to the curious
physician through their signatures, discovering to him . . . their inner
virtues hidden beneath nature’s veil of silence.22

But we must pause a little here to examine this language itself. To
examine the signs of which it is made up and the way in which these
signs refer back to what they indicate.
There exists a sympathy between aconite and our eyes. This
unexpected aﬃnity would remain in obscurity if there were not some
signature on the plant, some mark, some word, as it were, telling us
that it is good for diseases of the eye. This sign is easily legible in its
seeds: they are tiny dark globes set in white skinlike coverings whose

the prose of the world

appearance is much like that of eyelids covering an eye.23 It is
the same with the aﬃnity of the walnut and the human head: what
cures ‘wounds of the pericranium’ is the thick green rind covering the
bones – the shell – of the fruit; but internal head ailments may be
prevented by use of the nut itself ‘which is exactly like the brain in
appearance’.24 The sign of aﬃnity, and what renders it visible, is
quite simply analogy; the cipher of sympathy resides in the proportion.
But what signature can the proportion itself bear in order to make
itself recognizable? How is one to know that the lines of a hand or the
furrows on a brow are tracing on a man’s body the tendencies, accidents, or obstacles present in the whole vast fabric of his life? How
indeed, if not because we know that sympathy creates communication
between our bodies and the heavens, and transmits the movement of
the planets to the aﬀairs of men. And if not, too, because the shortness
of a line reﬂects the simple image of a short life, the intersection of two
furrows an obstacle in one’s path, the upward direction of a wrinkle a
man’s rise to success. Breadth is a sign of wealth and importance;
continuity denotes good fortune, discontinuity ill fortune.25 The
great analogy between body and destiny has its sign in the whole
system of mirrors and attractions. It is sympathies and emulations that
indicate analogies.
Emulation may be recognized by analogy: the eyes are stars because
they spread light over our faces just as stars light up the darkness, and
because blind people exist in the world like clairvoyants in the darkest
of nights. It can also be recognized through convenientia: we have known,
ever since the Greeks, that the strongest and bravest animals have large
and well-developed extremities to their limbs, as though their strength
had communicated itself to the most distant parts of their bodies. In the
same way, man’s face and hands must resemble the soul to which they
are joined. The recognition of the most visible similitudes occurs,
therefore, against a background of the discovery that things in general
are ‘convenient’ among themselves. And if one then considers that
conveniency is not always deﬁned by actual localization, but that many
beings separated in space are also ‘convenient’ (as with a disease and its
remedy, man and his stars, or a plant and the soil it needs), then again a
sign of their conveniency is essential. And what other sign is there that
two things are linked to one another unless it is that they have a mutual

31

32

the order of things

attraction for each other, as do the sun and the sunﬂower, or water and
a cucumber shoot, that there is an aﬃnity and, as it were, a sympathy
between them?
And so the circle is closed. Though it is apparent what a complicated
system of duplications was necessary to achieve this. Resemblances
require a signature, for none of them would ever become observable
were it not legibly marked. But what are these signs? How, amid all the
aspects of the world and so many interlacing forms, does one recognize
that one is faced at any given moment with a character that should give
one pause because it indicates a secret and essential resemblance? What
form constitutes a sign and endows it with its particular value as a
sign? – Resemblance does. It signiﬁes exactly in so far as it resembles
what it is indicating (that is, a similitude). But what it indicates is not
the homology; for its distinct existence as a signature would then be
indistinguishable from the face of which it is the sign; it is another
resemblance, an adjacent similitude, one of another type which enables
us to recognize the ﬁrst, and which is revealed in its turn by a third.
Every resemblance receives a signature; but this signature is no more
than an intermediate form of the same resemblance. As a result, the
totality of these marks, sliding over the great circle of similitudes, forms
a second circle which would be an exact duplication of the ﬁrst, point
by point, were it not for that tiny degree of displacement which causes
the sign of sympathy to reside in an analogy, that of analogy in emulation, that of emulation in convenience, which in turn requires the mark
of sympathy for its recognition. The signature and what it denotes are
of exactly the same nature; it is merely that they obey a diﬀerent law of
distribution; the pattern from which they are cut is the same.
The form making a sign and the form being signalized are resemblances, but they do not overlap. And it is in this respect that resemblance in sixteenth-century knowledge is without doubt the most
universal thing there is: at the same time that which is most clearly
visible, yet something that one must nevertheless search for, since it is
also the most hidden; what determines the form of knowledge (for
knowledge can only follow the paths of similitude), and what guarantees its wealth of content (for the moment one lifts aside the signs and
looks at what they indicate, one allows Resemblance itself to emerge
into the light of day and shine with its own inner light).

the prose of the world

Let us call the totality of the learning and skills that enable one to
make the signs speak and to discover their meaning, hermeneutics; let
us call the totality of the learning and skills that enable one to distinguish the location of the signs, to deﬁne what constitutes them as
signs, and to know how and by what laws they are linked, semiology:
the sixteenth century superimposed hermeneutics and semiology in
the form of similitude. To search for a meaning is to bring to light a
resemblance. To search for the law governing signs is to discover the
things that are alike. The grammar of beings is an exegesis of these
things. And what the language they speak has to tell us is quite simply
what the syntax is that binds them together. The nature of things, their
coexistence, the way in which they are linked together and communicate is nothing other than their resemblance. And that resemblance is
visible only in the network of signs that crosses the world from one end
to the other. ‘Nature’ is trapped in the thin layer that holds semiology
and hermeneutics one above the other; it is neither mysterious nor
veiled, it oﬀers itself to our cognition, which it sometimes leads astray,
only in so far as this superimposition necessarily includes a slight
degree of non-coincidence between the resemblances. As a result, the
grid is less easy to see through; its transparency is clouded over from
the very ﬁrst. A dark space appears which must be made progressively
clearer. That space is where ‘nature’ resides, and it is what one must
attempt to know. Everything would be manifest and immediately
knowable if the hermeneutics of resemblance and the semiology of
signatures coincided without the slightest parallax. But because the
similitudes that form the graphics of the world are one ‘cog’ out of
alignment with those that form its discourse, knowledge and the inﬁnite labour it involves ﬁnd here the space that is proper to them: it is
their task to weave their way across this distance, pursuing an endless
zigzag course from resemblance to what resembles it.

III THE LIMITS OF THE WORLD
Such, sketched in its most general aspects, is the sixteenth-century
episteme. This conﬁguration carries with it a certain number of
consequences.
First and foremost, the plethoric yet absolutely poverty-stricken

33

34

the order of things

character of this knowledge. Plethoric because it is limitless. Resemblance never remains stable within itself; it can be ﬁxed only if it refers
back to another similitude, which then, in turn, refers to others; each
resemblance, therefore, has value only from the accumulation of all the
others, and the whole world must be explored if even the slightest of
analogies is to be justiﬁed and ﬁnally take on the appearance of certainty. It is therefore a knowledge that can, and must, proceed by the
inﬁnite accumulation of conﬁrmations all dependent on one another.
And for this reason, from its very foundations, this knowledge will be a
thing of sand. The only possible form of link between the elements of
this knowledge is addition. Hence those immense columns of compilation, hence their monotony. By positing resemblance as the link
between signs and what they indicate (thus making resemblance both a
third force and a sole power, since it resides in both the mark and the
content in identical fashion), sixteenth-century knowledge condemned itself to never knowing anything but the same thing, and to
knowing that thing only at the unattainable end of an endless journey.
And it is here that we ﬁnd that only too well-known category, the
microcosm, coming into play. This ancient notion was no doubt
revived, during the Middle Ages and at the beginning of the Renaissance, by a certain neo-Platonist tradition. But by the sixteenth century
it had come to play a fundamental role in the ﬁeld of knowledge. It
hardly matters whether it was or was not, as was once claimed, a world
view or Weltanschauung. The fact is that it had one, or rather two, precise
functions in the epistemological conﬁguration of this period. As a
category of thought, it applies the interplay of duplicated resemblances to
all the realms of nature; it provides all investigation with an assurance
that everything will ﬁnd its mirror and its macrocosmic justiﬁcation on
another and larger scale; it aﬃrms, inversely, that the visible order of
the highest spheres will be found reﬂected in the darkest depths of the
earth. But, understood as a general conﬁguration of nature, it poses real and,
as it were, tangible limits to the indefatigable to-and-fro of similitudes
relieving one another. It indicates that there exists a greater world, and
that its perimeter deﬁnes the limit of all created things; that at the far
extremity of this great world there exists a privileged creation which
reproduces, within its restricted dimensions, the immense order of the
heavens, the stars, the mountains, rivers, and storms; and that it is

the prose of the world

between the eﬀective limits of this constituent analogy that the interplay of resemblances takes place. By this very fact, however immense
the distance from microcosm to macrocosm may be, it cannot be inﬁnite; the beings that reside within it may be extremely numerous, but in
the end they can be counted; and, consequently, the similitudes that,
through the action of the signs they require, always rest one upon
another, can cease their endless ﬂight. They have a perfectly closed
domain to support and buttress them. Nature, like the interplay of signs
and resemblances, is closed in upon itself in conformity with the
duplicated form of the cosmos.
We must therefore be careful not to invert the relations here. There is
no doubt that the idea of the microcosm was, as we say, ‘important’ in
the sixteenth century; it would probably have been one of the most
frequently mentioned terms in the results of any poll taken at the time.
But we are not concerned here with a study of opinions, which could
be undertaken only by a statistical analysis of contemporary records. If,
on the other hand, one investigates sixteenth-century knowledge at its
archaeological level – that is, at the level of what made it possible –
then the relations of macrocosm and microcosm appear as a mere
surface eﬀect. It was not because people believed in such relations that
they set about trying to hunt down all the analogies in the world. But
there was a necessity lying at the heart of their knowledge: they had to
ﬁnd an adjustment between the inﬁnite richness of a resemblance
introduced as a third term between signs and their meaning, and the
monotony that imposed the same pattern of resemblance upon the sign
and what it signiﬁed. In an episteme in which signs and similitudes were
wrapped around one another in an endless spiral, it was essential that
the relation of microcosm to macrocosm should be conceived as both
the guarantee of that knowledge and the limit of its expansion.
It was this same necessity that obliged knowledge to accept magic
and erudition on the same level. To us, it seems that sixteenth-century
learning was made up of an unstable mixture of rational knowledge,
notions derived from magical practices, and a whole cultural heritage
whose power and authority had been vastly increased by the rediscovery of Greek and Roman authors. Perceived thus, the learning of that
period appears structurally weak: a common ground where ﬁdelity to
the Ancients, a taste for the supernatural, and an already awakened

35

36

the order of things

awareness of that sovereign rationality in which we recognize ourselves, confronted one another in equal freedom. And this tripartite
period would consequently be reﬂected in the mirror of each work and
each divided mind occurring within it. . . . In fact, it is not from an
insuﬃciency of structure that sixteenth-century knowledge suﬀers. On
the contrary, we have already seen how very meticulous the conﬁgurations are that deﬁne its space. It is this very rigour that makes the
relation of magic to erudition inevitable – they are not selected contents but required forms. The world is covered with signs that must be
deciphered, and those signs, which reveal resemblances and aﬃnities,
are themselves no more than forms of similitude. To know must therefore be to interpret: to ﬁnd a way from the visible mark to that which is
being said by it and which, without that mark, would lie like unspoken
speech, dormant within things.
But we men discover all that is hidden in the mountains by signs and
outward correspondences; and it is thus that we ﬁnd out all the
properties of herbs and all that is in stones. There is nothing in the
depths of the seas, nothing in the heights of the ﬁrmament that man
is not capable of discovering. There is no mountain so vast that it
can hide from the gaze of man what is within it; it is revealed to him
by corresponding signs.26

Divination is not a rival form of knowledge; it is part of the main
body of knowledge itself. Moreover, these signs that must be interpreted indicate what is hidden only in so far as they resemble it; and it
is not possible to act upon those marks without at the same time
operating upon that which is secretly indicated by them. This is why
the plants that represent the head, or the eyes, or the heart, or the
liver, will possess an eﬃcacity in regard to that organ; this is why the
animals themselves will react to the marks that designate them. Paracelsus asks:
Tell me, then, why snakes in Helvetia, Algoria, Swedland understand
the Greek words Osy, Osya, Osy . . . In what academies did they learn
them, so that scarcely have they heard the word than they immediately
turn tail in order not to hear it again? Scarcely do they hear the word

the prose of the world
when, notwithstanding their nature and their spirit, they remain
immobile and poison no one with their venomous wounds.

And let no one say that this is merely the eﬀect of the sound made by
the words when pronounced: ‘If you write these words alone on vellum, parchment or paper at a favourable time, then place them in front
of the serpent, it will stay no less motionless than if you had pronounced them aloud.’ The project of elucidating the ‘Natural Magics’,
which occupies an important place at the end of the sixteenth century
and survives into the middle of the seventeenth, is not a vestigial
phenomenon in the European consciousness; it was revived – as
Campanella expressly tells us27 – and for contemporary reasons:
because the fundamental conﬁguration of knowledge consisted of the
reciprocal cross-reference of signs and similitudes. The form of magic
was inherent in this way of knowing.
And by the same token, so was erudition: for, in the treasure handed
down to us by Antiquity, the value of language lay in the fact that it was
the sign of things. There is no diﬀerence between the visible marks that
God has stamped upon the surface of the earth, so that we may know its
inner secrets, and the legible words that the Scriptures, or the sages of
Antiquity, have set down in the books preserved for us by tradition.
The relation to these texts is of the same nature as the relation to things:
in both cases there are signs that must be discovered. But God, in order
to exercise our wisdom, merely sowed nature with forms for us to
decipher (and it is in this sense that knowledge should be divinatio),
whereas the Ancients have already provided us with interpretations,
which we need do no more than gather together. Or which we would
need only to gather together, were it not for the necessity of learning
their language, reading their texts, and understanding what they have
said. The heritage of Antiquity, like nature itself, is a vast space requiring interpretation; in both cases there are signs to be discovered and
then, little by little, made to speak. In other words, divinatio and eruditio
are both part of the same hermeneutics; but this develops, following
similar forms, on two diﬀerent levels: one moves from the mute sign to
the thing itself (and makes nature speak); the other moves from the
unmoving graphism to clear speech (it restores sleeping languages to
life). But just as natural signs are linked to what they indicate by the

37

38

the order of things

profound relation of resemblance, so the discourse of the Ancients is in
the image of what it expresses; if it has the value of a precious sign, that
is because, from the depth of its being, and by means of the light that
has never ceased to shine through it since its origin, it is adjusted to
things themselves, it forms a mirror for them and emulates them; it is
to eternal truth what signs are to the secrets of nature (it is the mark
whereby the word may be deciphered); and it possesses an ageless
aﬃnity with the things that it unveils. It is useless therefore to demand
its title to authority; it is a treasury of signs linked by similitude to that
which they are empowered to denote. The only diﬀerence is that we
are dealing with a treasure-hoard of the second degree, one that refers
to the notations of nature, which in their turn indicate obscurely the
pure gold of things themselves. The truth of all these marks – whether
they are woven into nature itself or whether they exist in lines on
parchments and in libraries – is everywhere the same: coeval with the
institution of God.
There is no diﬀerence between marks and words in the sense that
there is between observation and accepted authority, or between veriﬁable fact and tradition. The process is everywhere the same: that of the
sign and its likeness, and this is why nature and the word can intertwine with one another to inﬁnity, forming, for those who can read it,
one vast single text.

IV THE WRITING OF THINGS
In the sixteenth century, real language is not a totality of independent
signs, a uniform and unbroken entity in which things could be
reﬂected one by one, as in a mirror, and so express their particular
truths. It is rather an opaque, mysterious thing, closed in upon itself, a
fragmented mass, its enigma renewed in every interval, which combines here and there with the forms of the world and becomes interwoven with them: so much so that all these elements, taken together,
form a network of marks in which each of them may play, and does in
fact play, in relation to all the others, the role of content or of sign, that
of secret or of indicator. In its raw, historical sixteenth-century being,
language is not an arbitrary system; it has been set down in the world
and forms a part of it, both because things themselves hide and

the prose of the world

manifest their own enigma like a language and because words oﬀer
themselves to men as things to be deciphered. The great metaphor of
the book that one opens, that one pores over and reads in order to
know nature, is merely the reverse and visible side of another transference, and a much deeper one, which forces language to reside in the
world, among the plants, the herbs, the stones, and the animals.
Language partakes in the world-wide dissemination of similitudes
and signatures. It must, therefore, be studied itself as a thing in nature.
Like animals, plants, or stars, its elements have their laws of aﬃnity and
convenience, their necessary analogies. Ramus divided his grammar
into two parts. The ﬁrst was devoted to etymology, which means that
one looked in it to discover, not the original meanings of words, but
the intrinsic ‘properties’ of letters, syllables, and, ﬁnally, whole words.
The second part dealt with syntax: its purpose was to teach ‘the building of words together by means of their properties’, and it consisted
‘almost entirely in the convenience and mutual communion of properties, as of the noun with the noun or with the verb, of the adverb with
all the words to which it is adjoined, of the conjunction in the order of
things conjoined’.28 Language is not what it is because it has a
meaning; its representative content, which was to have such importance for grammarians of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that
it provided them with the guiding thread of their analyses, has no role
to play here. Words group syllables together, and syllables letters,
because there are virtues placed in individual letters that draw them
towards each other or keep them apart, exactly as the marks found in
nature also repel or attract one another. The study of grammar in the
sixteenth century is based upon the same epistemological arrangement
as the science of nature or the esoteric disciplines. The only diﬀerences
are that there is only one nature and there are several languages; and
that in the esoteric ﬁeld the properties of words, syllables, and letters
are discovered by another discourse which always remains secret,
whereas in grammar it is the words and phrases of everyday life that
themselves express their properties. Language stands halfway between
the visible forms of nature and the secret conveniences of esoteric
discourse. It is a fragmented nature, divided against itself and deprived
of its original transparency by admixture; it is a secret that carries
within itself, though near the surface, the decipherable signs of what it

39

40

the order of things

is trying to say. It is at the same time a buried revelation and a
revelation that is gradually being restored to ever greater clarity.
In its original form, when it was given to men by God himself,
language was an absolutely certain and transparent sign for things,
because it resembled them. The names of things were lodged in the
things they designated, just as strength is written in the body of the
lion, regality in the eye of the eagle, just as the inﬂuence of the planets
is marked upon the brows of men: by the form of similitude. This
transparency was destroyed at Babel as a punishment for men. Languages became separated and incompatible with one another only in so
far as they had previously lost this original resemblance to the things
that had been the prime reason for the existence of language. All the
languages known to us are now spoken only against the background of
this lost similitude, and in the space that it left vacant. There is only one
language that retains a memory of that similitude, because it derives in
direct descent from that ﬁrst vocabulary which is now forgotten;
because God did not wish men to forget the punishment inﬂicted at
Babel; because this language had to be used in order to recount God’s
ancient Alliance with his people; and lastly, because it was in this
language that God addressed himself to those who listened to him.
Hebrew therefore contains, as if in the form of fragments, the marks of
that original name-giving. And those words pronounced by Adam as
he imposed them upon the various animals have endured, in part at
least, and still carry with them in their density, like an embedded
fragment of silent knowledge, the unchanging properties of beings:
Thus the stork, so greatly lauded for its charity towards its father and
its mother, is called in Hebrew Chasida, which is to say, meek, charitable, endowed with pity . . . The horse is named Sus, thought to be
from the verb Hasas, unless that verb is rather derived from the noun,
and it signiﬁes to rise up, for among all four-footed animals the horse
is most proud and brave, as Job depicts it in Chapter 39.29

But these are no more than fragmentary monuments; all other languages have lost these radical similitudes, which have been preserved
in Hebrew only in order to show that it was once the common
language of God, Adam, and the animals of the newly created earth.

the prose of the world

But though language no longer bears an immediate resemblance to
the things it names, this does not mean that it is separate from the
world; it still continues, in another form, to be the locus of revelations
and to be included in the area where truth is both manifested and
expressed. True, it is no longer nature in its primal visibility, but neither is it a mysterious instrument with powers known only to a few
privileged persons. It is rather the ﬁguration of a world redeeming
itself, lending its ear at last to the true word. This is why it was God’s
wish that Latin, the language of his Church, should spread over the
whole of the terrestrial globe. And it is also why all the languages of the
world, as it became possible to know them through this conquest,
make up together the image of the truth. Their interlacing and the
space in which they are deployed free the sign of the redeemed world,
just as the arrangement of the ﬁrst names bore a likeness to the things
that God had given to Adam for his use. Claude Duret points out that
the Hebrews, the Canaans, the Samaritans, the Chaldeans, the Syrians,
the Egyptians, the Carthaginians, the Phoenicians, the Arabs, the Saracens, the Turks, the Moors, the Persians, and the Tartars all write from
right to left, following ‘the course and daily movement of the ﬁrst
heaven, which is most perfect, according to the opinion of the great
Aristotle, tending towards unity’; the Greeks, the Georgians, the
Maronites, the Serbians, the Jacobites, the Copts, the Poznanians, and of
course the Romans and all Europeans write from left to right, following ‘the course and movement of the second heaven, home of the seven
planets’; the Indians, Cathayans, Chinese, and Japanese write from top
to bottom, in conformity with the ‘order of nature, which has given
men heads at the tops of their bodies and feet at the bottom’; ‘in
opposition to the aforementioned’, the Mexicans write either from
bottom to top or else in ‘spiral lines, such as those made by the sun in
its annual journey through the Zodiac’. And thus ‘by these ﬁve diverse
sorts of writing the secrets and mysteries of the world’s frame and the
form of the cross, the unity of the heaven’s rotundity and that of the
earth, are properly denoted and expressed’.30 The relation of languages to the world is one of analogy rather than of signiﬁcation; or
rather, their value as signs and their duplicating function are superimposed; they speak the heaven and the earth of which they are the
image; they reproduce in their most material architecture the cross

41

42

the order of things

whose coming they announce – that coming which establishes its
existence in its own turn through the Scriptures and the Word. Language possesses a symbolic function; but since the disaster at Babel we
must no longer seek for it – with rare exceptions31 – in the words
themselves but rather in the very existence of language, in its total
relation to the totality of the world, in the intersecting of its space with
the loci and forms of the cosmos.
Hence the form of the encyclopaedic project as it appears at the end
of the sixteenth century or in the ﬁrst years of the seventeenth: not to
reﬂect what one knows in the neutral element of language – the use of
the alphabet as an arbitrary but eﬃcacious encyclopaedic order does
not appear until the second half of the seventeenth century32 – but
to reconstitute the very order of the universe by the way in which
words are linked together and arranged in space. It is this
project that we ﬁnd in Grégoire’s Syntaxeon artis mirabilis (1610), and in
Alstedius’s Encyclopaedia (1630); or again in the Tableau de tous les arts libéraux
by Christophe de Savigny, who contrives to spatialize acquired knowledge both in accordance with the cosmic, unchanging, and perfect
form of the circle and in accordance with the sublunary, perishable,
multiple, and divided form of the tree; it is also to be found in the work
of La Croix du Maine, who envisages a space that would be at once an
Encyclopaedia and a Library, and would permit the arrangement of
written texts according to the forms of adjacency, kinship, analogy,
and subordination prescribed by the world itself.33 But in any case,
such an interweaving of language and things, in a space common to
both, presupposes an absolute privilege on the part of writing.
This privilege dominated the entire Renaissance, and was no doubt
one of the great events in Western culture. Printing, the arrival in
Europe of Oriental manuscripts, the appearance of a literature no
longer created for the voice or performance and therefore not governed by them, the precedence given to the interpretation of religious
texts over the tradition and magisterium of the Church – all these
things bear witness, without its being possible to indicate causes and
eﬀects, to the fundamental place accorded in the West to Writing.
Henceforth, it is the primal nature of language to be written. The
sounds made by voices provide no more than a transitory and precarious translation of it. What God introduced into the world was written

the prose of the world

words; Adam, when he imposed their ﬁrst names upon the animals,
did no more than read those visible and silent marks; the Law was
entrusted to the Tablets, not to men’s memories; and it is in a book that
the true Word must be found again. Vigenère and Duret34 both said –
and in almost identical terms – that the written had always preceded
the spoken, certainly in nature, and perhaps even in the knowledge of
men. For it was very possible that before Babel, before the Flood, there
had already existed a form of writing composed of the marks of nature
itself, with the result that its characters would have had the power to act
upon things directly, to attract them or repel them, to represent their
properties, their virtues, and their secrets. A primitively natural writing, of which certain forms of esoteric knowledge, and the cabala ﬁrst
and foremost, may perhaps have preserved the scattered memory and
were now attempting to retrieve its long-dormant powers. Esoterism in
the sixteenth century is a phenomenon of the written word, not the
spoken word. At all events, the latter is stripped of all its powers; it is
merely the female part of language, Vigenère and Duret tell us, just as
its intellect is passive; Writing, on the other hand, is the active intellect,
the ‘male principle’ of language. It alone harbours the truth.
This primacy of the written word explains the twin presence of two
forms which, despite their apparent antagonism, are indissociable in
sixteenth-century knowledge. The ﬁrst of these is a non-distinction
between what is seen and what is read, between observation and relation, which results in the constitution of a single, unbroken surface in
which observation and language intersect to inﬁnity. And the second,
the inverse of the ﬁrst, is an immediate dissociation of all language,
duplicated, without any assignable term, by the constant reiteration of
commentary.
Later, Buﬀon was to express astonishment at ﬁnding in the work of a
naturalist like Aldrovandi such an inextricable mixture of exact descriptions, reported quotations, fables without commentary, remarks dealing indiﬀerently with an animal’s anatomy, its use in heraldry, its
habitat, its mythological values, or the uses to which it could be put in
medicine or magic. And indeed, when one goes back to take a look at
the Historia serpentum et draconum, one ﬁnds the chapter ‘On the serpent in
general’ arranged under the following headings: equivocation (which
means the various meanings of the word serpent), synonyms and

43

44

the order of things

etymologies, diﬀerences, form and description, anatomy, nature and
habits, temperament, coitus and generation, voice, movements, places,
diet, physiognomy, antipathy, sympathy, modes of capture, death
and wounds caused by the serpent, modes and signs of poisoning,
remedies, epithets, denominations, prodigies and presages, monsters,
mythology, gods to which it is dedicated, fables, allegories and mysteries, hieroglyphics, emblems and symbols, proverbs, coinage, miracles, riddles, devices, heraldic signs, historical facts, dreams, simulacra
and statues, use in human diet, use in medicine, miscellaneous uses.
Whereupon Buﬀon comments: ‘Let it be judged after that what proportion of natural history is to be found in such a hotch-potch of
writing. There is no description here, only legend.’ And indeed, for
Aldrovandi and his contemporaries, it was all legenda – things to be
read. But the reason for this was not that they preferred the authority
of men to the precision of an unprejudiced eye, but that nature, in
itself, is an unbroken tissue of words and signs, of accounts and characters, of discourse and forms. When one is faced with the task of
writing an animal’s history, it is useless and impossible to choose
between the profession of naturalist and that of compiler: one has to
collect together into one and the same form of knowledge all that has
been seen and heard, all that has been recounted, either by nature or by men,
by the language of the world, by tradition, or by the poets. To know an
animal or a plant, or any terrestrial thing whatever, is to gather together
the whole dense layer of signs with which it or they may have been
covered; it is to rediscover also all the constellations of forms from
which they derive their value as heraldic signs. Aldrovandi was neither
a better nor a worse observer than Buﬀon; he was neither more credulous than he, nor less attached to the faithfulness of the observing eye
or to the rationality of things. His observation was simply not linked to
things in accordance with the same system or by the same arrangement
of the episteme. For Aldrovandi was meticulously contemplating a nature
which was, from top to bottom, written.
Knowledge therefore consisted in relating one form of language to
another form of language; in restoring the great, unbroken plain of
words and things; in making everything speak. That is, in bringing into
being, at a level above that of all marks, the secondary discourse of
commentary. The function proper to knowledge is not seeing or

the prose of the world

demonstrating; it is interpreting. Scriptural commentary, commentaries on Ancient authors, commentaries on the accounts of travellers,
commentaries on legends and fables: none of these forms of discourse
is required to justify its claim to be expressing a truth before it is
interpreted; all that is required of it is the possibility of talking about it.
Language contains its own inner principle of proliferation. ‘There is
more work in interpreting interpretations than in interpreting things;
and more books about books than on any other subject; we do nothing
but write glosses on one another’.35 These words are not a statement
of the bankruptcy of a culture buried beneath its own monuments;
they are a deﬁnition of the inevitable relation that language maintained
with itself in the sixteenth century. This relation enabled language to
accumulate to inﬁnity, since it never ceased to develop, to revise itself,
and to lay its successive forms one over another. Perhaps for the ﬁrst
time in Western culture, we ﬁnd revealed the absolutely open dimension of a language no longer able to halt itself, because, never being
enclosed in a deﬁnitive statement, it can express its truth only in some
future discourse and is wholly intent on what it will have said; but even
this future discourse itself does not have the power to halt the progression, and what it says is enclosed within it like a promise, a bequest to
yet another discourse. . . . The task of commentary can never, by deﬁnition, be completed. And yet commentary is directed entirely towards
the enigmatic, murmured element of the language being commented
on: it calls into being, below the existing discourse, another discourse
that is more fundamental and, as it were, ‘more primal’, which it sets
itself the task of restoring. There can be no commentary unless, below
the language one is reading and deciphering, there runs the sovereignty of an original Text. And it is this text which, by providing a
foundation for the commentary, oﬀers its ultimate revelation as the
promised reward of commentary. The necessary proliferation of the
exegesis is therefore measured, ideally limited, and yet ceaselessly animated, by this silent dominion. The language of the sixteenth century –
understood not as an episode in the history of any one tongue, but as a
global cultural experience – found itself caught, no doubt, between
these interacting elements, in the interstice occurring between the
primal Text and the inﬁnity of Interpretation. One speaks upon the
basis of a writing that is part of the fabric of the world; one speaks

45

46

the order of things

about it to inﬁnity, and each of its signs becomes in turn written matter
for further discourse; but each of these stages of discourse is addressed
to that primal written word whose return it simultaneously promises
and postpones.
It will be seen that the experience of language belongs to the same
archaeological network as the knowledge of things and nature. To
know those things was to bring to light the system of resemblances
that made them close to and dependent upon one another; but one
could discover the similitudes between them only in so far as there
existed, on their surface, a totality of signs forming the text of an
unequivocal message. But then, these signs themselves were no more
than a play of resemblances, and they referred back to the inﬁnite and
necessarily uncompleted task of knowing what is similar. In the same
way, though the analogy is inverted, language sets itself the task of
restoring an absolutely primal discourse, but it can express that discourse only by trying to approximate to it, by attempting to say things
about it that are similar to it, thereby bringing into existence the inﬁnity of adjacent and similar ﬁdelities of interpretation. The commentary
resembles endlessly that which it is commenting upon and which it
can never express; just as the knowledge of nature constantly ﬁnds new
signs for resemblance because resemblance cannot be known in itself,
even though the signs can never be anything but similitudes. And just
as this inﬁnite play within nature ﬁnds its link, its form, and its limitation in the relation of the microcosm to the macrocosm, so does the
inﬁnite task of commentary derive its strength from the promise of an
eﬀectively written text which interpretation will one day reveal in its
entirety.

V THE BEING OF LANGUAGE
Ever since the Stoics, the system of signs in the Western world had been
a ternary one, for it was recognized as containing the signiﬁcant, the
signiﬁed, and the ‘conjuncture’ (the τγχανον). From the seventeenth
century, on the other hand, the arrangement of signs was to become
binary, since it was to be deﬁned, with Port-Royal, as the connection of
a signiﬁcant and a signiﬁed. At the Renaissance, the organization is
diﬀerent, and much more complex: it is ternary, since it requires the

the prose of the world

formal domain of marks, the content indicated by them, and the similitudes that link the marks to the things designated by them; but since
resemblance is the form of the signs as well as their content, the three
distinct elements of this articulation are resolved into a single form.
This arrangement, together with the interplay it authorizes, is found
also, though inverted, in the experience of language. In fact, language
exists ﬁrst of all, in its raw and primitive being, in the simple, material
form of writing, a stigma upon things, a mark imprinted across the
world which is a part of its most ineﬀaceable forms. In a sense, this
layer of language is unique and absolute. But it also gives rise to two
other forms of discourse which provide it with a frame: above it, there
is commentary, which recasts the given signs to serve a new purpose,
and below it, the text, whose primacy is presupposed by commentary
to exist hidden beneath the marks visible to all. Hence there are three
levels of language, all based upon the single being of the written
word. It is this complex interaction of elements that was to disappear
with the end of the Renaissance. And in two ways: because the forms
oscillating endlessly between one and three terms were to be ﬁxed in
a binary form which would render them stable; and because language,
instead of existing as the material writing of things, was to ﬁnd its
area of being restricted to the general organization of representative
signs.
This new arrangement brought about the appearance of a new problem, unknown until then: in the sixteenth century, one asked oneself
how it was possible to know that a sign did in fact designate what it
signiﬁed; from the seventeenth century, one began to ask how a sign
could be linked to what it signiﬁed. A question to which the Classical
period was to reply by the analysis of representation; and to which
modem thought was to reply by the analysis of meaning and signiﬁcation. But given the fact itself, language was never to be anything more
than a particular case of representation (for the Classics) or of signiﬁcation (for us). The profound kinship of language with the world was
thus dissolved. The primacy of the written word went into abeyance.
And that uniform layer, in which the seen and the read, the visible and the
expressible, were endlessly interwoven, vanished too. Things and
words were to be separated from one another. The eye was thenceforth
destined to see and only to see, the ear to hear and only to hear.

47

48

the order of things

Discourse was still to have the task of speaking that which is, but it was
no longer to be anything more than what it said.
This involved an immense reorganization of culture, a reorganization of which the Classical age was the ﬁrst and perhaps the most
important stage, since it was responsible for the new arrangement in
which we are still caught – since it is the Classical age that separates us
from a culture in which the signiﬁcation of signs did not exist, because
it was reabsorbed into the sovereignty of the Like; but in which their
enigmatic, monotonous, stubborn, and primitive being shone in an
endless dispersion.
There is nothing now, either in our knowledge or in our reﬂection,
that still recalls even the memory of that being. Nothing, except perhaps literature – and even then in a fashion more allusive and diagonal
than direct. It may be said in a sense that ‘literature’, as it was constituted and so designated on the threshold of the modern age, manifests,
at a time when it was least expected, the reappearance, of the living
being of language. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the
peculiar existence and ancient solidity of language as a thing inscribed
in the fabric of the world were dissolved in the functioning of representation; all language had value only as discourse. The art of language
was a way of ‘making a sign’ – of simultaneously signifying something
and arranging signs around that thing; an art of naming, therefore, and
then, by means of a reduplication both demonstrative and decorative,
of capturing that name, of enclosing and concealing it, of designating it
in turn by other names that were the deferred presence of the ﬁrst
name, its secondary sign, its ﬁguration, its rhetorical panoply. And yet,
throughout the nineteenth century, and right up to our own day –
from Hölderlin to Mallarmé and on to Antonin Artaud – literature
achieved autonomous existence, and separated itself from all other
language with a deep scission, only by forming a sort of ‘counterdiscourse’, and by ﬁnding its way back from the representative or
signifying function of language to this raw being that had been forgotten since the sixteenth century.
It is possible to believe that one has attained the very essence of
literature when one is no longer interrogating it at the level of what it
says but only in its signiﬁcant form: in doing so, one is limiting one’s
view of language to its Classical status. In the modern age, literature is

the prose of the world

that which compensates for (and not that which conﬁrms) the signifying function of language. Through literature, the being of language
shines once more on the frontiers of Western culture – and at its centre –
for it is what has been most foreign to that culture since the sixteenth
century; but it has also, since this same century, been at the very centre
of what Western culture has overlain. This is why literature is appearing
more and more as that which must be thought; but equally, and for the
same reason, as that which can never, in any circumstance, be thought
in accordance with a theory of signiﬁcation. Whether one analyses it
from the point of view of what is signiﬁed (of what it is trying to say,
of its ‘ideas’, of what it promises, or of what it commits one to) or
from the point of view of that which signiﬁes (with the help of paradigms borrowed from linguistics or psychoanalysis) matters little: all
that is merely incidental. In both cases one would be searching for it
outside the ground in which, as regards our culture, it has never ceased
for the past century and a half to come into being and to imprint itself.
Such modes of decipherment belong to a Classical situation of language – the situation that predominated during the seventeenth
century, when the organization of signs became binary, and when
signiﬁcation was reﬂected in the form of the representation; for at
that time literature really was composed of a signifying element and
a signiﬁed content, so that it was proper to analyse it accordingly.
But from the nineteenth century, literature began to bring language
back to light once more in its own being: though not as it had still
appeared at the end of the Renaissance. For now we no longer have
that primary, that absolutely initial, word upon which the inﬁnite
movement of discourse was founded and by which it was limited;
henceforth, language was to grow with no point of departure, no end,
and no promise. It is the traversal of this futile yet fundamental space
that the text of literature traces from day to day.

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5

P. Grégoire, Syntaxeon artis mirabilis (Cologne, 1610, p. 28).
G. Porta, La Physionomie humaine (Fr. trans. 1655, p. i).
U. Aldrovandi, Monstrorum historia (Bononiae, 1647, p. 663).
T. Campanella, Realis philosophia (Frankfurt, 1623, p. 98).
G. Porta, Magie naturelle (Fr. trans. Rouen, 1650, p. 22).

49

50

the order of things
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

33
34
35

Aldrovandi, Monstrorum historia, p. 3.
Paracelsus, Liber paramirum (trans. Grillot de Givry, Paris, 1913, p. 3).
O. Crollius, Traité des signatures (Fr. trans. Lyon, 1624, p. 18).
Paracelsus, loc. cit.
Cesalpino, De plantis libri, XVI (1583).
Crollius, Traité des signatures, p. 88.
P. Belon, Histoire de la nature des oiseaux (Paris, 1555, p. 37).
Aldrovandi, Monstrorum historia, p. 4.
Crollius, Traité des signatures, p. 87.
Porta, Magic naturelle, p. 72.
Ibid.
J. Cardan, De la subtilité (Fr. trans. Paris, 1656, p. 154).
S.G.S. Annotations au grand miroir du monde de Duchesne, p. 498.
Paracelsus, Die 9 Bücher der Natura Rerum (Works, ed. Suhdorff, vol. IX, p. 393).
Crollius, Traité des signatures, p. 4.
Ibid., p. 6.
Ibid., p. 6.
Ibid., p. 33
Ibid., pp. 33–4.
J. Cardan, Métoposcopie (1658 edn., pp. iii–viii).
Paracelsus, Archidoxis magica (Fr. trans. 1909, pp. 21–3).
T. Campanella, De sensu rerum et magia (Frankfurt, 1620).
P. Ramus, Grammaire (Paris, 1572, p. 3 and pp. 125–6).
Claude Duret, Trésor de l’histoire des langues (Cologne, 1613, p. 40).
Duret, loc. cit.
In Mithridates, J. M. Gesner cites onomatopeias of course, but only as exceptions to a rule (2nd edn., Tiguri, 1610, pp. 3–4).
Except with regard to languages, since the alphabet is the raw material of
language. Cf. Chapter II of Gesner’s Mithridates. The ﬁrst alphabetical encyclopaedia is L. Moréri’s Grand dictionnaire historique of 1674.
La Croix du Maine, Les cents Buffets pour dresser une bibliothèque parfaite (1583).
Blaise de Vigenère, Traité des chiffres (Paris, 1537, pp. 1 and 2); C. Duret, Trésor de
l’histoire des langues, pp. 19 and 20.
Montaigne, Essais (1580–8, livre III, chap. XIII).

3
REPRESENTING
I DON QUIXOTE
With all their twists and turns, Don Quixote’s adventures form the
boundary: they mark the end of the old interplay between resemblance
and signs and contain the beginnings of new relations. Don Quixote is
not a man given to extravagance, but rather a diligent pilgrim breaking
his journey before all the marks of similitude. He is the hero of the
Same. He never manages to escape from the familiar plain stretching
out on all sides of the Analogue, any more than he does from his own
small province. He travels endlessly over that plain, without ever crossing the clearly deﬁned frontiers of diﬀerence, or reaching the heart of
identity. Moreover, he is himself like a sign, a long, thin graphism, a
letter that has just escaped from the open pages of a book. His whole
being is nothing but language, text, printed pages, stories that have
already been written down. He is made up of interwoven words; he is
writing itself, wandering through the world among the resemblances
of things. Yet not entirely so: for in his reality as an impoverished
hidalgo he can become a knight only by listening from afar to the ageold epic that gives its form to Law. The book is not so much his
existence as his duty. He is constantly obliged to consult it in order to
know what to do or say, and what signs he should give himself and
others in order to show that he really is of the same nature as the text

52

the order of things

from which he springs. The chivalric romances have provided once and
for all a written prescription for his adventures. And every episode,
every decision, every exploit will be yet another sign that Don Quixote
is a true likeness of all the signs that he has traced from his book. But
the fact that he wishes to be like them means that he must put them to
the test, that the (legible) signs no longer resemble (visible) people. All
those written texts, all those extravagant romances are, quite literally,
unparalleled: no one in the world ever did resemble them; their timeless language remains suspended, unfulﬁlled by any similitude; they
could all be burned in their entirety and the form of the world would
not be changed. If he is to resemble the texts of which he is the
witness, the representation, the real analogue, Don Quixote must also
furnish proof and provide the indubitable sign that they are telling the
truth, that they really are the language of the world. It is incumbent
upon him to fulﬁl the promise of the books. It is his task to recreate the
epic, though by a reverse process: the epic recounted (or claimed to
recount) real exploits, oﬀering them to our memory; Don Quixote, on
the other hand, must endow with reality the signs-without-content of
the narrative. His adventures will be a deciphering of the world: a
diligent search over the entire surface of the earth for the forms that
will prove that what the books say is true. Each exploit must be a proof:
it consists, not in a real triumph – which is why victory is not really
important – but in an attempt to transform reality into a sign. Into a
sign that the signs of language really are in conformity with things
themselves. Don Quixote reads the world in order to prove his books.
And the only proofs he gives himself are the glittering reﬂections of
resemblances.
His whole journey is a quest for similitudes: the slightest analogies
are pressed into service as dormant signs that must be reawakened and
made to speak once more. Flocks, serving girls, and inns become once
more the language of books to the imperceptible degree to which they
resemble castles, ladies, and armies – a perpetually untenable resemblance which transforms the sought-for proof into derision and leaves
the words of the books forever hollow. But non-similitude itself has its
model, and one that it imitates in the most servile way: it is to be found
in the transformations performed by magicians. So all the indices of
non-resemblance, all the signs that prove that the written texts are not

representing

telling the truth, resemble the action of sorcery, which introduces
diﬀerence into the indubitable existence of similitude by means of
deceit. And since this magic has been foreseen and described in the
books, the illusory diﬀerence that it introduces can never be anything
but an enchanted similitude, and, therefore, yet another sign that the
signs in the books really do resemble the truth.
Don Quixote is a negative of the Renaissance world; writing has ceased
to be the prose of the world; resemblances and signs have dissolved
their former alliance; similitudes have become deceptive and verge
upon the visionary or madness; things still remain stubbornly within
their ironic identity: they are no longer anything but what they are;
words wander oﬀ on their own, without content, without resemblance
to ﬁll their emptiness; they are no longer the marks of things; they lie
sleeping between the pages of books and covered in dust. Magic, which
permitted the decipherment of the world by revealing the secret
resemblances beneath its signs, is no longer of any use except as an
explanation, in terms of madness, of why analogies are always proved
false. The erudition that once read nature and books alike as parts of a
single text has been relegated to the same category as its own chimeras:
lodged in the yellowed pages of books, the signs of language no longer
have any value apart from the slender ﬁction which they represent. The
written word and things no longer resemble one another. And between
them, Don Quixote wanders oﬀ on his own.
Yet language has not become entirely impotent. It now possesses
new powers, and powers peculiar to it alone. In the second part of the
novel, Don Quixote meets characters who have read the ﬁrst part of his
story and recognize him, the real man, as the hero of the book. Cervantes’s text turns back upon itself, thrusts itself back into its own density,
and becomes the object of its own narrative. The ﬁrst part of the hero’s
adventures plays in the second part the role originally assumed by the
chivalric romances. Don Quixote must remain faithful to the book that
he has now become in reality; he must protect it from errors, from
counterfeits, from apocryphal sequels; he must ﬁll in the details that
have been left out; he must preserve its truth. But Don Quixote himself
has not read this book, and does not have to read it, since he is the book
in ﬂesh and blood. Having ﬁrst read so many books that he became a
sign, a sign wandering through a world that did not recognize him, he

53

54

the order of things

has now, despite himself and without his knowledge, become a book
that contains his truth, that records exactly all that he has done and said
and seen and thought, and that at last makes him recognizable, so
closely does he resemble all those signs whose ineﬀaceable imprint he
has left behind him. Between the ﬁrst and second parts of the novel, in
the narrow gap between those two volumes, and by their power alone,
Don Quixote has achieved his reality – a reality he owes to language
alone, and which resides entirely inside the words. Don Quixote’s truth
is not in the relation of the words to the world but in that slender and
constant relation woven between themselves by verbal signs. The hollow ﬁction of epic exploits has become the representative power of
language. Words have swallowed up their own nature as signs.
Don Quixote is the ﬁrst modern work of literature, because in it we see
the cruel reason of identities and diﬀerences make endless sport of
signs and similitudes; because in it language breaks oﬀ its old kinship
with things and enters into that lonely sovereignty from which it will
reappear, in its separated state, only as literature; because it marks the
point where resemblance enters an age which is, from the point of
view of resemblance, one of madness and imagination. Once similitude
and signs are sundered from each other, two experiences can be established and two characters appear face to face. The madman, understood
not as one who is sick but as an established and maintained deviant, as
an indispensable cultural function, has become, in Western experience,
the man of primitive resemblances. This character, as he is depicted in
the novels or plays of the Baroque age, and as he was gradually institutionalized right up to the advent of nineteenth-century psychiatry, is
the man who is alienated in analogy. He is the disordered player of the
Same and the Other. He takes things for what they are not, and people
one for another; he cuts his friends and recognizes complete strangers;
he thinks he is unmasking when, in fact, he is putting on a mask. He
inverts all values and all proportions, because he is constantly under the
impression that he is deciphering signs: for him, the crown makes
the king. In the cultural perception of the madman that prevailed up to
the end of the eighteenth century, he is Diﬀerent only in so far as he is
unaware of Diﬀerence; he sees nothing but resemblances and signs of
resemblance everywhere; for him all signs resemble one another, and
all resemblances have the value of signs. At the other end of the cultural

representing

area, but brought close by symmetry, the poet is he who, beneath the
named, constantly expected diﬀerences, rediscovers the buried kinships between things, their scattered resemblances. Beneath the established signs, and in spite of them, he hears another, deeper, discourse,
which recalls the time when words glittered in the universal resemblance of things; in the language of the poet, the Sovereignty of the
Same, so diﬃcult to express, eclipses, the distinction existing between
signs.
This accounts, no doubt, for the confrontation of poetry and madness in modern Western culture. But it is no longer the old Platonic
theme of inspired madness. It is the mark of a new experience of
language and things. At the fringes of a knowledge that separates
beings, signs, and similitudes, and as though to limit its power, the
madman fulﬁls the function of homosemanticism: he groups all signs
together and leads them with a resemblance that never ceases to proliferate. The poet fulﬁls the opposite function: his is the allegorical role;
beneath the language of signs and beneath the interplay of their precisely delineated distinctions, he strains his ears to catch that ‘other
language’, the language, without words or discourse, of resemblance.
The poet brings similitude to the signs that speak it, whereas the madman loads all signs with a resemblance that ultimately erases them.
They share, then, on the outer edge of our culture and at the point
nearest to its essential divisions, that ‘frontier’ situation – a marginal
position and a profoundly archaic silhouette – where their words
unceasingly renew the power of their strangeness and the strength of
their contestation. Between them there has opened up a ﬁeld of knowledge in which, because of an essential rupture in the Western world,
what has become important is no longer resemblances but identities
and diﬀerences.

II ORDER
Establishing discontinuities is not an easy task even for history in general. And it is certainly even less so for the history of thought. We may
wish to draw a dividing-line; but any limit we set may perhaps be no
more than an arbitrary division made in a constantly mobile whole. We
may wish to mark oﬀ a period; but have we the right to establish

55

56

the order of things

symmetrical breaks at two points in time in order to give an appearance
of continuity and unity to the system we place between them? Where,
in that case, would the cause of its existence lie? Or that of its subsequent disappearance and fall? What rule could it be obeying by both
its existence and its disappearance? If it contains a principle of coherence within itself, whence could come the foreign element capable of
rebutting it? How can a thought melt away before anything other than
itself? Generally speaking, what does it mean, no longer being able to
think a certain thought? Or to introduce a new thought?
Discontinuity – the fact that within the space of a few years a culture
sometimes ceases to think as it had been thinking up till then and
begins to think other things in a new way – probably begins with an
erosion from outside, from that space which is, for thought, on the
other side, but in which it has never ceased to think from the very
beginning. Ultimately, the problem that presents itself is that of the
relations between thought and culture: how is it that thought has a
place in the space of the world, that it has its origin there, and that it
never ceases, in this place or that, to begin anew? But perhaps it is not
yet time to pose this problem; perhaps we should wait until the
archaeology of thought has been established more ﬁrmly, until it is
better able to gauge what it is capable of describing directly and
positively, until it has deﬁned the particular systems and internal connections it has to deal with, before attempting to encompass thought
and to investigate how it contrives to escape itself. For the moment,
then, let it suﬃce that we accept these discontinuities in the simultaneously manifest and obscure empirical order wherever they posit
themselves.
At the beginning of the seventeenth century, during the period that
has been termed, rightly or wrongly, the Baroque, thought ceases to
move in the element of resemblance. Similitude is no longer the form
of knowledge but rather the occasion of error, the danger to which one
exposes oneself when one does not examine the obscure region of
confusions. ‘It is a frequent habit,’ says Descartes, in the ﬁrst lines of his
Regulae, ‘when we discover several resemblances between two things, to
attribute to both equally, even on points in which they are in reality
diﬀerent, that which we have recognized to be true of only one of
them’.1 The age of resemblance is drawing to a close. It is leaving

representing

nothing behind it but games. Games whose powers of enchantment
grow out of the new kinship between resemblance and illusion; the
chimeras of similitude loom up on all sides, but they are recognized as
chimeras; it is the privileged age of trompe-l’œil painting, of the comic
illusion, of the play that duplicates itself by representing another play,
of the quid pro quo, of dreams and visions; it is the age of the deceiving
senses; it is the age in which the poetic dimension of language is
deﬁned by metaphor, simile, and allegory. And it was also in the nature
of things that the knowledge of the sixteenth century should leave
behind it the distorted memory of a muddled and disordered body of
learning in which all the things in the world could be linked indiscriminately to men’s experiences, traditions, or credulities. From then
on, the noble, rigorous, and restrictive ﬁgures of similitude were to be
forgotten. And the signs that designated them were to be thought of as
the fantasies and charms of a knowledge that had not yet attained the
age of reason.
We already ﬁnd a critique of resemblance in Bacon – an empirical
critique that concerns, not the relations of order and equality between
things, but the types of mind and the forms of illusion to which they
might be subject. We are dealing with a doctrine of the quid pro quo.
Bacon does not dissipate similitudes by means of evidence and its
attendant rules. He shows them, shimmering before our eyes, vanishing as one draws near, then re-forming again a moment later, a little
further oﬀ. They are idols. The idols of the den and the idols of the theatre make
us believe that things resemble what we have learned and the theories
we have formed for ourselves; other idols make us believe that things
are linked by resemblances between themselves.
The human Intellect, from its peculiar nature, easily supposes a
greater order and equality in things than it actually ﬁnds; and, while
there are many things in Nature unique, and quite irregular, still it
feigns parallels, correspondents, and relations that have no existence.
Hence that ﬁction, ‘that among the heavenly bodies all motion takes
place by perfect circles’.

Such are the idols of the tribe, spontaneous ﬁctions of the mind; to which
are added – as eﬀects and sometimes as causes – the confusions of

57

58

the order of things

language: one and the same name being applied indiﬀerently to things
that are not of the same nature. These are the idols of the market.2 Only
prudence on the part of the mind can dissipate them, if it abjures its
natural haste and levity in order to become ‘penetrating’ and ultimately
perceive the diﬀerences inherent in nature.
The Cartesian critique of resemblance is of another type. It is no
longer sixteenth-century thought becoming troubled as it contemplates itself and beginning to jettison its most familiar forms; it is
Classical thought excluding resemblance as the fundamental experience and primary form of knowledge, denouncing it as a confused
mixture that must be analysed in terms of identity, diﬀerence, measurement, and order. Though Descartes rejects resemblance, he does so
not by excluding the act of comparison from rational thought, nor
even by seeking to limit it, but on the contrary by universalizing it and
thereby giving it its purest form. Indeed, it is by means of comparison
that we discover ‘form, extent, movement and other such things’ – that
is to say, simple natures – in all subjects in which they may be present.
And, moreover, in a deduction of the type ‘all of A is B, all of B is C,
therefore all of A is C’, it is clear that the mind ‘makes a comparison
between the term sought and the term given, to wit A and C, with
relation to the knowledge that both are B’. In consequence, if one
makes an exception of the intuition one may have of a single thing, one
can say that all knowledge ‘is obtained by the comparison of two or
more things with each other’.3 But in fact, there can be no true
knowledge except by intuition, that is, by a singular act of pure and
attentive intelligence, and by deduction, which links the observed evidence together. How then can comparison, which is required for the
acquisition of almost all knowledge and which, by deﬁnition, is neither an isolated observation nor a deduction, stand as an authority for a
true thought? ‘Almost all the labour accomplished by human reason
consists without doubt in rendering this operation possible’.4
There exist two forms of comparison, and only two: the comparison
of measurement and that of order. One can measure sizes or multiplicities, in other words continuous sizes or discontinuous sizes; but in
both cases the use of measurement presupposes that, unlike calculation, which proceeds from elements towards a totality, one considers
the whole ﬁrst and then divides it up into parts. This division results in

representing

a number of units, of which some are merely conventional or ‘borrowed’ (in the case of continuous size) and others (in the case of
multiplicities or discontinuous sizes) are the units of arithmetic. The
comparison of two sizes or two multiplicities requires, in any case, that
they both be analysed according to a common unit; so that comparison
eﬀected according to measurement is reducible, in every case, to the
arithmetical relations of equality and inequality. Measurement enables
us to analyse like things according to the calculable form of identity
and diﬀerence.5
Order, on the other hand, is established without reference to an
exterior unit: ‘I can recognize, in eﬀect, what the order is that exists
between A and B without considering anything apart from those two
outer terms’; one cannot know the order of things ‘in their isolated
nature’, but by discovering that which is the simplest, then that which
is the next simplest, one can progress inevitably to the most complex
things of all. Whereas comparison by measurement requires a division
to begin from, then the application of a common unit, here, comparison and order are one and the same thing: comparison by means of
order is a simple act which enables us to pass from one term to another,
then to a third, etc., by means of an ‘absolutely uninterrupted’6
movement. In this way we establish series in which the ﬁrst term is a
nature that we may intuit independently of any other nature; and in
which the other terms are established according to increasing
diﬀerences.
Such, then, are the two types of comparison: the one analyses into
units in order to establish relations of equality and inequality; the other
establishes elements, the simplest that can be found, and arranges differences according to the smallest possible degrees. Now, it is possible
to use the measurement of sizes and multiplicities in establishing an
order; arithmetical values can always be arranged according to a series;
a multiplicity of units can therefore ‘be arranged according to an order
such that the diﬃculty, which previously lay in the knowing of measurement, comes ﬁnally to depend solely on the consideration of
order’.7 And it is precisely in this that the method and its ‘progress’
consist: the reduction of all measurement (all determination by equality and inequality) to a serial arrangement which, beginning from the
simplest, will show up all diﬀerences as degrees of complexity. After

59

60

the order of things

being analysed according to a given unit and the relations of equality
or inequality, the like is analysed according to its evident identity and
diﬀerences: diﬀerences that can be thought in the order of inferences. However, this order or generalized form of comparison can be established
only according to its position in the body of our acquired knowledge;
the absolute character we recognize in what is simple concerns not the
being of things but rather the manner in which they can be known. A
thing can be absolute according to one relation yet relative according
to others;8 order can be at once necessary and natural (in relation to
thought) and arbitrary (in relation to things), since, according to the
way in which we consider it, the same thing may be placed at diﬀering
points in our order.
All this was of the greatest consequence to Western thought. Resemblance, which had for long been the fundamental category of knowledge – both the form and the content of what we know – became
dissociated in an analysis based on terms of identity and diﬀerence;
moreover, whether indirectly by the intermediary of measurement, or
directly and, as it were, on the same footing, comparison became a
function of order; and, lastly, comparison ceased to fulﬁl the function
of revealing how the world is ordered, since it was now accomplished
according to the order laid down by thought, progressing naturally
from the simple to the complex. As a result, the entire episteme of Western culture found its fundamental arrangements modiﬁed. And, in
particular, the empirical domain which sixteenth-century man saw as a
complex of kinships, resemblances, and aﬃnities, and in which language and things were endlessly interwoven – this whole vast ﬁeld was
to take on a new conﬁguration. This new conﬁguration may, I suppose,
be called ‘rationalism’; one might say, if one’s mind is ﬁlled with
ready-made concepts, that the seventeenth century marks the disappearance of the old superstitious or magical beliefs and the entry of
nature, at long last, into the scientiﬁc order. But what we must grasp
and attempt to reconstitute are the modiﬁcations that aﬀected knowledge itself, at that archaic level which makes possible both knowledge
itself and the mode of being of what is to be known.
These modiﬁcations may be summed up as follows. First, the substitution of analysis for the hierarchy of analogies: in the sixteenth
century, the fundamental supposition was that of a total system of

representing

correspondence (earth and sky, planets and faces, microcosm and
macrocosm), and each particular similitude was then lodged within
this overall relation. From now on, every resemblance must be subjected to proof by comparison, that is, it will not be accepted until its
identity and the series of its diﬀerences have been discovered by means
of measurement with a common unit, or, more radically, by its position in an order. Furthermore, the interplay of similitudes was hitherto
inﬁnite: it was always possible to discover new ones, and the only
limitation came from the fundamental ordering of things, from the
ﬁnitude of a world held ﬁrmly between the macrocosm and the microcosm. A complete enumeration will now be possible: whether in the
form of an exhaustive census of all the elements constituting the envisaged whole, or in the form of a categorical arrangement that will
articulate the ﬁeld of study in its totality, or in the form of an analysis
of a certain number of points, in suﬃcient number, taken along the
whole length of a series. Comparison, then, can attain to perfect certainty: the old system of similitudes, never complete and always open
to fresh possibilities, could, it is true, through successive conﬁrmations, achieve steadily increasing probability; but it was never certain.
Complete enumeration, and the possibility of assigning at each point
the necessary connection with the next, permit an absolutely certain
knowledge of identities and diﬀerences: ‘Enumeration alone, whatever
the question to which we are applying ourselves, will permit us always
to deliver a true and certain judgement upon it’.9 The activity of the
mind – and this is the fourth point – will therefore no longer consist in
drawing things together, in setting out on a quest for everything that might
reveal some sort of kinship, attraction, or secretly shared nature within
them, but, on the contrary, in discriminating, that is, in establishing their
identities, then the inevitability of the connections with all the successive degrees of a series. In this sense, discrimination imposes upon
comparison the primary and fundamental investigation of diﬀerence:
providing oneself by intuition with a distinct representation of things,
and apprehending clearly the inevitable connection between one element in a series and that which immediately follows it. Lastly, a ﬁnal
consequence, since to know is to discriminate, history and science will
become separated from one another. On the one hand there will be
erudition, the perusal of written works, the interplay of their authors’

61

62

the order of things

opinions; this interplay may well, in some cases, possess an indicative
value, not so much because of the agreement it produces as because of
the disagreement: ‘When the question at issue is a diﬃcult one, it is
more probable that there were few rather than many to discover the
truth about it.’ Over against this history, and lacking any common unit
of measurement with it, are the conﬁdent judgements we are able to
make by means of intuitions and their serial connection. These and
these alone are what constitute science, and even if we had ‘read all the
arguments of Plato and Aristotle, . . . what we would have learned
would not be sciences, it appears, but history’.10 This being so, the
written word ceases to be included among the signs and forms of
truth; language is no longer one of the ﬁgurations of the world, or a
signature stamped upon things since the beginning of time. The manifestation and sign of truth are to be found in evident and distinct
perception. It is the task of words to translate that truth if they can; but
they no longer have the right to be considered a mark of it. Language
has withdrawn from the midst of beings themselves and has entered a
period of transparency and neutrality.
This is a general phenomenon in seventeenth-century culture – a
more general one than the particular fortunes of Cartesianism.
We must, in fact, distinguish between three things. On the one hand,
there was the mechanism that, for what was really a fairly short period
(not quite the last ﬁfty years of the seventeenth century), oﬀered a
theoretical model to certain ﬁelds of knowledge such as medicine or
physiology. There was also an attempt, rather diverse in the forms it
took, to mathematicize empirical knowledge; though constant and
continuous in the case of astronomy and part of physics, it was only
sporadic in other ﬁelds – sometimes actually attempted (as with Condorcet), sometimes suggested as a universal ideal and a horizon for
research (as with Condillac or Destutt), and sometimes, too, rejected
even as a possibility (by Buﬀon, for example). But neither this
endeavour nor the attempts of mechanism should be confused with the
relation that all Classical knowledge, in its most general form, maintains with the mathesis, understood as a universal science of measurement and order. Under cover of the empty and obscurely incantatory
phrases ‘Cartesian inﬂuence’ or ‘Newtonian model’, our historians of
ideas are in the habit of confusing these three things and deﬁning

representing

Classical rationalism as the tendency to make nature mechanical and
calculable. Others are slightly more perceptive, and go to a great deal of
trouble to discover beneath this rationalism a play of ‘contrary forces’:
the forces of nature and life refusing to let themselves be reduced either
to algebra or to dynamics, and thus preserving, in the depths of Classicism itself, the natural resources of the non-rationalizable. These two
forms of analysis are equally inadequate; for the fundamental element
of the Classical episteme is neither the success or failure of mechanism,
nor the right to mathematicize or the impossibility of mathematicizing
nature, but rather a link with the mathesis which, until the end of the
eighteenth century, remains constant and unaltered. This link has two
essential characteristics. The ﬁrst is that relations between beings are
indeed to be conceived in the form of order and measurement, but
with this fundamental imbalance, that it is always possible to reduce
problems of measurement to problems of order. So that the relation of
all knowledge to the mathesis is posited as the possibility of establishing an ordered succession between things, even non-measurable ones.
In this sense, analysis was very quickly to acquire the value of a universal
method; and the Leibnizian project of establishing a mathematics of
qualitative orders is situated at the very heart of Classical thought; its
gravitational centre. But, on the other hand, this relation to the mathesis as a general science of order does not signify that knowledge is
absorbed into mathematics, or that the latter becomes the foundation
for all possible knowledge; on the contrary, in correlation with the
quest for a mathesis, we perceive the appearance of a certain number of
empirical ﬁelds now being formed and deﬁned for the very ﬁrst time.
In none of these ﬁelds, or almost none, is it possible to ﬁnd any trace of
mechanism or mathematicization; and yet they all rely for their foundation upon a possible science of order. Although they were all dependent upon analysis in general, their particular instrument was not the
algebraic method but the system of signs. So there ﬁrst appeared general
grammar, natural history, and the analysis of wealth, all sciences of
order in the domain of words, beings, and needs; and none of these
empirical studies, new in the Classical period and co-extensive with it
in duration (their chronological frontiers are marked by Lancelot and
Bopp, Ray and Cuvier, Petty and Ricardo, the ﬁrst group writing around
1660 and the second around 1800–10), could have been founded

63

64

the order of things

without the relation that the entire episteme of Western culture maintained at that time with a universal science of order.
This relation to Order is as essential to the Classical age as the relation
to Interpretation was to the Renaissance. And just as interpretation in the
sixteenth century, with its superimposition of a semiology upon a
hermeneutics, was essentially a knowledge based upon similitude, so
the ordering of things by means of signs constitutes all empirical forms
of knowledge as knowledge based upon identity and diﬀerence. The
simultaneously endless and closed, full and tautological world of
resemblance now ﬁnds itself dissociated and, as it were, split down the
middle: on the one side, we shall ﬁnd the signs that have become tools
of analysis, marks of identity and diﬀerence, principles whereby things
can be reduced to order, keys for a taxonomy; and, on the other, the
empirical and murmuring resemblance of things, that unreacting
similitude that lies beneath thought and furnishes the inﬁnite raw
material for divisions and distributions. On the one hand, the general
theory of signs, divisions, and classiﬁcations; on the other, the problem
of immediate resemblances, of the spontaneous movement of the
imagination, of nature’s repetitions. And between the two, the new
forms of knowledge that occupy the area opened up by this new split.

III THE REPRESENTATION OF THE SIGN
What is a sign in the Classical age? For what was altered in the ﬁrst half
of the seventeenth century, and for a long time to come – perhaps right
up to our own day – was the entire organization of signs, the conditions under which they exercise their strange function; it is this, among
so many other things one knows or sees, that causes them to emerge
suddenly as signs; it is their very being. On the threshold of the Classical age, the sign ceases to be a form of the world; and it ceases to be
bound to what it marks by the solid and secret bonds of resemblance or
aﬃnity.
Classical thought deﬁnes it according to three variables.11 First,
the certainty of the relation: a sign may be so constant that one can be
sure of its accuracy (in the sense that breathing denotes life), but it may
also be simply probable (in the sense that pallor probably denotes
pregnancy). Second, the type of relation: a sign may belong to the

representing

whole that it denotes (in the sense that a healthy appearance is part of
the health it denotes) or be separate from it (in the sense that the
ﬁgures of the Old Testament are distant signs of the Incarnation and
Redemption). Third, the origin of the relation: a sign may be natural
(in the sense that a reﬂection in a mirror denotes that which it reﬂects)
or conventional (in the sense that a word may signify an idea to a given
group of men). None of these forms of relation necessarily implies
resemblance; even the natural sign does not require that: a cry is a
spontaneous sign of fear, but not analogous to it; or again, as Berkeley
puts it, visual sensations are signs of touch established in us by God, yet
they do not resemble it in any way.12 These three variables replace
resemblance in deﬁning the sign’s eﬃcacity in the domains of
empirical knowledge.
1. The sign, since it is always either certain or probable, should ﬁnd
its area of being within knowledge. In the sixteenth century, signs were
thought to have been placed upon things so that men might be able to
uncover their secrets, their nature or their virtues; but this discovery
was merely the ultimate purpose of signs, the justiﬁcation of their
presence; it was a possible way of using them, and no doubt the best;
but they did not need to be known in order to exist: even if they
remained silent, even if no one were to perceive them, they were just as
much there. It was not knowledge that gave them their signifying function, but the very language of things. From the seventeenth century
onward, the whole domain of the sign is divided between the certain
and the probable: that is to say, there can no longer be an unknown
sign, a mute mark. This is not because men are in possession of all the
possible signs, but because there can be no sign until there exists a
known possibility of substitution between two known elements. The sign
does not wait in silence for the coming of a man capable of recognizing
it: it can be constituted only by an act of knowing.
It is here that knowledge breaks oﬀ its old kinship with divinatio. The
latter always presupposed signs anterior to it: so that knowledge always
resided entirely in the opening up of a discovered, aﬃrmed, or secretly
transmitted, sign. Its task was to uncover a language which God had
previously distributed across the face of the earth; it is in this sense that
it was the divination of an essential implication, and that the object of
its divination was divine. From now on, however, it is within knowledge

65

66

the order of things

itself that the sign is to perform its signifying function; it is from
knowledge that it will borrow its certainty or its probability. And
though God still employs signs to speak to us through nature, he is
making use of our knowledge, and of the relations that are set up
between our impressions, in order to establish in our minds a relation
of signiﬁcation. Such is the role of feeling in Malebranche or of
sensation in Berkeley; in natural judgement, in feeling, in visual
impressions, and in the perception of the third dimension, what we
are dealing with are hasty and confused, but pressing, inevitable, and
obligatory kinds of knowledge serving as signs for discursive kinds of
knowledge which we humans, because we are not pure intelligences,
no longer have the time or the permission to attain to ourselves and by
the unaided strength of our own minds. In Malebranche and Berkeley,
the sign arranged by God is the cunning and thoughtful superimposition of two kinds of knowledge. There is no longer any divinatio
involved – no insertion of knowledge in the enigmatic, open, and
sacred area of signs – but a brief and concentrated kind of knowledge:
the contraction of a long sequence of judgements into the rapidly
assimilated form of the sign. And it will also be seen how, by a reversal
of direction, knowledge, having enclosed the signs within its own
space, is now able to accommodate probability: between one impression and another the relation will be that of sign to signiﬁed, in other
words, a relation which, like that of succession, will progress from the
weakest probability towards the greatest certainty.
The connection of ideas does not imply the relation of cause and effect,
but only of a mark or sign with the thing signiﬁed. The ﬁre which I see is
not the cause of the pain I suffer upon my approaching it, but the mark
that forewarns me of it.13

The knowledge that divined, at random, signs that were absolute and
older than itself has been replaced by a network of signs built up step
by step in accordance with a knowledge of what is probable. Hume has
become possible.
2. The second variable of the sign: the form of its relation with what
it signiﬁes. By means of the interplay of conveniency, emulation, and
above all sympathy, similitude was able in the sixteenth century to

representing

triumph over space and time; for it was within the power of the sign to
draw things together and unite them. With the advent of Classical
thought, on the other hand, the sign becomes characterized by its
essential dispersion. The circular world of converging signs is replaced
by an inﬁnite progression. Within this space, the sign can have one of
two positions: either it can be claimed, as an element, to be part of that
which it serves to designate; or else it is really and actually separated
from what it serves to designate. The truth is, however, that this alternative is not a radical one, since the sign, in order to function, must be
simultaneously an insertion in that which it signiﬁes and also distinct
from it. For the sign to be, in eﬀect, what it is, it must be presented as
an object of knowledge at the same time as that which it signiﬁes. As
Condillac points out, a sound could never become the verbal sign of
something for a child unless the child had heard it at least once at the
moment of perceiving the object.14 But if one element of a perception is to become a sign for it, it is not enough merely for that element
to be part of the perception; it must be diﬀerentiated qua element and
be distinguished from the total impression with which it is confusedly
linked; consequently, that total impression itself must have been
divided up, and attention must have been directed towards one of the
intermingled regions composing it, in order to isolate one of them.
The constitution of the sign is thus inseparable from analysis. Indeed, it
is the result of it, since without analysis the sign could not become
apparent. But it is also the instrument of analysis, since once deﬁned
and isolated it can be applied to further impressions; and in relation to
them it plays the role of a grid, as it were. Because the mind analyses,
the sign appears. Because the mind has signs at its disposal, analysis
never ceases. It is understandable why, from Condillac to Destutt de
Tracy and Gerando, the general theory of signs and the deﬁnition of the
power of analysis of thought were so exactly superimposed to form a
single and unbroken theory of knowledge.
When the Logique de Port-Royal states that a sign can be inherent in what
it designates or separate from it, it is demonstrating that the sign, in the
Classical age, is charged no longer with the task of keeping the world
close to itself and inherent in its own forms, but, on the contrary, with
that of spreading it out, of juxtaposing it over an indeﬁnitely open
surface, and of taking up from that point the endless deployment of the

67

68

the order of things

substitutes in which we conceive of it. And it is by this means that it is
oﬀered simultaneously to analysis and to combination, and can be
ordered from beginning to end. The sign in Classical thought does not
erase distances or abolish time: on the contrary, it enables one to
unfold them and to traverse them step by step. It is the sign that enables
things to become distinct, to preserve themselves within their own
identities, to dissociate themselves or bind themselves together.
Western reason is entering the age of judgement.
3. There remains a third variable: the one that can assume the two
values of nature and of convention. It had long been known – and well
before Plato’s Cratylus – that signs can be either given by nature or
established by man. Nor was the sixteenth century ignorant of this fact,
since it recognized human languages to be instituted signs. But the
artiﬁcial signs owed their power only to their ﬁdelity to natural signs.
These latter, even at a remove, were the foundation of all others. From
the seventeenth century, the values allotted to nature and convention in
this ﬁeld are inverted: if natural, a sign is no more than an element
selected from the world of things and constituted as a sign by our
knowledge. It is therefore strictly limited, rigid, inconvenient, and
impossible for the mind to master. When, on the other hand, one
establishes a conventional sign, it is always possible (and indeed necessary) to choose it in such a way that it will be simple, easy to remember, applicable to an indeﬁnite number of elements, susceptible of
subdivision within itself and of combination with other signs; the
man-made sign is the sign at the peak of its activity. It is the man-made
sign that draws the dividing-line between man and animal; that transforms imagination into voluntary memory, spontaneous attention into
reﬂection, and instinct into rational knowledge.15 It is also what
Itard found lacking in the ‘wild man of Aveyron’.16 Natural signs are
merely rudimentary sketches for these conventional signs, the vague
and distant design that can be realized only by the establishment of
arbitrariness.
But this arbitrariness is measured by its function; and has its rules
very exactly deﬁned by that function. An arbitrary system of signs must
permit the analysis of things into their simplest elements; it must be
capable of decomposing them into their very origins; but it must also
demonstrate how combinations of those elements are possible, and

representing

permit the ideal genesis of the complexity of things. ‘Arbitrary’ stands
in opposition to ‘natural’ only if one is attempting to designate the
manner in which signs have been established. But this arbitrariness is
also the grid of analysis and the combinative space through which
nature is to posit itself as that which it is – at the level of primal
impressions and in all the possible forms of their combination. In its
perfect state, the system of signs is that simple, absolutely transparent
language which is capable of naming what is elementary; it is also that
complex of operations which deﬁnes all possible conjunctions. To our
eyes, this search for origins and this calculus of combinations appear
incompatible, and we are only too ready to interpret them as an ambiguity in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century thought. The same is true
of the interaction between the system and nature. In fact, there is no
contradiction at all for thought at that time. More precisely, there exists
a single, necessary arrangement running through the whole of the
Classical episteme: the association of a universal calculus and a search for
the elementary within a system that is artiﬁcial and is, for that very
reason, able to make nature visible from its primary elements right to
the simultaneity of all their possible combinations. In the Classical age,
to make use of signs is not, as it was in preceding centuries, to attempt
to rediscover beneath them the primitive text of a discourse sustained,
and retained, forever; it is an attempt to discover the arbitrary language
that will authorize the deployment of nature within its space, the ﬁnal
terms of its analysis and the laws of its composition. It is no longer the
task of knowledge to dig out the ancient Word from the unknown
places where it may be hidden; its job now is to fabricate a language,
and to fabricate it well – so that, as an instrument of analysis and
combination, it will really be the language of calculation.
It is now possible to deﬁne the instruments laid down for the use of
Classical thought by the sign system. It was this system that introduced
into knowledge probability, analysis, and combination, and the justiﬁed arbitrariness of the system. It was the sign system that gave rise
simultaneously to the search for origins and to calculability; to the
constitution of tables that would ﬁx the possible compositions, and to
the restitution of a genesis on the basis of the simplest elements; it was
the sign system that linked all knowledge to a language, and sought to
replace all languages with a system of artiﬁcial symbols and operations

69

70

the order of things

of a logical nature. At the level of the history of opinions, all this would
appear, no doubt, as a tangled network of inﬂuences in which the
individual parts played by Hobbes, Berkeley, Leibniz, Condillac, and
the ‘Idéologues’ would be revealed. But if we question Classical
thought at the level of what, archaeologically, made it possible, we
perceive that the dissociation of the sign and resemblance in the early
seventeenth century caused these new forms – probability, analysis,
combination, and universal language system – to emerge, not as successive themes engendering one another or driving one another out,
but as a single network of necessities. And it was this network that
made possible the individuals we term Hobbes, Berkeley, Hume, or
Condillac.

IV DUPLICATED REPRESENTATION
However, the property of signs most fundamental to the Classical episteme has not yet been mentioned. Indeed, the very fact that the sign can
be more or less probable, more or less distant from what it signiﬁes,
that it can be either natural or arbitrary, without its nature or its value
as a sign being aﬀected – all this shows clearly enough that the relation
of the sign to its content is not guaranteed by the order of things in
themselves. The relation of the sign to the signiﬁed now resides in a
space in which there is no longer any intermediary ﬁgure to connect
them: what connects them is a bond established, inside knowledge,
between the idea of one thing and the idea of another. The Logique de Port-Royal
states this as follows: ‘The sign encloses two ideas, one of the thing
representing, the other of the thing represented; and its nature consists
in exciting the ﬁrst by means of the second’.17 This dual theory of
the sign is in unequivocal opposition to the more complex organization of the Renaissance; at that time, the theory of the sign implied
three quite distinct elements: that which was marked, that which did
the marking, and that which made it possible to see in the ﬁrst the
mark of the second; and this last element was, of course, resemblance:
the sign provided a mark exactly in so far as it was ‘almost the same
thing’ as that which it designated. It is this unitary and triple system
that disappears at the same time as ‘thought by resemblance’, and is
replaced by a strictly binary organization.

representing

But there is one condition that must be fulﬁlled if the sign is indeed
to be this pure duality. In its simple state as an idea, or an image, or a
perception, associated with or substituted for another, the signifying
element is not a sign. It can become a sign only on condition that it
manifests, in addition, the relation that links it to what it signiﬁes. It
must represent; but that representation, in turn, must also be represented within it. This is a condition indispensable to the binary organization of the sign, and one that the Logique de Port-Royal sets forth even
before telling us what a sign is: ‘When one looks at a certain object
only in so far as it represents another, the idea one has of it is the idea of
a sign, and that ﬁrst object is called a sign’.18 The signifying idea
becomes double, since superimposed upon the idea that is replacing
another there is also the idea of its representative power. This appears to
give us three terms: the idea signiﬁed, the idea signifying, and, within
this second term, the idea of its role as representation. What we are
faced with here is not, however, a surreptitious return to a ternary
system, but rather an inevitable displacement within the two-term
ﬁgure, which moves backward in relation to itself and comes to reside
entirely within the signifying element. In fact, the signifying element
has no content, no function, and no determination other than what it
represents: it is entirely ordered upon and transparent to it. But this
content is indicated only in a representation that posits itself as such,
and that which is signiﬁed resides, without residuum and without
opacity, within the representation of the sign. It is characteristic that
the ﬁrst example of a sign given by the Logique de Port-Royal is not the
word, nor the cry, nor the symbol, but the spatial and graphic representation – the drawing as map or picture. This is because the picture has
no other content in fact than that which it represents, and yet that
content is made visible only because it is represented by a representation. The binary arrangement of the sign, as it appears in the seventeenth century, replaces an organization which, in diﬀerent modes,
had been ternary ever since the time of the Stoics, and even since the
ﬁrst Greek grammarians; and this new binary arrangement presupposes that the sign is a duplicated representation doubled over upon
itself. An idea can be the sign of another, not only because a bond
of representation can be established between them, but also because
this representation can always be represented within the idea that is

71

72

the order of things

representing. Or again, because representation in its peculiar essence is
always perpendicular to itself: it is at the same time indication and appearance; a relation to an object and a manifestation of itself. From the
Classical age, the sign is the representativity of the representation in so far
as it is representable.
This has very considerable consequences. First, the importance of
signs in Classical thought. Before, they were means of knowing and the
keys to knowledge; now, they are co-extensive with representation, that
is, with thought as a whole; they reside within it but they run through
its entire extent. Whenever one representation is linked to another and
represents that link within itself, there is a sign: the abstract idea signiﬁes the concrete perception from which it has been formed (Condillac); the general idea is no more than a particular idea serving as a
sign for other particular ideas (Berkeley); imaginings are signs of the
perceptions from which they arose (Hume, Condillac); sensations are
signs of one another (Berkeley, Condillac); and, ﬁnally, it is possible
that sensations may themselves be (as in Berkeley) signs of what God
wishes to tell us, which would make them, as it were, signs for a
complex of signs. Analysis of representation and the theory of signs
interpenetrate one another absolutely; and when the day came, at the
end of the eighteenth century, for Ideology to raise the question of
whether the idea or the sign should be accorded primacy, when Destutt could reproach Gerando for having created a theory of signs before
deﬁning the idea,19 this meant that their immediate link was already
becoming confused, and that idea and sign would soon cease to be
perfectly transparent to one another.
A second consequence: this universal extension of the sign within
the ﬁeld of representation precludes even the possibility of a theory of
signiﬁcation. For to ask ourselves questions about what signiﬁcation is
presupposes that it is a determinate form in our consciousness. But if
phenomena are posited only in a representation that, in itself and
because of its own representability, is wholly a sign, then signiﬁcation
cannot constitute a problem. Moreover, it is not even visible. All representations are interconnected as signs; all together, they form, as it
were, an immense network; each one posits itself in its transparency as
the sign of what it represents; and yet – or rather, by this very fact – no
speciﬁc activity of consciousness can ever constitute a signiﬁcation. No

representing

doubt it is because Classical thought about representation excludes any
analysis of signiﬁcation that we today, who conceive of signs only
upon the basis of such an analysis, have so much trouble, despite the
evidence, in recognizing that Classical philosophy, from Malebranche
to Ideology, was through and through a philosophy of the sign.
No meaning exterior or anterior to the sign; no implicit presence of
a previous discourse that must be reconstituted in order to reveal the
autochthonous meaning of things. Nor, on the other hand, any act
constitutive of signiﬁcation or any genesis interior to consciousness.
This is because there is no intermediary element, no opacity intervening between the sign and its content. Signs, therefore, have no other
laws than those that may govern their contents: any analysis of signs is
at the same time, and without need for further inquiry, the decipherment of what they are trying to say. Inversely, the discovery of what is
signiﬁed is nothing more than a reﬂection upon the signs that indicate
it. As in the sixteenth century, ‘semiology’ and ‘hermeneutics’ are
superimposed – but in a diﬀerent form. In the Classical age they no
longer meet and join in the third element of resemblance; their connection lies in that power proper to representation of representing
itself. There will therefore be no theory of signs separate and diﬀering
from an analysis of meaning. Yet the system does grant a certain privilege to the former over the latter; since it does not accord that which is
signiﬁed a nature diﬀerent from that accorded to the sign, meaning
cannot be anything more than the totality of the signs arranged in their
progression; it will be given in the complete table of signs. But, on the
other hand, the complete network of signs is linked together and
articulated according to patterns proper to meaning. The table of the
signs will be the image of the things. Though the meaning itself is
entirely on the side of the sign, its functioning is entirely on the side of
that which is signiﬁed. This is why the analysis of language, from
Lancelot to Destutt de Tracy, is conducted on the basis of an abstract
theory of verbal signs and in the form of a general grammar: but it
always takes the meaning of words as its guiding thread; it is also why
natural history manifests itself as an analysis of the characters of living
beings, and why, nevertheless, the taxonomies used, artiﬁcial though
they may be, are always intended to unite with the natural order, or at
least to dissociate it as little as possible; it is also why the analysis of

73

74

the order of things

wealth is conducted on the basis of money and exchange, but value is
always based upon need. In the Classical age, the pure science of signs
has value as the direct discourse of that which is signiﬁed.
Finally, a third consequence, which probably extends up to our own
time: the binary theory of the sign, the theory upon which the whole
general science of the sign has been founded since the seventeenth
century, is linked according to a fundamental relation with a general
theory of representation. If the sign is the pure and simple connection
between what signiﬁes and what is signiﬁed (a connection that may be
arbitrary or not, voluntary or imposed, individual or collective), then
the relation can be established only within the general element of
representation: the signifying element and the signiﬁed element are
linked only in so far as they are (or have been or can be) represented,
and in so far as the one actually represents the other. It was therefore
necessary that the Classical theory of the sign should provide itself with
an ‘ideology’ to serve as its foundation and philosophical justiﬁcation,
that is, a general analysis of all forms of representation, from elementary sensation to the abstract and complex idea. It was also necessary
that Saussure, rediscovering the project of a general semiology, should
have given the sign a deﬁnition that could seem ‘psychologistic’ (the
linking of a concept and an image): this is because he was in fact
rediscovering the Classical condition for conceiving of the binary
nature of the sign.

V THE IMAGINATION OF RESEMBLANCE
So signs are now set free from that teeming world throughout which
the Renaissance had distributed them. They are lodged henceforth
within the conﬁnes of representation, in the interstices of ideas, in that
narrow space in which they interact with themselves in a perpetual
state of decomposition and recomposition. As for similitude, it is now
a spent force, outside the realm of knowledge. It is merely empiricism
in its most unreﬁned form; like Hobbes, one can no longer ‘regard it as
being a part of philosophy’, unless it has ﬁrst been erased in its inexact
form of resemblance and transformed by knowledge into a relationship
of equality or order. And yet similitude is still an indispensable border
of knowledge. For no equality or relation of order can be established

representing

between two things unless their resemblance has at least occasioned
their comparison. Hume placed the relation of identity among those
‘philosophical’ relations that presuppose reﬂection; whereas, for him,
resemblance belonged to natural relations, to those that constrain our
minds by means of an inevitable but ‘calm force’.
Let the philosopher pride himself on his precision as much as he
will . . . I nevertheless dare defy him to make a single step in his
progress without the aid of resemblance. Throw but one glance upon
the metaphysical aspect of the sciences, even the least abstract of
them, and then tell me whether the general inductions that are derived
from particular facts, or rather the kinds themselves, the species and
all abstract notions, can be formed otherwise than by means of
resemblance.20

At the border of knowledge, similitude is that barely sketched form,
that rudimentary relation which knowledge must overlay to its full
extent, but which continues, indeﬁnitely, to reside below knowledge
in the manner of a mute and ineﬀaceable necessity.
As in the sixteenth century, resemblance and sign respond inevitably
to one another, but in a new way. Whereas similitude once required a
mark in order for its secret to be uncovered, it is now the undiﬀerentiated, shifting, unstable base upon which knowledge can establish its
relations, its measurements, and its identities. This results in a double
reversal: ﬁrst, because it is the sign – and with it the whole of discursive
knowledge – that requires a basis of similitude, and, second, because it
is no longer a question of making a previous content manifest to knowledge but of providing a content that will be able to oﬀer a ground
upon which forms of knowledge can be applied. Whereas in the sixteenth century resemblance was the fundamental relation of being to
itself, and the hinge of the whole world, in the Classical age it is the
simplest form in which what is to be known, and what is furthest from
knowledge itself, appears. It is through resemblance that representation
can be known, that is, compared with other representations that may
be similar to it, analysed into elements (elements common to it and
other representations), combined with those representations that may
present partial identities, and ﬁnally laid out into an ordered table.

75

76

the order of things

Similitude in Classical philosophy (that is, in a philosophy of analysis)
plays a role parallel to that which will be played by diversity in critical
thought and the philosophies of judgement.
In this limiting and conditional position (that without which and
beyond which one cannot know), resemblance is situated on the side
of imagination, or, more exactly, it can be manifested only by virtue of
imagination, and imagination, in turn, can be exercised only with the
aid of resemblance. And, in eﬀect, if we suppose in the uninterrupted
chain of representation certain impressions, the very simplest that can
be, without the slightest degree of resemblance between them, then
there would be no possibility whatever of the second recalling the ﬁrst,
causing it to reappear, and thus authorizing its representation in the
imagination; those impressions would succeed one another in the most
total diﬀerentiation – so total that it could not even be perceived, since
no representation would be able to immobilize itself in one place,
reanimate a former one, and juxtapose itself to it so as to give rise to a
comparison; even that tiny overlap of identity necessary for all diﬀerentiation would not be provided. Perpetual change would pass before us
without guidelines and in perpetual monotony. If representation did
not possess the obscure power of making a past impression present
once more, then no impression would ever appear as either similar to
or dissimilar from a previous one. This power of recall implies at least
the possibility of causing two impressions to appear as quasi-likenesses
(as neighbours or contemporaries, existing in almost the same way)
when one of those impressions only is present, while the other has
ceased, perhaps a long time ago, to exist. Without imagination, there
would be no resemblance between things.
The double requisite is patent. There must be, in the things represented, the insistent murmur of resemblance; there must be, in the
representation, the perpetual possibility of imaginative recall. And neither of these requisites can dispense with the other, which completes
and confronts it. Hence the two directions of analysis followed
throughout the Classical age, consistently drawing closer and closer
together until ﬁnally, in the second half of the eighteenth century, they
were able to express their common truth in Ideology. On the one hand,
we ﬁnd the analysis that provides an account of the inversion of the
series of representations to form a non-actual but simultaneous table

representing

of comparisons: the analysis of impressions, of reminiscence, of
imagination, of memory, of all that involuntary background which is,
as it were, the mechanics of the image in time. And, on the other hand,
there is the analysis that gives an account of the resemblance between
things – of their resemblance before their reduction to order, their
decomposition into identical and diﬀerent elements, the tabular
redistribution of their unordered similitudes. Why is it, then, that
things are given in an overlapping mixture, in an interpenetrating
jumble in which their essential order is confused, yet still visible
enough to show through in the form of resemblances, vague similitudes, and allusive opportunities for a memory on the alert? The ﬁrst
series of problems corresponds roughly with the analytic of imagination, as
a positive power to transform the linear time of representation into a
simultaneous space containing virtual elements; the second corresponds roughly with the analysis of nature, including the lacunae, the
disorders that confuse the tabulation of beings and scatter it into a
series of representations that vaguely, and from a distance, resemble
one another.
Now, these two opposing stages (the ﬁrst the negative one of the
disorder in nature and in our impressions, the other the positive one of
the power to reconstitute order out of those impressions) are united in
the idea of a ‘genesis’. And this in two possible ways. Either the negative stage (that of disorder and vague resemblance) is attributed to the
imagination itself, which then exercises a double function: if it is able
to restore order solely by duplicating representation, it is able to do so
only in so far as it would prevent us from perceiving directly, and in
their analytic truth, the identities and diﬀerences of things. The power
of imagination is only the inverse, the other side, of its defect. It exists
within man, at the suture of body and soul. It is there that Descartes,
Malebranche, and Spinoza analysed it, both as the locus of error and
as the power of attaining to truth, even mathematical truth; they
recognized in it the stigma of ﬁnitude, whether as the sign of a fall
outside the area of intelligibility or as the mark of a limited nature.
Alternatively, the positive stage of imagination can be attributed to
shifting resemblances and the vague murmur of similitudes. It is the
disorder of nature due to its own history, to its catastrophes, or perhaps
merely to its jumbled plurality, which is no longer capable of

77

78

the order of things

providing representation with anything but things that resemble one
another. So that representation, perpetually bound to contents so very
close to one another, repeats itself, recalls itself, duplicates itself quite
naturally, causes almost identical impressions to arise again and again,
and engenders imagination. It was in just this proliferation of a nature
that is multiple, yet obscurely and irrationally re-created, in the enigmatic fact of a nature that prior to all order resembles itself, that
Condillac and Hume sought for the link between resemblance and
imagination. Their solutions were strictly contradictory, but they were
both answers to the same problem. It is in any case understandable that
the second type of analysis should have so easily been deployed in the
mythical form of the ﬁrst man (Rousseau), or that of the awakening
consciousness (Condillac), or that of the stranger suddenly thrust into
the world (Hume): this genesis functioned exactly instead of and in
place of Genesis itself.
One further remark. Though the notions of nature and human
nature have a certain importance in the Classical age, this is not because
the hidden and inexhaustibly rich source of power which we call
nature had suddenly been discovered as a ﬁeld for empirical inquiry;
nor is it because a tiny, singular, and complex subregion called human
nature had been isolated within this vast ﬁeld of nature. In fact, these
two concepts function in such a way as to guarantee the kinship, the
reciprocal bond, between imagination and resemblance. It is true that
imagination is apparently only one of the properties of human nature,
and resemblance one of the eﬀects of nature; but if we follow the
archaeological network that provides Classical thought with its laws,
we see quite clearly that human nature resides in that narrow overlap of
representation which permits it to represent itself to itself (all human
nature is there: just enough outside representation for it to present
itself again, in the blank space that separates the presence of representation and the ‘re-’ of its repetition); and that nature is nothing but the
impalpable confusion within representation that makes the resemblance there perceptible before the order of the identities is yet visible.
Nature and human nature, within the general conﬁguration of the
episteme, permit the reconciliation of resemblance and imagination that
provides a foundation for, and makes possible, all the empirical
sciences of order.

representing

In the sixteenth century, resemblance was linked to a system of
signs; and it was the interpretation of those signs that opened up the
ﬁeld of concrete knowledge. From the seventeenth century, resemblance was pushed out to the boundaries of knowledge, towards the
humblest and basest of its frontiers. There, it links up with imagination,
with doubtful repetitions, with misty analogies. And instead of opening up the way to a science of interpretation, it implies a genesis that
leads from those unreﬁned forms of the Same to the great tables of
knowledge developed according to the forms of identity, of diﬀerence,
and of order. The project of a science of order, with a foundation such
as it had in the seventeenth century, carried the implication that it had
to be paralleled by an accompanying genesis of consciousness, as
indeed it was, eﬀectively and uninterruptedly, from Locke to the
‘Idéologues’.

VI MATHESIS AND ‘TAXINOMIA’
The project of a general science of order; a theory of signs analysing
representation; the arrangement of identities and diﬀerences into
ordered tables: these constituted an area of empiricity in the Classical
age that had not existed until the end of the Renaissance and that was
destined to disappear early in the nineteenth century. It is so diﬃcult
for us to reinstate now, and so thickly overlaid by the system of positivities to which our own knowledge belongs, that it has for long passed
unperceived. It is distorted and masked by the use of categories and
patterns that are our own. An attempt is apparently being made to
reconstitute what the ‘sciences of life’, of ‘nature’ or ‘man’, were, in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, while it is quite simply forgotten that man and life and nature are none of them domains that
present themselves to the curiosity of knowledge spontaneously and
passively.
What makes the totality of the Classical episteme possible is primarily
the relation to a knowledge of order. When dealing with the ordering
of simple natures, one has recourse to a mathesis, of which the universal method is algebra. When dealing with the ordering of complex
natures (representations in general, as they are given in experience),
one has to constitute a taxinomia, and to do that one has to establish a

79

80

the order of things

system of signs. These signs are to the order of composite natures what
algebra is to the order of simple natures. But in so far as empirical
representations must be analysable into simple natures, it is clear that
the taxinomia relates wholly to the mathesis; on the other hand, since the
perception of proofs is only one particular case of representation in
general, one can equally well say that mathesis is only one particular
case of taxinomia. Similarly, the signs established by thought itself constitute, as it were, an algebra of complex representations; and algebra,
inversely, is a method of providing simple natures with signs and of
operating upon those signs. We therefore have the arrangement shown
below:

But that is not all. Taxinomia also implies a certain continuum of
things (a non-discontinuity, a plenitude of being) and a certain power
of the imagination that renders apparent what is not, but makes possible, by this very fact, the revelation of that continuity. The possibility
of a science of empirical orders requires, therefore, an analysis of
knowledge – an analysis that must show how the hidden (and as it
were confused) continuity of being can be reconstituted by means of
the temporal connection provided by discontinuous representations.
Hence the necessity, constantly manifested throughout the Classical
age, of questioning the origin of knowledge. In fact, these empirical
analyses are not in opposition to the project of a universal mathesis, in
the sense that scepticism is to rationalism; they were already included
in the requisites of a knowledge that is no longer posited as experience
of the Same but as the establishment of Order. Thus, at the two extremities of the Classical episteme, we have a mathesis as the science of calculable order and a genesis as the analysis of the constitution of orders on
the basis of empirical series. On the one hand, we have a utilization
of the symbols of possible operations upon identities and diﬀerences;
on the other, we have an analysis of the marks progressively imprinted

representing

in the mind by the resemblances between things and the retrospective
action of imagination. Between the mathesis and the genesis there extends
the region of signs – of signs that span the whole domain of empirical
representation, but never extend beyond it. Hedged in by calculus and
genesis, we have the area of the table. This kind of knowledge involves
the allotting of a sign to all that our representation can present us with:
perceptions, thoughts, desires; these signs must have a value as characters, that is, they must articulate the representation as a whole into
distinct subregions, all separated from one another by assignable
characteristics; in this way they authorize the establishment of a simultaneous system according to which the representations express their
proximity and their distance, their adjacency and their separateness –
and therefore the network, which, outside chronology, makes patent
their kinship and reinstates their relations of order within a permanent
area. In this manner the table of identities and diﬀerences may be
drawn up.
It is in this area that we encounter natural history – the science of the
characters that articulate the continuity and the tangle of nature. It is
also in this area that we encounter the theory of money and the theory of
value – the science of the signs that authorize exchange and permit the
establishment of equivalences between men’s needs or desires. Lastly, it
is also in this region that we ﬁnd general grammar – the science of the
signs by means of which men group together their individual perceptions and pattern the continuous ﬂow of their thoughts. Despite their
diﬀerences, these three domains existed in the Classical age only in so
far as the fundamental area of the ordered table was established
between the calculation of equalities and the genesis of representations.
It is patent that these three notions – mathesis, taxinomia, genesis – designate not so much separate domains as a solid grid of kinships that
deﬁnes the general conﬁguration of knowledge in the Classical age.
Taxinomia is not in opposition to mathesis: it resides within it and is
distinguished from it; for it too is a science of order – a qualitative
mathesis. But understood in the strict sense mathesis is a science of
equalities, and therefore of attributions and judgements; it is the
science of truth. Taxinomia, on the other hand, treats of identities and
diﬀerences; it is the science of articulations and classiﬁcations; it is the
knowledge of beings. In the same way, genesis is contained within

81

82

the order of things

taxinomia, or at least ﬁnds in it its primary possibility. But taxinomia
establishes the table of visible diﬀerences; genesis presupposes a progressive series; the ﬁrst treats of signs in their spatial simultaneity, as a
syntax; the second divides them up into an analogon of time, as a
chronology. In relation to mathesis, taxinomia functions as an ontology
confronted by an apophantics; confronted by genesis, it functions as a
semiology confronted by history. It deﬁnes, then, the general law of
beings, and at the same time the conditions under which it is possible
to know them. Hence the fact that the theory of signs in the Classical
period was able to support simultaneously both a science with a dogmatic approach, which purported to be a knowledge of nature itself,
and a philosophy of representation, which, in the course of time,
became more and more nominalist and more and more sceptical.
Hence, too, the fact that such an arrangement has disappeared so completely that later ages have lost even the memory of its existence; this is
because after the Kantian critique, and all that occurred in Western
culture at the end of the eighteenth century, a new type of division was
established: on the one hand mathesis was regrouped so as to constitute an apophantics and an ontology, and it is in this form that it has
dominated the formal disciplines right up to our day; on the other
hand, history and semiology (the latter absorbed, moreover, by the
former) united to form those interpretative disciplines whose power
has extended from Schleiermacher to Nietzsche and Freud.
In any case, the Classical episteme can be deﬁned in its most general
arrangement in terms of the articulated system of a mathesis, a taxinomia,
and a genetic analysis. The sciences always carry within themselves the
project, however remote it may be, of an exhaustive ordering of the
world; they are always directed, too, towards the discovery of simple
elements and their progressive combination; and at their centre they
form a table on which knowledge is displayed in a system contemporary with itself. The centre of knowledge, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, is the table. As for the great controversies that occupied
men’s minds, these are accommodated quite naturally in the folds of
this organization.
It is quite possible to write a history of thought in the Classical
period using these controversies as starting-points or themes. But one
would then be writing only a history of opinions, that is, of the choices

representing

operated according to individuals, environments, social groups; and
a whole method of inquiry is thereby implied. If one wishes to
undertake an archaeological analysis of knowledge itself, it is not these
celebrated controversies that ought to be used as the guidelines and
articulation of such a project. One must reconstitute the general system
of thought whose network, in its positivity, renders an interplay of
simultaneous and apparently contradictory opinions possible. It is
this network that deﬁnes the conditions that make a controversy or
problem possible, and that bears the historicity of knowledge. If the
Western world did battle with itself in order to know whether life was
nothing but movement or whether nature was suﬃciently well ordered
to prove the existence of God, it was not because a problem had been
opened up; it was because, after dispersing the undeﬁned circle of
signs and resemblances, and before organizing the series of causality
and history, the episteme of Western culture had opened up an area to
form a table over which it wandered endlessly, from the calculable
forms of order to the analysis of the most complex representations.
And we see the marks of this movement on the historical surface of the
themes, controversies, problems, and preferences of opinion. Acquired
learning spanned from one end to the other a ‘space of knowledge’
which had suddenly appeared in the seventeenth century and which
was not to be closed again until a hundred and ﬁfty years later.
We must now undertake the analysis of this tabulated space, in those
subregions in which it is visible in its clearest form, that is, in the
theories of language, classiﬁcation, and money.
It may be objected that the mere fact of attempting to analyse general
grammar, natural history, and economics simultaneously and en bloc –
by relating them to a general theory of signs and representation –
presupposes a question that could originate only in our own century. It
is true that the Classical age was no more able than any other culture to
circumscribe or name its own general system of knowledge. But that
system was in fact suﬃciently constricting to cause the visible forms of
knowledge to trace their kinships upon it themselves, as though
methods, concepts, types of analysis, acquired experiences, minds, and
ﬁnally men themselves, had all been displaced at the behest of a fundamental network deﬁning the implicit but inevitable unity of knowledge. History has provided us with innumerable examples of these

83

84

the order of things

displacements. The connecting paths between the theories of knowledge, of signs, and of grammar were trodden so many times: PortRoyal produced its Grammaire as a complement and natural sequel to its
Logique, the former being connected to the latter by a common analysis
of signs; Condillac, Destutt de Tracy, and Gerando articulated one upon
the other the decomposition of knowledge into its conditions or
‘elements’, and the reﬂection upon those signs of which language
forms only the most visible application and use. There is also a welltrodden connection between the analysis of representation and signs
and the analysis of wealth: Quesnay the physiocrat wrote the article on
‘Évidence’ for the Encyclopédie; Condillac and Destutt included in their
theory of knowledge and language that of trade and economics, which
for them possessed political and also moral value; it is well known that
Turgot wrote the article on ‘Étymologie’ for the Encyclopédie and the ﬁrst
systematic parallel between money and words; that Adam Smith, in
addition to his great work on economics, wrote a treatise on the origin
of languages. There is a connecting path between the theory of natural
classiﬁcations and theories of language: Adanson did not merely
attempt to create, in the botanical ﬁeld, a nomenclature that was both
artiﬁcial and coherent; he aimed at (and in part carried out) a whole
reorganization of writing in terms of the phonetic data of language;
Rousseau left among his posthumous works some rudiments of botany
and a treatise on the origin of languages.
Such, traced out, as it were, in dotted lines, was the great grid of
empirical knowledge: that of non-quantitative orders. And perhaps the
deferred but insistent unity of a Taxinomia universalis appeared in all clarity
in the work of Linnaeus, when he conceived the project of discovering
in all the concrete domains of nature or society the same distributions
and the same order.21 The limit of knowledge would be the perfect
transparency of representations to the signs by which they are ordered.

NOTES
1
2
3
4

Descartes, (Œuvres philosophiques (Paris, 1963 edn., t. I, p. 77).
F. Bacon, Novum Organum (1620, book I, xlv and lix).
Descartes, Regulae, XIV, p. 168.
Ibid., XIV, p. 168.

representing
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Ibid., XIV, p. 182.
Ibid., VI, p. 102; VII, p. 109.
Ibid., XIV, p. 182.
Ibid., VI, p. 103.
Ibid., VII, p. 110.
Ibid., III, p. 86.
Logique de Port-Royal, Ière partie, chap. IV.
G. Berkeley, An essay towards a new theory of vision (1709, CXLVII).
G. Berkeley, A treatise concerning the principles of human knowledge (1710, LXV).
Condillac, Essai sur l’origine des connaissances humaines (Œuvres, Paris, 1798, t. I,
pp. 188–208).
15 Ibid., p. 75.
16 J. Itard, Rapport sur les nouveaux développements de Victor de l’Aveyron (1806);
reprinted in L. Malson, Les Enfants sauvages (Paris, 1964).
17 Logique de Port-Royal, Ière partie, chap. IV.
18 Ibid.
19 Destutt de Tracy, Eléments d’ldéologie (Paris, year XI, t. II, p. 1).
20 Merian, Réﬂexions philosophiques sur la ressemblance (1767, pp. 3 and 4).
21 Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, sections 155 and 256.

85

4
SPEAKING
I CRITICISM AND COMMENTARY
The existence of language in the Classical age is both pre-eminent and
unobtrusive.
Pre-eminent, because words have been allotted the task and the
power of ‘representing thought’. But representing in this case does not
mean translating, giving a visible version of, fabricating a material
double that will be able, on the external surface of the body, to reproduce thought in its exactitude. Representing must be understood in the
strict sense: language represents thought as thought represents itself. To
constitute language or give it life from within, there is no essential and
primitive act of signiﬁcation, but only, at the heart of representation,
the power that it possesses to represent itself, that is, to analyse itself by
juxtaposing itself to itself, part by part, under the eye of reﬂection, and
to delegate itself in the form of a substitute that will be an extension of
it. In the Classical age, nothing is given that is not given to representation; but, by that very fact, no sign ever appears, no word is spoken, no
proposition is ever directed at any content except by the action of a
representation that stands back from itself, that duplicates and reﬂects
itself in another representation that is its equivalent. Representations
are not rooted in a world that gives them meaning; they open of
themselves on to a space that is their own, whose internal network

speaking

gives rise to meaning. And language exists in the gap that representation creates for itself. Words do not, then, form a thin ﬁlm that duplicates thought on the outside; they recall thought, they indicate it, but
inwards ﬁrst of all, among all those representations that represent other
representations. The language of the Classical age is much closer to the
thought it is charged with expressing than is generally supposed; but it
is not parallel to it; it is caught in the grid of thought, woven into the
very fabric it is unrolling. It is not an exterior eﬀect of thought, but
thought itself.
And, because of this, it makes itself invisible, or almost so. In any
case, it has become so transparent to representation that its very existence ceases to be a problem. The Renaissance came to a halt before the
brute fact that language existed: in the density of the world, a graphism
mingling with things or ﬂowing beneath them; marks made upon
manuscripts or the pages of books. And all these insistent marks summoned up a secondary language – that of commentary, exegesis, erudition – in order to stir the language that lay dormant within them and to
make it speak at last; the existence of language preceded, as if by a mute
stubbornness, what one could read in it and the words that gave it
sound. From the seventeenth century, it is this massive and intriguing
existence of language that is eliminated. It no longer appears hidden in
the enigma of the mark; it has not yet appeared in the theory of
signiﬁcation. From an extreme point of view, one might say that
language in the Classical era does not exist. But that it functions: its
whole existence is located in its representative role, is limited precisely
to that role and ﬁnally exhausts it. Language has no other locus, no
other value, than in representation; in the hollow it has been able to
form.
In this way, Classical language discovers a certain relation with itself
which had hitherto been neither possible nor conceivable. In relation
to itself, the language of the sixteenth century was in a position of
perpetual commentary; but this commentary can take place only if
there is language – language that silently pre-exists within the discourse by which one tries to make that language speak; there can be no
commentary without the absolute precondition of the text; and,
inversely, if the world is a network of marks and words, how else is one
to speak of them but in the form of commentary? From the Classical

87

88

the order of things

age, language is deployed within representation and in that duplication
of itself which hollows itself out. Henceforth, the primary Text is
eﬀaced, and with it, the entire, inexhaustible foundation of the words
whose mute being was inscribed in things; all that remains is representation, unfolding in the verbal signs that manifest it, and hence becoming discourse. For the enigma of a speech which a second language must
interpret is substituted the essential discursivity of representation: the
open possibility, as yet neutral and undiﬀerentiating, but which it will
be the task of discourse to fulﬁl and to determine. When this discourse
becomes in turn an object of language, it is not questioned as if it were
saying something without actually saying it, as if it were a language
enclosed upon itself; one no longer attempts to uncover the great
enigmatic statement that lies hidden beneath its signs; one asks how it
functions: what representations it designates, what elements it cuts out
and removes, how it analyses and composes, what play of substitutions
enables it to accomplish its role of representation. Commentary has
yielded to criticism.
This new relation that language establishes with itself is neither a
simple nor a unilateral one. Criticism would appear to contrast with
commentary in the same way as the analysis of a visible form with the
discovery of a hidden content. But since this form is that of representation, criticism can analyse language only in terms of truth, precision,
appropriateness, or expressive value. Hence the combined role of criticism and ambiguity – the former never succeeding in freeing itself
from the latter. Criticism questions language as if language was a pure
function, a totality of mechanisms, a great autonomous play of signs;
but, at the same time, it cannot fail to question it as to its truth or
falsehood, its transparency or opacity, and therefore as to exactly how
what it says is present in the words by which it represents it. It is on the
basis of this double, fundamental necessity that the opposition between
content and form gradually emerged and ﬁnally assumed the importance we know it to have. But no doubt this opposition was consolidated only at a relatively late date, when, in the nineteenth century, the
critical relation had itself been weakened. In the Classical period, criticism was applied, without dissociation and, as it were, en bloc, to the
representative role of language. It then assumed four forms, which,
though distinct, were interdependent and articulated upon each other.

speaking

It was deployed ﬁrst, in the reﬂexive order, as a critique of words: the
impossibility of constructing a science or a philosophy with the
received vocabulary; a denunciation in general terms which confused
what was distinct in representation with the abstract terms which
separated what should remain united; the need to build up the vocabulary of a perfectly analytic language. It was also expressed in the grammatical order as an analysis of the representative values of syntax, word
order, and sentence construction. Is a language in a higher state of
perfection when it has declensions or a system of prepositions? Is it
preferable for the word order to be free or strictly determined? What
system of tenses best expresses relations of sequence? Criticism also
examines the forms of rhetoric: the analysis of ﬁgures, that is, the types of
discourse, with the expressive value of each, the analysis of tropes, that
is, the diﬀerent relations that words may have with the same representative content (designation by a part or the whole, the essential or the
accessory, the event or the circumstance, the thing itself or its analogues). Lastly, faced with existing and already written language, criticism sets out to deﬁne its relation with what it represents; hence the
importance assumed, since the seventeenth century, by critical
methods in the exegesis of religious texts; it was no longer a question,
in fact, of repeating what had already been said in them, but of deﬁning
through what ﬁgures and images, by following what order, to what
expressive ends, and in order to declare what truth, God or the
Prophets had given a discourse the particular form in which it was
communicated to us.
Such is the diversity of the critical dimension that is necessarily
established when language questions itself on the basis of its function.
Since the Classical age, commentary and criticism have been in profound opposition. By speaking of language in terms of representations
and truth, criticism judges it and profanes it. Now as language in the
irruption of its being, and questioning it as to its secret, commentary
halts before the precipice of the original text, and assumes the impossible and endless task of repeating its own birth within itself: it sacralizes language. These two ways by which language establishes a relation
with itself were now to enter into a rivalry from which we have not yet
emerged – and which may even be sharpening as time passes. This is
because since Mallarmé, literature, the privileged object of criticism,

89

90

the order of things

has drawn closer and closer to the very being of language, and requires
therefore a secondary language which is no longer in the form of
criticism, but of commentary. And in fact every critical language since
the nineteenth century has become imbued with exegesis, just as the
exegeses of the Classical period were imbued with critical methods.
However, until the connection between language and representation is
broken, or at least transcended, in our culture, all secondary languages
will be imprisoned within the alternative of criticism or commentary.
And in their indecision they will proliferate ad inﬁnitum.

II GENERAL GRAMMAR
Once the existence of language has been eliminated, all that remains is
its function in representation: its nature and its virtues as discourse. For
discourse is merely representation itself represented by verbal signs.
But what, then, is the particularity of these signs, and this strange
power that enables them, better than any others, to signalize representation, to analyse it, and to recombine it? What is the peculiar property
possessed by language and not by any other system of signs?
At ﬁrst sight, it is possible to deﬁne words according to their arbitrariness or their collective character. At its primary root, language is
made up, as Hobbes says, of a system of notations that individuals ﬁrst
chose for themselves; by means of these marks they are able to recall
representations, link them together, dissociate them, and operate upon
them. It is these notations that by covenant or violence were imposed
upon the collectivity; but the meaning of the words does not pertain,
in any case, to anything but each individual’s representation, and even
though it may be accepted by everyone it has no other existence than in
the thought of individuals taken separately: ‘That then which words are
the marks of,’ says Locke, ‘are the ideas of the speaker: nor can any one
apply them as marks, immediately, to anything else but the ideas that
he himself hath’.1 What distinguishes language from all other signs
and enables it to play a decisive role in representation is, therefore, not
so much that it is individual or collective, natural or arbitrary, but that
it analyses representation according to a necessarily successive order:
the sounds, in fact, can be articulated only one by one; language cannot
represent thought, instantly, in its totality; it is bound to arrange it, part

speaking

by part, in a linear order. Now, such an order is foreign to representation. It is true that thoughts succeed one another in time, but each one
forms a unity, whether one agrees with Condillac2 that all the elements of a representation are given in an instant and that only reﬂection
is able to unroll them one by one, or whether one agrees with Destutt
de Tracy3 that they succeed one another with a rapidity so great that
it is not practically possible to observe or to retain their order. It is these
representations, pressed in on one another in this way, that must be
sorted out into linear propositions: to my gaze, ‘the brightness is
within the rose’; in my discourse, I cannot avoid it coming either
before or after it.4 If the mind had the power to express ideas ‘as it
perceives them’, there can be no doubt that ‘it would express them all
at the same time’.5 But that is precisely what is not possible, for,
though ‘thought is a simple operation’, ‘its expression is a successive
operation’.6 It is here that the peculiar property of language resides,
that which distinguishes it both from representation (of which, in its
turn, it is nevertheless the representation) and from signs (to which it
belongs without any other particular privilege). It does not stand in
opposition to thought as the exterior does to the interior, or expression
to reﬂection; it does not stand in opposition to all the other signs –
gestures, mime, translation, paintings, emblems7 – as the arbitrary to
the natural or the collective to the singular. But it does stand in relation
to all that as the successive to the contemporaneous. It is to thought and
to signs what algebra is to geometry: it replaces the simultaneous comparison of parts (or magnitudes) with an order whose degrees must
be traversed one after the other. It is in this strict sense that language
is an analysis of thought: not a simple patterning, but a profound
establishment of order in space.
It is here that we ﬁnd that new epistemological domain that the
Classical age called ‘general grammar’. It would be nonsense to see this
purely and simply as the application of a logic to the theory of language. But it would be equally nonsensical to attempt to interpret it as a
sort of pre-ﬁguration of a linguistics. General grammar is the study of
verbal order in its relation to the simultaneity that it is its task to represent. Its
proper object is therefore neither thought nor any individual language,
but discourse, understood as a sequence of verbal signs. This sequence is
artiﬁcial in relation to the simultaneity of representations, and in so far

91

92

the order of things

as this is so language must be in opposition to thought, as what is
reﬂected upon is to what is immediate. And yet the sequence is not the
same in all languages: some of them place the action in the middle of
the sentence; others at the end; some name the principal object of the
representation ﬁrst, others the accessory circumstances; as the Encyclopédie points out, what renders foreign languages opaque to one another,
and so diﬃcult to translate, is not so much the diﬀerences between the
words as the incompatibility of their sequences.8 In relation to the
evident, necessary, universal order introduced into representation by
science, and by algebra in particular, language is spontaneous and unthought-out; it is, as it were, natural. It is equally, according to the
point of view from which one looks at it, an already analysed representation and a reﬂection in the primitive state. In fact, it is the concrete
link between representation and reﬂection. It is not so much the
instrument of men’s intercommunication as the path by which, necessarily, representation communicates with reﬂection. This is why general
grammar assumed so much importance for philosophy during the eighteenth century: it was, at one and the same time, the spontaneous form
of science – a kind of logic not controlled by the mind9 – and the ﬁrst
reﬂective decomposition of thought: one of the most primitive breaks
with the immediate. It constituted, as it were, a philosophy inherent in
the mind – metaphysics, Adam Smith pointed out, was an essential
ingredient in the formation of even the least of adjectives10 – and
one that any philosophy had to work through if it was to rediscover,
among so many diverse choices, the necessary and evident order
of representation. Language is the original form of all reﬂection, the
primary theme of any critique. It is this ambiguous thing, as broad as
knowledge, yet always interior to representation, that general grammar
takes as its object.
But a certain number of consequences must at once be drawn here.
1. The ﬁrst is that it is easy to see how the sciences of language are
divided up in the Classical period: on the one hand, rhetoric, which
deals with ﬁgures and tropes, that is, with the manner in which language
is spatialized in verbal signs; on the other, grammar, which deals with
articulation and order, that is, with the manner in which the analysis
of representation is arranged in accordance with a sequential series.
Rhetoric deﬁnes the spatiality of representation as it comes into being

speaking

with language; grammar deﬁnes in the case of each individual
language the order that distributes that spatiality in time. This is
why, as we shall see, grammar presupposes languages, even the most
primitive and spontaneous ones, to be rhetorical in nature.
2. On the other hand, grammar, as reﬂection upon language in
general, expresses the relation maintained by the latter with universality. This relation can take two forms, according to whether one takes
into consideration the possibility of a universal language or that of a universal discourse. In the Classical period, what was denoted by the term
universal language was not the primitive, pure, and unimpaired speech
that would be able, if it were rediscovered beyond the punishment of
oblivion, to restore the understanding that reigned before Babel. It
refers to a tongue that would have the ability to provide every representation, and every element of every representation, with the sign by
which it could be marked in a univocal manner; it would also be
capable of indicating in what manner the elements in a representation
are composed and how they are linked to one another; and since it
would possess the necessary instruments with which to indicate all the
possible relationships between the various segments of representation,
this language would also, by that very fact, be able to accommodate
itself to all possible orders. At once characteristic and combinative, the
universal language does not re-establish the order of days gone by: it
invents signs, a syntax, and a grammar, in which all conceivable order
must ﬁnd its place. As for universal discourse, that too is by no means
the unique text that preserves in the cipher of its secret the key to
unlock all knowledge; it is rather the possibility of deﬁning the natural
and necessary progress of the mind from the simplest representations
to the most reﬁned analyses or the most complex combinations: this
discourse is knowledge arranged in accordance with the unique order
laid down for it by its origin. It traverses the whole ﬁeld of knowledge,
though as it were in a subterranean manner, in order to reveal, on the
basis of representation, the possibility of that knowledge, to reveal its
origin, and its natural, linear, and universal link. This common
denominator, this foundation underlying all knowledge, this origin
expressed in a continuous discourse is Ideology, a language that duplicates the spontaneous thread of knowledge along the whole of its
length:

93

94

the order of things
Man, by his nature, always tends towards the nearest and most pressing result. He thinks ﬁrst of his needs, then of his pleasures. He
occupies himself with agriculture, with medicine, with war, with practical politics, then with poetry and the arts, before turning his thoughts
to philosophy; and when he turns back upon himself and begins to
reﬂect, he prescribes rules for his judgement, which is logic, for his
discourse, which is grammar, for his desires, which is ethics. He then
believes himself to have reached the summit of theory . . . ;

but he perceives that all these operations have ‘a common source’ and
that ‘this sole centre of all truths is the knowledge of his intellectual
faculties’.11
The universal characteristic and ideology stand in the same opposition to one another as do the universality of language in general
(which arranges all possible orders in the simultaneity of a single
fundamental table) and the universality of an exhaustive discourse
(which reconstitutes the single genesis, common to the whole
sequence of all possible branches of knowledge). But their aim and
their common possibility reside in a power that the Classical age attributes to language: that of providing adequate signs for all representations, whatever they may be, and of establishing possible links between
them. In so far as language can represent all representations it is with
good reason the element of the universal. There must exist within it at
least the possibility of a language that will gather into itself, between its
words, the totality of the world, and, inversely, the world, as the totality
of what is representable, must be able to become, in its totality, an
Encyclopaedia. And Charles Bonnet’s great dream merges at this
point with what language is in its connection and kinship with
representation:
I delight in envisaging the innumerable multitude of Worlds as so
many books which, when collected together, compose the immense
Library of the Universe or the true Universal Encyclopaedia. I conceive
that the marvellous gradation that exists between these different
worlds facilitates in superior intelligences, to whom it has been given
to traverse or rather to read them, the acquisition of truths of every
kind, which it encompasses, and instils in their understanding that

speaking
order and that concatenation which are its principal beauty. But these
celestial Encyclopaedists do not all possess the Encyclopaedia of the
Universe to the same degree; some possess only a few branches of it,
others possess a greater number, others grasp even more still; but all
have eternity in which to increase and perfect their learning and
develop all their faculties.12

Against this background of an absolute Encyclopaedia, human beings
constitute intermediary forms of a composite and limited universality:
alphabetical encyclopaedias, which accommodate the greatest possible
quantity of learning in the arbitrary order provided by letters; pasigraphies, which make it possible to transcribe all the languages of the
world by means of a single system of ﬁgures;13 polyvalent lexicons,
which establish synonymies between a greater or lesser number of
languages; and, ﬁnally, rational encyclopaedias, which claim to ‘exhibit
as far as is possible the order and concatenation of human learning’ by
examining ‘their genealogy and their ﬁliation, the causes that must
have given rise to them and the characteristics that distinguish
them’.14 Whatever the partial character of these projects, whatever
the empirical circumstances of such undertakings, the foundation of
their possibility in the Classical episteme is that, though language had
been entirely reduced to its function within representation, representation, on the other hand, had no relation with the universal except
through the intermediary of language.
3. Knowledge and language are rigorously interwoven. They share,
in representation, the same origin and the same functional principle;
they support one another, complement one another, and criticize one
another incessantly. In their most general form, both knowing and
speaking consist ﬁrst of all in the simultaneous analysis of representation, in the discrimination of its elements, in the establishing of the
relations that combine those elements, and the possible sequences
according to which they can be unfolded. It is in one and the same
movement that the mind speaks and knows: ‘It is by the same processes that one learns to speak and that one discovers either the principles of the world’s system or those of the human mind’s operations,
that is, all that is sublime in our knowledge’.15 But language is
knowledge only in an unreﬂecting form; it imposes itself on

95

96

the order of things

individuals from the outside, guiding them, willy nilly, towards
notions that may be concrete or abstract, exact or with little foundation. Knowledge, on the other hand, is like a language whose every
word has been examined and every relation veriﬁed. To know is to
speak correctly, and as the steady progress of the mind dictates; to
speak is to know as far as one is able, and in accordance with the model
imposed by those whose birth one shares. The sciences are well-made
languages, just as languages are sciences lying fallow. All languages
must therefore be renewed; in other words, explained and judged
according to that analytic order which none of them now follows
exactly; and readjusted if necessary so that the chain of knowledge
may be made visible in all its clarity, without any shadows or lacunae.
It is thus part of the very nature of grammar to be prescriptive, not by
any means because it is an attempt to impose the norms of a beautiful
language obedient to the rules of taste, but because it refers the radical
possibility of speech to the ordering system of representation. Destutt
de Tracy once observed that the best treatises on logic, in the eighteenth century, were written by grammarians: this is because the
prescriptions of grammar at that time were of an analytic and not an
aesthetic order.
And this link between language and knowledge opens up a whole
historical ﬁeld that had not existed in previous periods. Something like
a history of knowledge becomes possible; because, if language is a
spontaneous science, obscure to itself and unpractised, this also means,
in return, that it will be brought nearer to perfection by knowledge,
which cannot lodge itself in the words it needs without leaving its
imprint in them, and, as it were, the empty mould of its content.
Languages, though imperfect knowledge themselves, are the faithful
memory of the progress of knowledge towards perfection. They lead
into error, but they record what has been learned. In their chaotic
order, they give rise to false ideas; but true ideas leave in them the
indelible mark of an order that chance on its own could never have
created. What civilizations and peoples leave us as the monuments of
their thought is not so much their texts as their vocabularies, their
syntaxes, the sounds of their languages rather than the words they
spoke; not so much their discourse as the element that made it possible,
the discursivity of their language.

speaking
The language of a people gives us its vocabulary, and its vocabulary is
a sufﬁciently faithful and authoritative record of all the knowledge of
that people; simply by comparing the different states of a nation’s
vocabulary at different times one could form an idea of its progress.
Every science has its name, every notion within a science has its name
too, everything known in nature is designated, as is everything
invented in the arts, as well as phenomena, manual tasks, and
tools.16

Hence the possibility of writing a history of freedom and slavery based
upon languages,17 or even a history of opinions, prejudices, superstitions, and beliefs of all kinds, since what is written on these subjects
is always of less value as evidence than are the words themselves.18
Hence, too, the project of creating an encyclopaedia ‘of the sciences
and arts’, which would not follow the connecting links of knowledge
itself but would be accommodated in the form of the language, within
the space opened up in words themselves; for that is where future ages
would have to look to ﬁnd what we have known or thought, since
words, in their roughly hewn state, are distributed along that mid-way
line that marks the adjacency of science to perception and of reﬂection
to images. It is in them that what we imagine becomes what we know,
and, on the other hand, that what we know becomes what we represent
to ourselves every day. The old relation to the text, which was the
Renaissance deﬁnition of erudition, has now been transformed: it has
become, in the Classical age, the relation to the pure element of the
language.
Thus we see glowing into life the luminous element in which
language and learning, correct discourse and knowledge, universal language and analysis of thought, the history of mankind and the sciences
of language freely communicate. Even when it was intended for publication, the knowledge of the Renaissance was arranged within an
enclosed space. The ‘Academy’ was a closed circle which projected the
essentially secret form of knowledge onto the surface of social conﬁgurations. For the primary task of that knowledge was to draw speech
from mute signs: it had to recognize their forms, interpret them, and
retranscribe them by means of other graphic signs which then had to
be deciphered in their turn; so that even the discovery of the secret did

97

98

the order of things

not escape this array of obstacles, which had rendered it at once so
diﬃcult and yet so precious. In the Classical age, knowing and speaking
are interwoven in the same fabric; in the case of both knowledge and
language, it is a question of providing representation with the signs by
means of which it can unfold itself in obedience to a necessary and
visible order. Even when stated, knowledge in the sixteenth century
was still a secret, albeit a shared one. Even when hidden, knowledge in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is discourse with a veil drawn
over it. This is because it is of the very nature of science to enter into
the system of verbal communications,19 and of the very nature of
language to be knowledge from its very ﬁrst word. Speaking, enlightening, and knowing are, in the strict sense of the term, of the same order. The
interest shown by the Classical age in science, the publicity accorded to
its controversies, its extremely exoteric character, its opening up to the
uninitiated, Fontenelle’s popularization of astronomy, Voltaire reading
Newton, all this is doubtless nothing more than a sociological phenomenon. It did not provoke the slightest alteration in the history of
thought, or modify the development of knowledge one jot. It explains
nothing, except of course on the doxographic level where it should be
situated; but its condition of possibility is nevertheless there, in that
reciprocal kinship between knowledge and language. The nineteenth
century was to dissolve that link, and to leave behind it, in confrontation, a knowledge closed in upon itself and a pure language that had
become, in nature and function, enigmatic – something that has been
called, since that time, Literature. Between the two, the intermediary
languages – descendants of, or outcasts from, both knowledge and
language – were to proliferate to inﬁnity.
4. Because it had become analysis and order, language entered into
relations with time unprecedented hitherto. The sixteenth century
accepted that languages succeeded one another in history and were
capable of engendering one another. The oldest were the mother languages. The most archaic of all, since it was the tongue of the Eternal
when he addressed himself to men, was Hebrew, and Hebrew was
thought to have given rise to Syriac and Arabic; then came Greek, from
which both Coptic and Egyptian were derived; Latin was the common
ancestor of Italian, Spanish, and French; lastly, ‘Teutonic’ had given rise
to German, English, and Flemish.20 In the seventeenth century, the

speaking

relation of language to time is inverted: it is no longer time that allots
languages their places, one by one, in world history; it is languages that
unfold representations and words in a sequence of which they themselves deﬁne the laws. It is by means of this internal order, and the
positions it allots to its words, that each language deﬁnes its speciﬁcity,
and no longer by means of its place in a historical series. For language,
time is its interior mode of analysis, not its place of birth. Hence the
paucity of interest shown by the Classical age in chronological ﬁliation,
to the point of denying, contrary to all the ‘evidence’ – our evidence,
that is – the kinship of Italian or French with Latin.21 The kinds of
series that existed in the sixteenth century, and were to reappear in the
nineteenth, were replaced by typologies, typologies of order. There is
the group of languages that places the subject being dealt with ﬁrst;
next the action undertaken or undergone by that subject; and last the
object upon which it is exercised: as witness, French, English, Spanish.
Opposed to these is the group of languages that places ‘sometimes the
action, sometimes the object, sometimes the modiﬁcation or circumstance ﬁrst’: for example Latin, or ‘Slavonian’, in which the function of
words is indicated, not by their positions, but by their inﬂections.
Finally, there is the third group made up of mixed languages (such as
Greek or Teutonic), ‘which have something of both the other groups,
possessing an article as well as cases’.22 But it must be understood
that it is not the presence or absence of inﬂections that deﬁnes the
possible or necessary order of the words in each language. It is order as
analysis and a sequential alignment of representations that constitutes
the preliminary form and prescribes the use of declensions or articles.
Those languages that follow the order ‘of imagination and interest’ do
not determine any constant position for words: they are obliged to
emphasize them by means of inﬂections (these are the ‘transpositive’
languages). If, on the other hand, they follow the uniform order of
reﬂection, they need only indicate the number and gender of substantives by means of an article; position in the analytic ordering of the
sentence has a functional value in itself: these are the ‘analogical’ languages.23 Languages are related to and distinguished from one
another according to a table of possible types of word order. The
table shows them all simultaneously, but suggests which were the
most ancient languages; it may be admitted, in fact, that the most

99

100 the order of things
spontaneous order (that of images and passions) must have preceded
the most considered (that of logic); external dating is determined by
the internal forms of analysis and order. Time has become interior to
language.
The history of the various languages is no longer anything more
than a question of erosion or accident, introduction, meetings, and the
mingling of various elements; it has no law, no progress, no necessity
proper to it. How, for instance, was the Greek language formed?
It was Phoenician merchants, adventurers from Phrygia, from Macedonia and Illyria, Galatians, Scythians, and bands of exiles or fugitives
who loaded the ﬁrst stratum of the Greek language with so many kinds
of innumerable particles and so many dialects.24

French is made up of Latin and Gothic nouns, Gallic constructions,
Arabic articles and numerals, words borrowed from the English and the
Italians – as journeys, wars, or trade agreements dictated.25 This is
because languages evolve in accordance with the eﬀects of migrations,
victories and defeats, fashions, and commerce; but not under the
impulsion of any historicity possessed by the languages themselves.
They do not obey any internal principle of development; they simply
unfold representations and their elements in a linear sequence. If there
does exist a time for languages that is positive, then it must not be
looked for outside them, in the sphere of history, but in the ordering of
their words, in the form left by discourse.
It is now possible to circumscribe the epistemological ﬁeld of general
grammar, which appeared during the second half of the seventeenth
century and faded away again during the last years of the following
century. General grammar is not at all the same as comparative grammar: the comparisons it makes between diﬀerent languages are not its
object; they are merely employed as a method. This is because its
generality does not consist in the discovery of peculiarly grammatical
laws, common to all linguistic domains, which could then be used to
display the structure of any possible language in an ideal and constricting unity; if it is indeed general, then it is so to the extent that it
attempts to make visible, below the level of grammatical rules, but at
the same level as their foundation, the representative function of

speaking

discourse – whether it be the vertical function, which designates what
is represented, or the horizontal function, which links what is represented to the same mode as thought. Since it makes language visible as
a representation that is the articulation of another representation, it is
indisputably ‘general’; what it treats of is the interior duplication existing within representation. But since that articulation can be accomplished in many diﬀerent ways, there must be, paradoxically, various
general grammars: French, English, Latin, German, etc..26 General
grammar does not attempt to deﬁne the laws of all languages, but to
examine each particular language, in turn, as a mode of the articulation
of thought upon itself. In every language, taken in isolation, representation provides itself with ‘characters’. General grammar is intended to
deﬁne the system of identities and diﬀerences that these spontaneous
characters presuppose and employ. It must establish the taxonomy of
each language. In other words, the basis, in each of them, for the
possibility of discourse.
Hence the two directions that it necessarily takes. Since discourse
links its parts together in the same way as representation does its elements, general grammar must study the representative function of words
in relation to each other; which presupposes in the ﬁrst place an analysis of the links that connect words together (theory of the proposition
and in particular of the verb), then an analysis of the various types of
words and of the way in which they pattern the representation and are
distinguished from each other (theory of articulation). However, since
discourse is not simply a representative whole, but a duplicated representation that denotes another representation – the one that it is in fact
representing – general grammar must also study the way in which
words designate what they say, ﬁrst of all in their primitive value
(theory of origins and of the root), then in their permanent capacity
for displacement, extension, and reorganization (theory of rhetoric
and of derivation).

III THE THEORY OF THE VERB
The proposition is to language what representation is to thought, at
once its most general and most elementary form, since as soon as it
is broken down we no longer encounter the discourse but only its

101

102 the order of things
elements, in the form of so much scattered raw material. Below the
proposition we do indeed ﬁnd words, but it is not in them that language is created. It is true that in the beginning man emitted only
simple cries, but these did not begin to be language until they contained – if only within their monosyllable – a relation that was of the
order of a proposition. The yell of the primitive man in a struggle
becomes a true word only when it is no longer the lateral expression of
his pain, and when it has validity as a judgement or as a statement of
the type ‘I am choking’.27 What constitutes a word as a word and
raises it above the level of cries and noises is the proposition concealed
within it. If the wild man of Aveyron did not attain to speech, it was
because words remained for him merely the vocal marks of things and
of the impressions that those things made upon his mind; they had
acquired no prepositional value. He could, it is true, pronounce the
word ‘milk’ when a bowl of milk was put in front of him; but that was
merely ‘the confused expression of that alimentary liquid, of the vessel
containing it, and of the desire produced by it’;28 the word never
became a sign representing the thing, for at no point did he ever wish
to say that the milk was hot, or ready, or expected. It is in fact the
proposition that detaches the vocal sign from its immediate expressive
values and establishes its supreme linguistic possibility. For Classical
thought, language begins not with expression, but with discourse.
When one says ‘no’, one is not translating one’s refusal into a mere cry;
one is contracting into the form of a single word ‘an entire
proposition: . . . I do not feel that, or I do not believe that’.29
‘Let us go directly to the proposition, the essential object of grammar’.30 In the proposition, all the functions of language are led back
to the three elements that alone are indispensable to the formation of a
proposition: the subject, the predicate, and the link between them.
Even then, the subject and predicate are of the same nature, since the
proposition aﬃrms that the one is identical to or akin to the other; it is
therefore possible for them, under certain conditions, to exchange
functions. The only diﬀerence, though it is a decisive one, is that
manifested by the irreducibility of the verb: as Hobbes31 says:
In every proposition three things are to be considered, viz. the two
names, which are the subject and the predicate, and their copulation;

speaking
both which names raise in our mind the thought of one and the same
thing; but the copulation makes us think of the cause for which those
names were imposed on that thing.

The verb is the indispensable condition for all discourse; and wherever
it does not exist, at least by implication, it is not possible to say that
there is language. All nominal propositions conceal the invisible presence of a verb, and Adam Smith32 thinks that, in its primitive form,
language was composed only of impersonal verbs (such as ‘it is raining’ or ‘it is thundering’), and that all the other parts of discourse
became detached from this original verbal core as so many derived and
secondary details. The threshold of language lies at the point where the
verb ﬁrst appears. This verb must therefore be treated as a composite
entity, at the same time a word among other words, subjected to the
same rules of case and agreement as other words, and yet set apart from
all other words, in a region which is not that of the spoken, but rather
that from which one speaks. It is on the fringe of discourse, at the
connection between what is said and what is saying itself, exactly at
that point where signs are in the process of becoming language.
It is this function that we must now examine – by stripping the verb
of all that has constantly overlaid and obscured it. We must not stop, as
Aristotle did, at the fact that the verb signiﬁes tenses (there are many
other words, adverbs, adjectives, nouns, that can carry temporal signiﬁcations). Nor must we stop, as Scaliger did, at the fact that it expresses
actions or passions, whereas nouns denote things – and permanent
things (for there is precisely the very noun ‘action’ to be considered).
Nor must we attach importance, as Buxtorf did, to the diﬀerent persons
of the verb, for these can also be designated by certain pronouns. What
we must do before all else is to reveal, in all clarity, the essential
function of the verb: the verb aﬃrms, it indicates ‘that the discourse in
which this word is employed is the discourse of a man who does not
merely conceive of nouns, but judges them’.33 A proposition exists –
and discourse too – when we aﬃrm the existence of an attributive link
between two things, when we say that this is that.34 The entire
species of the verb may be reduced to the single verb that signiﬁes to be.
All the others secretly make use of this unique function, but they have
hidden it beneath a layer of determinations: attributes have been added

103

104 the order of things
to it, and instead of saying ‘I am singing’, we say ‘I sing’;35 indications of time have been added, and instead of saying ‘before now I am
singing’, we say ‘I sang’; lastly, certain languages have integrated the
subject itself into their verbs, and thus we ﬁnd the Romans saying, not
ego vivit, but vivo. All of this is merely accretion and sedimentation
around and over a very slight yet essential verbal function, ‘there is
only the verb to be . . . that has remained in this state of simplicity’.36
The entire essence of language is concentrated in that singular word.
Without it, everything would have remained silent, and though men,
like certain animals, would have been able to make use of their voices
well enough, yet not one of those cries hurled through the jungle
would ever have proved to be the ﬁrst link in the great chain of
language.
In the Classical period, language in its raw state – that mass of signs
impressed upon the world in order to exercise our powers of interrogation – vanished from sight, but language itself entered into new relations with being, ones more diﬃcult to grasp, since it is by means of a
word that language expresses being and is united to it; it aﬃrms being
from within itself; and yet it could not exist as language if that word,
on its own, were not, in advance, sustaining all possibility of discourse.
Without a way of designating being, there would be no language at all;
but without language, there would be no verb to be, which is only one
part of language. This simple word is the representation of being in
language; but it is equally the representative being of language – that
which, by enabling language to aﬃrm what it says, renders it susceptible of truth or error. In this respect it is diﬀerent from all the signs
that may or may not be consistent with, faithful to, or well adapted to,
what they designate, but that are never true or false. Language is,
wholly and entirely, discourse; and it is so by virtue of this singular power
of a word to leap across the system of signs towards the being of that
which is signiﬁed.
But from where does this power derive? And what is this meaning,
which, by overﬂowing the words containing it, forms the basis of the
proposition? The grammarians of Port-Royal said that the meaning of the
verb to be was aﬃrmation – which indicated well enough in what
region of language its absolute privilege lay, but not at all in what it
consisted. We must not imagine that the verb to be contains the idea of

speaking

aﬃrmation, for the word aﬃrmation itself, and also the word yes, contain
it equally well;37 what the verb to be provides is rather the aﬃrmation
of the idea. But is the aﬃrmation of an idea also the expression of its
existence? This is in fact what Bauzée thinks, and he also takes it to be
one reason why variations of time have been concentrated into the
form of the verb: for the essence of things does not change, it is only
their existence that appears and disappears, it is only their existence
that has a past and a future.38 To which Condillac can observe in
reply that if existence can be withdrawn from things, this must mean
that it is no more than an attribute, and that the verb can aﬃrm death as
well as existence. The only thing that the verb aﬃrms is the coexistence
of two representations: for example, those of a tree and greenness, or of
man and existence or death; this is why the tenses of verbs do not
indicate the time when things existed in the absolute, but a relative
system of anteriority or simultaneity between diﬀerent things.39
Coexistence is not, in fact, an attribute of the thing itself; it is no more
than a form of the representation: to say that the greenness and the tree
coexist is to say that they are linked together in all, or most of, the
impressions I receive.
So that the essential function of the verb to be is to relate all language
to the representation that it designates. The being towards which it
spills over its signs is neither more nor less than the being of thought.
Comparing language to a picture, one late-eighteenth-century grammarian deﬁnes nouns as forms, adjectives as colours, and the verb as
the canvas itself, upon which the colours are visible. An invisible canvas, entirely overlaid by the brightness and design of the words, but
one that provides language with the site on which to display its painting. What the verb designates, then, is the representative character of
language, the fact that it has its place in thought, and that the only word
capable of crossing the frontier of signs and providing them with a
foundation in truth never attains to anything other than representation
itself. So that the function of the verb is found to be identiﬁed with the
mode of existence of language, which it traverses throughout its
length: to speak is at the same time to represent by means of signs and
to give signs a synthetic form governed by the verb. As Destutt says,
the verb is attribution, the sustaining power, and the form of all
attributes:

105

106 the order of things
The verb to be is found in all propositions, because we cannot say that
a thing is in such and such a way without at the same time saying that
it is . . . But this word is which is in all propositions is always a part of
the attribute [predicate] in those propositions, it is always the beginning and the basis of the attribute, it is the general and common
attribute.40

It will be seen how the function of the verb, once it had reached this
point of generality, had no other course but to become dissociated, as
soon as the unitary domain of general grammar itself disappeared.
When the dimension of the purely grammatical was opened up, the
proposition was to become no more than a syntactical unit. The verb
was merely to ﬁgure in it along with all the other words, with its own
system of agreement, inﬂections, and cases. And at the other extreme,
the power of manifestation of language was to reappear in an autonomous question, more archaic than grammar. And throughout the nineteenth century, language was to be examined in its enigmatic nature as
verb: in that region where it is nearest to being, most capable of naming
it, of transmitting or giving eﬀulgence to its fundamental meaning, of
rendering it absolutely manifest. From Hegel to Mallarmé, this astonishment in the face of the relations of being and language was to
counterbalance the reintroduction of the verb into the homogeneous
order of grammatical functions.

IV ARTICULATION
The verb to be, a mixture of attribution and aﬃrmation, the junction
of discourse with the primary and radical possibility of speech,
deﬁnes the ﬁrst constant of the proposition, and also the most fundamental. Beside it, on either side, are elements: parts of discourse or
‘oration’. These sites are still neutral, and determined solely by the
slender, almost imperceptible, yet central ﬁgure designating being;
they function, on either side of this ‘judicator’ as the thing to be
judged – the judicandum – and the thing judged – the judicatum.41
How can this pure design of the proposition be transformed into
distinct sentences? How can discourse express the whole content of a
representation?

speaking

Because it is made up of words that name, part by part, what is given
to representation.
The word designates, that is, in its very nature it is a noun or name. A
proper noun, since it is directed always towards a particular representation, and towards no other. So, in contrast to the uniformity of the verb,
which is never more than the universal expression of attribution,
nouns proliferate in endless diﬀerentiation. There ought to be as many
of them as there are things to name. But each name would then be so
strongly attached to the single representation it designated that one
could never formulate even the slightest attribution; and language
would fall back to a lower level:
If we had no other substantives but proper nouns, it would be necessary to create an inﬁnite multiplicity of them. These words, whose
great number would overburden our memories, would produce no
order in the objects of our learning, nor, consequently, in our ideas,
and all our discourse would be in the greatest state of confusion.42

Nouns cannot function in a sentence and permit attribution unless one
of the two (the attribute at least) designates some element common to
several representations. The generality of the noun is as necessary to the
parts of discourse as is the designation of being to the form of the
proposition.
This generality may be acquired in two ways. Either by a horizontal
articulation, grouping together individuals that have certain identities
in common and separating those that are diﬀerent; such an articulation
then forms a sequential generalization of groups growing gradually
larger and larger (and less and less numerous); it may also subdivide
them almost to inﬁnity by means of fresh distinctions, and thus return
to the proper noun from which it began;43 the entire order of the
resulting coordinations and subordinations is covered by a grid of
language, and each one of these points will be found upon it together
with its name: from the individual to the species, then from the species
to the genus and on to the class, language is articulated precisely upon
the dimension of increasing generalities; this taxonomic function is
manifested in language by the substantives: we say an animal, a quadruped, a dog, a spaniel.44 Or else by a vertical articulation, linked to

107

108 the order of things
the ﬁrst, for each is indispensable to the other; this second articulation
distinguishes the things that subsist by themselves from those – modiﬁcations, features, accidents, or characteristics – that one can never
meet in an independent state: deep down, substances; on the surface,
qualities; this division – this metaphysic, as Adam Smith called it – is
manifested in discourse by the presence of adjectives, which designate
everything in representation that cannot subsist by itself. The primary
articulation of language (if we leave aside the verb to be, which is as
much a condition of discourse as it is a part of it) is thus aligned along
two orthogonal axes: one proceeding from the individual unit to the
general; the other proceeding from the substance to the quality. At
their point of intersection stands the common noun; at one extremity
the proper noun, at the other the adjective.
But these two types of representation can distinguish words from
one another only to precisely that degree to which representation is
analysed according to this same model. As the authors of Port-Royal put
it: words ‘that signify things are called substantival nouns, such as earth,
sun. Those that signify manners, while at the same time indicating the
subject with which the manners agree, are called adjectival nouns, such
as good, just, round’.45 However, there does exist a certain amount of
play between the articulation of language and that of representation.
When we speak of ‘whiteness’, we are certainly designating a quality,
but we are designating it by means of a substantive; when we speak of
‘humans’ we are employing an adjective to designate individuals that
subsist by themselves. This displacement is not an indication that
language obeys other laws than those of representation, but, on the
contrary, that it has relations, with itself and in its own density, that are
identical with those of representation. For is it not, in fact, a duplicated
kind of representation, and thus able to combine with the elements of
its representation another representation distinct from the ﬁrst, even
though the only function and meaning of the second representation is
the representation of the ﬁrst? If discourse seizes upon the adjective
designating a modiﬁcation and gives it within the sentence the value of
the very substance of the proposition, then that adjective becomes substantival; the noun, on the other hand, which behaves within the sentence like an accident, becomes adjectival, even though it is designating
substances, as hitherto.

speaking
Because substance is that which subsists of itself, the term substantive has been given to all those words that subsist by themselves in
discourse, even though they may signify accidents. And, on the other
hand, the term adjective has been given to those words that signify
substances when, in their manner of signifying, they must be joined in
discourse to other nouns.46

The relations between the elements of the proposition are identical
with those of representation; but this identity is not carefully arranged
point by point, so that every substance is designated by a substantive
and every accident by an adjective. The identity here is total and a
matter of nature: the proposition is a representation; it is articulated
according to the same modes as representation; but it possesses the
power to articulate the representation it transforms into discourse in
more than one way. It is, in itself, a representation providing the articulation for another, with a possibility of displacement that constitutes at
the same time the freedom of discourse and the diﬀerences between
languages.
Such is the ﬁrst stratum of articulation – the most superﬁcial or in
any case the most apparent. Once this has been established, everything
can become discourse; but in the form of a still rather undiﬀerentiated
language: we still have nothing but the monotony of the verb to be and
its attributive function to link our nouns together. Now, the elements of
representation are articulated according to a whole network of complex relations (succession, subordination, consequence) that must be
brought over into language if it is to become truly representative.
Hence all the words, syllables, even letters, which, circulating among
the nouns and the verbs, are given the task of designating those ideas
that in Port-Royal were termed ‘accessory’;47 there must be prepositions and conjunctions; there must be syntactical signs indicating the
relations of identity or agreement, and those of dependence or
case:48 marks of plurality and gender, declension endings; and,
ﬁnally, there must be words relating common nouns to the individuals
they designate – the articles or demonstratives that Lemercier called
‘concretizers’ or ‘disabstractors’.49 Such a scattering of words constitutes an articulation inferior to the unity of the name (whether
substantival or adjectival) as required by the naked form of the

109

110 the order of things
proposition: none of them possesses in its own right, and in an isolated
state, a ﬁxed and determinate representative content; they cannot cover
an idea – even an accessory one – until they have been linked together
with other words; whereas nouns and verbs are ‘absolute signiﬁcants’,
these words, on the other hand, have no power of signiﬁcation except
in a relative mode. It is true that they are addressed to representation;
they exist only in so far as the latter, in the process of analysing itself,
makes the interior network of these relationships visible; but they
themselves have value only through the grammatical whole of which
they are a part. They establish a new articulation in language, one of a
composite nature, at once representative and grammatical, though
without either of these two orders being able to ﬁt exactly over the
other.
At this stage, then, the sentence is peopled with syntactical elements
cut out according to much more delicate patterns than the broad ﬁgures of the proposition. This new and more complicated patterning
presents general grammar with a necessary choice: either to pursue its
analysis at a lower level than nominal unity, and to bring into prominence, before signiﬁcation, the insigniﬁcant elements of which it is
constructed, or to reduce that nominal unity by means of a regressive
process, to recognize its existence within more restricted units, and to
ﬁnd its eﬃcacity as representation below the level of whole words, in
particles, in syllables, and even in single letters themselves. These possibilities are presented – indeed, they are prescribed – as soon as the
theory of languages takes as its object discourse and the analysis of its
representative values. They deﬁne the point of heresy that splits all
eighteenth-century grammar.
Shall we suppose, Harris asks, that all signiﬁcation is, like the body,
divisible into an inﬁnity of other signiﬁcations, themselves divisible to
inﬁnity? That would be an absurdity; we must therefore necessarily
admit that there are signiﬁcant sounds of which no part can possess
signiﬁcation of itself.50 Signiﬁcation disappears as soon as the representative values of words are dissociated or suspended: instead, there
appear, in their independence, raw materials that are not articulated
upon thought and whose links cannot be reduced to those of discourse.
There is a ‘mechanics’ proper to agreements, to cases, to inﬂections, to
syllables, and to sounds, and no representative value can provide us

speaking

with an account of that mechanics. Language must be treated like a
mechanical construction susceptible of gradual improvement:51 in
its simplest form, the sentence is composed only of a subject, a verb,
and a predicate; and every addition of meaning requires a fresh and
entire proposition; in the same way, the most rudimentary machines
presuppose principles of movement that diﬀer for each of their organs.
But as they are perfected, so they subordinate all their organs to one
and the same principle, of which the organs are then only the intermediaries, the means of transformation, the points of application; similarly, as languages perfect themselves, they transmit the sense of a
proposition by means of grammatical organs that do not in themselves
possess any representative value, but perform the tasks of making it
more speciﬁc, of linking its elements together, of indicating its actual
determinations. In a single continuous sentence it is possible to indicate relations of time, of consequence, of possession, and of localization, all of which certainly enter into the subject-verb-predicate series,
but cannot be pinned down by so broad a distinction. Hence the
importance accorded since Bauzée52 to the theories of the complement, of subordination. Hence, too, the growing role of syntax; at the
time of Port-Royal, syntax was identiﬁed with the construction and
ordering of words, and thus with the interior development of the
proposition;53 with Sicard it became independent: it is syntax ‘that
determines the proper form of each word’.54 These were the preliminary sketches for the grammatical autonomy to be deﬁned later, at
the very end of the century, by Sylvestre de Saci, when he became the
ﬁrst – together with Sicard – to distinguish between the logical analysis
of the proposition and the grammatical analysis of the sentence.55
It is understandable why analyses of this kind should have remained
in suspense as long as discourse remained the object of grammar; as
soon as a stratum of articulation was reached where representative
values crumbled away, there was a movement from the other side of
grammar, where grammar no longer had any power, into the domain
of usage and history – syntax, in the eighteenth century, was thought
of as the locus of the arbitrary in which the habits of each people were
deployed according to whim.56
In any case, such analyses could not, in the eighteenth century, be
anything more than abstract possibilities; not preﬁgurations of what

111

112 the order of things
was to be philology, but the non-privileged branch of a choice. Opposite, and with the same point of heresy as its starting-point, we see
developing a reﬂection, which, for us and the science of language we
have constructed since the nineteenth century, is void of all value, but
which at that time enabled all analysis of verbal signs to be retained
within discourse itself. And which, by means of this exact overlaying,
came to be included in the positive ﬁgures of knowledge. There was a
search for the obscure nominal function that was thought to be
invested and concealed in those words, in those syllables, in those
inﬂections, in those letters that the over-generalized analysis of the
proposition was allowing to pass through its net. Because, after all, as
the authors of Port-Royal pointed out, all connective particles must have a
certain content, since they represent the manner in which objects are
linked together, and in which they are connected in our representations.57 May one not suppose that they have been names like all the
others? But that instead of substituting themselves for objects they have
taken the place of those gestures by which men indicated them or
simulated their connections and their succession?58 It is these words
that have either gradually lost their own particular meaning (which
was not always visible, in any case, since it was linked to the gestures,
the body, and the situation of the speaker) or incorporated themselves
into other words, in which they found a stable support, and to which
they gave in return a whole system of modiﬁcations.59 So that all
words, of whatever kind, are dormant names: verbs have joined
adjectival names to the verb to be; conjunctions and prepositions are
the names of gestures now frozen into immobility; declensions and
conjugations are no more than names that have been absorbed. Words,
now, can open up and restore their freedom of ﬂight to all the names
that have been lodged within them. As Le Bel said, stating it as a
fundamental principle of analysis, ‘there is no group of which the parts
have not existed separately before being grouped together’;60 this
enabled him to reduce all words to syllabic elements in which the old
forgotten names at last made their reappearance – the only vocables
that possessed the possibility of existing side by side with the verb to
be: Romulus, for example,61 comes from Roma and moliri (to build);
and Roma comes from ro, which denoted strength (robur) and ma, which
denoted magnitude (magnus). In the same way, Thiébault discovers

speaking

three latent signiﬁcations in abandonner: a, which ‘presents the idea of
the tendency or destination of one thing towards another’; ban, which
‘gives the idea of the totality of the social body’, and do, which indicates
‘the act whereby one relinquishes something’.62
And if one is forced to descend below the level of individual syllables
to the very letters of the words, one can still ﬁnd the values of a
rudimentary form of nomination. A task to which, to his greater –
though even more perishable – glory, Court de Gébelin really applied
himself: ‘the labial contact, the easiest to bring into play, the gentlest,
the most gracious, served to designate the ﬁrst beings man comes to
know, those who surround him and to whom he owes everything’
(papa, mama). On the other hand, ‘the teeth are as ﬁrm as the lips are
mobile and ﬂexible; the intonations that proceed from them are strong,
sonorous, noisy . . . ’ It is by means of dental contact that one expresses
the ideas that lie behind such verbs as tonner (to thunder), retentir (to
resound), étonner (to astonish); it is by this means too that one denotes
tambours (drums), timbales (timpani), and trompettes (trumpets). Vowels,
too, in isolation, are able to unfold the secret of the age-old names that
usage has buried within them: A for possession (avoir, to have), E for
existence, I for puissance (power), O for étonnement (astonishment, eyes
opened wide), U for humidité (humidity) and therefore for humeur
(mood).63 And perhaps, in the very oldest stratum of our history,
consonants and vowels, diﬀerentiated only as two still vague groups,
formed as it were the two sole names upon which human speech is
ultimately articulated: the singing vowels speaking our passions; the
rough consonants our needs.64 It is still possible to distinguish the
rocky tongues of the North – a forest of gutturals, of hunger and cold –
from the Southern tongues that are all vowels, born of early morning
encounters between shepherds when ‘the ﬁrst ﬁres of love were
bursting from the pure crystal of the springs’.
Throughout its density, even down to the most archaic of those
sounds that ﬁrst rescued it from its state as pure cry, language preserves
its representative function; in each one of its articulations, from the
depths of time, it has always named. It is nothing in itself but an
immense rustling of denominations that are overlying one another,
contracting into one another, hiding one another, and yet preserving
themselves in existence in order to permit the analysis or the

113

114 the order of things
composition of the most complex representations. Within sentences, in
that very depth where signiﬁcation seems to be relying upon the mute
support of insigniﬁcant syllables, there is always a dormant
nomination, a form that holds imprisoned within its vocal walls the
reﬂection of an invisible and yet indelible representation. For
nineteenth-century philology, such analyses remained, in the literal
sense of the word, ‘a dead letter’. But not so for a whole way of
experiencing language – at ﬁrst esoteric and mystic at the time of SaintMarc, Reveroni, Fabre d’Olivet, Oegger, then literary when the enigma
of the word re-emerged in all its density of being, with Mallarmé,
Roussel, Leiris, or Ponge. The idea that, when we destroy words, what
is left is neither mere noise nor arbitrary, pure elements, but other
words, which, when pulverized in turn, will set free still other words –
this idea is at once the negative of all the modern science of languages
and the myth in which we now transcribe the most obscure and the
most real powers of language. It is probably because it is arbitrary, and
because one can deﬁne the condition upon which it attains its power of
signiﬁcation, that language can become the object of a science. But it is
because it has never ceased to speak within itself, because it is penetrated as far as we can reach within it by inexhaustible values, that we
can speak within it in that endless murmur in which literature is born.
But in the Classical period the relation was not at all the same; the two
ﬁgures ﬁtted over each other exactly: in order that language could be
entirely comprised within the general form of the proposition, each
word, down to the least of its molecules, had to be a meticulous form
of nomination.

V DESIGNATION
And yet, the theory of ‘generalized nomination’ reveals at the extremity of language a certain relation to things that is of an entirely diﬀerent
nature from that of the propositional form. If, fundamentally, the function of language is to name, that is, to raise up a representation or point
it out, as though with a ﬁnger, then it is indication and not judgement.
It is linked to things by a mark, a notation, an associated ﬁgure, a
gesture of designation: nothing that could be reduced to a relation of
predication. The principle of primal nomination, of the origin of

speaking

words, is balanced by the formal primacy of judgement. As though, on
either side of language, unfolded in all its articulations, there lay its
being, in its verbal role as attribution, and its origin, in its role as
primary designation. The latter permits the substitution of a sign for
that which is indicated, the former makes possible the linking of one
content to another. And thus we encounter once again, in their opposition yet also in their aﬃnity, the two functions of connection and
substitution that have been allotted to the sign in general with its
power of analysing representation.
To bring the origin of language back into the light of day means also
to rediscover the primitive moment in which it was pure designation.
And one ought, by this means, to provide at the same time an explanation for its arbitrariness (since that which designates can be as diﬀerent
from that which it indicates as a gesture from the object towards which
it is directed), and for its profound relation with that which it names
(since a particular syllable or word has always been chosen to designate
a particular thing). The ﬁrst of these requirements is fulﬁlled by the
analysis of the language of action, the second by the study of roots. But
these two things are not in opposition to one another in the same way
as, in the Cratylus, are explanation in terms of ‘nature’ and explanation
in terms of ‘law’; on the contrary, they are absolutely indispensable to
one another, since the ﬁrst gives an account of the substitution of the
sign for the thing designated and the second justiﬁes the permanent
power of designation possessed by that sign.
The language of action is spoken by the body; and yet, it is not
something given from the very ﬁrst. All that nature permits is that man,
in the various situations in which he ﬁnds himself, should be able to
make gestures; his face is agitated by movements; he emits inarticulate
cries – in other words, cries that are ‘coined neither by the tongue nor
by the lips’.65 All this is not yet either language or even sign, but the
eﬀect and consequence of our animality. This manifest agitation nevertheless has the virtue of being universal, since it depends solely upon
the conformation of our organs. Hence the possibility for man to
observe that it is identical in himself and his companions. He is therefore able to associate the cry he hears from another’s mouth, the grimace he sees upon that other’s face, with the same representations that
have, on several occasions, accompanied his own cries and movements.

115

116 the order of things
He is able to accept this mimesis as the mark and substitute of the
other’s thought. As a sign. Comprehension is beginning. He can also, in
return, employ this mimesis that has become a sign in order to excite
in his companions the idea that he himself is experiencing, the sensations, the needs, the diﬃculties that are ordinarily associated with certain gestures and certain sounds: a cry expressly directed in another’s
presence and towards an object, a pure interjection.66 With this
concerted use of the sign (which is already expression), something like
a language is in the process of being born.
It is evident, from these analyses common to Condillac and Destutt,
that the language of action does indeed link language to nature by
means of a genesis – but in order to detach it from nature rather than to
give it roots there, to emphasize its indelible diﬀerence from the cry
and to provide a basis for that which constitutes its artiﬁce. As long as it
is a simple extension of the body, action has no power to speak: it is
not language. It becomes language, but only at the end of deﬁnite and
complex operations: the notation of an analogy of relations (the
other’s cry is to what he is experiencing – that which is unknown –
what my cry is to my appetite or my fear); inversion of time and
voluntary use of the sign before the representation it designates (before
experiencing a sensation of hunger strong enough to make me cry out,
I emit the cry that is associated with it); lastly, the purpose of arousing
in the other the representation corresponding to the cry or gesture (but
with this particularity, that, by emitting a cry, I do not arouse, and do
not intend to arouse, the sensation of hunger, but the representation of
the relation between this sign and my own desire to eat). Language is
possible only upon the basis of this entanglement. It rests not upon a
natural movement of comprehension or expression, but upon the
reversible and analysable relations of signs and representations. Language does not come into being when representation is exteriorized,
but only when, in a concerted fashion, it detaches a sign from itself and
causes itself to be represented by that sign. It is not, therefore, because
he functions as a speaking subject, or from within a language already
made, that man discovers, all around him, signs that might be taken as
so many mute words to be deciphered and rendered audible again; it is
because representation provides itself with signs that words can come
into being, and with them a whole language that is no more than the

speaking

ulterior organization of vocal signs. Despite its name, the ‘language
of action’ calls into existence the irreducible network of signs that
separates language from action.
And in this way it bases its artiﬁce in nature. For the elements of
which this language of action is composed (sounds, gestures, grimaces) are suggested successively by nature, and yet they have no identity of content – for the most part – with what they designate, but
above all relations of simultaneity or succession. The cry does not
resemble fear, nor the outstretched hand the sensation of hunger. Once
they have become concerted, these signs will remain without ‘fantasy
and without caprice’,67 since they have been established once and
for all by nature; but they will not express the nature of what they
designate, for they are in no way its image. And from this starting-point
men will be able to establish a language of convention: they now have
at their disposal enough signs as marks for things to enable them to
invent further signs that will analyse and combine the primary ones. In
his Discours sur l’origine de l’inégalité,68 Rousseau made the point that no
language can have an agreement between men as its basis, since such an
agreement presupposes that some established, recognized, and practised language already exists; we would therefore have to imagine it as
having been received by men, not built by them. In fact, the language
of action conﬁrms this necessity and renders this hypothesis futile. Man
receives from nature the material to make signs, and those signs serve
him ﬁrst of all as a means of reaching agreement with other men as
to the choice of those that shall be retained, the values that they shall
be recognized as possessing, and the rules for employing them; after
that, they serve him as a means of forming new signs on the model
of the primary ones. The ﬁrst form of agreement consists in selecting
the vocal signs (which are easier to recognize from a distance and
the only ones that can be used when it is dark), the second in
composing, in order to designate representations still left without
signs, sounds close to those indicating neighbouring representations.
It is in this way that language, properly speaking, is constituted, by a
series of analogies that are a lateral extension of the language of
action or at least of its vocal element: language resembles this vocal
element, and ‘it is this resemblance that facilitates the understanding
of it. We term it analogy . . . You observe that analogy, which gives

117

118 the order of things
us law, does not permit us to choose signs at random or
arbitrarily.’69
The genesis of language in the language of action entirely avoids the
alternatives of natural imitation and arbitrary convention. In that which
is natural – in the signs that arise spontaneously through the medium
of our bodies – there is no resemblance; and where there is employment of resemblances it is after a voluntary agreement has been
reached between men. Nature juxtaposes the diﬀerences and binds
them together by force; reﬂection discovers the resemblances, and
analyses and develops them. The ﬁrst phase makes artiﬁce possible, but
with material imposed upon all men in identical fashion; the second
excludes arbitrary choice but opens up channels for analysis that will
not be exactly superimposable in the case of all men and all peoples.
The law of nature is constituted by the diﬀerence between words and
things – the vertical division between language and that lying beneath
it which it is the task of language to designate; the rule prescribed by
conventions is the resemblance that exists between words, the great
horizontal network that forms words from other words and propagates
them ad inﬁnitum.
It now becomes comprehensible why the theory of roots in no way
contradicts the analysis of the language of action, but is to be found
within it. Roots are those rudimentary words that are to be found,
always identical, in a great number of languages – perhaps in all; they
have been imposed upon language by nature in the form of involuntary
cries spontaneously employed by the language of action. It was there
that men sought them out in order to give them a place in their
conventional languages. And if all peoples, in all climates, chose these
same elementary sounds from among the raw material of the language
of action, that is because they discerned in them, though in a secondary
and reﬂective manner, a resemblance with the object they designated,
or the possibility of applying it to an analogous object. The resemblance of the root to what it names assumes its value as a verbal sign
only through the agency of the convention that brought men together
and regulated their language of action so as to create a language. In this
way, from within representation, signs are united with the very nature
of what they designate, and the primitive treasury of vocables is
imposed, in identical fashion, on all languages.

speaking

Roots may be formed in several ways. By onomatopoeia, of course,
which is not a spontaneous expression, but the deliberate articulation
of a sign that is also a resemblance: ‘to make the same sound with one’s
voice as the object that one wishes to name’.70 By employing a
resemblance experienced in one’s sensations: ‘the impression made by
the colour red, which is vivid, rapid, harsh to the eye, will be very well
rendered by the sound R, which makes an analogous impression upon
the ear’.71 By imposing movements upon the organs of the voice
analogous to those one wishes to signify: ‘so that the sound resulting
from the form and natural movement of the organ when placed in this
state becomes the name of the object’; the throat rasps to designate the
rubbing of one body against another, it hollows itself inside to indicate
a concave surface.72 Finally, by employing the sounds an organ naturally produces to designate that organ: the glottal stop determined the
name of the throat in which it occurs, and the dentals (d and t) are used
to designate the teeth.73 Using these conventional articulations of
resemblance, every language is able to provide itself with its pack of
primitive roots. The pack is a small one, since the roots are almost all
monosyllabic and exist only in very small numbers – two hundred for
Hebrew, according to Bergier’s estimate;74 and even smaller when
one remembers that (because of the relations of resemblance that they
establish) they are common to almost all of our languages: de Brosses
thinks that all of them together, from all the dialects of Europe and the
Orient, would not ﬁll ‘a single sheet of writing paper’. But it is on the
basis of them that each language develops its own particularity: ‘their
development is prodigious. Just as one elm seed produces a great tree,
which by growing new shoots from each root produces in the end an
entire forest’.75
Language can now reveal its genealogy, the genealogy that de
Brosses attempted to display in a dimension of continuous ﬁliation that
he called the ‘Universal Archaeologist’.76 At the top of this space,
one would write the roots – very few in number – employed in all
European and Oriental languages; below each root one could place the
more complicated words derived from it, but taking care to place ﬁrst
those that are nearest to the roots, and to follow them in a sequence
suﬃciently tight for there to be as small a distance as possible between
each word in the series. In this way one would be able to constitute a

119

120 the order of things
number of perfect and exhaustive series, of absolutely continuous
chains in which the breaks, if there were any, would indicate the place
of a word, a dialect, or a language no longer in existence.77 Once this
vast, seamless expanse had been constituted, one would have a twodimensional space that one could cross either on abscissae or on ordinates: vertically, one would have the complete ﬁliation of each root;
horizontally, one would have the words employed in any given language; the further away one moved from the primitive roots, the more
complicated – and no doubt more recent – would the languages
deﬁned by any transversal line become, but, at the same time, the more
subtle and eﬃcacious would the words be as instruments for the analysis of representations. And thus superimposed, the historical space and
the grid of thought would be exactly coincidental.
This quest for the roots of language may well appear to be a return to
the historical hypothesis and to the theory of mother-languages that
Classicism seemed, for a time, to have suspended. In reality, an analysis
of its roots does not replace language in a history that is, as it were, the
environment into which it was born and in which it developed. Rather,
it makes history a journey, accomplished in successive stages, across
the simultaneous patterning of representation and words. In the Classical period, language is not a fragment of history authorizing at any
given moment a deﬁnite mode of thought and reﬂection; it is an area
of analysis upon which time and human knowledge pursue their journey. And the fact that language does not become – or become once
again – through the agency of the root theory a historical entity is
proved quite easily by the way in which etymologies were sought for
in the eighteenth century. The guiding thread used for such investigations was not the material transformations undergone by the word, but
the constancy of its signiﬁcations.
This search had two aspects: deﬁnition of the root, and isolation of
the inﬂectional endings and preﬁxes. To deﬁne the root was to discover
an etymology. It was an art with codiﬁed rules;78 one had to strip
the word of all the subsequent traces that might have been left upon it
by combinations and inﬂections; arrive at a monosyllabic element;
follow that element through the entire past of the language, through all
the ancient ‘charts and glossaries’; then follow it back into other and
more primitive languages. And it must also be accepted that at any

speaking

point along this backward journey the monosyllable may change: all
the vowels may replace one another in the history of a root, for the
vowels are the voice itself, which knows no discontinuity or rupture;
the consonants, on the other hand, are modiﬁed according to certain
privileged channels: gutturals, linguals, palatals, dentals, labials, and
nasals all make up families of homophonous consonants within which
changes of pronunciation are made for preference, though without any
obligation.79 The only indelible constant guaranteeing the continuity of the root throughout its history is the unity of meaning: the
representative area that persists indeﬁnitely. This is because ‘nothing
perhaps can limit inductions and everything can serve as a basis for
them, from total resemblance to the very slightest of resemblances’: the
meaning of words is ‘the surest source of enlightenment we can
consult’.80

VI DERIVATION
How is it that words, which in their primary essence are names and
designations, and which are articulated just as representation itself is
analysed, can move irresistibly away from their original signiﬁcation
and acquire either a broader or more limited adjacent meaning? How
can they change not only their forms but their ﬁeld of application?
How can they acquire new sounds, and also new contents, to such an
extent that various languages, equipped in the ﬁrst place with a number of probably identical roots, have formed diﬀerent sounds, to say
nothing of words whose meanings are lost to us?
The modiﬁcations of form obey no rule, are more or less endless,
and never stable. All their causes are external: ease of pronunciation,
fashions, habits, climate – cold weather encourages ‘unvoiced labials’,
hot weather ‘guttural aspirates’.81 The alterations of meaning, on the
other hand – since they are so limited as to justify an etymological
science, which, if not absolutely exact, is at least ‘probable’82 – do
obey ﬁxed principles. These principles, which foment the internal history of languages, are all of a spatial order. Some concern the visible
resemblance or adjacency between things; others concern the area in
which language and the form it uses to preserve itself coexist. Figures
and writing.

121

122 the order of things
We know of two broad types of writing: that which retraces the
meaning of words, and that which analyses and reconstitutes their
sounds. Between these two there is a strict dividing-line, whether one
accepts that the second took over from the ﬁrst among certain peoples
as the result of a veritable ‘stroke of genius’,83 or whether one
accepts – so diﬀerent are they from one another – that they both
appeared more or less simultaneously, the ﬁrst among graphically
oriented peoples, the second among song-oriented peoples.84 To
represent the meaning of words graphically is originally to make an
exact drawing of the thing to be designated. In fact, it is scarcely writing at all – at the very most a pictorial reproduction with the aid of
which one can scarcely transcribe anything more than the most concrete form of narrative. According to Warburton, the Mexicans scarcely
knew of any other method.85 True writing began when the attempt
was made to represent, no longer the thing itself, but one of its constituent elements, or one of the circumstances that habitually attend it,
or again some other thing that it resembles. These three methods produced three techniques: the curiological writing of the Egyptians – the
crudest of the three – which employs ‘the principal circumstance of a
subject in lieu of the whole’ (a bow for a battle, a ladder for a siege);
then the ‘tropal’ hieroglyphics – somewhat more perfected – which
employ some notable circumstance (since God is all-powerful he
knows everything and sees all that men do: he is therefore represented
by an eye); ﬁnally, symbolic writing, which makes use of more or less
concealed resemblances (the rising sun is expressed by the head of a
crocodile whose round eyes are just level with the surface of the
water).86 We can recognize here the three great ﬁgures of rhetoric:
synecdoche, metonymy, catachresis. And it is by following the nervure
laid down by these ﬁgures that those languages paralleled with a symbolic form of writing will be able to evolve. They become endowed,
little by little, with poetic powers; their primary nominations become
the starting-points for long metaphors; these metaphors become progressively more complicated, and are soon so far from their points of
origin that it is diﬃcult to recall them. This is how superstitions arise
whereby people believe that the sun is a crocodile, or that God is a
great eye keeping watch on the world; it is also how esoteric forms of
knowledge arise among those (the priests) who pass on the metaphors

speaking

to their successors from generation to generation; and it is how allegorical discourse (so frequent in the most ancient literatures) comes into
being, as well as the illusion that knowledge consists in understanding
resemblances.
But the history of a language endowed with a ﬁgurative writing soon
comes to a halt. For it is hardly possible to achieve much progress in
such a language. Its signs do not multiply with the meticulous analysis
of representations but with the most distant analogies; so that it is the
imagination of the peoples using them that is encouraged rather than
their powers of reﬂection, their credulity rather than science. Moreover,
knowledge necessitates two kinds of apprenticeship: ﬁrst in words (as
with all languages), then with written signs that have no bearing upon
the pronunciation of the words; a human life-span is not too long for
this double education; and if one has had, in addition, the leisure to
make some discovery, one has no signs at one’s disposal to hand it on.
Inversely, since it bears no intrinsic relation to the word it represents, a
transmitted sign always remains dubious: from one age to the next one
can never be sure that the same sound resides in the same ﬁgure.
Innovations are therefore impossible, and traditions compromised.
With the result that the only concern of the learned is to maintain ‘a
superstitious respect’ for the learning handed down by their ancestors
and for the institutions preserving that heritage: ‘they feel that any
change in manners will bring change in the language, and that any
change in the language will confound and annul all their knowledge’.87 When a people possesses nothing but a ﬁgurative form of
writing, its politics must exclude history, or at least all history other
than pure and simple conservation. It is here, according to Volney,88
in this relation of space to language, that the essential diﬀerence
between East and West is situated. As though the spatial arrangement of
the language prescribed the law of time; as though their particular
language did not come to men via history, but that, inversely, their
only means of access to history was via their system of signs. It is in this
nexus of representation, words, and space (the words representing the
space of the representation, and in turn representing themselves in
time) that the destiny of peoples is silently formed.
With alphabetic writing, in fact, the history of men is entirely
changed. They transcribe in space, not their ideas but sounds, and from

123

124 the order of things
those sounds they extract the common elements in order to form a
small number of unique signs whose combination will enable them to
form all possible syllables and words. Whereas symbolic writing, in
attempting to spatialize representations themselves, obeys the confused
law of similitudes, and causes language to slip out of the forms of
reﬂective thought, alphabetical writing, by abandoning the attempt to
draw the representation, transposes into its analysis of sounds the rules
that are valid for reason itself. So that it does not matter that letters do
not represent ideas, since they can be combined together in the same
way as ideas, and ideas can be linked together and disjoined just like
the letters of the alphabet.89 The disruption of the exact parallelism
between representation and graphic signs makes it possible to bring
language, even written language, as a totality, into the general domain
of analysis, thus allowing the progress of writing and that of thought to
provide each other with mutual support.90 The same graphic signs
can break down all new words, and hand on each new discovery, as
soon as it is made, without fear of its being forgotten; the same alphabet can be used to transcribe diﬀerent languages, and thus to convey
the ideas of one people to another. Since it is very easy to learn this
alphabet, because of its very small number of elements, everyone is
able to devote to reﬂection and to the analysis of ideas the time that the
hieroglyphic peoples wasted in learning how to write. And so it is
within language itself, exactly in that fold of words where analysis and
space meet, that the ﬁrst but endless possibility of progress arises. In its
root, progress, as deﬁned in the eighteenth century, is not a movement
within history, but the result of a fundamental relation between space
and language:
The arbitrary signs of language and writing provide men with the
means of ensuring the possession of their ideas and of communicating them to others in the manner of an inheritance, constantly augmented with the new discoveries of each age; and the human race,
considered from its origin, appears to the eyes of the philosopher as
an immense whole that itself possesses, like every individual, its
childhood and its progress.91

Language gives the perpetual disruption of time the continuity of

speaking

space, and it is to the degree that it analyses, articulates, and patterns
representation that it has the power to link our knowledge of things
together across the dimension of time. With the advent of language,
the chaotic monotony of space is fragmented, while at the same time
the diversity of temporal successions is uniﬁed.
There remains one last problem, however. For though writing is
indeed the buttress and ever-watchful guardian of these progressively
more reﬁned analyses, it is neither their principle nor even their initial
movement. This latter is a slipping movement common to attention, to
signs, and to words. In any representation, the mind can attach itself,
and attach a verbal sign, to one element of that representation, to a
circumstance attending it, to some other, absent, thing that is similar to
it and is recalled to memory on account of it.92 There is no doubt
that this is how language developed and gradually drifted away from
primary designations. Originally, everything had a name – a proper or
peculiar name. Then the name became attached to a single element of
the thing, and became applicable to all the other individual things that
also contained that element: it is no longer a particular oak that is called
tree, but anything that includes at least a trunk and branches. The name
also became attached to a conspicuous circumstance: night came to
designate, not the end of this particular day, but the period of darkness
separating all sunsets from all dawns. Finally, it attached itself to analogies: everything was called a leaf that was as thin and ﬂexible as the leaf
of a tree.93 The progressive analysis and more advanced articulation
of language, which enable us to give a single name to several things,
were developed along the lines of these three fundamental ﬁgures so
well known to rhetoric: synecdoche, metonymy, and catachresis (or
metaphor, if the analogy is less immediately perceptible). For these
things are not the eﬀect of a reﬁnement of style; on the contrary, they
reveal the mobility peculiar to all language whenever it is spontaneous:
‘La Halle produces more ﬁgures of speech in one market day than our
academic assemblies do in a week’.94 It is very probable that this
mobility was even greater in the beginnings of language than it is
now: today, the analysis is so detailed, the grid so ﬁne, the relations
of coordination and subordination are so ﬁrmly established, that
words scarcely have any opportunity to move from their places. But at
the beginning of human history, when words were few, when

125

126 the order of things
representations were still confused and not well analysed, when the
passions both modiﬁed them and provided them with a basis, words
had greater mobility. One might even say that words were ﬁgurative
before being proper: in other words, that they had scarcely attained
their status as particular names before they were being scattered over
representations by the force of spontaneous rhetoric. As Rousseau says,
we probably talked about giants before designating men.95 Boats
were originally designated by their sails, and the soul, the ‘psyche’, was
initially given the ﬁgurative form of the moth.96
So that at the base of spoken language, as with writing, what we
discover is the rhetorical dimension of words: that freedom of the sign
to alight, according to the analysis of representation, upon some
internal element, upon some adjacent point, upon some analogous
ﬁgure. And if languages possess the diversity we observe in them; if
from the starting-point of their primitive designations, which were
doubtless common to them all owing to the universality of human
nature, they have not ceased to develop according to the dictates of
diﬀering forms; if they have all had their own history, fashions, customs, and periods of oblivion; this is because words have their locus, not
in time, but in a space in which they are able to ﬁnd their original site,
change their positions, turn back upon themselves, and slowly unfold a
whole developing curve: a tropological space. And in this way one returns
once more to what had served as a starting-point for reﬂection upon
language. Language was of all signs the one having the property of
being sequential: not because it was itself part of a chronology, but
because it drew out into sequential sounds the simultaneity of representation. But this succession, which analyses discontinuous elements
and brings them into view one after the other, traverses the space
oﬀered by representation to the mind’s eye. So that language merely
arranges into a linear order the scattered fragments represented. The
proposition unfolds and makes audible the ﬁgure that rhetoric makes
visible. Without this tropological space, language would not be formed
of all those common names that make it possible to establish a predicative relation. And without this analysis of the words, the ﬁgures would
have remained mute and momentary; and since they would have been
perceived only in the incandescence of the instant, they would have
fallen forthwith into a darkness in which there is not even any time.

speaking

From the theory of the proposition to that of derivation, all Classical
reﬂection upon language – all that was called ‘general grammar’ – is
merely a detailed commentary upon the simple phrase: ‘language
analyses’. It was upon this point, in the seventeenth century, that the
whole Western experience of language foundered – the experience that
had always led men to believe, until then, that language spoke.

VII THE QUADRILATERAL OF LANGUAGE
A few concluding remarks. The four theories – of the proposition, of
articulation, of designation, and of derivation – form, as it were, the
segments of a quadrilateral. They confront each other in pairs and
reinforce each other in pairs. Articulation gives content to the pure and
still empty verbal form of the proposition; it ﬁlls that form, yet is in
opposition to it, as a nomination that diﬀerentiates things is in opposition to the predication that links them together. The theory of designation reveals the point of attachment of all the nominal forms cut out by
articulation; but they are in opposition to articulation, just as the
instantaneous, gestural, perpendicular designation is in opposition to
patterns based on generalities. The theory of derivation indicates the
continuous movement of words from their source of origin, but the
slipping that occurs on the surface of representation is in opposition to
the single stable bond that links one root to one representation. Finally,
derivation leads back to the proposition, since without it all designation would remain folded in on itself and could never acquire the
generality that alone can authorize a predicating link; yet derivation is
created by means of a spatial ﬁgure, whereas the proposition unfolds in
obedience to a sequential and linear order.
It should be noted that there also exist diagonal relations, as it were,
between the opposing corners of this rectangle. First of all, between
articulation and derivation: if the existence of an articulated language is
possible, with words in juxtaposition, interlocking, or arranging themselves in relation to one another, then it is so only in so far as the words
of that language – starting from their original values and from the
simple act of designation that was their basis – have never ceased to
move further and further away, by a process of derivation, thus acquiring a variable extension; hence an axis that cuts across the whole

127

128 the order of things
quadrilateral of language; and it is along this line that the state of a
language is marked oﬀ: its articulative capacities are determined by the
distance it has moved along the line of derivation; such a reading
deﬁnes both its historical posture and its power of discrimination. The
other diagonal runs from the proposition back to the origin, that is,
from the aﬃrmation at the heart of every act of judgement to the
designation implied by any act of nomination; it is along this axis that
the relation of words to what they represent is established: here it
becomes apparent that words never speak anything other than the
being of representation, but that they always name something represented. The ﬁrst diagonal marks the progress of a language from the
point of view of its speciﬁcation; the second the endless interleaving of
language and representation – the duplicating process which is the
reason why the verbal sign is always representing a representation. On
this latter line, the word functions as a substitute (with its power to
represent); on the former, as an element (with its power to make
combinations and break them down).
At the point where these two diagonals intersect, at the centre of the
quadrilateral, where the duplicating process of representation is
revealed as analysis, where the substitute has the power of distribution,
and where, in consequence, there resides the possibility and the principle of a general taxonomy of representation, there is the name. To
name is at the same time to give the verbal representation of a representation, and to place it in a general table. The entire Classical theory of
language is organized around this central and privileged entity. All
the various functions of language intersect within it, since it is by
nomination that representations are enabled to enter as ﬁgures into a
proposition. It is therefore also through nomination that discourse is
articulated upon knowledge. Only the judgement, of course, can be
true or false. But if all names were exact, if the analysis upon which
they are based had been perfectly thought out, if the language in question had been ‘well made’, there would be no diﬃculty in pronouncing true judgements, and error, should it occur, would be as easy
to uncover and as evident as in a calculation in algebra. But the imperfection of analysis, and all the slight shifts caused by derivation, have
caused names to be attached to analyses, abstractions, and combinations that are in fact illegitimate. There would be no disadvantage in

speaking

this (any more than in giving names to fabulous monsters) if words
did not posit themselves as being representations of representations:
with the result that we cannot think of a word – however abstract,
general, and empty it may be – without aﬃrming the possibility of
what it represents. This is why, in the middle of the quadrilateral of
language, the name appears both as the point upon which all the
structures of a language converge (for the name is its most secret, most
closely guarded ﬁgure, the pure internal result of all its conventions,
rules, and history), and as the point from which all language in general
can enter into a relation with the truth according to which it will be
judged.
This is the nexus of the entire Classical experience of language: the
reversible character of grammatical analysis, which is at one and the
same time science and prescription, a study of words and a rule for
constructing them, employing them, and remoulding them into their
representative function; the fundamental nominalism of philosophy
from Hobbes to Ideology, a nominalism that is inseparable from a
critique of language and from all that mistrust with regard to general
and abstract words that we ﬁnd in Malebranche, Berkeley, Condillac,
and Hume; the great utopia of a perfectly transparent language in
which things themselves could be named without any penumbra of
confusion, either by a totally arbitrary but precisely thought-out system (artiﬁcial language), or by a language so natural that it would
translate thought like a face expressing a passion (it was this language
of immediate sign that Rousseau dreamed of in the ﬁrst of his Dialogues).
One might say that it is the Name that organizes all Classical discourse;
to speak or to write is not to say things or to express oneself, it is not a
matter of playing with language, it is to make one’s way towards the
sovereign act of nomination, to move, through language, towards the
place where things and words are conjoined in their common essence,
and which makes it possible to give them a name. But once that name
has been spoken, all the language that has led up to it, or that has been
crossed in order to reach it, is reabsorbed into it and disappears. So that
Classical discourse, in its profound essence, tends always towards this
boundary; but, in surviving it, pushes the boundary further away. It
continues on its way in the perpetually maintained suspension of the
Name. This is why, in its very possibility, it is linked with rhetoric, that

129

130 the order of things
is, with all the space that surrounds the name, causes it to oscillate
around what it represents, and reveals the elements, or the adjacency,
or the analogies of what it names. The ﬁgures through which discourse
passes act as a deterrent to the name, which then arrives at the last
moment to fulﬁl and abolish them. The name is the end of discourse.
And possibly all Classical literature resides in this space, in this striving
to reach a name that remains always formidable because it exhausts,
and thereby kills, the possibility of speech. It is this striving movement
that carried the experience of language onwards from the restrained
confession of La Princesse de Clèves to the immediate violence of Juliette. In
the latter, nomination is at last posited in its starkest nudity, and the
rhetorical ﬁgures, which until then had been holding it in suspense,
collapse and become the endless ﬁgures of desire – and the same
names, constantly repeated, exhaust themselves in their eﬀort to cross
those ﬁgures, without ever being able to reach their end.
All Classical literature resides in the movement that proceeds from
the ﬁgure of the name to the name itself, passing from the task of
naming the same thing yet again by means of new ﬁgures (which is
preciosity) to that of ﬁnding words that will at last name accurately that
which has never been named before or that which has remained dormant in the enveloping folds of words too far removed from it: of this
latter kind are those secrets of the soul, those impressions born at the
frontier of things and the body for which the language of the Cinquième
Rêverie made itself spontaneously transparent. Later, Romanticism was to
believe that it had broken with the previous age because it had learned
to name things by their name. In fact all Classicism tended towards this
end: Hugo was the fulﬁlment of Voltaire’s promise. But, by this very
fact, the name ceases to be the reward of language; it becomes instead
its enigmatic raw material. The only moment – an intolerable one, for
long buried in secrecy – at which the name was at the same time the
fulﬁlment and the substance of language, its promise and its raw
material, was when, with Sade, it was traversed throughout its whole
expanse by desire, of which it was at once the place of occurrence, the
satisfaction, and the perpetual recurrence. Hence the fact that Sade’s
works play the role of an incessant primordial murmur in our culture.
With this violence of the name being uttered at last for its own sake,
language emerges in all its brute being as a thing; the other ‘parts of

speaking

oration’ assume in turn their autonomy, escaping from the sovereignty
of the name, and ceasing to form around it an accessory circle of
ornaments. And since there is no longer any particular beauty in
‘retaining’ language around the frontiers of the name, in making it
show what it does not say, the result will be a non-discursive discourse
whose role will be to manifest language in its brute being. This proper
being of language is what the nineteenth century was to call the Word
(le Verbe), as opposed to the Classical ‘verb’, whose function is to pin
language, discreetly but continuously, to the being of representation.
And the discourse that contains this being and frees it for its own sake
is literature.
Around the privileged position occupied by the name in the Classical period, the theoretical segments (proposition, articulation, designation, and derivation) constitute the frontiers of what the experience
of language was at that time. Our step-by-step analysis of these segments was not undertaken in order to provide a history of grammatical
conceptions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, or to establish
the general outline of what men might have thought about language at
that time. The intention was to determine in what conditions language
could become the object of a period’s knowledge, and between what
limits this epistemological domain developed. Not to calculate the
common denominator of men’s opinions, but to deﬁne what made it
possible for opinions about language – whatever the opinions may have
been – to exist at all. This is why our rectangle deﬁnes a periphery
rather than provides an interior ﬁgure, and it shows how language
intertwines with what is exterior and indispensable to it. We have seen
that language existed only by virtue of the proposition: without at least
the implicit presence of the verb to be, and of the predicative relation for
which it provides authority, it would not be language that we were
dealing with at all, but a collection of signs like any others. The propositional form posits as a condition of language the aﬃrmation of a
relation of identity or diﬀerence: we can speak only in so far as this
relation is possible. But the other three theoretical segments enclose a
quite diﬀerent requirement: if it is to be possible to derive words from
their ﬁrst source, if an original kinship is to be already in existence
between a root and its signiﬁcation, if there is to be an articulated
patterning of representations, there must be a murmur of analogies

131

132 the order of things
rising from things, perceptible even in the most immediate experience;
there must be resemblances that posit themselves from the very start. If
everything were absolute diversity, thought would be doomed to singularity, and like Condillac’s statue before it began to remember and
make comparisons, it would be doomed also to absolute dispersion
and absolute monotony. Neither memory nor imagination, nor, therefore, reﬂection, would be possible. And it would be impossible to
compare things with each other, to deﬁne their identical characteristics, and to establish a common name for them. There would be no
language. If language exists, it is because below the level of identities
and diﬀerences there is the foundation provided by continuities,
resemblances, repetitions, and natural criss-crossings. Resemblance,
excluded from knowledge since the early seventeenth century, still
constitutes the outer edge of language: the ring surrounding the
domain of that which can be analysed, reduced to order, and known.
Discourse dissipates the murmur, but without it it could not speak.
It is now possible to grasp how solid and tightly knit the unity of
language is in the Classical experience. It is this unity that, through the
play of an articulated designation, enables resemblance to enter the
propositional relation, that is, a system of identities and diﬀerences as
based upon the verb to be and manifested by the network of names. The
fundamental task of Classical ‘discourse’ is to ascribe a name to things, and in
that name to name their being. For two centuries, Western discourse was the
locus of ontology. When it named the being of all representation in
general, it was philosophy: theory of knowledge and analysis of ideas.
When it ascribed to each thing represented the name that was ﬁtted to
it, and laid out the grid of a well-made language across the whole ﬁeld
of representation, then it was science – nomenclature and taxonomy.

NOTES
John Locke, An essay concerning human understanding (1690, book III, chap. II,
section 2).
2 Condillac, Grammaire (Œuvres, t. V, pp. 39–40).
3 Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, t. I.
4 U. Domergue, Grammaire générale analytique (Paris, year VII, t. I, pp. 10–11).
5 Condillac, Grammaire (Œuvres, t. V, p. 336).
6 Abbé Sicard, Éléments de grammaire générale (3rd edn., Paris, 1808, t. II, p. 113).
1

speaking
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

19

20

21

22
23

24
25
26

27
28
29

Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, t. I, pp. 261–6.
Encyclopédie, article on ‘Langue’.
Condillac, Grammaire (Œuvres, t. V, pp. 4–5 and 67–73).
Adam Smith, Considerations concerning the formation of languages.
Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, préface, t. I, p. 2.
C. Bonnet, Contemplation de la nature (Œuvres complètes, t. IV, p. 136 note).
Destutt de Tracy, Mèmoires de l’Academie des Sciences morales et politiques, t. III,
p. 535.
D’Alembert, Discours préliminaire de ‘l’Encyclopédie’.
Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, t. I, p. 24.
Diderot, article on ‘Encyclopédie’ in the Encyclopédie, t. V, p. 637.
Rousseau, Essai sur l’origine des langues (Œuvres, Paris, 1826 edn., t. XIII,
pp. 220–1).
Cf. Michaelis, De l’inﬂuence des opinions sur le langage (1759, Fr. trans. Paris,
1762): we know that the Greeks identiﬁed both fame and public opinion by the
word ; and that the Teutons believed in the fertilizing virtues of storms
from their expression das liebe Gewitter (pp. 24 and 40).
It is thought (cf., for instance, W.Warburton, The divine legation of Moses (1737–
41, book IV, sections II–VI)) that the knowledge of the Ancients, and, above all,
that of the Egyptians, was not ﬁrst of all secret then subsequently made public,
but that, having ﬁrst been constructed communally, it was later conﬁscated,
masked, and travestied by the priests. Esoterism, far from being the ﬁrst form
of knowledge, is only a perversion of it.
E. Guichard, Harmonie étymologique (1606). Cf. other classiﬁcations of the
same type in Scaliger, Diatribe de Europaeorum linguis, or Wilkins, An essay
towards real character (London, 1668, p. 3 et seq.).
Le Blan, Théorie nouvelle de la parole (Paris, 1750), according to which Latin
bequeathed nothing to Italian, Spanish, or French other than ‘the heritage of a
few words’.
Abbé Girard, Les Vrais Principes de la langue française (Paris, 1747, t. I, pp. 22–5).
On this problem and the discussions it has raised, cf. Bauzée, Grammaire
générale (Paris, 1767); Abbé Batteux, Nouvel examen du préjugé de I’inversion
(Paris, 1767); and Abbé d’Olivet, Remarques sur la langue française (Paris, 1771).
Abbé Pluche, La Mécanique des langues (reissued 1811, p. 26).
Ibid., p. 23.
Cf. for example, Bufﬁer, Grammaire française (Paris, new edn., 1723). This is
why, at the end of the eighteenth century, the expression ‘philosophical grammar’ came to be preferred to that of ‘general grammar’, which ‘would be that of
all languages’; D. Thiébault, Grammaire philosophique (Paris, 1802, t. 1, pp. 6
and 7).
Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, t. II, p. 87.
J. Itard, Rapport sur les nouveaux développements de Victor de l’Aveyron, 1964
edn., p. 209.
Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, t. II, p. 60.

133

134 the order of things
30 U. Domergue, Grammaire générale analytique, p. 34.
31 Hobbes, Logic, chap. III, section 3.
32 Adam Smith, Considerations concerning the formation of languages.
33 Logique de Port-Royal, pp. 106–7.
34 Condillac, Grammaire, p. 115.
35 In the French this phrase reads: ‘ . . . au lieu de dire ‘‘je suis chantant’’, on dit
‘‘je chante’’. The signiﬁcance of the author’s remark is lost on the English
reader since he can indeed say ‘I am singing’ whereas the Frenchman cannot
say ‘je suis chantant’. This form, often known as the ‘progressive’, is not to be
found in French, or in most other languages. [Translator’s note.]
36 Logique de Port-Royal, p. 107. Cf. Condillac, Grammaire, pp. 132–4. In his
L’Origine des connaissances, the history of the verb is analysed in a somewhat
different fashion, but not its function. D. Thiébault, Grammaire philosophique,
t. 1, p. 216.
37 Cf. Logique de Port-Royal, p. 107, and Abbé Girard, Les Vrais Principes de la langue
française, p. 56.
38 Bauzée, Grammaire générale, I, p. 426 et seq.
39 Condillac, Grammaire, pp. 185–6.
40 Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, t. II, p. 64.
41 U. Domergue, Grammaire générale analytique, p. 11.
42 Condillac, Grammaire, p. 152.
43 Ibid., p. 155.
44 Ibid., p. 153. Cf. also A. Smith, Considerations concerning the formation of
languages, pp. 408–10.
45 Logique de Port-Royal, p. 101.
46 Ibid., pp. 59–60.
47 Ibid., p. 101.
48 Duclos, Commentaire à la ‘Grammaire de Port-Royal’ (Paris, 1754, p. 213).
49 J.-B. Lemercier. Lettre sur la possibilité de faire de la grammaire un Art-Science
(Paris, 1806, pp. 63–5).
50 James Harris, Hermes.
51 A. Smith, Considerations concerning the formation of languages, pp. 430–1.
52 Bauzée (Grammaire générale) was the ﬁrst to employ the term ‘complement’.
53 Logique de Port-Royal, p. 117 et seq.
54 Abbé Sicard, Éléments de grammaire générale, t. II, p. 2.
55 Sylvestre de Saci, Principes de grammaire générale (1799). Cf. also U. Domergue,
Grammaire générale analytique, pp. 29–30.
56 Cf., for example, Abbé Girard, Les Vrais Principes de la langue française, pp. 82–3.
58 Logique de Port-Royal, p. 59
58 Batteux, Nouvel examen du préjugé de l’inversion, pp. 23–4.
59 Ibid., pp. 24–8.
60 Le Bel, Anatomie de la langue latine (Paris, 1764, p. 24).
61 Ibid., p. 8.
62 D. Thiébault, Grammaire philosophique, pp. 172–3.

speaking
63 Court de Gébelin, Histoire naturelle de la parole (1816 edn., pp. 98–104).
64 Rousseau, Essai sur l’origine des langues (Œuvres, 1826 edn., t. XIII, pp. 144–51
and 188–92).
65 Condillac, Grammaire, p. 8.
66 All the parts of discourse are, therefore, merely the fragments, broken
down and recombined, of that initial interjection (Destutt de Tracy, Éléments
d’Idéologie, t. II, p. 75).
67 Condillac, Grammaire, p. 10.
68 Rousseau, Discours sur l’origine de l’inégalité (cf. Condillac, Grammaire, p. 27,
note 1).
69 Condillac, Grammaire, pp. 11–12.
70 De Brosses, Traité de la formation mécanique des langues (Paris, 1765, t. I, p. 9).
71 Abbé Copincau, Essai synthétique sur l’origine et la formation des langues (Paris,
1774, pp. 34–5).
72 De Brosses, Traité de la formation mécanique des langues, t. I, pp. 16–18.
73 Ibid., t. I, p. 14.
74 Bergier, Les Éléments primitifs des langues (Paris, 1764, pp. 7–8).
75 De Brosses, Traité de la formation mécanique des langues, t. I, p. 18.
76 Ibid., t. II, pp. 490–9.
77 Ibid., t. I, préface, p. 1.
78 Cf., especially, Turgot’s article on ‘Étymologie’ in the Encyclopédie.
79 These, together with a few accessory variants, are the only laws of phonetic
variation recognized by de Brosses (Traité de la formation mécanique des
langues, pp. 108–23), Bergier (Éléments primitifs des langues, pp. 45–62), Court
de Gébelin (Histoire naturelle de la parole, pp. 59–64), and Turgot (‘Étymologie’
in the Encyclopédie).
80 Turgot, article ‘Étymologie’ in the Encyclopédie. Cf. de Brosses, op. cit., p. 420.
81 De Brosses, Traité de la formation mécanique des langues, t. I, pp. 66–7.
82 Turgot, article ‘Étymologie’ in the Encyclopédie.
83 Duclos, Remarques sur la grammaire générale, pp. 43–4.
84 Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, II, pp. 307–12.
85 Warburton, The divine legation of Moses.
86 Warbuton, op. cit.
87 Destutt de Tracy, Éléments d’Idéologie, t. II, pp. 284–300.
88 Volney, Les Ruines (Paris, 1791, chap. XIV).
89 Condillac, Grammaire, chap. 2.
90 Adam Smith, Considerations concerning the formation of languages.
91 Turgot, Tableau des progrès successifs de l’esprit humain (1750; Œuvres, ed.
Schelle, p. 215).
92 Condillac, Essai sur l’origine des connaissances humaines (Œuvres, t. I, pp. 75–87).
93 Du Marsais, Traité des tropes (1811 edn., pp. 150–1).
94 Ibid., p. 2.
95 Rousseau, Essai sur l’origine des langues, pp. 152–3.
96 De Brosses, Traité de la prononciation mécanique, p. 267.

135

5
CLASSIFYING
I WHAT THE HISTORIANS SAY
Histories of ideas or of the sciences – by which is meant here an
average cross-section of them – credit the seventeenth century, and
especially the eighteenth, with a new curiosity: the curiosity that
caused them, if not to discover the sciences of life, at least to give them
a hitherto unsuspected scope and precision. A certain number of causes
and several essential manifestations are traditionally attributed to this
phenomenon.
On the side of origins or motives, we place the new privileges
accorded to observation: the powers attributed to it since Bacon and
the technical improvements introduced in it by the invention of the
microscope. Alongside these is set the then recently attained prestige of
the physical sciences, which provided a model of rationality; since it
had proved possible, by means of experimentation and theory, to analyse the laws of movement or those governing the reﬂection of light
beams, was it not normal to seek, by means of experiments, observations, or calculations, the laws that might govern the more complex but
adjacent realm of living beings? Cartesian mechanism, which subsequently proved an obstacle, was used at ﬁrst, the historians tell us, as
a sort of instrument of transference, and led, rather in spite of itself,
from mechanical rationality to the discovery of that other rationality

classifying

which is that of the living being. Still on the side of causes, and in a
somewhat pell-mell fashion, the historians of ideas place a variety of
new interests: the economic attitude towards agriculture – the Physiocrats’ beliefs were evidence of this, but so too were the ﬁrst eﬀorts to
create an agronomy; then, half-way between husbandry and theory, a
curiosity with regard to exotic plants and animals, which attempts
were made to acclimatize, and of which the great voyages of inquiry or
exploration – that of Tournefort to the Middle East, for example, or that
of Adanson to Senegal – brought back descriptions, engravings, and
specimens; and then, above all, the ethical valorization of nature,
together with the whole of that movement, ambiguous in its principle,
by means of which – whether one was an aristocrat or a bourgeois –
one ‘invested’ money and feeling into a land that earlier periods had
for so long left fallow. Rousseau, at the heart of the eighteenth century,
was a student of botany.
In their list of manifestations, the historians then include the varied
forms that were taken by these new sciences of life, and the ‘spirit’, as
they put it, that directed them. Apparently, under the inﬂuence of
Descartes, they were mechanistic to begin with, and continued to be so
to the end of the seventeenth century; then the ﬁrst eﬀorts of an infant
chemistry made its imprint upon them, but throughout the eighteenth
century the vitalist themes are thought to have attained or returned to
their privileged status, ﬁnally coalescing to form a unitary doctrine –
that ‘vitalism’ which in slightly diﬀering forms was professed by Bordeu and Barthez in Montpellier, by Blumenbach in Germany, and by
Diderot then Bichat in Paris. Under these diﬀerent theoretical regimens, questions were asked that were almost always the same but were
given each time a diﬀerent solution: the possibility of classifying living
beings – some, like Linnaeus, holding that all of nature can be accommodated within a taxonomy, others, like Buﬀon, holding that it is too
rich and various to be ﬁtted within so rigid a framework; the generative process, with the more mechanistically minded in favour of preformation, and others believing in the speciﬁc development of germs;
analysis of functions (circulation after Harvey, sensation, motivity, and,
towards the end of the century, respiration).
After examining these problems and the discussions they give rise
to, it is simple enough for the historians to reconstruct the great

137

138 the order of things
controversies that are said to have divided men’s opinions and passions, as well as their reasoning. By these means they believe that they
can discover the traces of a major conﬂict between a theology that sees
the providence of God and the simplicity, mystery, and foresight of his
ways residing beneath each form and in all its movements, and a science that is already attempting to deﬁne the autonomy of nature. They
also recognize the contradiction between a science still too attached to
the old pre-eminence of astronomy, mechanics, and optics, and
another science that already suspects all the irreducible and speciﬁc
contents there may be in the realms of life. Lastly, the historians see the
emergence, as though before their very eyes, of an opposition between
those who believe in the immobility of nature – in the manner of
Tournefort, and above all Linnaeus – and those who, with Bonnet,
Benoît de Maillet, and Diderot, already have a presentiment of life’s
creative powers, of its inexhaustible power of transformation, of its
plasticity, and of that movement by means of which it envelops all its
productions, ourselves included, in a time of which no one is master.
Long before Darwin and long before Lamarck, the great debate on
evolution would appear to have been opened by the Telliamed, the Palingénésie and the Rêve de d’Alembert. Mechanism and theology, supporting
one another or ceaselessly conﬂicting with one another, tended to
keep the Classical age as close as possible to its origin – on the side of
Descartes and Malebranche; whereas, opposite them, irreligion and a
whole confused intuition of life, conﬂicting in turn (as in Bonnet) or
acting as accomplices (as with Diderot), are said to be drawing it
towards its imminent future – towards the nineteenth century, which
is supposed to have provided the still obscure and fettered endeavours
of the eighteenth with their positive and rational fulﬁlment in a science of life which did not need to sacriﬁce rationality in order to
preserve in the very quick of its consciousness the speciﬁcity of living
things, and that somewhat subterranean warmth which circulates
between them – the object of our knowledge – and us, who are here
to know them.
It would be pointless to go back over the presuppositions inherent in
such a method. Let it suﬃce here to point out its consequences: the
diﬃculty of apprehending the network that is able to link together
such diverse investigations as attempts to establish a taxonomy and

classifying

microscopic observations; the necessity of recording as observed facts
the conﬂicts between those who were ﬁxists and those who were not,
or between the experimentalists and the partisans of the system; the
obligation to divide knowledge into two interwoven fabrics when in
fact they were alien to one another – the ﬁrst being deﬁned by what
was known already and from elsewhere (the Aristotelian or scholastic
inheritance, the weight of Cartesianism, the prestige of Newton), the
second by what still remained to be known (evolution, the speciﬁcity
of life, the notion of organism); and above all the application of
categories that are strictly anachronistic in relation to this knowledge.
Obviously, the most important of all these refers to life. Historians
want to write histories of biology in the eighteenth century; but they
do not realize that biology did not exist then, and that the pattern of
knowledge that has been familiar to us for a hundred and ﬁfty years is
not valid for a previous period. And that, if biology was unknown,
there was a very simple reason for it: that life itself did not exist. All
that existed was living beings, which were viewed through a grid of
knowledge constituted by natural history.

II NATURAL HISTORY
How was the Classical age able to deﬁne this realm of ‘natural history’,
the proofs and even the unity of which now appear to us so distant, and
as though already blurred? What is this ﬁeld in which nature appeared
suﬃciently close to itself for the individual beings it contained to be
classiﬁed, and yet so far removed from itself that they had to be so by
the medium of analysis and reﬂection?
One has the impression – and it is often expressed – that the history
of nature must have appeared as Cartesian mechanism ebbed. When it
had at last become clear that it was impossible to ﬁt the entire world
into the laws of rectilinear movement, when the complexity of the
vegetable and animal kingdoms had suﬃciently resisted the simple
forms of extended substance, then it became necessary for nature to
manifest itself in all its strange richness; and the meticulous observation of living beings was thus born upon the empty strand from which
Cartesianism had just withdrawn. Unfortunately, things do not happen
as simply as that. It is quite possible – though it would be a matter

139

140 the order of things
requiring careful scrutiny – that one science can arise out of another;
but no science can be generated by the absence of another, or from
another’s failure, or even from some obstacle another has encountered.
In fact, the possibility of natural history, with Ray, Jonston, Christophorus Knauth, is contemporaneous with Cartesianism itself, and not
with its failure. Mechanism from Descartes to d’Alembert and natural
history from Tournefort to Daubenton were authorized by the same
episteme.
For natural history to appear, it was not necessary for nature to
become denser and more obscure, to multiply its mechanisms to the
point of acquiring the opaque weight of a history that can only be
retraced and described, without any possibility of measuring it, calculating it, or explaining it; it was necessary – and this is entirely the
opposite – for History to become Natural. In the sixteenth century, and
right up to the middle of the seventeenth, all that existed was histories:
Belon had written a History of the nature of birds; Duret, an Admirable history of
plants; Aldrovandi, a History of serpents and dragons. In 1657, Jonston published a Natural history of quadrupeds. This date of birth is not, of course,
absolutely deﬁnitive;1 it is there only to symbolize a landmark, and
to indicate, from afar, the apparent enigma of an event. This event is the
sudden separation, in the realm of Historia, of two orders of knowledge
henceforward to be considered diﬀerent. Until the time of Aldrovandi,
History was the inextricable and completely unitary fabric of all that
was visible of things and of the signs that had been discovered or
lodged in them: to write the history of a plant or an animal was as
much a matter of describing its elements or organs as of describing the
resemblances that could be found in it, the virtues that it was thought
to possess, the legends and stories with which it had been involved, its
place in heraldry, the medicaments that were concocted from its substance, the foods it provided, what the ancients recorded of it, and what
travellers might have said of it. The history of a living being was that
being itself, within the whole semantic network that connected it to
the world. The division, so evident to us, between what we see, what
others have observed and handed down, and what others imagine or
naïvely believe, the great tripartition, apparently so simple and so
immediate, into Observation, Document, and Fable, did not exist. And this
was not because science was hesitating between a rational vocation and

classifying

the vast weight of naïve tradition, but for the much more precise and
much more constraining reason that signs were then part of things
themselves, whereas in the seventeenth century they become modes of
representation.
When Jonston wrote his Natural history of quadrupeds, did he know any
more about them than Aldrovandi did, a half-century earlier? Not a
great deal more, the historians assure us. But that is not the question.
Or, if we must pose it in these terms, then we must reply that Jonston
knew a great deal less than Aldrovandi. The latter, in the case of each
animal he examined, oﬀered the reader, and on the same level, a
description of its anatomy and of the methods of capturing it; its
allegorical uses and mode of generation; its habitat and legendary mansions; its food and the best ways of cooking its ﬂesh. Jonston subdivides
his chapter on the horse under twelve headings: name, anatomical
parts, habitat, ages, generation, voice, movements, sympathy and
antipathy, uses, medicinal uses.2 None of this was omitted by
Aldrovandi, and he gives us a great deal more besides. The essential
diﬀerence lies in what is missing in Jonston. The whole of animal semantics has disappeared, like a dead and useless limb. The words that had
been interwoven in the very being of the beast have been unravelled
and removed: and the living being, in its anatomy, its form, its habits,
its birth and death, appears as though stripped naked. Natural history
ﬁnds its locus in the gap that is now opened up between things and
words – a silent gap, pure of all verbal sedimentation, and yet articulated according to the elements of representation, those same elements
that can now without let or hindrance be named. Things touch against
the banks of discourse because they appear in the hollow space of
representation. It is not therefore at the moment when one gives up
calculation that one ﬁnally begins to observe. We must not see the
constitution of natural history, with the empirical climate in which it
develops, as an experiment forcing entry, willy-nilly, into a knowledge
that was keeping watch on the truth of nature elsewhere; natural history – and this is why it appeared at precisely this moment – is the
space opened up in representation by an analysis which is anticipating
the possibility of naming; it is the possibility of seeing what one will be
able to say, but what one could not say subsequently, or see at a distance, if things and words, distinct from one another, did not, from

141

142 the order of things
the very ﬁrst, communicate in a representation. The descriptive order
proposed for natural history by Linnaeus, long after Jonston, is very
characteristic. According to this order, every chapter dealing with a
given animal should follow the following plan: name, theory, kind,
species, attributes, use, and, to conclude, Litteraria. All the language
deposited upon things by time is pushed back into the very last
category, like a sort of supplement in which discourse is allowed to
recount itself and record discoveries, traditions, beliefs, and poetical
ﬁgures. Before this language of language, it is the thing itself that
appears, in its own characters, but within the reality that has been
patterned from the very outset by the name. The constitution of a
natural science in the classical age is not the eﬀect, either direct or
indirect, of the transference of a rationality formed elsewhere (for
geometrical or mechanical purposes). It is a separate formation, one
that has its own archaeology, even though it is linked (though in a
correlative and simultaneous mode) to the general theory of signs and
to the project for a universal mathesis.
Thus the old word ‘history’ changes its value, and perhaps
rediscovers one of its archaic signiﬁcations. In any case, though it is
true that the historian, for the Greeks, was indeed the individual who
sees and who recounts from the starting-point of his sight, it has not
always been so in our culture. Indeed, it was at a relatively late date, on
the threshold of the Classical age, that he assumed – or resumed – this
role. Until the mid-seventeenth century, the historian’s task was to
establish the great compilation of documents and signs – of everything,
throughout the world, that might form a mark, as it were. It was the
historian’s responsibility to restore to language all the words that had
been buried. His existence was deﬁned not so much by what he saw as
by what he retold, by a secondary speech which pronounced afresh so
many words that had been muﬄed. The Classical age gives history a
quite diﬀerent meaning: that of undertaking a meticulous examination
of things themselves for the ﬁrst time, and then of transcribing what it
has gathered in smooth, neutralized, and faithful words. It is understandable that the ﬁrst form of history constituted in this period of
‘puriﬁcation’ should have been the history of nature. For its construction requires only words applied, without intermediary, to things
themselves. The documents of this new history are not other words,

classifying

texts or records, but unencumbered spaces in which things are juxtaposed: herbariums, collections, gardens; the locus of this history is a
non-temporal rectangle in which, stripped of all commentary, of all
enveloping language, creatures present themselves one beside another,
their surfaces visible, grouped according to their common features, and
thus already virtually analysed, and bearers of nothing but their own
individual names. It is often said that the establishment of botanical
gardens and zoological collections expressed a new curiosity about
exotic plants and animals. In fact, these had already claimed men’s
interest for a long while. What had changed was the space in which it
was possible to see them and from which it was possible to describe
them. To the Renaissance, the strangeness of animals was a spectacle: it
was featured in fairs, in tournaments, in ﬁctitious or real combats, in
reconstitutions of legends in which the bestiary displayed its ageless
fables. The natural history room and the garden, as created in the
Classical period, replace the circular procession of the ‘show’ with the
arrangement of things in a ‘table’. What came surreptitiously into
being between the age of the theatre and that of the catalogue was not
the desire for knowledge, but a new way of connecting things both to
the eye and to discourse. A new way of making history.
We also know what methodological importance these ‘natural’ allocations assumed, at the end of the eighteenth century, in the classiﬁcation of words, languages, roots, documents, records – in short, in the
constitution of a whole environment of history (in the now familiar
sense of the word) in which the nineteenth century was to rediscover,
after this pure tabulation of things, the renewed possibility of talking
about words. And of talking about them, not in the style of commentary, but in a mode that was to be considered as positive, as objective,
as that of natural history.
The ever more complete preservation of what was written, the establishment of archives, then of ﬁling systems for them, the reorganization of libraries, the drawing up of catalogues, indexes, and
inventories, all these things represent, at the end of the Classical age,
not so much a new sensitivity to time, to its past, to the density of
history, as a way of introducing into the language already imprinted on
things, and into the traces it has left, an order of the same type as that
which was being established between living creatures. And it is in this

143

144 the order of things
classiﬁed time, in this squared and spatialized development, that the
historians of the nineteenth century were to undertake the creation of a
history that could at last be ‘true’ – in other words, liberated from
Classical rationality, from its ordering and theodicy: a history restored
to the irruptive violence of time.

III STRUCTURE
Thus arranged and understood, natural history has as a condition of its
possibility the common aﬃnity of things and language with representation; but it exists as a task only in so far as things and language
happen to be separate. It must therefore reduce this distance between
them so as to bring language as close as possible to the observing gaze,
and the things observed as close as possible to words. Natural history is
nothing more than the nomination of the visible. Hence its apparent
simplicity, and that air of naïveté it has from a distance, so simple does
it appear and so obviously imposed by things themselves. One has the
impression that with Tournefort, with Linnaeus or Buﬀon, someone
has at last taken on the task of stating something that had been visible
from the beginning of time, but had remained mute before a sort of
invincible distraction of men’s eyes. In fact, it was not an age-old
inattentiveness being suddenly dissipated, but a new ﬁeld of visibility
being constituted in all its density.
Natural history did not become possible because men looked harder
and more closely. One might say, strictly speaking, that the Classical
age used its ingenuity, if not to see as little as possible, at least to restrict
deliberately the area of its experience. Observation, from the seventeenth century onward, is a perceptible knowledge furnished with a
series of systematically negative conditions. Hearsay is excluded, that
goes without saying; but so are taste and smell, because their lack of
certainty and their variability render impossible any analysis into distinct elements that could be universally acceptable. The sense of touch
is very narrowly limited to the designation of a few fairly evident
distinctions (such as that between smooth and rough); which leaves
sight with an almost exclusive privilege, being the sense by which we
perceive extent and establish proof, and, in consequence, the means to
an analysis partes extra partes acceptable to everyone: the blind man in the

classifying

eighteenth century can perfectly well be a geometrician, but he cannot
be a naturalist.3 And, even then, everything that presents itself to our
gaze is not utilizable: colours especially can scarcely serve as a foundation for useful comparisons. The area of visibility in which observation
is able to assume its powers is thus only what is left after these exclusions: a visibility freed from all other sensory burdens and restricted,
moreover, to black and white. This area, much more than the receptivity and attention at last being granted to things themselves, deﬁnes
natural history’s condition of possibility, and the appearance of its
screened objects: lines, surfaces, forms, reliefs.
It may perhaps be claimed that the use of the microscope compensates for these restrictions; and that though sensory experience was
being restricted in the direction of its more doubtful frontiers, it was
nevertheless being extended towards the new objects of a technically
controlled form of observation. In fact, it was the same complex of
negative conditions that limited the realm of experience and made the
use of optical instruments possible. To attempt to improve one’s power
of observation by looking through a lens, one must renounce the
attempt to achieve knowledge by means of the other senses or from
hearsay. A change of scale in the visual sphere must have more value
than the correlations between the various kinds of evidence that may
be provided by one’s impressions, one’s reading, or learned compilations. Though indeﬁnite conﬁnement of the visible within its own
extent is made more easily perceptible to the eye by a microscope, it is
nevertheless not freed from it. And the best proof of this is probably
that optical instruments were used above all as a means of resolving
problems of generation. In other words, as a means of discovering how
the forms, arrangements, and characteristic proportions of individual
adults, and of their species, could be handed on down the centuries
while preserving their strictly deﬁned identity. The microscope was
called upon not to go beyond the frontiers of the fundamental domain
of visibility, but to resolve one of the problems it posed: the maintenance of speciﬁc visible forms from generation to generation. The use of
the microscope was based upon a non-instrumental relation between
things and the human eye – a relation that deﬁnes natural history. It
was Linnaeus, after all, who said that Naturalia – as opposed to Coelestia
and Elementa – were intended to be transmitted directly to the senses.4

145

146 the order of things
And Tournefort thought that, in order to gain a knowledge of plants,
‘rather than scrutinize each of their variations with a religious scruple’,
it was better to analyse them ‘as they fall beneath the gaze’.5
To observe, then, is to be content with seeing – with seeing a few
things systematically. With seeing what, in the rather confused wealth
of representation, can be analysed, recognized by all, and thus given a
name that everyone will be able to understand: ‘All obscure similitudes,’ said Linnaeus, ‘are introduced only to the shame of art’.6
Displayed in themselves, emptied of all resemblances, cleansed even of
their colours, visual representations will now at last be able to provide
natural history with what constitutes its proper object, with precisely
what it will convey in the well-made language it intends to construct.
This object is the extension of which all natural beings are constituted –
an extension that may be aﬀected by four variables. And by four
variables only: the form of the elements, the quantity of those elements, the manner in which they are distributed in space in relation to
each other, and the relative magnitude of each element. As Linnaeus
said, in a passage of capital importance, ‘every note should be a product
of number, of form, of proportion, of situation’.7 For example, when
one studies the reproductive organs of a plant, it is suﬃcient, but
indispensable, to enumerate the stamens and pistil (or to record their
absence, according to the case), to deﬁne the form they assume,
according to what geometrical ﬁgure they are distributed in the ﬂower
(circle, hexagon, triangle), and what their size is in relation to the other
organs. These four variables, which can be applied in the same way to
the ﬁve parts of the plant – roots, stem, leaves, ﬂowers, fruits – specify
the extension available to representation well enough for us to articulate it into a description acceptable to everyone: confronted with the
same individual entity, everyone will be able to give the same description; and, inversely, given such a description everyone will be able to
recognize the individual entities that correspond to it. In this fundamental articulation of the visible, the ﬁrst confrontation of language
and things can now be established in a manner that excludes all
uncertainty.
Each visibly distinct part of a plant or an animal is thus describable
in so far as four series of values are applicable to it. These four
values aﬀecting, and determining, any given element or organ are what

classifying

botanists term its structure. ‘By the structure of a plant’s parts we mean
the composition and arrangement of the pieces that make up its
body.’8 Structure also makes possible the description of what one
sees, and this in two ways which are neither contradictory nor mutually exclusive. Number and magnitude can always be assigned by
means of a count or a measure; they can therefore be expressed
in quantitative terms. Forms and arrangements, on the other hand,
must be described by other methods: either by identiﬁcation with
geometrical ﬁgures, or by analogies that must all be ‘of the utmost
clarity’.9 In this way it becomes possible to describe certain fairly
complex forms on the basis of their very visible resemblance to
the human body, which serves as a sort of reservoir for models of
visibility, and acts as a spontaneous link between what one can see and
what one can say.10
By limiting and ﬁltering the visible, structure enables it to be transcribed into language. It permits the visibility of the animal or plant to
pass over in its entirety into the discourse that receives it. And ultimately, perhaps, it may manage to reconstitute itself in visible form by
means of words, as with the botanical calligrams dreamed of by Linnaeus.11 His wish was that the order of the description, its division
into paragraphs, and even its typographical modules, should reproduce
the form of the plant itself. That the printed text, in its variables of
form, arrangement, and quantity, should have a vegetable structure. ‘It
is beautiful to follow nature: to pass from the Root to the Stems, to the
Petioles, to the Leaves, to the Peduncles, to the Flowers.’ The description would have to be divided into the same number of paragraphs as
there are parts in the plant, everything concerning its principal parts
being printed in large type, and the analysis of the ‘parts of parts’ being
conveyed in small type. One would then add what one knew of the
plant from other sources in the same way as an artist completes his
sketch by introducing the interplay of light and shade: ‘the Adumbration would exactly contain the whole history of the plant, such as its
names, its structure, its external assemblage, its nature, its use.’ The
plant is thus engraved in the material of the language into which it has
been transposed, and recomposes its pure form before the reader’s very
eyes. The book becomes the herbarium of living structures. And let no
one reply that this is merely the reverie of a systematizer and does not

147

148 the order of things
represent the whole of natural history. Buﬀon was a constant adversary
of Linnaeus, yet the same structure exists in his work and plays the
same role: ‘The method of examination will be directed towards form,
magnitude, the diﬀerent parts, their number, their position, and the
very substance of the thing’.12 Buﬀon and Linnaeus employ the
same grid; their gaze occupies the same surface of contact upon things;
there are the same black squares left to accommodate the invisible; the
same open and distinct spaces to accommodate words.
By means of structure, what representation provides in a confused
and simultaneous form is analysed and thereby rendered suitable to the
linear unwinding of language. In eﬀect, description is to the object one
looks at what the proposition is to the representation it expresses: its
arrangement in a series, elements succeeding elements. But it will be
remembered that language in its empirical form implied a theory of
the proposition and a theory of articulation. In itself, the proposition
remained empty; and the ability of articulation to give form to
authentic discourse was conditional upon its being linked together
by the patent or secret function of the verb to be. Natural history is a
science, that is, a language, but a securely based and well-constructed
one: its propositional unfolding is indisputably an articulation; the
arrangement of its elements into a linear series patterns representation according to an evident and universal mode. Whereas one and
the same representation can give rise to a considerable number of
propositions, since the names that embody it articulate it according
to diﬀerent modes, one and the same animal, or one and the same
plant, will be described in the same way, in so far as their structure
governs their passage from representation into language. The theory
of structure, which runs right through natural history in the Classical
age, superimposes the roles played in language by the proposition and
articulation in such a way that they perform one and the same
function.
And it is by this means that structure links the possibility of a natural
history to the mathesis. In fact, it reduces the whole area of the visible
to a system of variables all of whose values can be designated, if not
by a quantity, at least by a perfectly clear and always ﬁnite description.
It is therefore possible to establish the system of identities and the
order of diﬀerences existing between natural entities. Adanson was of

classifying

the opinion that one day it would be possible to treat botany as a
rigorously mathematical science, and that it would prove permissible
to pose botanical problems in the same way as one does algebraic or
geometrical ones: ‘ﬁnd the most obvious point that establishes the line
of separation or discussion between the scabious family and the honeysuckle family’; or again, ﬁnd a known genus of plants (whether natural
or artiﬁcial is unimportant) that stands exactly half-way between
Dog’s-bane and Borage.13 By virtue of structure, the great proliferation of beings occupying the surface of the globe is able to enter both
into the sequence of a descriptive language and into the ﬁeld of a
mathesis that would also be a general science of order. And this constituent relation, complex as it is, is established within the apparent
simplicity of a description of the visible.
All this is of great importance for the deﬁnition of natural history in
terms of its object. The latter is provided by surfaces and lines, not by
functions or invisible tissues. The plant and the animal are seen not so
much in their organic unity as by the visible patterning of their organs.
They are paws and hoofs, ﬂowers and fruits, before being respiratory
systems or internal liquids. Natural history traverses an area of visible,
simultaneous, concomitant variables, without any internal relation of
subordination or organization. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries anatomy lost the leading role that it had played during the
Renaissance and that it was to resume in Cuvier’s day; it was not that
curiosity had diminished in the meantime, or that knowledge had
regressed, but rather that the fundamental arrangement of the visible
and the expressible no longer passed through the thickness of the body.
Hence the epistemological precedence enjoyed by botany: the area
common to words and things constituted a much more accommodating, a much less ‘black’ grid for plants than for animals; in so far as
there are a great many constituent organs visible in a plant that are not
so in animals, taxonomic knowledge based upon immediately perceptible variables was richer and more coherent in the botanical order
than in the zoological. We must therefore reverse what is usually said
on this subject: it is not because there was a great interest in botany
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that so much investigation was undertaken into methods of classiﬁcation. But because it
was possible to know and to say only within a taxonomic area of

149

150 the order of things
visibility, the knowledge of plants was bound to prove more extensive
than that of animals.
At the institutional level, the inevitable correlatives of this patterning
were botanical gardens and natural history collections. And their
importance, for Classical culture, does not lie essentially in what they
make it possible to see, but in what they hide and in what, by this
process of obliteration, they allow to emerge: they screen oﬀ anatomy
and function, they conceal the organism, in order to raise up before the
eyes of those who await the truth the visible relief of forms, with their
elements, their mode of distribution, and their measurements. They are
books furnished with structures, the space in which characteristics
combine, and in which classiﬁcations are physically displayed. One
day, towards the end of the eighteenth century, Cuvier was to topple
the glass jars of the Museum, smash them open and dissect all the
forms of animal visibility that the Classical age had preserved in them.
This iconoclastic gesture, which Lamarck could never bring himself to
make, does not reveal a new curiosity directed towards a secret that no
one had the interest or courage to uncover, or the possibility of
uncovering, before. It is rather, and much more seriously, a mutation in
the natural dimension of Western culture: the end of history in the sense
in which it was understood by Tournefort, Linnaeus, Buﬀon, and
Adanson – and in the sense in which it was understood by Boissier de
Sauvages also, when he opposed historical knowledge of the visible to
philosophical knowledge of the invisible, of what is hidden and of
causes.14 And it was also to be the beginning of what, by substituting anatomy for classiﬁcation, organism for structure, internal subordination for visible character, the series for tabulation, was to make
possible the precipitation into the old ﬂat world of animals and plants,
engraved in black on white, a whole profound mass of time to which
men were to give the renewed name of history.

IV CHARACTER
Structure is that designation of the visible which, by means of a kind of
pre-linguistic sifting, enables it to be transcribed into language. But the
description thus obtained is nothing more than a sort of proper noun:
it leaves each being its strict individuality and expresses neither the

classifying

table to which it belongs, nor the area surrounding it, nor the site it
occupies. It is designation pure and simple. And for natural history to
become language, the description must become a ‘common noun’. It
has been seen how, in spontaneous language, the primary designations,
which concerned only individual representations, after having originated in the language of action and the resultant primitive roots, had
little by little, through the momentum of derivation, acquired more
general values. But natural history is a well-constructed language: it
should not accept the constraint imposed by derivation and its forms; it
should not lend credit to any etymology.15 It should unite in one
and the same operation what everyday language keeps separate: not
only must it designate all natural entities very precisely, but it must also
situate them within the system of identities and diﬀerences that unites
them to and distinguishes them from all the others. Natural history
must provide, simultaneously, a certain designation and a controlled derivation. And just as the theory of structure superimposed articulation and
the proposition so that they became one and the same, so the theory of
character must identify the values that designate and the area in which
they are derived. Tournefort says:
To know plants is to know with precision the names that have been
given to them in relation to the structure of some of their parts . . . The
idea of the character that essentially distinguishes plants from one
another ought invariably to be one with the name of each plant.16

Establishing character is at the same time easy and diﬃcult. Easy,
because natural history does not have to establish a system of names
based upon representations that are diﬃcult to analyse, but only to
derive it from a language that has already been unfolded in the process
of description. The process of naming will be based, not upon what
one sees, but upon elements that have already been introduced into
discourse by structure. It is a matter of constructing a secondary language based upon that primary, but certain and universal, language.
But a major diﬃculty appears immediately. In order to establish the
identities and diﬀerences existing between all natural entities, it would
be necessary to take into account every feature that might have been
listed in a given description. Such an endless task would push the

151

152 the order of things
advent of natural history back into an inaccessible never-never land,
unless there existed techniques that would avoid this diﬃculty and
limit the labour of making so many comparisons. It is possible, a priori,
to state that these techniques are of two types. Either that of making
total comparisons, but only within empirically constituted groups in
which the number of resemblances is manifestly so high that the enumeration of the diﬀerences will not take long to complete; and in this
way, step by step, the establishment of all identities and distinctions can
be guaranteed. Or that of selecting a ﬁnite and relatively limited group
of characteristics, whose variations and constants may be studied in
any individual entity that presents itself. This last procedure was termed
the System, the ﬁrst the Method. They are usually contrasted, in the
same way as Linnaeus is contrasted with Buﬀon, Adanson, or AntoineLaurent de Jussieu – or as a rigid and simple conception of nature is
contrasted with the detailed and immediate perception of its relations,
or as the idea of a motionless nature is contrasted with that of a teeming continuity of beings all communicating with one another, mingling with one another, and perhaps being transformed into one
another. . . . And yet the essential does not lie in this conﬂict between
the great intuitions of nature. It lies rather in the network of necessity
which at this point rendered the choice between two ways of constituting natural history as a language both possible and indispensable. The
rest is merely a logical and inevitable consequence.
From the elements that the System juxtaposes in great detail by means
of description, it selects a particular few. These deﬁne the privileged
and, in fact, exclusive structure in relation to which identities or diﬀerences as a whole are to be examined. Any diﬀerence not related to one
of these elements will be considered irrelevant. If, like Linnaeus, one
selects as the characteristic elements ‘all the diﬀerent parts related to
fructiﬁcation’,17 then a diﬀerence of leaf or stem or root or petiole
must be systematically ignored. Similarly, any identity not occurring in
one of these selected elements will have no value in the deﬁnition of
the character. On the other hand, when these elements are similar in
two individuals they receive a common denomination. The structure
selected to be the locus of pertinent identities and diﬀerences is what is
termed the character. According to Linnaeus, the character should be
composed of ‘the most careful description of the fructiﬁcation of the

classifying

ﬁrst species. All the other species of the genus are compared with the
ﬁrst, all discordant notes being eliminated; ﬁnally, after this process,
the character emerges’.18
The system is arbitrary in its basis, since it deliberately ignores all
diﬀerences and all identities not related to the selected structure. But
there is no law that says that it will not be possible to arrive one day,
through a use of this technique, at the discovery of a natural system –
one in which all the diﬀerences in the character would correspond to
diﬀerences of the same value in the plant’s general structure; and in
which, inversely, all the individuals or all the species grouped together
under a common character would in fact have the same relation of
resemblance in all and each of their parts. But one cannot ﬁnd the way
to this natural system unless one has ﬁrst established with certainty an
artiﬁcial system, at least in certain of the vegetable or animal domains.
This is why Linnaeus does not seek to establish a natural system
immediately, ‘before a complete knowledge has been attained of everything that is relevant’19 to his system. It is true that the natural
method constitutes ‘the ﬁrst and last wish of botanists’, and that all its
‘fragments should be searched for with the greatest care’,20 as Linnaeus himself searches for them in his Classes Plantarum; but until this
natural method appears in its certain and ﬁnished form, ‘artiﬁcial
systems are absolutely necessary’.21
Moreover, the system is relative: it is able to function according to a
desired degree of precision. If the selected character is composed of a
large structure, having a large number of variables, then as soon as one
passes from one individual to another, even if it is immediately
adjacent, the diﬀerences will appear at once: the character in this case is
very close to pure description.22 If, on the other hand, the selected
structure is limited in extent, and its variables few, then the diﬀerences
will be rare and the individuals grouped in compact masses. The character is chosen according to the degree of detail required in the classiﬁcation. In order to establish genera, Tournefort chose the combination
of ﬂower and fruit as his character. Not, as with Cesalpino, because
these were the most useful parts of the plant, but because they permitted a numerically satisfying combinability: the elements that would be
taken from the other three parts (roots, stems, and leaves) were, in
eﬀect, either too numerous if treated together or too few if taken

153

154 the order of things
separately.23 Linnaeus calculated that the thirty-eight organs of
reproduction, each comprising the four variables of number, form,
situation, and proportion, would produce 5,776 conﬁgurations, or
suﬃcient to deﬁne the genera.24 If one wishes to obtain groups
more numerous than genera, then one must make use of more limited
characters (‘factitious characters agreed upon between botanists’), as,
for example, the stamens alone, or the pistil alone. In this way one
would be able to distinguish classes or orders.25
In this way, a grid can be laid out over the entire vegetable or animal
kingdom. Each group can be given a name. With the result that any
species, without having to be described, can be designated with the
greatest accuracy by means of the names of the diﬀerent groups in
which it is included. Its complete name will cross the entire network of
characters that one has established, right up to the largest classiﬁcations
of all. But for convenience, as Linnaeus points out, part of this name
should remain ‘silent’ (one does not name the class and order), while
the other part should be ‘sounded’ (one must name the genus, the
species, and the variety.26 The plant thus recognized in its essential
character and designated upon that basis will express at the same time
that which accurately designates it and the relation linking it to those
plants that resemble it and belong to the same genus (and thus to the
same family and the same order). It will have been given at the same
time its proper name and the whole series of common names (manifest or hidden) in which it resides. ‘The generic name is, as it were, the
oﬃcial currency of our botanical republic’.27 Natural history will
have accomplished its fundamental task, which is that of ‘arrangement
and designation’.28
The Method is another technique for resolving the same problem.
Instead of selecting, from the totality described, the elements –
whether few or numerous – that are to be used as characters, the
method consists in deducing them stage by stage. Deduction is to be
taken here in the sense of subtraction. One begins – as Adanson did in
his examination of the plants of Senegal29 – with a species either
arbitrarily chosen or encountered by chance. One describes it in its
entirety, leaving out none of its parts and determining all the values
that the variables have derived from it. This process is repeated with
the next species, also given by the arbitrary nature of representation; the

classifying

description should be as total as in the ﬁrst instance, but with the one
diﬀerence that nothing that has been mentioned in the ﬁrst description should be repeated in the second. Only the diﬀerences are listed.
And similarly with the third species in relation to the ﬁrst two, and so
on indeﬁnitely. So that, at the very end, all the diﬀerent features of all
the plants have been listed once, but never more than once. And by
arranging the later and progressively more sparse descriptions around
the earlier ones, we shall be able to perceive, through the original
chaos, the emergence of the general table of relations. The character
that distinguishes each species or each genus is the only feature
picked out from the background of tacit identities. Indeed, such a
technique would probably be the most reliable, only the number of
existing species is so great that it would be impossible to deal with
them all. Nevertheless, the examination of such species as we do meet
with reveals the existence of great ‘families’, of very broad groups in
which the species and the genera have a considerable number of
identities. So considerable, indeed, that they signalize themselves by a
very large number of characteristics, even to the least analytic eye; the
resemblance between all the species of Ranunculus, or between all the
species of Aconite, is immediately apparent to the senses. At this
point, in order to prevent the task becoming inﬁnite, one is obliged to
reverse the process. One admits the existence of the great families that
are manifestly recognizable, and whose general features have been
deﬁned, as it were blindfold, by the ﬁrst descriptions of them. These
are the common features that we now establish in a positive way;
then, whenever we meet with a genus or species that is manifestly
contained by them, it will suﬃce to indicate what diﬀerence distinguishes it from the others that serve it as a sort of natural entourage. A knowledge of each species can be acquired easily upon the
basis of this general characterization: ‘We shall divide each of the
three kingdoms into several families which will group together all
those beings that are strikingly related, and we shall review all the
general and particular characters of the beings contained within those
families’; in this way
we shall be assured of relating all these beings to their natural families; and thus, beginning with the ferret and the wolf, the dog and the

155

156 the order of things
bear, we shall come to know sufﬁcient about the lion, the tiger, and
the hyena, which are animals of the same family.30

It is immediately apparent in what way the method and the system
are opposed. There can be only one method; but one can invent and
apply a considerable number of systems: Adanson alone set out sixtyﬁve.31 The system is arbitrary throughout its development, but once
the system of variables – the character – has been deﬁned at the outset,
it is no longer possible to modify it, to add or subtract even one
element. The method is imposed from without, by the total resemblances that relate things together; it immediately transcribes perception into discourse; it remains, in its point of departure, very close to
description; but it is always possible to apply to the general character it
has deﬁned empirically such modiﬁcations as may be imposed: a feature one had thought essential to a whole group of plants or animals
may very well prove to be no more than a particularity of a few of
them, if one discovers others that, without possessing that feature,
belong quite obviously to the same family; the method must always be
ready to rectify itself. As Adanson says, the system is like ‘the trial and
error method in mathematics’: it is the result of a decision, but it must
be absolutely coherent; the method, on the other hand, is
a given arrangement of objects or facts grouped together according to
certain given conventions or resemblances, which one expresses by a
general notion applicable to all those objects, without, however,
regarding that fundamental notion or principle as absolute or invariable, or as so general that it cannot suffer any exception . . . The
method differs from the system only in the idea that the author
attaches to his principles, regarding them as variables in the method
and as absolutes in the system.32

Moreover, the system can recognize only relations of coordination
between animal or vegetable structures. Since the character is selected,
not on account of its functional importance but on account of its
combinative eﬃcacity, there is no proof that in the internal hierarchy
of any individual plant such and such a form of pistil or arrangement
of stamens necessarily entails such and such a structure: if the germ of

classifying

the Adoxa is placed between the calyx and the corolla, or if, in the
arum, the stamens are arranged between the pistils, these are nothing
more or less than ‘singular structures’;33 their slight importance is a
product of their rarity alone, whereas the equal division of calyx and
corolla derives its value only from its frequency.34 The method, on
the other hand, because it proceeds from identities and diﬀerences of
the most general kind to those that are less so, is capable of bringing
out vertical relations of subordination. It enables us, in fact, to see
which characters are important enough never to be negated within a
given family. In relation to the system, the reversal is very important:
the most essential characters make it possible to distinguish the largest
and most visibly distinct families, whereas, for Tournefort or Linnaeus,
the essential character deﬁned the genus; and it was suﬃcient for the
naturalists’ ‘agreement’ to select a factitious character that would distinguish between classes or orders. In the method, general organization
and its internal dependencies are more important than the lateral
application of a constant apparatus of variables.
Despite these diﬀerences, both system and method rest upon the
same epistemological base. It can be deﬁned brieﬂy by saying that, in
Classical terms, a knowledge of empirical individuals can be acquired
only from the continuous, ordered, and universal tabulation of all possible diﬀerences. In the sixteenth century, the identity of plants or
animals was assured by the positive mark (sometimes hidden, often
visible) which they all bore: what distinguished the various species of
birds, for instance, was not the diﬀerences that existed between them but
the fact that this one hunted its food at night, that another lived on the
water, that yet another fed on living ﬂesh.35 Every being bore a
mark, and the species was measured by the extent of a common
emblem. So that each species identiﬁed itself by itself, expressed its
individuality independently of all the others: it would have been perfectly possible for all those others not to exist, since the criteria of
deﬁnition would not thereby have been modiﬁed for those that
remained visible. But, from the seventeenth century, there can no
longer be any signs except in the analysis of representations according
to identities and diﬀerences. That is, all designation must be accomplished by means of a certain relation to all other possible designations.
To know what properly appertains to one individual is to have before

157

158 the order of things
one the classiﬁcation – or the possibility of classifying – all others.
Identity and what marks it are deﬁned by the diﬀerences that remain.
An animal or a plant is not what is indicated – or betrayed – by the
stigma that is to be found imprinted upon it; it is what the others are
not; it exists in itself only in so far as it is bounded by what is
distinguishable from it. Method and system are simply two ways of
deﬁning identities by means of the general grid of diﬀerences. Later
on, beginning with Cuvier, the identity of species was to be determined in the same way by a set of diﬀerences, but the diﬀerences were
in this case to emerge from the background of the great organic unities
possessing their own internal systems of dependencies (skeleton, respiration, circulation); the invertebrates were to be deﬁned, not only by
their lack of vertebrae, but also by a certain mode of respiration, by the
existence of a type of circulation, and by a whole organic cohesiveness
outlining a positive unity. The internal laws of the organism were to
replace diﬀerential characters as the object of the natural sciences. Classiﬁcation, as a fundamental and constituent problem of natural history,
took up its position historically, and in a necessary fashion, between a
theory of the mark and a theory of the organism.

V CONTINUITY AND CATASTROPHE
At the heart of this well-constructed language that natural history has
become, one problem remains. It is possible after all that the transformation of structure into character may never be possible, and that
the common noun may never be able to emerge from the proper noun.
Who can guarantee that the descriptions, once made, are not going to
display elements that vary so much from one individual to the next, or
from one species to the next, that any attempt to use them as the basis
for a common noun would be doomed in advance? Who can be certain
that each structure is not strictly isolated from every other structure,
and that it will not function as an individual mark? In order that the
simplest character can become apparent, it is essential that at least one
element in the structure examined ﬁrst should be repeated in another.
For the general order of diﬀerences that makes it possible to establish
the arrangement of species implies a certain number of similarities.
The problem here is isomorphic with the one we have already met in

classifying

relation to language:36 for a common noun to be possible, there had
to be an immediate resemblance between things that permitted the
signifying elements to move along the representations, to slide across
the surface of them, to cling to their similarities and thus, ﬁnally, to
form collective designations. But in order to outline this rhetorical
space in which nouns gradually took on their general value, there was
no need to determine the status of that resemblance, or whether it was
founded upon truth; it was suﬃcient for it to strike the imagination
with suﬃcient force. In natural history, however, which is a wellconstructed language, these analogies of the imagination cannot have
the value of guarantees; and since natural history is threatened, like all
language, by the radical doubt that Hume brought to bear upon the
necessity for repetition in experience, it must ﬁnd a way of avoiding
that threat. There must be continuity in nature.
This requirement that nature should be continuous does not take
exactly the same form in the systems as it does in the methods. For the
systematician, continuity consists only of the unbroken juxtaposition
of the diﬀerent regions that can be clearly distinguished by means of
characters; all that is required is an uninterrupted gradation of the
values that the structure selected as a character can assume in the
species as a whole; starting from this principle, it will become apparent
that all these values are occupied by real beings, even though they may
not yet be known. ‘The system indicates the plants, even those it has
not mentioned; which is something that the enumeration of a catalogue can never do’.37 And the categories will not simply be arbitrary conventions laid out over this continuity of juxtaposition; they
will correspond (if they have been properly established) to areas that
have a distinct existence on this uninterrupted surface of nature; they will be
areas that are larger than individuals but just as real. In this way, according to Linnaeus, the reproductive system made it possible to establish
the existence of indisputably well-founded genera: ‘Know that it is
not the character that constitutes the genus, but the genus that constitutes the character, that the character derives from the genus, not the
genus from the character’.38 In the methods, on the other hand,
since resemblances – in their massive and clearly evident form – are
posited to start with, the continuity of nature will not be this purely
negative postulate (no blank spaces between distinct categories), but a

159

160 the order of things
positive requirement: all nature forms one great fabric in which beings
resemble one another from one to the next, in which adjacent individuals are inﬁnitely similar to each other; so that any dividing-line that
indicates, not the minute diﬀerence of the individual, but broader
categories, is always unreal. There is a continuity produced by fusion in
which all generality is nominal. Our general ideas, says Buﬀon,
are relative to a continuous scale of objects of which we can clearly
perceive only the middle rungs and whose extremities increasingly ﬂee
from and escape our considerations . . . The more we increase the
number of divisions in the productions of nature, the closer we shall
approach to the true, since nothing really exists in nature except individuals, and since genera, orders, and classes exist only in our
imagination.39

And Bonnet, meaning much the same thing, said:
There are no leaps in nature: everything in it is graduated, shaded. If
there were an empty space between any two beings, what reason
would there be for proceeding from the one to the other? There is thus
no being above and below which there are not other beings that are
united to it by some characters and separated from it by others.

It is therefore always possible to discover ‘intermediate productions’,
such as the polyp between the animal and the vegetable, the ﬂying
squirrel between the bird and the quadruped, the monkey between the
quadruped and man. Consequently, our divisions into species and
classes ‘are purely nominal’; they represent no more than ‘means
relative to our needs and to the limitations of our knowledge’.40
In the eighteenth century, the continuity of nature is a requirement
of all natural history, that is, of any eﬀort to establish an order in nature
and to discover general categories within it, whether they be real and
prescribed by obvious distinctions or a matter of convenience and
quite simply a pattern produced by our imagination. Only continuity
can guarantee that nature repeats itself and that structure can, in
consequence, become character. But this requirement immediately
becomes a double one. For if it were given to experience, in its

classifying

uninterrupted momentum, to traverse exactly, step by step, the great
continuity comprising individuals, varieties, species, genera, and
classes, there would be no need to constitute a science; descriptive
designations would attain to generality quite freely, and the language
of things would be constituted as scientiﬁc discourse by its own
spontaneous momentum. The identities of nature would be presented
to the imagination as though spelled out letter by letter, and the
spontaneous shift of words within their rhetorical space would
reproduce, with perfect exactitude, the identity of beings with their
increasing generality. Natural history would become useless, or rather
it would already have been written by man’s everyday language;
general grammar would at the same time be the universal taxonomy of
beings. But if a natural history perfectly distinct from the analysis of
words is indispensable, that is because experience does not reveal the
continuity of nature as such, but gives it to us both broken up – since
there are a great many gaps in the series of values eﬀectively occupied
by the variables (there are possible creatures whose place in the grid
one can note without ever having had the opportunity to observe
them) – and blurred, since the real, geographic and terrestrial space in
which we ﬁnd ourselves confronts us with creatures that are interwoven with one another, in an order which, in relation to the great
network of taxonomies, is nothing more than chance, disorder, or
turbulence. Linnaeus pointed out that, by associating the hydra (which
is an animal) and the conferva (which is an alga), or the sponge and
the coral, in the same localities, nature is not, as the order of our classiﬁcations would have it, linking together ‘the most perfect plants with
the animals termed very imperfect, but combining imperfect animals
with imperfect plants’.41 And Adanson remarked that nature is
a confused mingling of beings that seem to have been brought
together by chance: here, gold is mixed with another metal, with stone,
with earth; there, the violet grows side by side with an oak. Among
these plants, too, wander the quadruped, the reptile, and the insect;
the ﬁshes are confused, one might say, with the aqueous element in
which they swim, and with the plants that grow in the depths of the
waters . . . This mixture is indeed so general and so multifarious that it
appears to be one of nature’s laws.42

161

162 the order of things
Now, this great mixture is the result of a chronological series of
events. And these events have their point of origin and their primary
locus of application, not in the living species themselves, but in the
space in which those species reside. They are produced in the relation
of the Earth to the Sun, in climatic conditions, in the movements of the
earth’s crust; what they aﬀect ﬁrst are the oceans and the continents,
the surface of the globe; living beings are aﬀected only indirectly and
in a secondary way: they are attracted or driven away by heat; volcanoes
destroy them; they disappear with the land that crumbles away beneath
them. It is possible, as Buﬀon, for example, supposed,43 that the
earth was originally incandescent, before gradually growing colder; the
animals, accustomed to living in very high temperatures, then
regrouped themselves in the only region that still remains torrid,
whereas the temperate or cold lands were peopled by species that had
not had the opportunity to appear until that time. With the revolutions
in the history of the earth, the taxonomic area (in which adjacencies
are of the order of character and not of modus vivendi) was divided up into a
concrete and geographical area that jumbled it all up. Moreover, it was
probably broken up into fragments, and many species, adjacent to
those we know or intermediary between taxonomic squares familiar to
us, must have disappeared, leaving nothing behind them but traces
diﬃcult to decipher. In any case, this historical series of events is an
addition to the expanse of beings: it does not properly appertain to it;
its development lies in the real dimension of the world, not the analytic
one of classiﬁcations; what it calls into question is the world as a locus
for beings, not the beings themselves in so far as they have the property
of being alive. There is a historicity, symbolized by the biblical
accounts, which aﬀects our astronomic system directly and the taxonomic grid of species indirectly; and apart from Genesis and the Flood,
it is very possible that
our globe underwent other revolutions that have not been revealed to
us. It is connected to the whole astronomic system, and the links that
join this globe to the other celestial bodies, in particular to the Sun
and the comets, could have been the source of many revolutions that
have left no traces perceptible to us, but of which the inhabitants of
neighbouring worlds may perhaps have some knowledge.44

classifying

To be able to exist as a science, natural history must, then,
presuppose two groupings. One of them is constituted by the continuous network of beings; this continuity may take various spatial forms;
Charles Bonnet thinks of it sometimes as a great linear scale of which
one extremity is very simple, the other very complicated, with a narrow intermediary region – the only one that is visible to us – in the
centre; sometimes as a central trunk from which there is a branch
forking out on one side (that of the shellﬁsh, with the crabs and crayﬁsh as supplementary ramiﬁcations) and the series of insects on the
other, branching out to include the frogs;45 Buﬀon deﬁnes this same
continuity ‘as a wide woven strip, or rather a bundle which every so
often puts out side branches that join it up with the bundles of another
order’;46 Pallas sees it as a polyhedric ﬁgure;47 Hermann wished
to constitute a three-dimensional model composed of threads all starting from a common point of origin, separating from one another,
‘spreading out through a very great number of lateral branches’, then
coming together again.48 The series of events, however, is quite
distinct from these spatial conﬁgurations, each of which describes the
taxonomic continuity in its own way; the series of events is discontinuous, and diﬀerent in each of its episodes; but, as a whole, it can
be drawn only as a simple line, which is that of time itself (and which
can be conceived as straight, broken, or circular). In its concrete form,
and in the depth that is proper to it, nature resides wholly between the
fabric of the taxinomia and the line of revolutions. The tabulations that it
forms in the eyes of men, and that it is the task of the discourse of
science to traverse, are the fragments of the great surface of living
species that are apparent according to the way it has been patterned,
burst open, and frozen, between two temporal revolutions.
It will be seen how superﬁcial it is to oppose, as two diﬀerent opinions confronting one another in their fundamental options, a ‘ﬁxism’
that is content to classify the beings of nature in a permanent tabulation, and a sort of ‘evolutionism’ that is supposed to believe in an
immemorial history of nature and in a deep-rooted, onward urge of all
beings throughout its continuity. The solidity, without gaps, of a network of species and genera, and the series of events that have blurred
that network, both belong, at the same level, to the epistemological
foundation that made a body of knowledge like natural history possible

163

164 the order of things
in the Classical age. They are not two ways of perceiving nature,
radically opposed because deeply rooted in philosophical choices older
and more fundamental than any science; they are two simultaneous
requirements in the archaeological network that deﬁnes the knowledge
of nature in the Classical age. But these two requirements are complementary, and therefore irreducible. The temporal series cannot be integrated into the gradation of beings. The eras of nature do not prescribe
the internal time of beings and their continuity; they dictate the intemperate interruptions that have constantly dispersed them, destroyed
them, mingled them, separated them, and interwoven them. There is
not and cannot be even the suspicion of an evolutionism or a transformism in Classical thought; for time is never conceived as a principle
of development for living beings in their internal organization; it is
perceived only as the possible bearer of a revolution in the external
space in which they live.

VI MONSTERS AND FOSSILS
It will be objected that, long before Lamarck, there already existed a
whole body of thought of the evolutionist type. That its importance
was considerable in the middle of the eighteenth century, and up to the
sudden halt marked by the work of Cuvier. That Bonnet, Maupertuis,
Diderot, Robinet, and Benoît de Maillet all very clearly articulated the
idea that living forms may pass from one into another, that the present
species are no doubt the result of former transformations, and that the
whole of the living world is perhaps in motion towards a future point,
so that one cannot guarantee of any living form that it has been deﬁnitively acquired and is now stabilized forever. In fact, such analyses are
incompatible with what we understand today by evolutionary thought.
They are concerned, in fact, with linking the table of identities and
diﬀerences to the series of successive events. And in order to conceive
of the unity of that table and that series they have only two means at
their disposal.
The ﬁrst consists of integrating the series of successions with the
continuity of the beings and their distribution over the table. All the
creatures that taxonomy has arranged in an uninterrupted simultaneity
are then subjected to time. Not in the sense that the temporal series

classifying

would give rise to a multiplicity of species that a horizontally oriented
eye could then arrange according to the requirements of a classifying
grid, but in the sense that all the points of the taxonomy are aﬀected by
a temporal index, with the result that ‘evolution’ is nothing more than
the interdependent and general displacement of the whole scale from
the ﬁrst of its elements to the last. This system is that of Charles Bonnet.
He implies in the ﬁrst place that the chain of being, stretching up
through an innumerable series of links towards the perfection of God,
does not at present attain to it;49 that the distance between God and
the least defective of his creatures is still inﬁnite; and that across this,
perhaps unbridgeable, distance the whole uninterrupted fabric of
beings is ceaselessly advancing towards a greater perfection. He implies
further that this ‘evolution’ keeps intact the relation that exists between
the diﬀerent species: if one of them, in the process of perfecting itself,
should attain the degree of complexity possessed beforehand by the
species one step higher, this does not mean that the latter has thereby
been overtaken, because, carried onward by the same momentum, it
cannot avoid perfecting itself to an equivalent degree:
There will be a continual and more or less slow progress of all the
species towards a superior perfection, with the result that all the
degrees of the scale will be continually variable within a determined
and constant relation . . . Man, once transported to an abode more
suited to the eminence of his faculties, will leave to the monkey and
the elephant that foremost place that he occupied before among the
animals of our planet . . . There will be Newtons among the monkeys
and Vaubans among the beavers. The oysters and the polyps will stand
in the same relation to the species at the top of the scale as the birds
and the quadrupeds do now to man.50

This ‘evolutionism’ is not a way of conceiving of the emergence of
beings as a process of one giving rise to another; in reality, it is a way of
generalizing the principle of continuity and the law that requires that
all beings form an uninterrupted expanse. It adds, in a Leibnizian
style,51 the continuity of time to the continuity of space, and the
inﬁniteness of the progress of beings towards perfection to their inﬁnite multiplicity. It is not a matter of progressive hierarchization, but of

165

166 the order of things
the constant and total force exerted by an already established hierarchy.
In the end this presupposes that time, far from being a principle of
taxinomia, is merely one of its factors, and that it is pre-established, like
all the other values assumed by all the other variables. Bonnet must,
therefore, be a preformationist – and as far removed as possible from
what we understand, since the nineteenth century, by ‘evolutionism’;
he must suppose that the upheavals or catastrophes of the globe were
arranged in advance as so many opportunities for the inﬁnite chain of
being to continue its progress in the direction of inﬁnite amelioration:
‘These evolutions were foreseen and inscribed in the germs of animals
upon the very ﬁrst day of creation. For these evolutions are linked with
revolutions in the whole solar system that were arranged by God in
advance.’ The universe in its entirety has been a larva; now it is a
chrysalis; one day it will, no doubt, become a butterﬂy.52 And every
species will be caught up in the same way in that great mutation. Such a
system, it is clear, is not an evolutionism beginning to overthrow the
old dogma of ﬁxism; it is a taxinomia that includes time in addition – a
generalized classiﬁcation.
The other form of ‘evolutionism’ consists of giving time a completely opposite role to play. It is used no longer to move the classifying
table as a whole along the ﬁnite or inﬁnite line leading to perfection,
but to reveal, one after the other, the squares that, when viewed
together, will form the continuous network of the species. It causes the
variables of the living world to assume all possible values successively:
it is the immediacy of a characterization that is accomplished little by
little and, as it were, element after element. The partial identities or
resemblances that make a taxinomia possible would then be the marks,
revealed in the present, of one and the same living being, persisting
through all the upheavals of nature and thereby ﬁlling all the vacant
possibilities oﬀered by the taxonomic table. If birds have wings in the
way that ﬁshes have ﬁns, Benoît de Maillet points out, it is because they
were once, at the time when the original waters of the earth were
ebbing, dehydrated giltheads or dolphins that passed over, once for all,
into an aerial home.
The seed of these ﬁshes, carried into swamps, may perhaps have
produced the ﬁrst transmigration of the species from its marine to its

classifying
terrestrial home. Even though a hundred millions may have perished
without having been able to grow accustomed to it, it was sufﬁcient for
two of them to arrive at that point to give rise to the species.53

Changes in the conditions of life of living beings seem here, as in
certain forms of evolutionism, to be the necessary cause of the appearance of new species. But the mode in which the air, the water, the
climate, or the earth acts upon animals is not that of an environment
upon a function and upon the organs in which that function takes
place; here, the exterior elements intervene only in so far as they occasion the emergence of a character. And that emergence, though it may be
chronologically determined by such and such a global event, is rendered possible a priori by the general table of variables that deﬁnes all
the possible forms of the living world. The quasi-evolutionism of
the eighteenth century seems to presage equally well the spontaneous
variation of character, as it was later to be found in Darwin, and
the positive action of the environment, as it was to be described by
Lamarck. But this is an illusion of hindsight: for this form of thought,
in fact, the sequence of time can never be anything but the line along
which all the possible values of the pre-established variables succeed
one another. Consequently, a principle of modiﬁcation must be deﬁned
within the living being, enabling it to take on a new character when a
natural revolution occurs.
We are presented, then, with another choice: either to presuppose a
spontaneous aptitude in living beings to change their forms (or at least
to acquire – with succeeding generations – a slightly diﬀerent character from that originally given, so that it will change gradually from
one to the next and ﬁnally become unrecognizable), or to attribute to
them some obscure urge towards a terminal species that will possess
the characters of all those that have preceded it, but in a higher degree
of complexity and perfection.
The ﬁrst system is that of errors to inﬁnity – as it is to be in Maupertuis. According to this system, the table of species that it is possible for
natural history to establish has been built up piecemeal by the balance,
constantly present in nature, between a memory that guarantees its
continuity (maintenance of the species in time and their resemblance
to one another) and a tendency towards deviation that simultaneously

167

168 the order of things
guarantees the existence of history, diﬀerences, and dispersion.
Maupertuis supposes that the particles of matter are endowed with
activity and memory. When attracted to one another, the least active
form mineral substances; the most active form the more complex bodies of animals. These forms, which are the result of attraction and
chance, disappear if they are unable to survive. Those that do remain in
existence give rise to new individuals in which the characters of the
parent couple are preserved by memory. And this process continues
until a deviation of the particles – a chance happening – brings into
being a new species, which the stubborn force of memory maintains in
existence in turn: ‘By dint of repeated deviations, the inﬁnite diversity
of the animals came to pass’.54 Thus, progressing from one to the
next, living beings acquired by successive variations all the characters
we now recognize in them, and, when one considers them in the
dimension of time, the coherent, solid expanse they form is merely the
fragmentary result of a much more tightly knit, much ﬁner, continuity:
a continuity that has been woven from an incalculable number of tiny,
forgotten, or miscarried diﬀerences. The visible species that now present themselves for our analysis have been separated out from the ceaseless background of monstrosities that appear, glimmer, sink into the
abyss, and occasionally survive. And this is the fundamental point:
nature has a history only in so far as it is susceptible of continuity. It is
because it takes on all possible characters in turn (each value of all the
variables) that it is presented in the form of a succession.
The same can be said for the inverse system of the prototype and the
terminal species. In this case it is necessary to suppose, with J-B. Robinet, that continuity is assured, not by memory, but by a project – the
project of a complex being towards which nature makes its way from
the starting-point of simple elements which it gradually combines and
arranges: ‘First of all, the elements combine. A small number of simple
principles serves as a basis for all bodies’; these are the ones that govern
exclusively the organization of minerals; then ‘the magniﬁcence of
nature’ continues to increase without a break ‘up to the level of the
beings that move upon the surface of the globe’; ‘the variation of the
organs in number, in size, in reﬁnement, in internal texture, and in
external form, produces species which are divided and subdivided to
inﬁnity by new arrangements’.55 And so on, until we reach the most

classifying

complex arrangement we know of. So that the entire continuity of
nature resides between an absolutely archaic prototype, buried deeper
than any history, and the extreme complication of this model as it is
now possible to observe it, at least on this earthly globe, in the person
of the human being.56 Between these two extremes there lie all the
possible degrees of complexity and combination – like an immense
series of experiments, of which some have persisted in the form of
continuing species and some have sunk into oblivion. Monsters are not
of a diﬀerent ‘nature’ from the species themselves:
We should believe that the most apparently bizarre forms . . . belong
necessarily and essentially to the universal plan of being; that they are
metamorphoses of the prototype just as natural as the others, even
though they present us with different phenomena; that they serve as
means of passing to adjacent forms; that they prepare and bring about
the combinations that follow them, just as they themselves were
brought about by those that preceded them; that far from disturbing
the order of things, they contribute to it. It is only, perhaps, by dint of
producing monstrous beings that nature succeeds in producing
beings of greater regularity and with a more symmetrical structure.57

In Robinet, as in Maupertuis, succession and history are for nature
merely means of traversing the inﬁnite fabric of variations of which it
is capable. It is not, then, that time or duration ensures the continuity
and speciﬁcation of living beings throughout the diversity of successive environments, but that against the continuous background of all
the possible variations time traces out an itinerary upon which climates
and geography pick out only certain privileged regions destined to
survive. Continuity is not the visible wake of a fundamental history in
which one same living principle struggles with a variable environment.
For continuity precedes time. It is its condition. And history can play no
more than a negative role in relation to it: it either picks out an entity
and allows it to survive, or ignores it and allows it to disappear.
This has two consequences. First, the necessity of introducing monsters into the scheme – forming the background noise, as it were, the
endless murmur of nature. Indeed, if it is necessary for time, which is
limited, to run through – or perhaps to have already run through – the

169

170 the order of things
whole continuity of nature, one is forced to admit that a considerable
number of possible variations have been encountered and then erased;
just as the geological catastrophe was necessary to enable us to work
back from the taxonomic table to the continuum, through a blurred,
chaotic, and fragmented experience, so the proliferation of monsters
without a future is necessary to enable us to work down again from the
continuum, through a temporal series, to the table. In other words,
what must be construed, as we move in one direction, as a drama of the
earth and waters must be construed, in the other direction, as an obvious aberration of forms. The monster ensures in time, and for our
theoretical knowledge, a continuity that, for our everyday experience,
ﬂoods, volcanoes, and subsiding continents confuse in space. The other
consequence is that the signs of continuity throughout such a history
can no longer be of any order other than that of resemblance. Since this
history is not deﬁned by any relation of organism to environment,58
the living forms will be subjected in it to all possible metamorphoses
and leave behind them no trace of the path they have followed other
than the reference points represented by similitudes. How, for example,
are we to recognize that nature, starting from a primitive prototype,
has never ceased to work towards the provisionally terminal form that
is man? By the fact that it has abandoned on the way thousands of
forms that provide us with a picture of the rudimentary model. How
many fossils are there, for man’s ear, or skull, or sexual parts, like so
many plaster statues, fashioned one day and dropped the next in favour
of a more perfected form?
The species that resembles the human heart, and for that reason is
named Anthropocardite . . . is worthy of particular attention. Its substance is ﬂint inside. The form of a heart is imitated as perfectly as
possible. One can distinguish in it the stump of the vena cava,
together with a portion of its two cross-sections. One can also see the
stump of the great artery emerging from the left ventricle, together
with its lower or descending branch.59

The fossil, with its mixed animal and mineral nature, is the privileged
locus of a resemblance required by the historian of the continuum,
whereas the space of the taxinomia decomposed it with rigour.

classifying

The monster and the fossil both play a very precise role in this
conﬁguration. On the basis of the power of the continuum held by
nature, the monster ensures the emergence of diﬀerence. This diﬀerence is still without law and without any well-deﬁned structure; the
monster is the root-stock of speciﬁcation, but it is only a sub-species
itself in the stubbornly slow stream of history. The fossil is what permits resemblances to subsist throughout all the deviations traversed by
nature; it functions as a distant and approximative form of identity; it
marks a quasi-character in the shift of time. And this is because the
monster and the fossil are merely the backward projection of those
diﬀerences and those identities that provide taxinomia ﬁrst with structure, then with character. Between table and continuum they form a
shady, mobile, wavering region in which what analysis is to deﬁne as
identity is still only mute analogy; and what it will deﬁne as assignable
and constant diﬀerence is still only free and random variation. But, in
truth, it is so impossible for natural history to conceive of the history of
nature, the epistemological arrangement delineated by the table and the
continuum is so fundamental, that becoming can occupy nothing but
an intermediary place measured out for it solely by the requirements of
the whole. This is why it occurs only in order to bring about the
necessary passage from one to the other – either as a totality of destructive events alien to living beings and occurring only from outside
them, or as a movement ceaselessly being outlined, then halted as soon
as sketched, and perceptible only on the fringes of the table, in its
unconsidered margins. Thus, against the background of the continuum, the monster provides an account, as though in caricature, of
the genesis of diﬀerences, and the fossil recalls, in the uncertainty of its
resemblances, the ﬁrst buddings of identity.

VII THE DISCOURSE OF NATURE
The theory of natural history cannot be dissociated from that of language. And yet it is not a question of a transference of method, from
one to the other; nor of a communication of concepts; nor of the
prestige of a model which, because it has ‘succeeded’ in one ﬁeld, has
been tried out in the one next to it. Nor is it a question of a more general
rationality imposing identical forms upon grammatical thinking and

171

172 the order of things
upon taxinomia. Rather, it concerns a fundamental arrangement of
knowledge, which orders the knowledge of beings so as to make it
possible to represent them in a system of names. There were doubtless,
in this region we now term life, many inquiries other than attempts at
classiﬁcation, many kinds of analysis other than that of identities and
diﬀerences. But they all rested upon a sort of historical a priori, which
authorized them in their dispersion and in their singular and divergent
projects, and rendered equally possible all the diﬀerences of opinion of
which they were the source. This a priori does not consist of a set of
constant problems uninterruptedly presented to men’s curiosity by
concrete phenomena as so many enigmas; nor is it made up of a certain
state of acquired knowledge laid down in the course of the preceding
ages and providing a ground for the more or less irregular, more or less
rapid, progress of rationality; it is doubtless not even determined by
what is called the mentality or the ‘framework of thought’ of any given
period, if we are to understand by that the historical outline of the
speculative interests, beliefs, or broad theoretical options of the time.
This a priori is what, in a given period, delimits in the totality of experience a ﬁeld of knowledge, deﬁnes the mode of being of the objects that
appear in that ﬁeld, provides man’s everyday perception with theoretical powers, and deﬁnes the conditions in which he can sustain a
discourse about things that is recognized to be true. In the eighteenth
century, the historical a priori that provided the basis for inquiry into or
controversy about the existence of genera, the stability of species, and
the transmission of characters from generation to generation, was the
existence of a natural history: the organization of a certain visible
existence as a domain of knowledge, the deﬁnition of the four variables
of description, the constitution of an area of adjacencies in which any
individual being whatever can ﬁnd its place. Natural history in the
Classical age is not merely the discovery of a new object of curiosity; it
covers a series of complex operations that introduce the possibility of a
constant order into a totality of representations. It constitutes a whole
domain of empiricity as at the same time describable and orderable. What
makes it akin to theories of language also distinguishes it from what we
have understood, since the nineteenth century, by biology, and causes
it to play a certain critical role in Classical thought.
Natural history is contemporaneous with language: it is on the

classifying

same level as the spontaneous play that analyses representations in
the memory, determines their common elements, establishes signs
upon the basis of those elements, and ﬁnally imposes names. Classiﬁcation and speech have their place of origin in the same space that
representation opens up within itself because it is consecrated to time,
to memory, to reﬂection, to continuity. But natural history cannot and
should not exist as a language independent of all other languages
unless it is a well-constructed language – and a universally valid one. In
spontaneous and ‘badly constructed’ language, the four elements
(proposition, articulation, designation, derivation) leave interstices
open between them: individual experiences, needs or passions, habits,
prejudices, a more or less awakened concentration, have established
hundreds of diﬀerent languages – languages that diﬀer from one
another not only in the form of their words, but above all in the way in
which those words pattern representation. Natural history can be a
well-constructed language only if the amount of play in it is enclosed:
if its descriptive exactitude makes every proposition into an invariable
pattern of reality (if one can always attribute to the representation what
is articulated in it) and if the designation of each being indicates clearly the
place it occupies in the general arrangement of the whole. In language, the
function of the verb is universal and void; it merely prescribes the most
general form of the proposition; and it is within the latter that the
names bring their system of articulation into play; natural history
regroups these two functions into the unity of the structure, which
articulates together all the variables that can be attributed to a being.
And whereas in language the designation, in its individual functioning,
is exposed to the hazard of derivations, which endow the common
names with their scope and extension, the character, as established by
natural history, makes it possible both to indicate the individual and to
situate it in a space of generalities that ﬁt inside one another. So that
above the ordinary, everyday words (and by means of them, since it is
of course necessary to use them for the initial descriptions) there is
raised the ediﬁce of a language in the second degree in which the exact
Names of things ﬁnally rule:
The method, the soul of science, designates at ﬁrst sight any body in
nature in such a way that the body in question expresses the name that

173

174 the order of things
is proper to it, and that this name recalls all the knowledge that may, in
the course of time, have been acquired about the body thus named: so
that in the midst of extreme confusion there is revealed the sovereign
order of nature.60

But this essential nomination – this transition from the visible structure to the taxonomic character – leads back to a costly requirement. In
order to fulﬁl and enclose the ﬁgure that proceeds from the monotonous function of the verb to be to derivation and traversal of rhetorical
space, spontaneous language had no need of anything but the play of
imagination: that is, of immediate resemblances. For taxonomy to be
possible, on the other hand, nature must be truly continuous, and in all
its plenitude. Where language required the similarity of impressions,
classiﬁcation requires the principle of the smallest possible diﬀerence
between things. Now, this continuum, which appears therefore at the
very basis of nomination, in the opening left between description and
arrangement, is presupposed well before language, as its condition.
And not only because it can provide the basis for a well-constructed
language, but because it accounts for all language in general. It is
without doubt the continuity of nature that gives memory the
opportunity of exercising itself, as when a representation, through
some confused and ill-perceived identity, recalls another and makes it
possible to apply to both the arbitrary sign of a common name. What
was presented in the imagination as a blind similitude was merely the
blurred and unreﬂected trace of the great uninterrupted fabric of identities and diﬀerences. Imagination (which, by making comparison possible, justiﬁes language) formed, without its then being known, the
ambiguous locus in which the shattered but insistent continuity of
nature was united with the empty but attentive continuity of consciousness. It would not have been possible to speak, there would have
been no place for even the merest name, if nature, in the very depth of
things, before all representation, had not been continuous. To establish
the great, unﬂawed table of the species, genera, and classes, natural
history had to employ, criticize, and ﬁnally reconstitute at new expense
a language whose condition of possibility resided precisely in that
continuum. Things and words are very strictly interwoven: nature is
posited only through the grid of denominations, and – though without

classifying

such names it would remain mute and invisible – it glimmers far oﬀ
beyond them, continuously present on the far side of this grid, which
nevertheless presents it to our knowledge and renders it visible only
when wholly spanned by language.
This, no doubt, is why natural history, in the Classical period, cannot
be established as biology. Up to the end of the eighteenth century, in
fact, life does not exist: only living beings. These beings form one class,
or rather several classes, in the series of all the things in the world; and
if it is possible to speak of life it is only as of one character – in the
taxonomic sense of that word – in the universal distribution of beings.
It is usual to divide the things in nature into three classes: minerals,
which are recognized as capable of growth, but not of movement or
feeling; vegetables, which are capable of growth and susceptible to
sensation; and animals, which are capable of spontaneous movement.61 As for life and the threshold it establishes, these can be made
to slide from one end of the scale to the other, according to the criteria
one adopts. If, with Maupertuis, one deﬁnes life by the mobility and
relations of aﬃnity that draw elements towards one another and keep
them together, then one must conceive of life as residing in the simplest particles of matter. But one must situate it much higher in the
series if one deﬁnes it by means of a crowded and complex character, as
Linnaeus did when he set up as his criteria birth (by seed or bud),
nutrition (by intussusception), ageing, exterior movement, internal
propulsion of ﬂuids, diseases, death, and presence of vessels, glands,
epiderms, and utricles.62 Life does not constitute an obvious threshold beyond which entirely new forms of knowledge are required. It is a
category of classiﬁcation, relative, like all the other categories, to the
criteria one adopts. And also, like them, subject to certain imprecisions
as soon as the question of deciding its frontiers arises. Just as the
zoophyte stands on the ambiguous frontier between animals and
plants, so the fossils, as well as the metals, reside in that uncertain
frontier region where one does not know whether one ought to
speak of life or not. But the dividing-line between the living and the
non-living is never a decisive problem.63 As Linnaeus says, the
naturalist – whom he calls Historiens naturalis – ‘distinguishes the parts
of natural bodies with his eyes, describes them appropriately according to their number, form, position, and proportion, and he names

175

176 the order of things
them’.64 The naturalist is the man concerned with the structure of
the visible world and its denomination according to characters. Not
with life.
We must therefore not connect natural history, as it was manifested
during the Classical period, with a philosophy of life, albeit an obscure
and still faltering one. In reality, it is interwoven with a theory of
words. Natural history is situated both before and after language; it
decomposes the language of everyday life, but in order to recompose it
and discover what has made it possible through the blind resemblances
of imagination; it criticizes language, but in order to reveal its foundation. If natural history reworks language and attempts to perfect it, this
is because it also delves down into the origin of language. It leaps over
the everyday vocabulary that provides it with its immediate ground,
and beyond that ground it searches for that which could have constituted its raison d’être; but, inversely, it resides in its entirety in the area of
language, since it is essentially a concerted use of names and since its
ultimate aim is to give things their true denomination. Between language and the theory of nature there exists therefore a relation that is of
a critical type; to know nature is, in fact, to build upon the basis of
language a true language, one that will reveal the conditions in which
all language is possible and the limits within which it can have a
domain of validity. The critical question did exist in the eighteenth
century, but linked to the form of a determinate knowledge. For this
reason it could not acquire either autonomy or the value of radical
questioning: it prowled endlessly through a region where what mattered was resemblance, the strength of the imagination, nature and
human nature, and the value of general and abstract ideas – in short,
the relations between the perception of similitude and the validity of
the concept. In the Classical age – Locke and Linnaeus, Buﬀon and
Hume are our evidence of this – the critical question concerned the
basis for resemblance and the existence of the genus.
In the late eighteenth century, a new conﬁguration was to appear
that would deﬁnitively blur the old space of natural history for modern
eyes. On the one hand, we see criticism displacing itself and detaching
itself from the ground where it had ﬁrst arisen. Whereas Hume made
the problem of causality one case in the general interrogation of
resemblances,65 Kant, by isolating causality, reverses the question;

classifying

whereas before it was a question of establishing relations of identity or
diﬀerence against the continuous background of similitudes, Kant
brings into prominence the inverse problem of the synthesis of the
diverse. This simultaneously transfers the critical question from the
concept to the judgement, from the existence of the genus (obtained
by the analysis of representations) to the possibility of linking representations together, from the right to name to the basis for attribution,
from nominal articulation to the proposition itself, and to the verb to be
that establishes it. Whereupon it becomes absolutely generalized.
Instead of having validity solely when applied to the relations of nature
and human nature, it questions the very possibility of all knowledge.
On the other hand, however, and during the same period, life
assumes its autonomy in relation to the concepts of classiﬁcation. It
escapes from that critical relation which, in the eighteenth century,
was constitutive of the knowledge of nature. It escapes – which means
two things: life becomes one object of knowledge among others, and is
answerable, in this respect, to all criticism in general; but it also resists
this critical jurisdiction, which it takes over on its own account and
brings to bear, in its own name, on all possible knowledge. So that
throughout the nineteenth century, from Kant to Dilthey and to Bergson, critical forms of thought and philosophies of life ﬁnd themselves
in a position of reciprocal borrowing and contestation.

NOTES
1 J. Ray published a Historia plantarum generalis as late as 1686.
2 Jonston, Historia naturalis de quadripedidus (Amsterdam, 1657, pp. 1–11).
3 Diderot, Lettre sur les aveugles. Cf. Linnaeus: ‘We should reject . . . all accidental notes that do not exist in the Plant either for the eye or for the touch’
(Philosophie botanique, section 258).
4 Linnaeus, Systema naturae, p. 214. On the limited usefulness of the microscope, cf. ibid, pp. 220–1. (We have retained throughout the author’s references
to the French editions of the works of Linné (Linnaeus) – translator’s note.)
5 Tournefort, Isagoge in rem herbariam (1719); Fr. trans. in Becker-Tournefort
(Paris, 1956, p. 295). Buffon criticized the Linnaean method for relying upon
characters so tenuous that it rendered the use of the microscope unavoidable.
From one naturalist to another, reproof concerning the use of an optical
instrument has value as a theoretical objection.
6 Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 299.

177

178 the order of things
7
8
9
10

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41

Ibid., section 167; cf. also section 327.
Tournefort, Éléments de botanique, p. 558.
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 299.
Linnaeus (op. cit., section 331) lists the parts of the body that can be used as
archetypes, whether for dimensions or, above all, for forms: hair, nails, thumbs,
palms, eyes, ears, ﬁngers, navel, penis, vulva, breasts.
Ibid., sections 328–9.
Buffon, Discours sur la manière de traiter l’histoire naturelle (Œuvres complètes,
t. I, p. 21).
Adanson, Familles des plantes (Paris, 1763, t. I, préface, p. cci).
Boissier de Sauvages, Nosologie méthodique (Fr. trans. Lyon, 1772, t. I,
pp. 91–2).
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 258.
Tournefort, Éléments de botanique, pp. 1–2.
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 192.
Ibid., section 193.
Linnaeus, Systema naturae, section 12.
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 77.
Linnaeus, Systema naturae, section 12.
‘The natural character of the species is its description’ (Linnaeus, Philosophie
botanique, section 193).
Tournefort, Éléments de botanique, p. 27.
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 167.
Linnaeus, Système sexuel des végétaux (Fr. trans. Paris, year VI, p. 21).
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 212.
Ibid., section 284.
Ibid., section 151. These two functions, which are guaranteed by the character,
correspond exactly to the functions of designation and derivation performed in
language by the common noun.
Adanson, Histoire naturelle du Sénégal (Paris, 1757).
Adanson, Cours d’histoire naturelle (Paris, 1772; 1845 edn., p. 17).
Adanson, Familles des plantes.
Ibid., t. I, préface.
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 105.
Ibid., section 94.
Cf. P. Belon, Histoire de la nature des oiseaux.
Cf. p. 113 above.
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 156.
Ibid., section 169.
Buffon, Discours sur la manière de traiter l’histoire naturelle (Œuvres complètes,
t. I, pp. 36 and 39).
C. Bonnet, Contemplation de la nature, Ière partie (Œuvres complètes, t. IV,
pp. 35–6).
Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique.

classifying
Adanson, Cours d’histoire naturelle, 1845 edn., pp. 4–5.
Buffon, Histoire de la terre.
C. Bonnet, Palingénésie philosophique (Œuvres complètes, t. VII, p. 122).
C. Bonnet, Contemplation de la nature, chap. XX, pp. 130–8.
Buffon, Histoire naturelle des oiseaux (1770, t. I, p. 396).
Pallas, Elenchus Zoophytorum (1786).
J. Hermann, Tabulae afﬁnitatum animalium (Strasbourg, 1783, p. 24).
C. Bonnet, Contemplation de la nature, lère partie (Œuvres complètes, t. IV, p. 34
et seq.).
50 C. Bonnet, Palingénésie philosophique (Œuvres complètes, t. VII, pp. 149–150).
51 C. Bonnet Œuvres complètes, t. III, p. 173) quotes a letter from Leibniz to
Hermann on the chain of being.
52 C. Bonnet, Palingénésie philosophique (Œuvres complètes, t. VII, p. 193).
53 Benoît de Maillet, Telliamed ou les entretiens d’un philosophe chinois avec un
missionnaire français (Amsterdam, 1748, p. 142).
54 Maupertuis, Essai sur la formation des corps organisés (Berlin, 1754, p. 41).
55 J-B. Robinet, De la nature (3rd edn., 1766, pp. 25–8).
56 J-B. Robinet, Considérations philosophiques sur la gradation naturelle des formes de
l’être (Paris, 1768, pp. 4–5).
57 Ibid., p. 198.
58 On the non-existence of the biological notion of the ‘environment’ in the eighteenth century, cf. G. Canguilhem, La Connaissance de la vie (Paris, 2nd edn.,
1965, pp. 129–54).
59 J-B. Robinet, Considérations philosophiques sur la gradation naturelle des formes de
l’être, p. 19.
60 Linnaeus, Systema naturae, p. 13.
61 Cf., for example, Linnaeus, Systema naturae, p. 215.
62 Linnaeus, Philosophie botanique, section 133. Cf. also Système sexuel des
végétaux, p. 1.
63 Bonnet accepted a quadripartite division in nature: unstructured brute beings,
inanimate structured beings (vegetables), animate structured beings (animals), animate structured and reasoning beings (men). Cf. Contemplation de la
nature, II ième partie, chap. I.
64 Linnaeus, Systema naturae, p. 215.
65 Hume, A treatise of human nature (1739, book I, part III, section III, and part IV,
section VI).
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

179

6
EXCHANGING
I THE ANALYSIS OF WEALTH
There is no life in the Classical period, nor any science of life; nor any
philology either. But there is natural history, and general grammar. In
the same way, there is no political economy, because, in the order of
knowledge, production does not exist. On the other hand, there does
exist in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries a notion that is still
familiar to us today, though it has lost its essential precision for us. But
‘notion’ is not really the word we should apply to it, since it does not
occur within an interplay of economic concepts that it might displace
to some slight extent by taking over a little of their meaning or eating
into their sphere of application. It is more a question of a general
domain: a very coherent and very well-stratiﬁed layer that comprises
and contains, like so many partial objects, the notions of value, price,
trade, circulation, income, interest. This domain, the ground and object
of ‘economy’ in the Classical age, is that of wealth. It is useless to apply to
it questions deriving from a diﬀerent type of economics – one organized around production or work, for example; useless also to analyse its
various concepts (even, and above all, if their names have been perpetuated in succeeding ages with somewhat analogous meanings),
without taking into account the system from which they draw their
positivity. One might as well try to analyse the Linnaean genus outside

exchanging

the domain of natural history, or Bauzée’s theory of tenses without
taking into account the fact that general grammar was its historical
condition of possibility.
We must therefore avoid a retrospective reading of these things that
would merely endow the Classical analysis of wealth with the ulterior
unity of a political economy in the tentative process of constituting
itself. Yet it is in this way that historians of ideas do go about their
reconstructions of the enigmatic birth of this knowledge, which,
according to them, sprang up in Western thought, fully armed and
already full of danger, at the time of Ricardo and J-B. Say. They presuppose that a scientiﬁc economics had for long been rendered impossible
by a purely moral problematics of proﬁt and income (theory of the fair
price, justiﬁcation or condemnation of interest), then by a systematic
confusion between money and wealth, value and market price: and of
this assimilation they take mercantilism to be one of the principle
causes and the most striking manifestation. But then the eighteenth
century is supposed to have provided the essential distinctions and
outlined some of the great problems that positivist economics subsequently treated with tools better adapted to the task: money is
supposed to have revealed in this way its conventional – though not
arbitrary – character (as a consequence of the long discussion between
bullionists and anti-bullionists: among the ﬁrst would have to be
included Child, Petty, Locke, Cantillon, Galiani; among the latter,
Barbon, Boisguillebert, and, above all, Law; then, to a lesser degree,
after the disaster of 1720, Montesquieu and Melon); a beginning is
thought to have been made, too – in the work of Cantillon – on the task
of disentangling the theory of intrinsic value from that of market value;
and the great ‘paradox of value’ was dealt with, by opposing the useless
dearness of the diamond to the cheapness of the water without which
we cannot live (it is possible, in fact, to ﬁnd this problem rigorously
formulated in Galiani); a start is supposed to have been made, thus
preﬁguring the work of Jevons and Menger, at connecting value to a
general theory of utility (which we ﬁnd sketched out in Galiani, in
Graslin, and in Turgot); an understanding of the importance of high
prices to the development of trade was supposedly reached (this is the
‘Becher principle’, taken up in France by Boisguillebert and Quesnay);
lastly – and here we meet the Physiocrats – a start was made on the

181

182 the order of things
analysis of the mechanics of production. And thus, in fragments here
and there, political economy is thought to have been silently bringing
into position its essential themes, until the moment when, taking up
the analysis of production again in another direction, Adam Smith is
supposed to have brought to light the process of the increasing division
of labour, Ricardo the role played by capital, and J-B. Say some of the
fundamental laws of the market economy. From this moment on, political economy is supposed to have begun to exist with its own proper
object and its own inner coherence.
In fact, the concepts of money, price, value, circulation, and market
were not regarded, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, in
terms of a shadowy future, but as part of a rigorous and general epistemological arrangement. It is this arrangement that sustains the
‘analysis of wealth’ in its overall necessity. The analysis of wealth is to
political economy what general grammar is to philology and what
natural history is to biology. And just as it is not possible to understand
the theory of verb and noun, the analysis of the language of action, and
that of roots and their development, without referring, through the
study of general grammar, to the archaeological network that makes
those things possible and necessary; just as one cannot understand,
without exploring the domain of natural history, what Classical
description, characterization, and taxonomy were, any more than the
opposition between system and method, or ‘ﬁxism’ and ‘evolution’;
so, in the same way, it would not be possible to discover the link of
necessity that connects the analysis of money, prices, value, and trade if
one did not ﬁrst clarify this domain of wealth which is the locus of
their simultaneity.
It is true that the analysis of wealth is not constituted according to
the same curves or in obedience to the same rhythm as general grammar or natural history. This is because reﬂection upon money, trade,
and exchange is linked to a practice and to institutions. And though
practice and pure speculation may be placed in opposition to one
another, they nevertheless rest upon one and the same fundamental
ground of knowledge. A money reform, a banking custom, a trade
practice can all be rationalized, can all develop, maintain themselves or
disappear according to appropriate forms; they are all based upon a
certain ground of knowledge: an obscure knowledge that does not

exchanging

manifest itself for its own sake in a discourse, but whose necessities are
exactly the same as for abstract theories or speculations without apparent relation to reality. In any given culture and at any given moment,
there is always only one episteme that deﬁnes the conditions of possibility of all knowledge, whether expressed in a theory or silently invested
in a practice. The monetary reform prescribed by the States General of
1575, mercantilist measures, or Law’s experiment and its liquidation,
all have the same archaeological basis as the theories of Davanzatti,
Bouteroue, Petty, or Cantillon. And it is these fundamental necessities
of knowledge that we must give voice to.

II MONEY AND PRICES
In the sixteenth century, economic thought is restricted, or almost so,
to the problem of prices and that of the best monetary substance. The
question of prices concerns the absolute or relative character of the
increasing dearness of commodities and the eﬀect that successive
devaluations or the inﬂux of American metals may have had upon
prices. The problem of monetary substance is that of the nature of the
standard, of the price relation between the various metals employed,
and of the distortion between the weights of coins and their nominal
values. But these two series of problems were linked, since the metal
appeared only as a sign, and as a sign for measuring wealth, in so far as
it was itself wealth. It possessed the power to signify because it was
itself a real mark. And just as words had the same reality as what they
said, just as the marks of living beings were inscribed upon their bodies in the manner of visible and positive marks, similarly, the signs that
indicated wealth and measured it were bound to carry the real mark in
themselves. In order to represent prices, they themselves had to be
precious. They had to be rare, useful, desirable. Moreover, all these
qualities had to be stable if the mark they imprinted upon things was
to be an authentic and universally legible signature. Hence the correlation between the problem of prices and the nature of money, which
constitutes the privileged object of all reﬂection upon wealth from
Copernicus to Bodin and Davanzatti.
The two functions of money, as a common measure between commodities and as a substitute in the mechanism of exchange, are based

183

184 the order of things
upon its material reality. A measure is stable, recognized as valid by
everyone and in all places, if it has as a standard an assignable reality
that can be compared to the diversity of things that one wishes to
measure: as is the case, Copernicus points out, with the fathom and the
bushel, whose material length and volume serve as units.1 In consequence, money does not truly measure unless its unit is a reality that
really exists, to which any commodity whatever may be referred. In
this sense, the sixteenth century returns to the theory accepted during
at least part of the Middle Ages, which gave either the prince or popular consent the right to ﬁx the valor impositus of money, to modify its rate,
to withdraw any category of coins or any particular metal. The value of
money must be determined by the quantity of metal it contains; that is,
it returns to what it was before, when princes had not yet stamped
their eﬃgy or seal upon pieces of metal; at that time ‘neither copper,
nor gold, nor silver were minted, but only valued according to their
weight’;2 arbitrary signs were not accorded the value of real marks;
money was a fair measure because it signiﬁed nothing more than its
power to standardize wealth on the basis of its own material reality as
wealth.
It is upon this epistemological foundation that reforms were eﬀected
in the sixteenth century, and that the controversies of the age assumed
their particular dimensions. There was an attempt to bring monetary
signs back to their exactitude as measures: the nominal values stamped
on the coins had to be in conformity with the quantity of metal chosen
as a standard and incorporated into each coin; money would then
signify nothing more than its measuring value. In this sense, the
anonymous author of the Compendious insists that all the money actually
current should cease to be so after a certain date, since the ‘forcing up’
of its nominal value has long since vitiated its functions of measurement; all coinage already minted should then be accepted only in
accordance with the amount of metal it is estimated to contain; as for
new money, that will have its own weight as its nominal value, so that
henceforward only the new and the old money will be current, each in
accordance with one and the same value, weight and denomination, so
that all money will be re-established at its former rate and regain its
former goodness.3 It is not known whether the Compendious, which
was not published before 1581, but was certainly in existence and

exchanging

circulating in manuscript for thirty years beforehand, inspired England’s monetary policy under Elizabeth. One thing is certain: that
after a series of ‘forcings up’ (devaluations) between 1544 and 1559,
the proclamation of March 1561 ‘brought down’ the nominal value of
money and made it equal once more to the quantity of metal each coin
contained. Similarly, in France, the States General of 1575 asked for and
obtained the suppression of accounting units (which introduced a
third deﬁnition of money, a purely arithmetical one, in addition to the
deﬁnition by weight and that by nominal value: this supplementary
relation concealed the sense of monetary operations from those
who did not understand it); the edict of September 1577 established
the gold écu as both a real coin and an accounting unit, decreed the
subordination of all other metals to gold – in particular, silver, which
retained its legality as tender but lost its legal immutability. The coinage was thus restandardized on the basis of its metallic weight. The
sign the coins bore – the valor impositus – was merely the exact and
transparent mark of the measure they constituted.
But at the same time as this restandardization was being demanded,
and occasionally accomplished, a certain number of phenomena came
to light which are peculiar to the money-sign and perhaps deﬁnitively
compromised its role as a measure. First, the fact that coinage circulates
all the quicker for being less good, whereas coins with a high percentage of metal are hoarded and do not take part in trade: this is what was
called Gresham’s law,4 and both Copernicus5 and the author of the
Compendious6 were already aware of it. Second, and above all, there was
the relation between the monetary facts and the movement of prices: it
was this that revealed money as a commodity like any other – not an
absolute standard for all equivalences, but a commodity whose capacity for exchange, and consequently whose value as a substitute in
exchange, are modiﬁed according to its abundance or rarity: money
too has its price. Malestroit7 had pointed out that, despite appearances, there had been no increase in prices during the sixteenth century: since commodities are always what they are, and since money, in
its particular nature, is a constant standard, the increased dearness of
commodities can be due only to the augmentation of the nominal
values borne by an unchanging metallic mass: but, for the same quantity of wheat, one still gives the same weight in silver or gold. So that

185

186 the order of things
‘nothing has become dearer’: since the golden écu was worth twenty
sols tournois in accounting money under Philippe VI, and since it is now
worth ﬁfty, it is inevitable that an ell of velvet, which formerly cost
four livres, should now be worth ten. ‘The increasing dearness of things
does not come from having to deliver more but from receiving a lesser
quantity of gold or ﬁne silver than one was accustomed to before.’ But
once this identiﬁcation has been established between the role of
money and the mass of metal it causes to circulate, it becomes clearly
apparent that it is subjected to the same variations as all other merchandise. And though Malestroit implicitly admitted that the quantity
and marketable value of metals remained stable, Bodin, only a very few
years later,8 observes that there has been an increase in the stock of
metal imported from the New World, and in consequence a real
increase in the price of commodities, since princes, now possessing
ingots in larger quantity or receiving more from private persons, have
been minting more and better-quality coins; for the same amount of a
commodity one is therefore giving a larger quantity of metal. The rise
in prices therefore has a ‘principal cause, and that almost the only one
that no one has touched upon hitherto’: ‘the abundance of gold and
silver’, ‘the abundance of that which gives things estimation and
price’.
The standard of equivalences is itself involved in the system of
exchanges, and the buying power of money signiﬁes nothing but the
marketable value of the metal. The mark that distinguishes money,
determines it, renders it certain and acceptable to all, is thus reversible,
and may be construed in either direction: it refers to a quantity of metal
that is a constant measure (which is the construction Malestroit puts
upon it); but it also refers to certain commodities, variable in quantity
and price, called metals (which is Bodin’s reading of the matter). We
are, then, presented with an arrangement analogous to that which
characterizes the general organization of signs in the sixteenth century:
signs, it will be remembered, were constituted by resemblances which,
in turn, necessitated further signs in order to be recognized. Here, the
monetary sign cannot deﬁne its exchange value, and can be established
as a mark only on a metallic mass which in turn deﬁnes its value in the
scale of other commodities. If one admits that exchange, in the
system of needs, corresponds to similitude in the system of acquired

exchanging

knowledge, then one sees that knowledge of nature, and reﬂection or
practices concerning money, were controlled during the Renaissance
by one and the same conﬁguration of the episteme.
And just as the relation of the microcosm to the macrocosm was
indispensable in order to arrest the indeﬁnite oscillation between
resemblance and sign, so it was necessary to lay down a certain
relation between metal and merchandise which, when it came to it,
made it possible to ﬁx the total marketable value of the precious
metals, and consequently to standardize the price of all commodities
in a certain and deﬁnitive fashion. This relation is the one that was
established by Providence when it buried gold and silver mines under
the earth, and caused them to grow, just as plants grow and animals
multiply on the surface of the earth. Between all the things that man
may need or desire, and the glittering, hidden veins where those
metals grow in darkness, there is an absolute correspondence. As
Davanzatti says:
Nature made all terrestrial things good; the sum of these, by virtue of
the agreement concluded by men, is worth all the gold that is worked;
all men therefore desire everything in order to acquire all things . . . In
order to ascertain each day the rule and mathematical proportions
that exist between things and between them and gold, we should have
to be able to contemplate, from the height of heaven or some very tall
observatory, all the things that exist or are done on earth, or rather
their images reproduced and reﬂected in the sky as in a faithful mirror.
We would then abandon all our calculations and we would say: there is
upon earth so much gold, so many things, so many men, so many
needs; and to the degree that each thing satisﬁes needs, its value shall
be so many things, or so much gold.9

This celestial and exhaustive calculation can be accomplished by none
other than God: it corresponds to that other calculation that brings
each and every element of the microcosm into relation with a corresponding element in the macrocosm – with this one diﬀerence, that
the latter unites the terrestrial to the celestial, going from things, from
animals, or from man, up to the stars; whereas the former links the
earth to its caves and mines; it makes those things that are brought into

187

188 the order of things
being by the hands of men correspond with the treasures buried in the
earth since the creation of the world. The marks of similitude, because
they are a guide to knowledge, are addressed to the perfection of
heaven; the signs of exchange, because they satisfy desire, are sustained
by the dark, dangerous, and accursed glitter of metal. An equivocal
glitter, for it reproduces in the depths of the earth that other glitter that
sings at the far end of the night: it resides there like an inverted promise
of happiness, and, because metal resembles the stars, the knowledge of
all these perilous treasures is at the same time knowledge of the world.
And thus reﬂection upon wealth has its pivot in the broadest speculation upon the cosmos, just as, inversely, profound knowledge of the
order of the world must lead to the secret of metals and the possession
of wealth. It becomes apparent how tightly knit is the network of
necessities that, in the sixteenth century, links together all the elements
of knowledge: how the cosmology of signs provides a duplication, and
ﬁnally a foundation, for reﬂection upon prices and money; how it also
authorizes theoretical and practical speculation upon metals; how it
provides a communicating link between the promises of desire and
those of knowledge, in the same way as the metals and the stars communicate with one another and are drawn together by secret aﬃnities.
On the conﬁnes of knowledge, in that region where it becomes all
powerful and quasi-divine, three great functions meet – those of the
Basileus, of the Philosophos, and of the Metallicos. But just as this knowledge
is given only in fragments and in the attentive lightning-ﬂash of the
divinatio, so, in the case of the singular and partial relations of things
with metal, of desire with prices, divine knowledge, or that which one
might acquire from ‘some very tall observatory’, is not given to man.
Except for brief instants, and as though at random, to those minds that
know how to watch for it – in other words, to merchants. What the
soothsayers were to the undeﬁned interplay of resemblances and signs,
the merchants are to the interplay, also forever open, of exchange and
money.
From here below, we have difﬁculty in perceiving the few things that
surround us, and we give a price to them according to whether we
perceive them to be more or less in demand in each place and at each
time. The merchants are promptly and very well advised of these

exchanging
things, and that is why they have an admirable knowledge of the price
of things.10

III MERCANTILISM
In order that the domain of wealth could be constituted as an object of
reﬂection in Classical thought, the conﬁguration established in the sixteenth century had to be dissolved. For the Renaissance ‘economists’,
and right up to Davanzatti himself, the ability of money to measure
commodities, as well as its exchangeability, rested upon its intrinsic
value: they were well aware that the precious metals had little usefulness other than as coinage; but if they had been chosen as standards, if
they had been employed as a means of exchange, if, in consequence,
they fetched a high price, that was because they possessed, both in the
natural scale of things and in themselves, an absolute and fundamental
price, higher than any other, to which the value of any and every
commodity could be referred.11 Fine metal was, of itself, a mark of
wealth; its buried brightness was suﬃcient indication that it was at the
same time a hidden presence and a visible signature of all the wealth of
the world. It is for this reason that it had a price; for this reason too that it
was a measure of all prices; and for this reason, ﬁnally, that one could
exchange it for anything else that had a price. It was precious above all other
things. In the seventeenth century, these three properties are still
attributed to money, but they are all three made to rest, not on the ﬁrst
(possession of price), but on the last (substitution for that which possesses price). Whereas the Renaissance based the two functions of coinage (measure and substitution) on the double nature of its intrinsic
character (the fact that it was precious), the seventeenth century turns the
analysis upside down: it is the exchanging function that serves as a
foundation for the other two characters (its ability to measure and its
capacity to receive a price thus appearing as qualities deriving from that
function).
This reversal is the work of a complex of reﬂections and practices
that occurred throughout the seventeenth century (from Scipion de
Grammont to Nicolas Barbon) and that are grouped together under the
somewhat approximate term ‘mercantilism’. It is usual to characterize
this rather hastily as an absolute ‘monetarism’, that is, a systematic (or

189

190 the order of things
stubborn) confusion between wealth and coinage. In fact, it is not an
identity – more or less confused – that ‘mercantilism’ established
between these two things, but a considered articulation that makes
money the instrument of the representation and analysis of wealth, and
makes wealth, conversely, into the content represented by money. Just
as the old circular conﬁguration of similitudes and marks had
unravelled itself so that it could be redeployed to form the two correlative fabrics of representation and signs, so the circle of ‘preciousness’ is
broken with the coming of mercantilism, and wealth becomes whatever is the object of needs and desires; it is split into elements that can
be substituted for one another by the interplay of the coinage that
signiﬁes them; and the reciprocal relations of money and wealth are
established in the form of circulation and exchange. If it was possible
to believe that mercantilism confused wealth and money, this is probably because money for the mercantilists had the power of representing
all possible wealth, because it was the universal instrument for the
analysis and representation of wealth, because it covered the entire
extent of its domain leaving no residuum. All wealth is coinable; and it is
by this means that it enters into circulation – in the same way that any
natural being was characterizable, and could thereby ﬁnd its place in a
taxonomy; that any individual was nameable and could ﬁnd its place in an
articulated language; that any representation was signiﬁable and could ﬁnd its
place, in order to be known, in a system of identities and diﬀerences.
But this must be examined more closely. Among all the things that
exist in the world, which ones will mercantilism be able to include in
the term ‘wealth’? All those that, being representable, are also objects
of desire – that is, moreover, those that are marked by ‘necessity, or
utility, or pleasure, or rarity’.12 Now, can one say that the metals
used in the manufacture of coinage (we are not concerned here with
copper coinage, which is used as small change only in certain countries, but with coins that are used in foreign trade) are part of wealth?
Gold and silver have very little utility – ‘as far as their use in the house
goes’; and, however rare they may be, their abundance still exceeds
what is required by their utility. If they are sought after, if men ﬁnd that
they never have enough of them, if they dig mines and make war on
one another in order to get hold of them, it is because the process of
minting them into gold and silver coinage has given them a utility and

exchanging

a rarity that those metals do not possess of themselves. ‘Money does
not draw its value from the material of which it is composed, but
rather from its form, which is the image or mark of the Prince’.13
Gold is precious because it is money – not the converse. The relation so
strictly laid down in the sixteenth century is forthwith reversed: money
(and even the metal of which it is made) receives its value from its pure
function as sign. This entails two consequences. First, the value of
things will no longer proceed from the metal itself; it establishes itself
by itself, without reference to the coinage, according to the criteria of
utility, pleasure, or rarity. Things take on value, then, in relation to one
another; the metal merely enables this value to be represented, as a
name represents an image or an idea, yet does not constitute it: ‘Gold is
merely the sign and the instrument commonly used to convey the
value of things in practice; but the true estimation of that value has its
source in human judgement and in that faculty termed the estimative’.14 Wealth is wealth because we estimate it, just as our ideas are
what they are because we represent them. Monetary or verbal signs are
additional to this.
But why have gold and silver, which are scarcely wealth at all in
themselves, received or taken on this signifying power? No doubt one
could very well employ some other commodity to this eﬀect ‘however
vile and base it might be’.15 Copper, which in many countries is still
a cheap commodity, becomes precious in others only when it is turned
into coinage.16 But in a general fashion we use gold and silver
because they contain hidden within themselves ‘a peculiar perfection’.
A perfection that is not of the order of price, but is dependent upon
their endless capacity for representation. They are hard, imperishable,
uncorrodable; they can be divided into minute pieces; they can concentrate a great weight into a little volume; they can be easily transported;
they are easily pierced. All these factors make gold and silver into a
privileged instrument for the representation of all other kinds of
wealth, and for strict comparisons between them by means of analysis.
It is in this way that the relation of money to wealth has come to be
deﬁned. It is an arbitrary relation because it is not the intrinsic value of
the metal that gives things their prices; any object, even one that has no
price, can serve as money; but it must, nevertheless, possess peculiar
properties of representation and capacities for analysis that will permit

191

192 the order of things
it to establish relations of equality and diﬀerence between diﬀerent
kinds of wealth. It is apparent, then, that the use of gold and silver for
this purpose has a justiﬁable basis. As Bouteroue says, money ‘is a
portion of matter to which public authority has given a certain value
and weight so that it may serve as a price and make the inequality of all
things equal in trade’.17 ‘Mercantilism’ freed money from the postulate of the intrinsic value of metal – the folly of those who ‘say that
money is a commodity like other things’18 – and at the same time
established between it and wealth a strict relation of representation and
analysis. Money, says Barbon, is that by which men ‘estimate the value
of all other things; having regard more to the stamp and currency of
the money than to the quantity of ﬁne silver in each piece’.19
The usual attitude towards what it has been agreed to call ‘mercantilism’ is doubly unjust: either it is denounced for comprising a notion it
continually criticized (the intrinsic value of precious metal as the principle of wealth), or it is revealed as a series of immediate contradictions: it is accused of deﬁning money in its pure function as a sign
while insisting upon its accumulation as a commodity; of recognizing
the importance of quantitative ﬂuctuations in specie, while misunderstanding their action upon prices; of being protectionist while basing
its mechanism for the increase of wealth upon exchange. In fact, these
contradictions or hesitations exist only if one confronts mercantilism
with a dilemma that could have no meaning for it: that of money as
commodity or as sign. For Classical thought in its formative phase,
money is that which permits wealth to be represented. Without such
signs, wealth would remain immobile, useless, and as it were silent; in
this sense, gold and silver are the creators of all that man can covet. But
in order to play this role as representation, money must oﬀer properties
(physical and not economic ones) that render it adequate to its task,
and in consequence precious. It is in its quality as a universal sign that it
becomes a rare and unequally distributed commodity: ‘The rate and
value imposed upon all money is its true intrinsic goodness’.20 Just
as in the order of representations the signs that replace and analyse
them must also be representations themselves, so money cannot signify
wealth without itself being wealth. But it becomes wealth because it is
a sign; whereas a representation must ﬁrst be represented in order
subsequently to become a sign.

exchanging

Hence the apparent contradictions between the principles of
accumulation and the rules of circulation. At any given moment of
time, the number of coins in existence is determined; Colbert even
thought, despite the exploitation of mines, despite the imports of
metal from America, that ‘the quantity of money circulating in Europe
is constant’. Now it is this money that is needed to represent wealth, in
other words to attract it, to make it appear by bringing it in from
abroad or manufacturing it at home; it is this money, too, that is
needed in order to make wealth pass from hand to hand in the process
of exchange. It is necessary, therefore, to import metal by taking it
from neighbouring states: ‘Trade alone, and all that depends on it,
is capable of producing this great eﬀect’.21 The legislature must
therefore take care to do two things:
Forbid the transfer of metal abroad, or its utilization for other ends
than that of coinage, and impose customs duties such that they
enable the balance of trade to be always positive; encourage the
importation of raw materials, prevent as far as possible that of manufactured goods, export manufactured products rather than the commodities themselves whose disappearance leads to famine and
causes the rise of prices.22

Now, the metal accumulated is not intended to sleep and grow fat; it is
attracted into a state only so that it may be consumed by the process of
exchange. As Becher said, everything that is expense for one of the
partners is income for the other;23 and Thomas Mun identiﬁed ready
money with wealth.24 This is because money becomes real wealth
only to exactly the same degree to which it fulﬁls its representative
function: when it replaces commodities, when it enables them to be
moved or to wait, when it provides raw materials with the opportunity
of becoming consumable, when it remunerates work. There is therefore no reason to fear that the accumulation of money in a state will
cause prices to rise in it; and the principle established by Bodin that the
great dearness prevalent in the sixteenth century was caused by the
inﬂux of gold from America is not valid; though it is true that an
increase in specie causes prices to rise at ﬁrst, it also stimulates trade
and manufacturing; the quantity of wealth grows and the number of

193

194 the order of things
elements among which the coinage is to be divided increases by the
same amount. Rising prices are not to be feared: on the contrary, now
that the number of precious objects has increased, now that the middle
classes, as Scipion de Grammont puts it, can wear ‘satin and velvet’, the
value of things, even of the rarest things, could fall only in relation to
the totality of the others; similarly, each piece of metal loses some of its
value with regard to the others as the mass of coinage in circulation
increases.25
The relations between wealth and money, then, are based on circulation and exchange, and no longer on the ‘preciousness’ of metal. When
goods can circulate (and this thanks to money), they multiply, and
wealth increases; when coinage becomes more plentiful, as a result of a
good circulation and a favourable balance, one can attract fresh merchandise and increase both agriculture and manufacturing. As Horneck
puts it, gold and silver ‘are the purest part of our blood, the marrow of
our strength’, ‘the most indispensable instruments of human activity
and of our existence’.26 We meet once more with the old metaphor
of a coinage that is to society what blood is to the body.27 But for
Davanzatti, specie had no other role than that of irrigating the various
parts of the nation. Now that money and wealth are both included
within the area of exchange and circulation, mercantilism can adjust its
analysis in terms of the model recently provided by Harvey. According
to Hobbes,28 the venous circulation of money is that of duties and
taxes, which levy a certain mass of bullion upon all merchandise transported, bought, or sold; the bullion levied is conveyed to the heart of
Man-Leviathan – in other words, into the coﬀers of the state. It is there
that the metal is ‘made vital’: the state can, in eﬀect, melt it down or
send it back into circulation. But at all events it is the state’s authority
alone that can give it currency; and redistributed among private persons (in the form of pensions, salaries, or renumeration for provisions
bought by the state), it will stimulate, in its second, arterial circuit,
exchanges of wealth, manufactures, and agriculture. Thus circulation
becomes one of the fundamental categories of analysis. But the transference of this physiological metaphor was made possible only by the
more profound opening up of a space common to both money and
signs, to both wealth and representations. The metaphor of the city and
the body, so assiduously put to work in our Western culture, derived its

exchanging

imaginary powers only from the much deeper foundation of archaeological necessities.
Through the mercantilist experience, the domain of wealth was constituted in the same mode as that of representations. We have seen that
these latter had the power to represent themselves with themselves as
the basis of that representation: to open within themselves a space in
which they could analyse themselves, and to form substitutes for themselves out of their own elements, thus making it possible to establish
both a system of signs and a table of identities and diﬀerences. Similarly, wealth has the power to be exchanged; to analyse itself into
elements that authorize relations of equality or inequality; to signify
itself by means of those completely comparable elements of wealth
called precious metals. And just as the entire world of representation
covers itself with representations which, at one remove, represent it, in
an uninterrupted sequence, so all the kinds of wealth in the world are
related one to another in so far as they are all part of a system of
exchange. From one representation to another, there is no autonomous
act of signiﬁcation, but a simple and endless possibility of exchange.
Whatever its economic determinations and consequences, mercantilism, when questioned at the level of the episteme, appears as the slow,
long eﬀort to bring reﬂection upon prices and money into alignment
with the analysis of representations. It was responsible for the emergence of a domain of ‘wealth’ connected to that which, at about the
same time, was opened up to natural history, and likewise to that
which unfolded before general grammar. But whereas in these last two
cases the mutation came about abruptly (a certain mode of being
emerging suddenly for language in the Grammaire de Port-Royal, a certain
mode of being for individuals in nature manifesting itself almost
simultaneously with Jonston and Tournefort), the mode of being for
money and wealth, on the other hand, because it was linked to an
entire praxis, to a whole institutional complex, had a much higher
degree of historic viscosity. Neither natural beings nor language
needed the equivalent of the long mercantilist process in order to enter
the domain of representation, subject themselves to its laws, and
receive from it their signs and their principles of order.

195

196 the order of things
IV THE PLEDGE AND THE PRICE
The Classical theory of money and prices was elaborated during a wellknown series of historical experiences. First of all, there was the great
crisis of monetary signs that began in Europe fairly early in the seventeenth century. Possibly we ought to construe Colbert’s statement,
that the quantity of bullion is stable in Europe and that imports from
America can be ignored, as a ﬁrst, though still marginal and allusive,
sign of awareness as to what was happening. At the end of the century,
at all events, the shortage of coin became an acute and direct experience: recession of trade, lowering of prices, diﬃculties in paying debts,
rents, and duties, a fall in the value of land. Hence the great series of
devaluations that took place in France during the ﬁrst ﬁfteen years of
the eighteenth century in order to increase the quantity of specie; the
eleven ‘diminutions’ (revaluations) that were spaced out at regular intervals between 1 December 1713 and 1 September 1715, and
were intended – though the attempt failed – to draw hoarded bullion
back into circulation; a whole series of measures that diminished the
rate of investment income and reduced nominal capital; the appearance
of paper money in 1701, soon to be replaced by government bonds.
Among its many other consequences, Law’s experiment made possible
the reappearance of metal money, price increases, the revaluation
of land, and the revival of trade. The edicts of January and May 1726
established a coinage that was to remain stable throughout the
eighteenth century: they decreed the minting of a louis-d’or worth
twenty-four livres tournois – a value it retained right up to the Revolution.
It is usual to construe these experiences, their theoretical context,
and the discussions to which they have given rise, as the confrontation
of the money-as-sign faction with the upholders of money-ascommodity. In the ﬁrst group we ﬁnd Law, of course, together with
Terrasson,29 Dutot,30 Montesquieu,31 and the Chevalier de Jaucourt;32
on the opposing side we ﬁnd Paris-Duverney,33 the Chancelier
d’Aguesseau,34 Condillac, and Destutt; between the two factions, on the
half-way line as it were, one would have to place Melon35 and Graslin.36
And it would certainly be interesting to work out a detailed account of
these opinions and discover how they were distributed among the
various social groups. But if we investigate the knowledge that made all

exchanging

those various opinions simultaneously possible, we perceive that the
opposition between them is superﬁcial; and that, though it is logically
necessary, it is so on the basis of a single arrangement that
simply creates, at a given point, the alternatives of an indispensable
choice.
This single arrangement is that which deﬁnes money as a pledge. It
is a deﬁnition we ﬁnd in Locke and, slightly earlier, in Vaughan;37
then in Melon – ‘gold and silver are, by general agreement, the pledge,
the equivalent, or the common measure of all that which serves for
men’s use’;38 in Dutot – ‘wealth of credit or opinion is only representative, as are gold, silver, bronze, and copper’;39 in Fortbonnais –
‘the important point’ in conventional wealth lies ‘in the conﬁdence of
the owners of money and commodities that they can exchange them
when they will . . . on the footing established by custom’.40 To say
that money is a pledge is to say that it is no more than a token accepted
by common consent – hence, a pure ﬁction; but it is also to say that it
has exactly the same value as that for which it has been given, since it
can in turn be exchanged for that same quantity of merchandise or the
equivalent. Coinage can always bring back into the hands of its owner
that which has just been exchanged for it, just as, in representation, a
sign must be able to recall to thought that which it represents. Money
is a material memory, a self-duplicating representation, a deferred
exchange. As Le Trosne says, trade that makes use of money is an
improvement in so far as it is ‘an imperfect trade’,41 an act that lacks,
for a time, that which recompenses it, a demi-operation that promises
and expects the converse exchange whereby the pledge will be
reconverted into its eﬀective content.
But how can the monetary pledge provide this assurance? How can it
escape from the dilemma of the valueless sign as opposed to the commodity analogous to all other commodities? It is here, for the Classical
analysis of money, that the point of heresy occurs – the choice that
divides the followers of Law from his opponents. It is conceivable, in
fact, that the operation that pledges the money is guaranteed by the
marketable value of the material from which it is made; or, on the other
hand, by another quantity of merchandise, exterior to it, but linked to
it by collective consent or the will of the prince. It is this second
solution that Law chose, on account of the rarity of precious metal and

197

198 the order of things
the ﬂuctuations in its market value. He thought that one could circulate
paper money backed by landed property: in which case it was simply a
matter of issuing ‘banknotes mortgaged against lands and due to be
redeemed by annual payments . . . , these notes will be exchanged, like
minted coin, for the value printed on them’.42 As we know, Law was
obliged to renounce this technique in his French experiment and subsequently provided surety for his money by means of a trading company. The failure of his enterprise in no way aﬀected the validity of the
money-pledge theory that had made it possible, but that had also made
possible all reﬂection of any kind on money, even that opposed to
Law’s conceptions. And when a stable metallic money was established
in 1726, the pledge was required to be provided by the actual substance of the coins. What ensured the exchange-ability of money, it
was decided, was the market value of the metal to be found in it; and
Turgot was to criticize Law for having believed that
money is only a sign of wealth, a sign whose credit is based upon the
mark of the prince. That mark is on each coin only in order to certify its
weight and title . . . It is therefore as merchandise that money is, not
the sign, but the common measure of all other merchandise . . . Gold
derives its price from its rarity, and far from its being an evil that it
should be employed at the same time as both merchandise and
measure, these two uses maintain its price.43

Law, together with his partisans, does not stand in opposition to his age
as the brilliant – or imprudent – precursor of ﬁduciary currency. He
deﬁnes money, as his opponents did, as a pledge. But he thought that it
would be better guaranteed (more abundant as well as more stable) if it
were based upon some merchandise exterior to monetary specie itself;
whereas his opponents thought that it would be better guaranteed
(more secure and less subject to speculation) if based upon the metallic
substance constituting the material reality of money. The conﬂict
between Law and his critics concerns only the distance between the
pledge and what it is pledging. In the one case, money, relieved of all
marketable value, but guaranteed by a value exterior to it, is that ‘by
means of which’ one exchanges merchandise;44 in the other case,
since money has a price in itself, it is at the same time that ‘by means of

exchanging

which’ and that ‘for which’ one exchanges wealth. But in both cases it
is money that makes it possible to ﬁx the price of things, thanks to a
certain relation of proportion with various forms of wealth and a certain
power to make them circulate.
As a pledge, money designates a certain wealth (actual or not): it
establishes its price. But the relation between money and commodities,
and thus the price system, is modiﬁed as soon as the quantity of money
or the quantity of commodities at any moment of time is also modiﬁed. If money is in short supply with relation to goods, then it will
have a high value, and prices will be low; if it increases in quantity to
the point of becoming abundant in relation to wealth, then it will
have a low value, and prices will be high. The power of money to
represent and analyse varies with the quantity of specie on the one
hand and with the quantity of wealth on the other: it would be
constant only if both quantities were stable, or varied together in the
same proportion.
The ‘quantitative law’ was not ‘invented’ by Locke. Bodin and
Davanzatti already knew, in the sixteenth century, that an increase in
the mass of metal in circulation caused the price of commodities to
rise; but this mechanism seemed to them to be linked to an intrinsic
devalorization of the metal itself. In the late seventeenth century, this
same mechanism was deﬁned on the basis of the representative
function of money, ‘the quantity of money being in proportion to the
whole of trade’. More metal – and immediately any commodity existing in the world will have slightly more representative elements at its
disposal; more merchandise – and each metallic unit will be slightly
more heavily mortgaged. One need only take any given commodity as a
stable reference point and this phenomenon of ﬂuctuation is clearly
revealed. As Locke says:
That supposing wheat a standing measure, that is, that there is constantly the same quantity of it in proportion to its vent, we shall ﬁnd
money to run the same variety of changes in its value, as all other
commodities do . . . The reason whereof is this, that there being ten
times as much silver now in the world, (the discovery of the West9
Indies having made the plenty) as there was then, it is ––
10 less worth
9
––
now than it was at that time; that is, it will exchange for 10 less of any

199

200 the order of things
commodity now, which bears the same proportion to its vent as it did
200 years since.45

The drop in the value of precious metal invoked here does not concern
a certain precious quality which it is thought of as possessing in itself,
but its general power of representation. Money and wealth are to be
thought of as twin masses, which necessarily correspond with one
another:
As the total of the one is to the total of the other, so part of the one is
to part of the other . . . If there were only one commodity, divisible as
gold is, then half of that commodity would correspond to half of its
total on the other side.46

Supposing that there were only one form of goods in the world, all
the gold on earth would be there to represent it; and, inversely, if
men possessed only one coin between them, then all the wealth
produced by nature or by their own hands would have to share in its
subdivisions. Given these limiting circumstances, if there is an inﬂux of
money – while commodities remain unchanged in quantity – ‘the
value of each division of the current specie will diminish by the same
amount’; on the other hand,
if industry, the arts and the sciences introduce new objects into the
circle of exchange . . . it will be necessary to apply a portion of the
signs representing values to the new value of those new productions;
since this portion will be taken from the whole mass of signs, it will
diminish the relative quantity of that mass and increase its representative value by the same amount in order to cover the increase in values,
its function being to represent them all, in the proportions appropriate
to them.47

There can therefore be no fair price: nothing in any given commodity indicates by any intrinsic character the quantity of money that
should be paid for it. Cheapness is neither more nor less exact than
dearness. Though there do exist rules of convention that make it possible to ﬁx the quantity of money by means of which it is desirable to

exchanging

represent wealth. In the last resort, everything exchangeable should
have its equivalent – ‘its designation’ – in specie; a state of aﬀairs that
would entail no drawbacks if the money used were of paper (which
would be printed or destroyed, as Law proposed, in accordance with
the needs of exchange), but that would be troublesome, or even
impossible, if the money were metallic. Now, as it circulates, one and
the same monetary unit acquires the power to represent several things;
when it changes hands it is sometimes payment to an entrepreneur for
some object, sometimes payment to a worker of his wage, sometimes
payment to a merchant for some commodity, sometimes payment to a
farmer for his produce, sometimes payment to a landowner of his rent.
A single piece of metal can, in the course of time and according to the
individuals that receive it, represent several equivalent things (an
object, work, a measure of wheat, a portion of income) – just as a
common noun has the power to represent several things, or a taxonomic character has the power to represent several individuals, several
species, several genera, etc. But whereas the character can cover a larger
generality only by becoming simpler, money can represent more kinds
of wealth only by circulating faster. The extension of a character is
deﬁned by the number of species it includes (therefore by the area it
occupies in the table); speed of circulation is deﬁned by the number of
hands through which money passes during the time it takes to return
to its starting-point (this is why payment to agriculture for the products of its harvest is taken as a ﬁrst source, because there one has
absolutely reliable annual cycles to deal with). It will be seen, therefore,
that the speed of monetary movement during a set time corresponds to
the taxonomic extension of a character within the simultaneous space
of the table.
This speed is limited in two directions: an inﬁnitely rapid speed
would imply an immediate exchange in which money would have no
role to play, and an inﬁnitely slow speed would mean that every element of wealth possesses its permanent monetary double. Between these
two extremes there are variable speeds to which the quantities of
money that make them possible correspond. Now, the cycles of circulation are determined by the yearly occurrence of the harvests: it is
possible, therefore, given the harvests and taking into account the
number of individuals making up the population of a state, to deﬁne

201

202 the order of things
the necessary and suﬃcient quantity of money there must be if it is to
pass through everyone’s hands and to represent at least the means of
subsistence to them all. It is thus understandable how, in the eighteenth
century, analyses of the circulation of money based upon agricultural
revenue were linked to the problem of population growth and to calculation of the optimum quantity of coinage. A triple question that is
posited in a normative form: for the problem is not to discover by what
mechanisms money circulates or fails to circulate, how it is expended
or accumulated (such questions are possible only in an economy that
poses problems of production or capital), but what the necessary quantity of money is in a given country that will provide a suﬃciently rapid
circulation and pass through a suﬃciently large number of hands. Thus
prices will not be intrinsically ‘fair’, but exactly regulated: the divisions
of the monetary mass will analyse wealth according to an articulation
that will be neither too loosely nor too tightly knit. The ‘table’ will be
well made.
This optimum proportion is not the same whether we consider a
country in isolation or the movement of its foreign trade. If we suppose
a state capable of living on itself, the quantity of money it would be
necessary to put into circulation would depend upon several variables:
the quantity of merchandise entering the exchange system; the portion
of that merchandise which, being neither distributed nor paid for by
barter, must at some moment during its journey be represented by
money; the quantity of metal for which signed paper may be substituted; and, ﬁnally, the rhythm according to which payments must be
made: it is not a matter of indiﬀerence, as Cantillon points out,48
whether workers are paid by the week or the day, or whether rents fall
due at the end of every year rather than, as is customary, at the end of
every quarter. Since the values of these four variables are determinable
for any given country, the optimum quantity of coinage for that country can be likewise determined. In order to make a calculation of this
kind, Cantillon begins with what is produced by the land, from which
all wealth is directly or indirectly derived. This product is divided into
three revenues in the hands of the farmer: the revenue paid to the
landowner; that which is used for the maintenance of the farmer himself and that of his men and horses; and, lastly, ‘a third which should
remain in order to make his enterprise proﬁtable’.49 Now, only the

exchanging

ﬁrst of these and roughly half of the third have to be paid in specie; the
rest can be paid in the form of direct exchanges of goods. Taking into
account the fact that one-half of the population lives in towns and must
therefore expend more on upkeep than do peasants, it is apparent that
the monetary mass in circulation should be almost equal to two-thirds
of production – if, that is, all payments were made once a year; but, in
fact, ground rent falls due every quarter; it is therefore suﬃcient if the
quantity of coinage is equivalent to one-sixth of production. Moreover,
many other payments are made daily or weekly; the quantity of coin
required is therefore of the order of a ninth part of production – in
other words, one-third of the landowners’ revenue from ground
rent.50
But this calculation is exact only on condition that our imaginary
nation is wholly isolated. Now, the majority of states maintain a trade
with one another in which the only means of payment are barter, metal
estimated according to its weight (and not in the form of coins with
their nominal value), and, on occasion, bankers’ drafts. In this case also
it is possible to calculate the relative quantity of money that it is desirable to put into circulation: however, this estimate should not be
arrived at with reference to the production of the land but rather with
reference to a certain relation of wages and prices with those in force in
foreign countries. In fact, in a country where prices are relatively low
(because the quantity of money in circulation is small), foreign money
is attracted by the greater buying power it acquires there: the quantity
of metal increases. The state, as we say, becomes ‘rich and powerful’; it
is able to maintain a ﬂeet and an army, achieve conquests, and enrich
itself further. The quantity of coinage in circulation causes prices to
rise, while at the same time aﬀording private persons the resources to
buy abroad, where prices are lower: little by little, the metal disappears,
and the state becomes poor once again. Such is the cycle that Cantillon
described and formulated into a general principle: ‘The excessive
abundance of money, which makes the power of states while it lasts,
thrusts them imperceptibly and naturally back into indigence’.51
It would, no doubt, be impossible to avoid these ﬂuctuations did
there not exist in the order of things a contrary tendency, which ceaselessly aggravates the poverty of nations that are already poor and, on
the other hand, increases the prosperity of states that are rich. For

203

204 the order of things
population tends to move in the contrary direction to money. The latter
moves out from the prosperous states into the regions where prices are
low; whereas men are attracted towards high wages, therefore towards
countries that have an abundant coinage at their disposal. The poorer
countries thus have a tendency to become depopulated; their agriculture and industries deteriorate and poverty increases. In rich countries, in contrast, the inﬂux of labour makes possible the exploitation of
new wealth, the sale of which proportionately increases the amount
of metal in circulation.52 Governmental policy should therefore
attempt to come to terms with these two contrary movements on the
part of population and currency. The number of inhabitants must
grow, gradually but uninterruptedly, so that manufacturing industries
will always have an abundance of workers to draw on; then wages will
not increase at a greater rate than wealth, nor prices with them; and the
balance of trade will be able to remain favourable: one recognizes in all
this the foundation of the populationist theses.53 But, on the other
hand, it is also necessary that the quantity of specie should be slightly
but constantly on the rise: the only means of making sure that the
products of the land or of industry will be well remunerated, that
wages will be suﬃcient, and that the population will not be poverty
stricken in the midst of the wealth it is creating: hence all the measures
intended to encourage foreign trade and maintain a positive balance.
What ensures the equilibrium of the economy, therefore, and prevents profound ﬂuctuations between wealth and poverty, is not a certain and deﬁnitively acquired economic constitution, but the balanced
interaction – at once natural and deliberately maintained – of two
tendencies. There is prosperity within a state, not when coin is plentiful and prices are high, but when the coinage has reached that stage of
augmentation – which must be made to continue indeﬁnitely – that
makes it possible to maintain wages without increasing prices any
further: this being so, the population grows at a steady rate, its work
constantly produces more, and, since each consecutive increase in the
coinage is divided up (in accordance with the law of representativity)
between small quantities of wealth, prices will not increase in relation
to those in force abroad. It is only between an increase in the quantity
of gold and a rise in prices that an increasing quantity of gold and
silver encourages industry. A nation whose coinage is in process of

exchanging

diminution is, at any given moment of comparison, weaker and poorer
than another nation which has no greater possessions but whose coinage is in process of growth. This is the explanation of the Spanish
disaster: its mining possessions had, in fact, increased the nation’s
coinage – and, consequently, prices – to a massive degree, without
giving industry, agriculture, and population the time, between cause
and eﬀect, to develop proportionately: it was inevitable that American
gold should spread throughout Europe, buy commodities there, cause
manufacturing to develop, and enrich its farms, while leaving Spain
more poverty stricken than it had ever been. England, on the other
hand, though it attracted bullion too, did so always for the proﬁt of
labour and not merely to provide its inhabitants with luxury, that is, in
order to increase the number of its workers and the quantity of its
products before any increase in prices occurred.54
Such analyses are important because they introduce the notion of
progress into the order of human activity. But they are still more
important in that they provide the interplay of signs and representations with a temporal index that gives progress a deﬁnition of its
condition of possibility. An index not to be found in any other area of
the theory of order. Money, as conceived by Classical thought, cannot,
in fact, represent wealth without that power being modiﬁed, from
within, by time – whether a spontaneous cycle augments, after having
ﬁrst diminished, its capacity for representing wealth, or whether governmental policy, by dint of concerted eﬀorts, keeps its representativity
constant. In the order of natural history, the characters (the groups of
identities selected to represent and distinguish a number of species or a
number of genera) resided within the continuous area of nature,
which they divided into a taxonomic table; time intervened only from
without, in order to upset the continuity of the very smallest diﬀerences and to scatter them in accordance with the fragmented localities
of geography. Here, on the contrary, time belongs to the inner law of
the representations and is part of it; it follows and modiﬁes without
interruption the power possessed by wealth to represent itself and so
analyse itself by means of a monetary system. Where natural history
revealed squares of identities separated by diﬀerences, the analysis of
wealth reveals ‘diﬀerentials’ – tendencies towards increase and towards
diminution.

205

206 the order of things
It was inevitable that this function of time within wealth should
became come apparent as soon as money was deﬁned (as it was at the
end of the seventeenth century) as a pledge and assimilated into credit:
it then became necessary that the duration of the credit, the rapidity
with which repayment fell due, the number of hands through which it
passed in a given time, should become characteristic variables of its
representative power. But all this was merely the consequence of a form
of reﬂection that placed the monetary sign, with relation to wealth, in
a posture of representation in the full sense of the term. It is, therefore,
the same archaeological network that supports the theory of moneyas-representation in the analysis of wealth and the theory of character-asrepresentation in natural history. The character designates natural beings
by situating them in their surroundings; monetary price designates
wealth, but in the movement of its growth or diminution.

V THE CREATION OF VALUE
The theory of money and trade responds to the question: how, in the
movement of exchange, can prices characterize things – how can
money establish a system of signs and designation between kinds of
wealth? The theory of value responds to a question that intersects this
ﬁrst one, a question that probes, as it were vertically and in depth, the
horizontal area in which exchange is continuously taking place: why
are there things that men seek to exchange; why are some of them
worth more than others, why do some of them, that have no utility,
have a high value, whereas others, that are indispensable, have no value
at all? It is thus no longer a question of knowing in accordance with
what mechanism kinds of wealth can represent each other (and represent themselves by means of that universally representative wealth constituted by precious metal), but why objects of desire and need have to
be represented, how one posits the value of a thing, and why one can
aﬃrm that it is worth this or that.
To be worth, for Classical thought, is ﬁrst of all to be worth something, to be substitutable for that thing in a process of exchange.
Money was invented, prices were ﬁxed and can modify themselves,
only in so far as that process of exchange exists. Now, exchange is only
apparently a simple process. In fact, exchange by barter is possible only

exchanging

if each of the two parties concerned recognizes a value in what the
other possesses. In one sense, therefore, these exchangeable things,
together with their particular values, should exist in advance in the
hands of each party so that the double cession and double acquisition
can ﬁnally take place. But, from another point of view, what each
person eats and drinks, what he needs in order to live, has no value as
long as he does not relinquish it; and what he does not need is equally
devoid of value as long as he does not employ it to acquire something
he does need. In other words, in order that one thing can represent
another in an exchange, they must both exist as bearers of value; and
yet value exists only within the representation (actual or possible), that
is, within the exchange or the exchangeability. Hence two simultaneously possible ways of construing the matter: the one analyses
value in the act of exchange itself, at the point where the given and the
received intersect; the other analyses it as anterior to the exchange and
as a primary condition without which that exchange could not take
place. The ﬁrst of these two readings corresponds to an analysis that
places and encloses the whole essence of language within the proposition; the second corresponds to an analysis that reveals this same
essence of language as residing in the region of primitive designations
(language of action or roots); in the ﬁrst case, language does, in fact,
ﬁnd its ﬁeld of possibility in a predication provided by the verb – that
is, by the element of language that is set apart from all other words, yet
relates them to one another; the verb, which renders all the words of
language possible on the basis of their propositional connection, corresponds to the exchange, which, as an act antedating the others, provides a basis for the value of the things exchanged and for the price for
which they are relinquished; in the other form of analysis, language is
rooted outside itself and, as it were, in the nature or the analogies of
things; the root, the ﬁrst cry that gave rise to words even before language itself was born, corresponds to the immediate formation of
value prior to exchange and the reciprocal measurements of need.
For grammar, however, these two forms of analysis – based on the
proposition or based on roots – are perfectly distinct, because grammar
is dealing with language, that is, with a system of representation
required both to designate and to judge, or again, related to both an
object and a truth. In the economic sphere this distinction does not

207

208 the order of things
exist, since, for desire, the relation to its object and the aﬃrmation that
it is desirable are one and the same thing; to designate it is already to
posit the connection. So that, whereas grammar had two separate and
reciprocally adjusted theoretical segments at its disposal, forming ﬁrst
of all an analysis of the proposition (or the judgement), then an analysis of designation (the gesture or the root), the economy knows only a
single theoretical segment, but one that is simultaneously susceptible
of two readings made in contrary directions. The one analyses value in
terms of the exchange of objects of need – of useful objects; the other in
terms of the formation and origin of objects whose exchange will later
deﬁne their value – in terms of nature’s prolixity. Between these two
possible readings we recognize a point of heresy that is by now familiar: it separates what is termed the ‘psychological theory’ of Condillac,
Galiani, and Graslin, from that of the Physiocrats, with Quesnay and his
school. The doctrines of the Physiocrats may not really possess the
importance attributed to them by economists of the early nineteenth
century, when the latter were seeking in them the foundation stone of
political economy; but it would be equally vain to attribute the same
role – as the marginalists in fact did – to the ‘psychological school’.
There are no diﬀerences between these two modes of analysis other
than the point of origin and the direction chosen to traverse a network
of necessity that remains identical in both.
In order that there may be values and wealth, say the Physiocrats, an
exchange must be possible: that is, one should have at one’s disposal a
superﬂuity that the other party needs. The fruit I am hungry for, which
I pick and eat, is a commodity presented to me by nature; there can be no
wealth unless the fruits on my tree are suﬃciently numerous to exceed
my appetite. Even then, someone else must be hungry and require
those fruit of me. ‘The air we breathe,’ says Quesnay, ‘the water we
draw from the stream, and all the other superabundant goods or forms
of wealth common to all men, are not marketable: they are commodities, not wealth’.55 Before exchange, there is nothing but that rare
or abundant reality provided by nature; demand on the one hand and
relinquishment on the other are alone capable of producing value.
Now, the purpose of exchange is precisely that of distributing whatever
is in excess in such a manner that it will be passed on to those who
need it. It is therefore ‘wealth’ only provisionally, during the time

exchanging

when, possessed by some and needed by others, it begins and completes the trajectory that will convey it to the consumers and thus
restore it to its original nature as a commodity. ‘The aim of exchange,’
says Mercier de La Rivière, ‘is enjoyment, consumption. Trade, then,
can be summarized as the exchange of everyday things in order to
achieve their distribution into the hands of their consumers’.56 Now,
this constitution of value by means of trade57 cannot be achieved
without a subtraction of goods: trade, in fact, transports goods, and
entails cartage, storage, processing, and selling costs:58 in short, it
costs a certain consumption of goods for the goods themselves to be
converted into wealth. The only sort of trade that would cost nothing
would be simple barter, since in that case the goods are wealth and have
value only for the brief instant during which the exchange is made: ‘If
the exchange could be made immediately and without cost, it could be
only the more advantageous to the two exchangers: it is therefore a
grievous mistake to take for trade itself those intermediary operations
that serve as the means of trade’.59 The Physiocrats allow themselves
to posit only the material reality of goods, which means that the formation of value in exchange becomes a process costly in itself and must be
debited against existing goods. The creation of value is therefore not a
means of satisfying a greater number of needs; it is the sacriﬁce of a
certain quantity of goods in order to exchange others. Values thus form
the negative of goods.
But how is it that value can be formed in this way? What is the origin
of this excess that makes it possible for goods to be transformed into
wealth without being eﬀaced and ﬁnally disappearing altogether as a
result of successive exchanges and continual circulation? How is it that
the cost of this continuous creation of value does not exhaust the goods
that men have at their disposal?
Is it that trade is able to ﬁnd this necessary supplement in itself?
Certainly not, since its aim is to exchange value for value in accordance
with the greatest possible equality. ‘In order to receive much, one must
give much; and in order to give much, one must receive much. That is
the whole art of trade. Trade, by its very nature, exchanges together
only things of equal value’.60 It is true that a commodity taken to a
distant market can be exchanged for a price higher than that which it
would command in its place of origin; but this increase corresponds to

209

210 the order of things
the real expense of transporting it; and the only reason it does not lose
anything because of this fact is that the stationary merchandise for
which it is exchanged loses those freightage charges out of its own
price. One may haul one’s merchandise from one end of the world to
the other, but the cost of its exchange is always levied on the goods
exchanged. It is not trade that has produced the superﬂuity of goods:
the excess must already have existed in order for trade to be possible.
Nor is industry capable of compensating for the cost of the creation
of value. In fact, manufactured products may be sold in accordance
with two diﬀerent systems. If prices are free, competition tends to
lower them to the point where, apart from the cost of the raw
materials, they cover no more than the work of the worker who made
the product; according to Cantillon’s deﬁnition, this wage corresponds
to the worker’s subsistence during the time he takes to do the work;
and doubtless one should also add the subsistence and proﬁts of the
entrepreneur; but in any case, the increase in value due to the manufacturing process represents the consumption of those whom it
remunerates; so that in order to produce wealth it has been necessary
to sacriﬁce some goods: ‘The artisan destroys as much in subsistence as
he produces by his work’.61 When prices are controlled by a monopoly, the selling price of objects can rise considerably. But this does
not mean that the labour of the workers will be better remunerated: the
competition existing between them tends to maintain their wages at
the level that is just indispensable for their subsistence;62 as for the
proﬁts of the entrepreneurs, it is true that monopolistic prices increase
them to the degree that the value of the objects put on the market is
increased; but this increase is merely the proportional drop in the
exchange value of other merchandise: ‘All these entrepreneurs make
fortunes only because others incur expenses’.63 Industry appears to
increase values; in fact, it deducts the cost of one or several subsistences
from the exchange itself. Value is created, or increased, not by production, but by consumption – whether it be that of the worker in order to
subsist, that of the entrepreneur taking his proﬁt, or that of the nonworker who buys. ‘The increase in market value which is due to the
sterile class is the eﬀect of the worker’s expenditure, not of his work.
For the idle man who expends without working produces the
same eﬀect in this respect’.64 Value arises only where goods have

exchanging

disappeared; and work functions as an expenditure: it turns the
subsistence which it has itself consumed into a price.
This is even true of agricultural work. The status of the worker who
ploughs is in no way diﬀerent from that of the worker who weaves or
carts; he is only one of ‘the tools of work or cultivation’65 – a tool
that requires a subsistence, and deducts it from what the land produces.
As in all the other cases, the remuneration of agricultural labour tends
to regulate itself so as to provide that subsistence exactly. Yet agricultural labour does possess one privilege, not an economic one, in the
system of exchanges, but a physical one, in the sphere of the production of goods: the land, when worked, provides a possible quantity of
subsistence much greater than that actually needed by the labourer
who works it. As remunerated work, therefore, the agricultural worker’s
labour is just as negative and wasteful as that of factory workers;
but, as ‘physical commerce’ with nature,66 it is the source of an
immense fecundity. And though it is true that this lavishness is
remunerated in advance by the costs of ploughing, sowing, and animal
fodder, everyone knows that where you sow a grain of wheat you reap
an ear; and that herds and ﬂocks grow fatter every day even while they
rest, which cannot be said of a bale of silk or wool in storage’.67
Agriculture is the only sphere in which the increase in value due to
production is not equivalent to the maintenance of the producer. This
is because there is really an invisible producer who does not require
any remuneration; it is with him that the farmer is, without knowing it,
in partnership; and while the labourer consumes an amount equal to
his work, that same work, by virtue of the labourer’s Co-Author, produces all the goods from which the creation of values will be deducted:
‘Agriculture is a manufacture of divine institution in which the manufacturer has as his partner the Author of nature, the Producer of all
goods and all wealth’.68
It is understandable, therefore, why the Physiocrats accorded such
theoretical and practical importance to ground rent – and not to agricultural labour. This is because the latter is remunerated by consumption, whereas ground rent represents, or ought to represent, the net
product: the quantity of goods provided by nature over and above the
subsistence it yields to the worker and the remuneration it demands
for itself in order to go on producing. It is this rent that permits the

211

212 the order of things
transformation of goods into values or into wealth. It provides the
remuneration for all other kinds of work and all the consumption
corresponding to them. Hence two major concerns: to have a large
quantity of specie at one’s disposal, so that labour, trade, and industry
can be adequately supplied with it; and to see to it that absolute protection is given to that part of the working capital that must return to the
land in order to allow it to go on producing. The Physiocrats’ economic
and political programme must therefore include: an increase in agricultural prices, but not in the wages of those who work the land; the
levying of all taxes on ground rent itself; the abolition of monopolistic
prices and all trade preferences (so that industry and trade, regulated by
competition, will be forced to maintain fair prices); a vast reinvestment
of money in the land for the advances necessary for future production.
The whole system of exchanges, the whole costly creation of values,
is referred back to the unbalanced, radical, and primitive exchange
established between the advances made by the landowner and the generosity of nature. This exchange alone is absolutely proﬁtable, and it is
from within this net proﬁt that deductions of goods can be made to
cover the costs necessitated by each exchange, and thus by the appearance of each new element of wealth. It would be untrue to say that
nature spontaneously produces values; but it is the inexhaustible source
of the goods that exchange transforms into values, though not without
expenditure and consumption. Quesnay and his disciples analyse
wealth on the basis of what is given in exchange – that is, on the basis
of the superﬂuity that exists without any value, but that becomes value
by taking part in a circuit of substitutions, in which it must remunerate
each of its movements, each of its transformations, with wages, food,
and subsistence, in short, with a part of that surplus of which it is itself
a part. The Physiocrats begin their analysis with the thing itself which
is designated in value, but which exists prior to the system of wealth.
The same is true of grammarians when they analyse words on the basis
of their roots, of the immediate relation that unites a sound and a
thing, and of the successive abstractions by means of which that root
becomes a name in a language.

exchanging

VI UTILITY
The analysis of Condillac, Galiani, Graslin, and Destutt corresponds to
the grammatical theory of the proposition. It selects as its point of
departure, not what is given in an exchange, but what is received: the
same thing, in fact, but seen from the point of view of the person who
needs it, who wants it, and who agrees to give up what he possesses in
order to obtain this other thing which in his estimation is more useful
and to which he attaches greater value. The Physiocrats and
their opponents are in fact traversing the same theoretical segment, but
in opposite directions: the former are asking themselves on what condition – and at what cost – an article can become a value in a system of
exchanges; the latter, on what condition a judgement of appraisal can
be transformed into a price in that same system of exchanges. It is
understandable, then, why the analyses of the Physiocrats and those of
the utilitarians are often so close, and sometimes complementary; why
Cantillon could be claimed by the former – for his theory of the three
fundamental revenues and the importance he gives to land – as well as
by the latter – for his analysis of circulation and the role he gives to
money;69 why Turgot was able to be faithful to Physiocrat doctrine
in Réﬂexions sur la formation et la distribution des richesses, and yet very close to
Galiani in Valeur et monnaie.
Let us imagine the most rudimentary of all exchange situations: a
man who has nothing but corn or wheat confronted with another who
has nothing but wine or wood. As yet, there is no ﬁxed price, no
equivalence, no common measure. Yet if these men have gone to the
trouble to collect the wood, to sow and harvest the corn or the wheat, it
is because they have passed a certain judgement on these things; without having to compare it with anything else, they judged that this
wheat or that wood was able to satisfy one of their needs – that it
would be useful to them: ‘To say that a thing has value is to say that it is,
or that we esteem it, good for some use. The value of things is thus
founded on their utility, or, what amounts to the same thing, on the
use we can make of them’.70 This judgement is the foundation of
what Turgot terms the ‘estimative value’ of things.71 A value that is
absolute, since it concerns each commodity individually and without
its being compared with any other; yet it is also relative and changing,

213

214 the order of things
since it is modiﬁed in accordance with men’s appetite, desires, and
need.
However, the exchange achieved upon the basis of these primary
utilities is not their simple reduction to a common denominator. It is in
itself a creator of utility, since it presents for the appraisal of one party
what until then had possessed only slight utility for the other. At this
point, three possibilities exist. It may be that the ‘surplus of each’, as
Condillac72 puts it – that which he has not utilized or does not
expect to utilize immediately – corresponds in quality and in quantity
to the needs of the other: the whole surplus of the wheat-owner is
revealed, in the exchange situation, as being useful to the wine-owner,
and vice versa; in this case, what was useless becomes totally useful,
through a creation of simultaneous and equal values on each side; what
was estimated as null by the one becomes positive in the estimation of
the other; and since the situation is symmetrical, the estimative values
thus created are automatically equivalent; utility and price correspond
exactly, with no residuum; the appraisal adjusting itself automatically
to the estimate. Or it may be that the surplus of the one party is not
suﬃcient for the needs of the other, and that the latter will refrain from
giving all that he possesses; he will keep some part of it in order to
obtain from a third party the additional quantity indispensable to his
need; this deducted portion – which the second party will try to reduce
to a minimum, since he needs all the ﬁrst’s surplus – gives rise to price:
it is no longer an excess of wheat that is being exchanged for an excess
of wine, but, as the result of an altercation, so many hogsheads of wine
for so many bushels of wheat. Shall we say, then, that the party who
gives the most is losing some of the value of what he possessed in this
exchange? Not at all, for the surplus is of no use to him, or at all events,
since he has agreed to exchange it, he must be according a greater value
to what he receives than to what he relinquishes. Or it may be, and this
is the third hypothesis, that there is nothing absolutely superﬂuous to
either party, since each of them knows that he can use, sooner or later,
the totality of what he possesses: the state of need is therefore general,
and every item of goods owned becomes wealth. In this case, the two
parties may very well exchange nothing at all; but equally, each one of
them may calculate that a portion of the other’s commodity would be
more useful to him than a portion of his own. They both establish – but

exchanging

each for himself, and therefore in accordance with diﬀering calculations – a minimum inequality: so many measures of the corn I do not
have, one of them says, will be worth a little more to me than so many
measures of my wood; such and such a quantity of wood, says the
other, will be more valuable to me than such and such a quantity of
corn. These two estimative inequalities deﬁne for each party the relative value he gives to what he possesses and to what he does not
possess. And the only means of reconciling these two inequalities is to
establish between them the equality of two relations: the exchange will
take place when the relation of corn to wood for the one party
becomes equal to the relation of wood to corn for the other. Whereas
estimative value is deﬁned solely by the interaction of a need and an
object – and thus by a single interest in an isolated individual – in
appreciative value, as it now appears,
there are two men who compare and there are four interests being
compared; but the two private interests of each of the two contracting
parties have ﬁrst been compared with one another separately, and it is
the results of this comparison that are then compared in order to
arrive at an average estimative value;

this equality of relation makes it possible to say, for example, that four
measures of corn and ﬁve bundles of wood have an equal exchangeable
value.73 But this equality does not mean that one exchanges utility
for utility in identical portions: one exchanges inequalities, which
means that on both sides – and despite the fact that each element
traded has an intrinsic utility – more value is acquired than was originally possessed. Instead of two immediate utilities, one has two others
which are considered to satisfy larger needs.
Such analyses show how value and exchange interlock: there would
be no exchange if there were no immediate values – that is, if there did
not exist in things ‘an attribute which is accidental to them and which
is dependent solely upon man’s needs, as an eﬀect is dependent upon
its cause’.74 But the exchange creates value in its turn, and in two
ways. First, it renders useful things that without it would be of slight
utility or perhaps none at all: what can a diamond be worth to men
who are hungry or need clothes? But it is suﬃcient that there exists one

215

216 the order of things
woman in the world with a desire to be attractive, together with the
trade capable of conveying it into her hands, for that stone to become
‘indirect wealth for its owner who does not need it . . . the value of that
object is for him an exchange value’;75 and he will be able to feed
himself by selling something that can serve only to glitter: hence the
importance of luxury goods, hence the fact that, from the point of view
of wealth, there is no diﬀerence between need, comfort, and pleasure.76 On the other hand, exchange gives rise to a new type of value,
which is ‘appreciative’: it organizes a reciprocal relation between utilities, which parallels the relation to mere need; and which also, and
above all, modiﬁes it: for in the sphere of appreciation, and thus of the
comparison of each value with all others, the least new creation of
utility diminishes the relative value of all those already in existence.
The total of wealth does not increase, despite the appearance of new
objects capable of satisfying needs; all production creates only ‘a new
order of values relative to the mass of wealth; the ﬁrst objects of need
will have diminished in value so as to make room in the mass for the
new value of objects of comfort or pleasure’.77 Exchange is therefore
that which increases values (by giving rise to new utilities which, at
least indirectly, satisfy needs); but it is equally that which diminishes
values (in relation to one another, in the appreciation made of each).
By means of it, the non-useful becomes useful, and the more useful
becomes less useful in exactly the same proportion. Such is the constituent role of exchange in the action of value: it gives each thing a
price, and it lowers the price of each one in doing so.
It will be seen that the theoretical elements are the same in the works
of the Physiocrats as in those of their opponents. The body of fundamental propositions used is common to both: all wealth springs from
the land; the value of things is linked with exchange; money has value
as the representation of the wealth in circulation; circulation should be
as simple and as complete as possible. But these theoretical segments
are arranged by the Physiocrats and by the ‘utilitarians’ in inverse
orders; and as a result of the interplay of these diﬀering arrangements,
what plays a positive role in one theory becomes negative in the other.
Condillac, Galiani, and Graslin start from the exchange of utilities as
the subjective and positive foundation of all values; all that satisﬁes a
need, has, therefore, a value, and any transformation or transference

exchanging

that makes it possible to satisfy a greater number of needs constitutes
an increase of value: it is this increase that makes it possible to
remunerate workers, by giving them an amount, deducted from this
increase, which is equivalent to their subsistence. But all these positive
elements which constitute value are based upon a certain state of need
present in men, and therefore upon the ﬁnite character of nature’s
fecundity. For the Physiocrats, the same sequence must be gone
through in the opposite direction: all transformation of the products
of the land, and all work on them, is remunerated by the worker’s
subsistence; it must therefore be debited to the totality of goods as a
diminution; value arises only where there is consumption. For value to
be created, then, nature must be endowed with endless fecundity. All
that is perceived positively and, as it were, in relief, in one of these two
interpretations is perceived negatively, like a cast of the ﬁrst, in the
other. The ‘utilitarians’ base their attribution of a certain value to things
upon the articulation of exchanges; the Physiocrats explain the progressive patterning of values by the existence of wealth. But in both interpretations the theory of value, like that of structure in natural history, links
the moment of attribution and that of articulation.
Perhaps it would have been simpler to say that the Physiocrats represented the landowners and the ‘utilitarians’ the merchants and entrepreneurs. That the latter, in consequence, believed that the value of
what the land produced was increased when it was transformed or
transported; that they were preoccupied, by force of circumstance,
with a market economy in which needs and desires created the laws.
And that the Physiocrats, on the other hand, believed only in agricultural production, and claimed that its remuneration should be
higher; that, being landowners, they attributed a natural basis to
ground rent, and that, since they were claiming political power, they
wanted to be the only ones subject to taxation, and thus in exclusive
enjoyment of the rights taxation conferred. And there is no doubt that
the broad economic choices of both sides can be perceived beyond
their coherence of interests. But though membership of a social group
can always explain why such and such a person chose one system of
thought rather than another, the condition enabling that system to be
thought never resides in the existence of the group. We must be careful
to distinguish here between two forms and two levels of investigation.

217

218 the order of things
The ﬁrst would be a study of opinions in order to discover who in the
eighteenth century was a Physiocrat and who an Antiphysiocrat; what
interests were at stake; what were the points and arguments of the
polemic; how the struggle for power developed. The other, which takes
no account of the persons involved, or their history, consists in deﬁning the conditions on the basis of which it was possible to conceive of
both ‘physiocratic’ and ‘utilitarian’ knowledge in interlocking and
simultaneous forms. The ﬁrst analysis would be the province of a
doxology. Archaeology can recognize and practise only the second.

VII GENERAL TABLE
The general organization of the empirical spheres can now be sketched
out as a whole (see p. 219).
The ﬁrst thing we observe is that analysis of wealth obeys the same
conﬁguration as natural history and general grammar. The theory of value
makes it possible, in fact, to explain (whether by dearth and need or by
the superabundance of nature) how certain objects can be introduced
into the system of exchanges, how, by means of the primitive process
of barter, one thing can be posited as the equivalent of another, how
the estimate of the ﬁrst can be related to the estimate of the second in
accordance with a relation of equality (A and B have the same value) or
one of analogy (the value of A, possessed by my counterpart, is to my
need what the value of B, which I possess, is to him). Value corresponds, then, to the attributive function which, for general grammar, is
performed by the verb, and which, giving rise to the proposition,
constitutes the initial threshold beyond which there is language. But
when appreciative value becomes estimative value, that is, when it is
deﬁned and limited within the system constituted by all possible
exchanges, then each value ﬁnds itself positioned and patterned by
all the others: when this happens, value assumes the articulatory role
recognized by general grammar in all the non-verbal elements of the
proposition (that is, in nouns, and in all words that, whether visibly or
in secret, contain a nominal function). In the system of exchanges, in
the interplay that permits each portion of wealth to signify the others
or to be signiﬁed by them, value is at the same time verb and noun, power
to connect and principle of analysis, attribution, and pattern. Value,

exchanging

219

220 the order of things
then, occupies exactly the same position in the analysis of wealth as
structure does in natural history; like structure, it unites in one and the
same operation the function that permits the attribution of one sign to
another sign, of one representation to another, and the function that
permits the articulation of the elements that compose the totality of
representations or the signs that decompose them.
For its part, the theory of money and trade explains how any given
form of matter can take on a signifying function by being related to an
object and serving as a permanent sign for it; it also explains (by the
interaction of trade and the increase and diminution of the quantity of
specie) how this relation of sign to the thing signiﬁed can be modiﬁed
without ever disappearing, how the same monetary element can signify more or less wealth, how it can shift, dilate, and shrink in relation
to the values it has the task of representing. The theory of monetary
prices corresponds, therefore, to what in general grammar appears in the
form of an analysis of roots and of the language of action (the function
of designation) and to what appears in the form of tropes and shifts of
meaning (the function of derivation). Money, like words, has the role of
designating, yet never ceases to ﬂuctuate around that vertical axis: variations of price are to the initial establishment of the relation between
metal and wealth what rhetorical displacements are to the original
value of verbal signs. Moreover, by ensuring, on the basis of its own
possibilities, the designation of wealth, the establishment of prices, the
modiﬁcation of nominal values, and the impoverishment and enrichment of nations, money functions in relation to wealth in the same way
as character does in relation to natural beings: it makes it possible both to
impose a particular mark upon it and to indicate a place for it – no
doubt a provisional one – in the area actually deﬁned by the totality of
things and of the signs at one’s disposal. The theory of money and
prices occupies the same position in the analysis of wealth as the theory
of character does in natural history. Like the latter, it unites into one
and the same function the possibility of giving things a sign, of representing one thing by another, and the possibility of causing a sign to
shift in relation to what it designates.
The four functions that deﬁne the verbal sign in its particular properties, and distinguish it from all other signs that representation can
provide for itself, are thus to be found in the theoretical signalization of

exchanging

natural history and in the practical utilization of monetary signs. The
order of wealth and the order of natural beings are established and
revealed in so far as there are established between objects of need, and
between visible individuals, systems of signs which make possible the
designation of representations one by another, the derivation of signifying representations in relation to those signiﬁed, the articulation of
what is represented, and the attribution of certain representations to
certain others. In this sense, it can be said that, for Classical thought,
systems of natural history and theories of money or trade have the
same conditions of possibility as language itself. This means two
things: ﬁrst, that order in nature and order in the domain of wealth
have the same mode of being, for the Classical experience, as the order
of representations as manifested by words; second, that words form a
system of signs suﬃciently privileged, when it is a question of revealing the order of things, for natural history – if it is well organized – and
money – if it is well regulated – to function in the same way as language. What algebra is to mathesis, signs, and words in particular, are
to taxinomia: a constitution and evident manifestation of the order of
things.
There does exist, however, a major diﬀerence that prevents classiﬁcation from being the spontaneous language of nature and prices from
being the natural discourse of wealth. Or rather there exist two diﬀerences: one makes it possible to distinguish the domains of verbal signs
from that of wealth or that of natural beings; the other makes it possible to distinguish the theory of natural history from that of value of
prices.
The four moments that deﬁne the essential functions of language
(attribution, articulation, designation, derivation) are solidly linked to
one another, since they require one another as soon as, with the advent
of the verb, one has crossed the threshold beyond which language
exists. But in the real genesis of actual languages, the process does not
take place either in the same direction or with the same rigour: on the
basis of primitive designations, men’s imaginations (according to the
climates they live in, the conditions of their existence, their feelings
and their passions, their experiences) give rise to derivations which
diﬀer from people to people, and which doubtless explain, in addition
to the diversity of languages, the relative instability of each of them. At

221

222 the order of things
any given moment of this derivation, and within any particular language, men have at their disposal a totality of words, of names which
are articulated one upon another and provide the pattern of their representations; but this analysis is so imperfect, it allows so many imprecisions and overlappings to persist, that men employ various words and
formulate diﬀerent propositions with the same representations: their
reﬂection is not wholly protected against error. Between designation
and derivation, shifts of the imagination multiply; between articulation
and attribution, errors of reﬂection proliferate. This is why, on the
perhaps endlessly postponed horizon of language, there is projected
the idea of a universal language in which the representative value of
words would be suﬃciently clearly ﬁxed, suﬃciently securely based,
suﬃciently clearly recognized for reﬂection to be able to come to a
decision with total clarity about any proposition whatever – by means
of this language ‘peasants could better judge of the truth of things than
philosophers now do’;78 a perfectly distinct language would make
possible an entirely clear discourse: this language would be an Ars
combinatoria in itself. It is also why the practice of any real language
should be reinforced by an Encyclopaedia which deﬁnes the progress
of words, prescribes the most natural routes for them to take, traces out
the legitimate shifts of knowledge, and codiﬁes the relationship of
adjacency and resemblance. The Dictionary is created as a means of
controlling the play of derivations on the basis of the primary designation of words, just as the Universal Language is created in order to
control the errors of reﬂection – when it is formulating a judgement –
on the basis of a well-established articulation. The Ars combinatoria and
the Encyclopaedia together compensate for the imperfection of real
languages.
Natural history, since it must of necessity be a science, and the
circulation of wealth, since it is an institution created by men and also
controlled by them, are bound to escape the perils inherent in spontaneous languages. There is no error possible between articulation and
attribution in the order of natural history, since the structure is given
in its immediate visibility; no imaginary shifts either, no false resemblances, no incongruous juxtapositions placing a correctly designated
natural being in a space not its own, since character is established either
by the coherence of the system or by the exactness of the method. In

exchanging

natural history, structure and character ensure the theoretical closing of
what remains open in language and gives rise on its frontiers to the
projects of essentially uncompleted arts. Similarly, value, which automatically changes from being estimative to being appreciative, and
money, which by growth or diminution of its quantity causes yet
always limits ﬂuctuations of prices, ensure in the sphere of wealth the
congruity of attribution and articulation, and that of designation and
derivation. Value and prices ensure the virtual closing of those segments that remain open in language. Structure enables natural history
to ﬁnd itself immediately in the element of a combination, and character allows it to establish an exact and deﬁnitive poetics with regard to
beings and their resemblances. Value combines the forms of wealth one
with another, money permits their real exchange. Where the disordered order of language implies the continuous relation to an art and
its endless tasks, the orders of nature and wealth are expressed in the
mere existence of structure and character, value and money.
It should be noted, however, that the natural order is formulated in a
theory that has value as the correct interpretation of a real series or
table: moreover, the structure of beings is both the immediate form of
the visible and its articulation; similarly, character designates and localizes in one and the same movement. On the other hand, estimative
value becomes appreciative only by means of a transformation; and the
initial relation between metal and merchandise becomes only gradually a price subject to variations. In the ﬁrst case, there is an exact
superimposition of attribution and articulation, designation and derivation; in the second, a transition linked to the nature of things and to
human activity. With language, the system of signs is passively
accepted in its imperfection, and only an art can rectify it; the theory of
language is immediately prescriptive. Natural history establishes of
itself a system of signs for denoting beings, and that is why it is a
theory. Wealth is a system of signs that are created, multiplied, and
modiﬁed by men; the theory of wealth is linked throughout to politics.
However, the other two sides of the fundamental quadrilateral
remain open. How can designation (a single, precise act) make possible
an articulation of nature, wealth, and representations? How, generally
speaking, can the two opposite segments (those of judgement and
signiﬁcation for language, of structure and character for natural

223

224 the order of things
history, of value and prices for the theory of wealth) relate to each
other in such a way as to make possible a language, a system of nature,
and the uninterrupted ﬂow of wealth? It is here that it becomes really
necessary to suppose that representations resemble one another and
suggest one another in the imagination; that natural beings are in
relations of adjacency and resemblance to one another; and that men’s
needs correspond to one another and are capable of satisfaction. The
interconnection of representations, the unbroken expanse of beings,
and the proliferation of nature are still required if there is to be language, if there is to be a natural history, and if it is to be possible for
there to be wealth and use of wealth. The continuum of representation
and being, an ontology deﬁned negatively as an absence of nothingness, a general representability of being, and being as expressed in the
presence of representation – all this is included in the total conﬁguration of the Classical episteme. One can see in this principle of continuity
the metaphysically strong moment of seventeenth- and eighteenthcentury thought (that which enables the form of the proposition to
have an eﬀective meaning, structure to be ordered as character, and the
value of things to be calculated as prices); whereas the relations
between articulation and attribution, designation and derivation (that
which provides a foundation for judgement on the one hand and for
meaning on the other, structure and character, value and prices) deﬁne
the scientiﬁcally strong moment of that thought (that which makes
possible grammar, natural history, and the science of wealth). The
ordering of empiricity is thus linked to the ontology that characterizes
Classical thought; indeed, from the very outset, this thought exists
within an ontology rendered transparent by the fact that being is
oﬀered to representation without interruption; and within a representation illuminated by the fact that it releases the continuity of being.
It is now possible, from a distance, to characterize the mutation that
occurred in the entire Western episteme towards the end of the eighteenth century by saying that a scientiﬁcally strong moment was created
in just that area where the Classical episteme was metaphysically strong;
and that, on the other hand, a philosophical space emerged in that very
area where Classicism had most ﬁrmly established its epistemological
grip. In fact, the analysis of production, as the new project of the new
‘political economy’, has as its essential role the analysis of the relation

exchanging

between value and prices; the concepts of organisms and organic structure, the methods of comparative anatomy – in short, all the themes of
the new ‘biology’ – explain how structures observable in individuals
can have validity as general characters for genera, families,
sub-kingdoms; and lastly, in order to unify the formal arrangements of a language (its ability to establish propositions) and
the meaning belonging to words, ‘philology’ would no longer study
the representative functions of discourse, but a totality of morphological constants subject to a history. Philology, biology, and political
economy were established, not in the places formerly occupied by
general grammar, natural history, and the analysis of wealth, but in an area
where those forms of knowledge did not exist, in the space they
left blank, in the deep gaps that separated their broad theoretical segments and that were ﬁlled with the murmur of the ontological continuum. The object of knowledge in the nineteenth century is formed
in the very place where the Classical plenitude of being has fallen
silent.
Inversely, a new philosophical space was to emerge in the place
where the objects of Classical knowledge dissolved. The moment of
attribution (as a form of judgement) and that of articulation (as a
general patterning of beings) separated, and thus created the problem
of the relations between a formal apophantics and a formal ontology;
the moment of primitive designation and that of derivation through
time also separated, opening up a space in which there arose the question of the relations between original meaning and history. Thus the
two great forms of modern philosophic reﬂection were established.
The ﬁrst questions the relations between logic and ontology; it proceeds by the paths of formalization and encounters, in a new form, the
problem of mathesis. The second questions the relations of signiﬁcation
and time; it undertakes an unveiling which is not and probably never
can be completed, and it brings back into prominence the themes and
methods of interpretation. Probably the most fundamental question that
can present itself to philosophy, then, concerns the relation between
these two forms of reﬂection. It is certainly not within the province of
archaeology to say whether this relation is possible, or how it could be
provided with a foundation; but archaeology can designate the region
in which that relation seeks to exist, in what area of the episteme modern

225

226 the order of things
philosophy attempts to ﬁnd its unity, in what point of knowledge it
discovers its broadest domain: in such a place the formal (in apophantics and ontology) would meet the signiﬁcative as illuminated in interpretation. The essential problem of Classical thought lay in the relations
between name and order: how to discover a nomenclature that would be a
taxonomy, or again, how to establish a system of signs that would be
transparent to the continuity of being. What modern thought is to
throw fundamentally into question is the relation of meaning with the
form of truth and the form of being: in the ﬁrmament of our reﬂection
there reigns a discourse – a perhaps inaccessible discourse – which
would at the same time be an ontology and a semantics. Structuralism
is not a new method; it is the awakened and troubled consciousness of
modern thought.

VIII DESIRE AND REPRESENTATION
The men of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries do not think of
wealth, nature, or languages in terms that had been bequeathed to
them by preceding ages or in forms that presaged what was soon to be
discovered; they think of them in terms of a general arrangement that
not only prescribes their concepts and methods, but also, more fundamentally, deﬁnes a certain mode of being for language, natural individuals, and the objects of need and desire; this mode of being is that of
representation. As a result, a whole common ground appears upon
which the history of the sciences ﬁgures as a surface eﬀect. This does
not mean that it can now be left to one side; but that a reﬂection upon
the history of a particular branch of knowledge can no longer content
itself with following the development of that body of knowledge in a
temporal sequence; such a body of knowledge is not, in fact, a phenomenon of heredity and tradition; and one does not explain how it
came about simply by describing the state of knowledge that preceded
it and what it has provided by way of – as we say – ‘original contributions’. The history of knowledge can be written only on the basis of
what was contemporaneous with it, and certainly not in terms of
reciprocal inﬂuence, but in terms of conditions and a prioris established
in time. It is in this sense that archaeology can give an account of the
existence of a general grammar, a natural history, and an analysis of

exchanging

wealth, and thus open up a free, undivided area in which the history of
the sciences, the history of ideas, and the history of opinions can, if
they wish, frolic at ease.
Though the analyses of representation, language, natural orders,
and wealth are perfectly coherent and homogeneous with regard to
one another, there exists, nevertheless, a profound disequilibrium.
For representation governs the mode of being of language, individuals, nature, and need itself. The analysis of representation therefore has a determining value for all the empirical domains. The
whole Classical system of order, the whole of that great taxinomia that
makes it possible to know things by means of the system of their
identities, is unfolded within the space that is opened up inside
representation when representation represents itself, that area where
being and the Same reside. Language is simply the representation of
words; nature is simply the representation of beings; need is simply
the representation of needs. The end of Classical thought – and of
the episteme that made general grammar, natural history, and the science of wealth possible – will coincide with the decline of representation, or rather with the emancipation of language, of the living
being, and of need, with regard to representation. The obscure but
stubborn spirit of a people who talk, the violence and the endless
eﬀort of life, the hidden energy of needs, were all to escape from the
mode of being of representation. And representation itself was to be
paralleled, limited, circumscribed, mocked perhaps, but in any case
regulated from the outside, by the enormous thrust of a freedom, a
desire, or a will, posited as the metaphysical converse of consciousness. Something like a will or a force was to arise in the modern
experience – constituting it perhaps, but in any case indicating that
the Classical age was now over, and with it the reign of representative discourse, the dynasty of a representation signifying itself and
giving voice in the sequence of its words to the order that lay dormant within things.
This reversal is contemporaneous with Sade. Or rather, that
inexhaustible body of work manifests the precarious balance between
the law without law of desire and the meticulous ordering of discursive
representation. Here, the order of discourse ﬁnds its Limit and its Law;
but it is still strong enough to remain coexistensive with the very thing

227

228 the order of things
that governs it. Here, without doubt, is the principle of that ‘libertinage’ which was the last in the Western world (after it the age of sexuality begins): the libertine is he who, while yielding to all the fantasies
of desire and to each of its furies, can, but also must, illumine their
slightest movement with a lucid and deliberately elucidated representation. There is a strict order governing the life of the libertine: every
representation must be immediately endowed with life in the living
body of desire, every desire must be expressed in the pure light of a
representative discourse. Hence that rigid sequence of ‘scenes’ (the
scene, in Sade, is proﬂigacy subjected to the order of representation)
and, within the scenes, the meticulous balance between the conjugation of bodies and the concatenation of reasons. Possibly Justine and
Juliette are in the same position on the threshold of modern culture as
that occupied by Don Quixote between the Renaissance and Classicism.
Cervantes’s hero, construing the relations of world and language as
people had done in the sixteenth century, decoding inns into castles
and farm girls into ladies with no other key than the play of resemblance, was imprisoning himself without knowing it in the mode of
pure representation; but since this representation had no other law but
similitude, it could not fail to become visible in the absurd form of
madness. Now, in the second part of the novel, Don Quixote received
his truth and his law from that represented world; he had nothing
more to expect from the book in which he was born, which he had not
read but whose course he was bound to follow, but a fate henceforth
imposed upon him by others. He had only to allow himself to live in a
castle in which he himself, having penetrated by means of his madness
into the world of pure representation, ﬁnally became a mere character
in the artiﬁce of a representation. Sade’s characters correspond to him
at the other end of the Classical age, at the moment of its decline. It is
no longer the ironic triumph of representation over resemblance; it is
the obscure and repeated violence of desire battering at the limits of
representation. Justine would correspond to the second part of Don
Quixote: she is the unattainable object of the desire of which she is the
pure origin, just as Don Quixote is, despite himself, the object of the
representation which he also is in the depth of his being. In Justine,
desire and representation communicate only through the presence of
Another who represents the heroine to himself as an object of desire,

exchanging

while she herself knows nothing of desire other than its diaphanous,
distant, exterior, and icy form as representation. Such is her misfortune: her innocence acts as a perpetual chaperone between desire
and its representation. Juliette, on the other hand, is no more than the
subject of all possible desires; but those desires are carried over, without any residuum, into the representation that provides them with a
reasonable foundation in discourse and transforms them spontaneously
into scenes. So that the great narrative of Juliette’s life reveals, throughout the desire, violence, savagery, and death, the glittering table of
representation. But this table is so thin, so transparent to all the ﬁgures
of desire that untiringly accumulate within it and multiply there
simply by the force of their combination, that it is just as lacking
in reason as that of Don Quixote, when he believed himself to
be progressing, from similitude to similitude, along the commingled
paths of the world and books, but was in fact getting more and
more entangled in the labyrinth of his own representations. Juliette thins
out this inspissation of the represented so that, without the slightest
blemish, the slightest reticence, the slightest veil, all the possibilities of
desire may rise to the surface.
With that, this story closes the Classical age upon itself, just as Don
Quixote had opened it. And though it is true that this is the last language
still contemporaneous with Rousseau and Racine, though it is the last
discourse that undertakes to ‘represent’, to name, we are well enough
aware that it simultaneously reduces this ceremony to the utmost precision (it calls things by their strict name, thus eliminating the space
occupied by rhetoric) and extends it to inﬁnity (by naming everything,
including the slightest of possibilities, for they are all traversed in
accordance with the Universal Characteristic of Desire). Sade attains the
end of Classical discourse and thought. He holds sway precisely upon
their frontier. After him, violence, life and death, desire, and sexuality
will extend, below the level of representation, an immense expanse of
shade which we are now attempting to recover, as far as we can, in our
discourse, in our freedom, in our thought. But our thought is so brief,
our freedom so enslaved, our discourse so repetitive, that we must face
the fact that that expanse of shade below is really a bottomless sea. The
prosperities of Juliette are still more solitary – and endless.

229

230 the order of things
NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Copernicus, Discours sur la frappe des monnaies (in J-Y. Le Branchu, Écrits
notables sur la monnaie, Paris, 1934, t. I, p. 15).
Anonymous, Compendieux ou bref examen de quelques plaintes (in J-Y. Le
Branchu, op. cit., t. II, p. 117).
Ibid., p. 155.
Gresham, Avis de Sir Thomas Gresham (in J-Y. Le Branchu, op. cit., t. II, pp. 7 and 11.
Copernicus, Discours sur la frappe des monnaies, loc. cit., I, p. 12.
Compendieux ou bref examen de quelques plaintes, loc. cit., II, p. 156.
Malestroit, Le Paradoxe sur le fait des monnaies (Paris, 1566).
Bodin, La Réponse aux paradoxes de M. de Malestroit (1568).
Davanzatti, Leçon sur la monnaie (in Le Branchu, op. cit., t. II, pp. 230–1).
Ibid., p. 231.
Cf. further this proposition of Antoine de La Pierre early in the seventeenth
century: ‘The essential value of gold and silver coins is based upon the precious
material they contain’ (De la nécessité du pèsement).
Scipion de Grammont, Le Denier royal, traité curieux de l’or et de l’argent (Paris,
1620, p. 48).
Ibid., pp. 13–14.
Ibid., pp. 46–7.
Ibid., p. 14.
Schroeder, Fürstliche Schatz und Rentkammer, p. III. Montanari, Della moneta,
p. 35.
Bouteroue, Recherches curieuses des monnaies de France (Paris, 1666, p. 8).
J. Gee, Considerations on trade (London, 1730, p. 7).
N. Barbon, A discourse concerning coining the new money lighter (London, 1696,
unpaginated).
Dumoulin (quoted in Gonnard, Histoire des théories monétaires, I, p. 173).
Clément, Lettres, instructions et mémoires de Colbert, t. VII, p. 239.
Ibid., p. 284. Cf. also Bouteroue, Recherches curieuses . . . , pp. 10–11.
J. Becher, Politischer Diskurs (1668).
Thomas Mun, England’s treasure by foreign trade (1664, chap. II).
Scipion de Grammont, Le Denier royal, pp. 116–19.
Horneck, Oesterreich über alles, wenn es will (1684, pp. 8 and 188).
Cf. Davanzatti, Leçon sur la monnaie (quoted by J-Y. Le Branchu, op. cit., t. II,
p. 230).
T. Hobbes, Leviathan (1651; Cambridge, 1904 edn., pp. 179–80).
Terrasson, Trois lettres sur le nouveau système des ﬁnances (Paris, 1720).
Dutot, Réﬂexions sur le commerce et les ﬁnances (Paris, 1738).
Montesquieu, L’Esprit des lois, livre XXII, chap. II.
Encyclopédie, article ‘Monnaie’.
Paris-Duverney, Examen des réﬂexions politiques sur les ﬁnances (The Hague,
1740).

exchanging
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

54
55
56
57

58
59
60
61
62
63
64

D’Aguesseau, Considérations sur la monnaie (1718; Œuvres, Paris, 1777, t. X).
Melon, Essai politique sur le commerce (Paris, 1734).
Graslin, Essai analytique sur les richesses (London, 1767).
Vaughan, A discourse of coin and coinage (London, 1675, p. 1). Locke, Some
considerations of the consequences of the lowering of interest (London, 1692).
Melon, Essai politique sur le commerce (in Daire, Économistes et ﬁnanciers du
XVIIIe siècle, p. 761).
Dutot, Réﬂexions sur le commerce et les ﬁnances (ibid., pp. 905–6).
Véron de Fortbonnais, Éléments du commerce, t. II, p. 91. Cf. also Recherches et
considérations sur les richesses de la France, t. II, p. 582.
Le Trosne, De l’intérêt social (in Daire, Les Physiocrates, p. 908).
Law, Considérations sur le numéraire (in Daire, Économistes et ﬁnanciers du XVIIIe
siècle, p. 519).
Turgot, Seconde lettre à l’abbé de Cice (1749, Œuvres complétes, ed. Schelle, t. I,
pp. 146–7).
Law, Considérations sur le numéraire, p. 472 et seq.
Locke, Some considerations of the consequences of the lowering of interest
(London, 1692, pp. 71–2).
Montesquieu, L’Esprit des lois, livre XXII, chap. VII.
Graslin, Essai analytique sur les richesses, pp. 54–5.
Cantillon, Essai sur la nature du commerce en général (1952 edn., p. 73).
Ibid., pp. 68–9.
Ibid., pp. 69–73. Petty gives the analogous proportion of one-tenth (Political
anatomy of Ireland).
Cantillon, loc. cit., p. 76.
Dutot, Réﬂexions sur le commerce et les ﬁnances, pp. 862 and 906.
Cf. Véron de Fortbonnais, Éléments du commerce, t. I, p. 45, and above all
Tucker, Questions importantes sur le commerce (Fr. trans. by Turgot, Œuvres, I,
p. 335).
Véron de Fortbonnais, in his Éléments du commerce (t. I, pp. 51–2), gives the
eight fundamental rules of English trade.
Quesnay, article ‘Hommes’ (in Daire, Les Physiocrates, p. 42).
Mercier de La Rivière, L’Ordre naturel et essentiel des sociétés politiques (in Daire,
op. cit., p. 709).
‘Considered as marketable wealth, wheat, iron, vitriol, and diamonds are
equally forms of wealth whose value consists only in their price’ (Quesnay,
article ‘Hommes’, loc. cit., p. 138).
Dupont de Nemours, Réponse demandée, p. 16.
Saint-Péravy, Journal d’agriculture, December 1765.
Ibid.
Maximes de gouvernement (in Daire, Les Physiocrates, p. 289).
Turgot, Réﬂexions sur la formation et la distribution des richesses, section 6.
Maximes de gouvernement (in Daire, op. cit., p. 289).
Mirabeau Philosophie rurale, p. 56.

231

232 the order of things
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78

Ibid., p. 8.
Dupont de Nemours, Journal agricole, May 1766.
Mirabeau, Philosophie rurale, p. 37.
Ibid., p. 33.
Cantillon, Essai sur la nature du commerce en général, pp. 68, 69, and 73.
Condillac, Le Commerce et le gouvernement (Œuvres, t. IV, p. 10).
Turgot, Valeur et monnaie (Œuvres complètes, ed. Schelle, t. III, pp. 91–2).
Condillac, Le Commerce et le gouvernement, p. 28.
Turgot, Valeur et monnaie (Œuvres complètes, t. III, pp. 91–3).
Graslin, Essai analytique sur les richesses, p. 33.
Ibid., p. 45.
By ‘need’, Graslin means ‘necessity, utility, taste, and pleasure’ (Essai analytique
sur les richesses, p. 24).
Graslin, op. cit., p. 36.
Descartes, Lettre á Mersenne, 20 November 1629 (A. T., I, p. 76).

Part II

7
THE LIMITS OF
REPRESENTATION
I THE AGE OF HISTORY
The last years of the eighteenth century are broken by a discontinuity
similar to that which destroyed Renaissance thought at the beginning
of the seventeenth; then, the great circular forms in which similitude
was enclosed were dislocated and opened so that the table of identities
could be unfolded; and that table is now about to be destroyed in turn,
while knowledge takes up residence in a new space – a discontinuity as
enigmatic in its principle, in its original rupture, as that which separates the Paracelsian circles from the Cartesian order. Where did this
unexpected mobility of epistemological arrangement suddenly come
from, or the drift of positivities in relation to one another, or, deeper
still, the alteration in their mode of being? How is it that thought
detaches itself from the squares it inhabited before – general grammar,
natural history, wealth – and allows what less than twenty years before
had been posited and aﬃrmed in the luminous space of understanding
to topple down into error, into the realm of fantasy, into nonknowledge? What event, what law do they obey, these mutations that
suddenly decide that things are no longer perceived, described,
expressed, characterized, classiﬁed, and known in the same way, and

236 the order of things
that it is no longer wealth, living beings, and discourse that are presented to knowledge in the interstices of words or through their transparency, but beings radically diﬀerent from them? For an archaeology
of knowledge, this profound breach in the expanse of continuities,
though it must be analysed, and minutely so, cannot be ‘explained’ or
even summed up in a single word. It is a radical event that is distributed
across the entire visible surface of knowledge, and whose signs, shocks,
and eﬀects it is possible to follow step by step. Only thought reapprehending itself at the root of its own history could provide a
foundation, entirely free of doubt, for what the solitary truth of this
event was in itself.
Archaeology, however, must examine each event in terms of its own
evident arrangement; it will recount how the conﬁgurations proper to
each positivity were modiﬁed (in the case of grammar, for example, it
will analyse the eclipse of the major role hitherto accorded to the
name, and the new importance of systems of inﬂection; or, another
example, the subordination of character to function in living beings);
it will analyse the alteration of the empirical entities which inhabit the
positivities (the substitution of languages for discourse, of production
for wealth); it will study the displacement of the positivities each in
relation to the others (for example, the new relation between biology,
the sciences of language, and economics); lastly, and above all, it will
show that the general area of knowledge is no longer that of identities
and diﬀerences, that of non-quantitative orders, that of a universal characterization, of a general taxinomia, of a non-measurable mathesis, but
an area made up of organic structures, that is, of internal relations
between elements whose totality performs a function; it will show that
these organic structures are discontinuous, that they do not, therefore,
form a table of unbroken simultaneities, but that certain of them are on
the same level whereas others form series or linear sequences. So that
we see emerging, as the organizing principles of this space of empiricities, Analogy and Succession: the link between one organic structure and
another can no longer, in fact, be the identity of one or several elements, but must be the identity of the relation between the elements (a
relation in which visibility no longer plays a role) and of the functions
they perform; moreover, if these organic structures happen to be
adjacent to one another, on account of a particularly high density of

the limits of representation

analogies, it is not because they occupy proximate places within an area
of classiﬁcation; it is because they have both been formed at the same
time, and the one immediately after the other in the emergence of the
successions. Whereas in Classical thought the sequence of chronologies
merely scanned the prior and more fundamental space of a table which
presented all possibilities in advance, from now on, the contemporaneous and simultaneously observable resemblances in space will
be simply the ﬁxed forms of a succession which proceeds from analogy
to analogy. The Classical order distributed across a permanent space the
non-quantitative identities and diﬀerences that separated and united
things: it was this order that held sovereign sway – though in each case
in accordance with slightly diﬀering forms and laws – over men’s
discourse, the table of natural beings, and the exchange of wealth.
From the nineteenth century, History was to deploy, in a temporal
series, the analogies that connect distinct organic structures to one
another. This same History will also, progressively, impose its laws on
the analysis of production, the analysis of organically structured
beings, and, lastly, on the analysis of linguistic groups. History gives place
to analogical organic structures, just as Order opened the way to
successive identities and diﬀerences.
Obviously, History in this sense is not to be understood as the compilation of factual successions or sequences as they may have occurred;
it is the fundamental mode of being of empiricities, upon the basis of
which they are aﬃrmed, posited, arranged, and distributed in the
space of knowledge for the use of such disciplines or sciences as may
arise. Just as Order in Classical thought was not the visible harmony of
things, or their observed arrangement, regularity, or symmetry, but
the particular space of their being, that which, prior to all eﬀective
knowledge, established them in the ﬁeld of knowledge, so History,
from the nineteenth century, deﬁnes the birthplace of the empirical,
that from which, prior to all established chronology, it derives its own
being. It is no doubt because of this that History becomes so soon
divided, in accordance with an ambiguity that it is probably impossible
to control, into an empirical science of events and that radical mode of
being that prescribes their destiny to all empirical beings, to those
particular beings that we are. History as we know, is certainly the
most erudite, the most aware, the most conscious, and possibly the most

237

238 the order of things
cluttered area of our memory; but it is equally the depths from which
all beings emerge into their precarious, glittering existence. Since it is
the mode of being of all that is given us in experience, History has
become the unavoidable element in our thought: in this respect, it is
probably not so very diﬀerent from Classical Order. Classical Order, too,
could be established as a framework for acquired knowledge, but it was
more fundamentally the space in which every being approached man’s
consciousness; and the Classical metaphysic resided precisely in that
gap between order and Order, between classiﬁcations and Identity,
between natural beings and Nature; in short, between men’s perception (or imagination) and the understanding and will of God. In the
nineteenth century, philosophy was to reside in the gap between history and History, between events and the Origin, between evolution
and the ﬁrst rending open of the source, between oblivion and the
Return. It will be Metaphysics, therefore, only in so far as it is Memory,
and it will necessarily lead thought back to the question of knowing
what it means for thought to have a history. This question was to bear
down upon philosophy, heavily and tirelessly, from Hegel to Nietzsche
and beyond. But we must not see this as the end of an autonomous
philosophical reﬂection that came too early, and was too proud to lean,
exclusively, upon what was said before it and by others; let us not use
this as a pretext for disparaging a thought powerless to stand on its own
feet, and always forced to ﬁnd support by winding itself around a
previously established body of thought. It is enough to recognize here
a philosophy deprived of a certain metaphysics because it has been
separated oﬀ from the space of order, yet doomed to Time, to its ﬂux
and its returns, because it is trapped in the mode of being of History.
But we must return in a little more detail to what happened at the
end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century: to
that too sketchily outlined mutation of Order into History, and to the
fundamental modiﬁcation of those positivities which, for nearly a century and a half, had given place to so many adjacent kinds of knowledge – analysis of representations, general grammar, natural history,
reﬂections on wealth and trade. How were these ways of ordering
empiricity – discourse, the table, exchange – eclipsed? In what new space,
and in accordance with what forms, have words, beings, and objects of
need taken their places and arranged themselves in relation to one

the limits of representation

another? What new mode of being must they have received in order
to make all these changes possible, and to enable to appear, after
scarcely more than a few years, those now familiar forms of knowledge that we have called, since the nineteenth century, philology, biology,
and economics? We tend to imagine that if these new domains were
deﬁned during the last century, it was simply that a slight increase in
the objectivity of knowledge, in the precision of observation, in the
rigour of our reasoning, in the organization of scientiﬁc research and
information – that all this, with the aid of a few fortunate discoveries,
themselves helped by a little good luck or genius, enabled us to
emerge from a prehistoric age in which knowledge was still stammering out the Grammaire de Port-Royal, the classiﬁcations of Linnaeus, and
the theories of trade or agriculture. But though we may indeed talk of
prehistory from the point of view of the rationality of learning, from
the point of view of positivities we can speak, quite simply, of history.
And it took a fundamental event – certainly one of the most radical
that ever occurred in Western culture – to bring about the dissolution
of the positivity of Classical knowledge, and to constitute another
positivity from which, even now, we have doubtless not entirely
emerged.
This event, probably because we are still caught inside it, is largely
beyond our comprehension. Its scope, the depth of the strata it has
aﬀected, all the positivities it has succeeded in disintegrating and
recomposing, the sovereign power that has enabled it, in only a few
years, to traverse the entire space of our culture, all this could be
appraised and measured only after a quasi-inﬁnite investigation concerned with nothing more nor less than the very being of our modernity. The constitution of so many positive sciences, the appearance of
literature, the folding back of philosophy upon its own development,
the emergence of history as both knowledge and the mode of being of
empiricity, are only so many signs of a deeper rupture. Signs scattered
through the space of knowledge, since they allow themselves to be
perceived in the formation, here of philology, there of economics,
there again of biology. They are chronologically scattered too: true, the
phenomenon as a whole can be situated between easily assignable
dates (the outer limits are the years 1775 and 1825); but in each of the
domains studied we can perceive two successive phases, which are

239

240 the order of things
articulated one upon the other more or less around the years
1795-1800. In the ﬁrst of these phases, the fundamental mode of
being of the positivities does not change; men’s riches, the species of
nature, and the words with which languages are peopled, still remain
what they were in the Classical age: double representations – representations whose role is to designate representations, to analyse them, to
compose and decompose them in order to bring into being within
them, together with the system of their identities and diﬀerences, the
general principle of an order. It is only in the second phase that words,
classes, and wealth will acquire a mode of being no longer compatible
with that of representation. On the other hand, what is modiﬁed very
early on, beginning with the analyses of Adam Smith, A-L. de Jussieu,
or Vicq d’Azyr, at the time of Jones or Anquetil-Duperron, is the conﬁguration of positivities: the way in which, within each one, the representative elements function in relation to one another, in which they
perform their double role as designation and articulation, in which
they succeed, by means of the interplay of comparisons, in establishing
an order. It is this ﬁrst phase that will be investigated in the present
chapter.

II THE MEASURE OF LABOUR
It is often asserted that Adam Smith founded modern political economy – one might say economics tout court – by introducing the concept
of labour into a domain of reﬂection not previously aware of it: all the
old analyses of money, trade, and exchange were relegated at a single
blow to a prehistoric age of knowledge – with the one possible exception of the Physiocratic doctrine, which is accorded the merit of having
at least attempted the analysis of agricultural production. It is true that
from the very outset Adam Smith relates the notion of wealth to that of
labour:
The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies
it with all the necessaries and conveniences of life which it annually
consumes, and which consist always either in the immediate produce
of that labour, or in what is purchased with that produce from other
nations;1

the limits of representation

it is also true that Smith relates the ‘value in use’ of things to men’s
needs, and their ‘value in exchange’ to the quantity of labour applied to
its production:
The value of any commodity, therefore, to the person who possesses
it, and who means not to use or consume it himself, but to exchange it
for other commodities, is equal to the quantity of labour which it
enables him to purchase or command.2

In fact, the diﬀerence between Smith’s analyses and those of Turgot or
Cantillon is less than is supposed; or, rather, it does not lie where it is
generally believed to lie. From the time of Cantillon, and even before
him, the distinction between value in use and value in exchange was
being clearly made; and again, from Cantillon, quantity of labour was
being used as a measurement of the latter. But the quantity of labour
inscribed in the price of things was no more than a relative and
reducible tool of measurement. A man’s labour was in fact equal to the
value of the quantity of nourishment necessary to maintain him and
his family for as long as a given task lasted.3 So that in the last resort,
need – for food, clothing, housing – deﬁned the absolute measure of
market price. All through the Classical age, it was necessity that was the
measure of equivalences, and value in use that served as absolute reference for exchange values; the gauge of prices was food, which resulted
in the generally recognized privilege accorded in this respect to
agricultural production, wheat and land.
Adam Smith did not, therefore, invent labour as an economic concept, since it can be found in Cantillon, Quesnay, and Condillac; he
does not even give it a new role to play, since he too uses it as a
measure of exchange value: ‘Labour, therefore, is the real measure of
the exchangeable value of all commodities’.4 But he does displace it:
he maintains its function as a means of analysing exchangeable wealth;
but that analysis is no longer simply a way of expressing exchange in
terms of need (and trade in terms of primitive barter); it reveals an
irreducible, absolute unit of measurement. At the same time, wealth no
longer establishes the internal order of its equivalence by a comparison
of the objects to be exchanged, or by an appraisal of the power peculiar
to each represent an object of need (and, in the last resort, the most

241

242 the order of things
fundamental of all, food); it is broken down according to the units of
labour that have in reality produced it. Wealth is always a functioning
representative element: but, in the end, what it represents is no longer
the object of desire; it is labour.
But two objections immediately present themselves: how can labour
be a ﬁxed measure of the natural price of things when it has itself a
price – and a variable price? How can labour be an absolute unit when
it changes its form, and when industrial progress is constantly making
it more productive by introducing more and more divisions into it?
Now, it is precisely through these objections, and through their
spokesman, as it were, that it is possible to reveal the irreducibility of
labour and its primary character. There are, in fact, countries in the
world, and, in a particular country, times, in which labour is dear:
workers are few, wages are high; elsewhere, or at other times, manpower is plentiful, it is badly remunerated, and labour is cheap. But
what is modiﬁed in these alternating states is the quantity of food that
can be procured with a day’s work; if commodities are in short supply
and there are many consumers, each unit of labour will be remunerated with only a small quantity of subsistence; but if, on the other
hand, commodities are in good supply, it will be well paid. These are
merely the consequences of a market situation; the labour itself, the
hours spent at it, the toil and trouble, are in every case the same; and
the greater the number of units required, the more costly the products
will be. ‘Equal quantities of labour, at all times and places, may be said
to be of equal value to the labourer’.5
And yet one could say that this unit is not a ﬁxed one, since to
produce the self-same object will require more or less labour according
to the perfection of the manufacturing process (that is, according to the
degree of the division of labour). But it is not really the labour itself
that has changed; it is the relation of the labour to the production of
which it is capable. Labour, in the sense of a day’s work, toil and
trouble, is a ﬁxed numerator: only the denominator (the number of
objects produced) is capable of variations. A single worker who had to
perform on his own the eighteen distinct operations required in the
manufacture of a pin would certainly not produce more than twenty
pins in the course of a whole day. But ten workers who each had to
perform only one or two of those operations could produce between

the limits of representation

them more than 48,000 pins in a day; thus each of those workers,
producing a tenth part of the total product, can be considered as making 4,800 pins during his working day.6 The productive power of
labour has been multiplied; within a single unit (a wage-earner’s day),
the objects manufactured have been increased in number; their
exchange value will therefore fall, that is, each of those objects will be
able to buy only a proportionately smaller amount of work in turn.
Labour has not diminished in relation to the things; it is the things that
have, as it were, shrunk in relation to the unit of labour.
It is true that we exchange because we have needs; without them,
trade would not exist, nor labour either, nor, above all, the division that
renders it more productive. Inversely, it is needs, when they are satisﬁed, that limit labour and its improvement: ‘As it is the power of
exchange that gives occasion to the division of labour, so the extent of
this division must always be limited to the extent of that power, or in
other words, by the extent of the market’.7 Needs, and the exchange
of products that can answer to them, are still the principle of the
economy: they are its prime motive and circumscribe it; labour and the
division that organizes it are merely its eﬀects. But within exchange, in
the order of equivalences, the measure that establishes equalities and
diﬀerences is of a diﬀerent nature from need. It is not linked solely to
individual desires, modiﬁed by them, or variable like them. It is an
absolute measure, if one takes that to mean that it is not dependent
upon men’s hearts, or upon their appetites; it is imposed upon them
from outside: it is their time and their toil. In relation to that of his
predecessors, Adam Smith’s analysis represents an essential hiatus: it
distinguishes between the reason for exchange and the measurement
of that which is exchangeable, between the nature of what is
exchanged and the units that enable it to be broken down. People
exchange because they have needs, and they exchange precisely the
objects that they need; but the order of exchanges, their hierarchy and
the diﬀerences expressed in that hierarchy, are established by the units
of labour that have been invested in the objects in question. As men
experience things – at the level of what will soon be called psychology –
what they are exchanging is what is ‘indispensable, commodious
or pleasurable’ to them, but for the economist, what is actually
circulating in the form of things is labour – not objects of need

243

244 the order of things
representing one another, but time and toil, transformed, concealed,
forgotten.
This hiatus is of great importance. It is true that Adam Smith is still,
like his predecessors, analysing the ﬁeld of positivity that the eighteenth century termed ‘wealth’; and by that term he too means objects
of need – and thus the objects of a certain form of representation –
representing themselves in the movements and methods of exchange.
But within this duplication, and in order to regulate its laws – the
units and measures of exchange – he formulates a principle of order
that is irreducible to the analysis of representation: he unearths labour,
that is, toil and time, the working-day that at once patterns and uses
up man’s life. The equivalence of the objects of desire is no longer
established by the intermediary of other objects and other desires, but
by a transition to that which is radically heterogeneous to them; if
there is an order regulating the forms of wealth, if this can buy that, if
gold is worth twice as much as silver, it is not because men have
comparable desires; it is not because they experience the same hunger
in their bodies, or because their hearts are all swayed by the same
passions; it is because they are all subject to time, to toil, to weariness,
and, in the last resort, to death itself. Men exchange because they
experience needs and desires; but they are able to exchange and to order
these exchanges because they are subjected to time and to the great
exterior necessity. As for the fecundity of labour, it is not so much
due to personal ability or to calculations of self-interest; it is based
upon conditions that are also exterior to its representation: industrial
progress, growing division of tasks, accumulation of capital, division of
productive labour and non-productive labour. It is thus apparent how,
with Adam Smith, reﬂection upon wealth begins to overﬂow the
space assigned to it in the Classical age; then, it was lodged within
‘ideology’ – inside the analysis of representation; from now on, it is
referred, diagonally as it were, to two domains which both escape the
forms and laws of the decomposition of ideas: on the one hand, it is
already pointing in the direction of an anthropology that will call into
question man’s very essence (his ﬁnitude, his relation with time, the
imminence of death) and the object in which he invests his days
of time and toil without being able to recognize in it the object
of his immediate need; on the other, it indicates the still unfulﬁlled

the limits of representation

possibility of a political economy whose object would no longer be
the exchange of wealth (and the interplay of representations which
is its basis), but its real production: forms of labour and capital.
It is understandable how, between these newly formed positivities –
an anthropology dealing with a man rendered alien to himself and
an economics dealing with mechanisms exterior to human consciousness – Ideology, or the Analysis of representations, was soon to ﬁnd
itself reduced to being no more than a psychology, whereas opposite,
in opposition, and soon to dominate ideology from its full height,
there was to emerge the dimension of a possible history. From Smith
onward, the time of economics was no longer to be the cyclical time
of alternating impoverishment and wealth; nor the linear increase
achieved by astute policies, constantly introducing slight increases in
the amount of circulating specie so that they accelerated production at
a faster rate than they raised prices; it was to be the interior time of an
organic structure which grows in accordance with its own necessity
and develops in accordance with autochthonous laws – the time of
capital and production.

III THE ORGANIC STRUCTURE OF BEINGS
In the domain of natural history, the modiﬁcations observable between
the years 1775 and 1795 are of the same type. The principle of classiﬁcations is not called into question: their aim is still to determine the
‘character’ that groups individuals and species into more general units,
that distinguishes those units one from another, and that enables them
to ﬁt together to form a table in which all individuals and all groups,
known or unknown, will have their appropriate place. These characters
are drawn from the total representation of the individuals concerned;
they are the analysis of that representation and make it possible, by
representing those representations, to constitute an order; the general
principles of taxinomia – the same principles that had determined the
systems of Tournefort and Linnaeus and the method of Adanson –
preserve the same kind of validity for A-L. de Jussieu, Vicq d’Azyr,
Lamarck, and Candolle. Yet the technique that makes it possible to
establish the character, the relation between visible structure and criteria of identity, are modiﬁed in just the same way as Adam Smith

245

246 the order of things
modiﬁed the relations of need or price. Throughout the eighteenth
century, classiﬁers had been establishing character by comparing visible structures, that is, by correlating elements that were homogeneous
(since each element, according to the ordering principle selected,
could be used to represent all the others): the only diﬀerence lay in the
fact that for the systematicians the representative elements were ﬁxed
from the outset, whereas for the methodists they were the gradual
result of a progressive confrontation. But the transition from described
structure to classifying character took place wholly at the level of the
representative functions exercised by the visible with regard to itself.
From Jussieu, Lamarck, and Vicq d’Azyr onward, character, or rather
the transformation of structure into character, was to be based upon a
principle alien to the domain of the visible – an internal principle not
reducible to the reciprocal interaction of representations. This principle
(which corresponds to labour in the economic sphere) is organic
structure. And as a basis for taxonomies, organic structure appears in four
diﬀerent ways.
1. First, in the form of a hierarchy of characters. If one does not, in
fact, arrange the species side by side in all their vast diversity, but, in
order to limit the ﬁeld of investigation forthwith, if one accepts the
broad groupings evident at a ﬁrst glance – such as the Gramineae, the
Compositae, the Cruciferae, and the Leguminosae for plants; or worms,
ﬁshes, birds, and quadrupeds, for animals – it becomes apparent that
certain characters are absolutely constant and occur in all the genera
and all the species it is possible to distinguish: for example, the insertion of the stamens, their position in relation to the pistil, the insertion
of the corolla when it bears the stamens, the number of lobes surrounding the embryo in the seed. Other characters are very frequent
throughout a family, but do not attain the same degree of constancy;
this is because they are formed by less essential organs (number of
petals, presence or absence of the corolla, respective position of the
calyx or the pistil); these are the ‘secondary sub-uniform’ characters.
Finally, the ‘tertiary semi-uniform’ characters are sometimes constant
and sometimes variable (unifoliate or polyfoliate calyx, number of cells
in the fruit, position of ﬂowers and leaves, nature of the stem): with
these semi-uniform characters it is not possible to deﬁne families or
orders – not because they are not capable, if applied to all the species,

the limits of representation

of forming general entities, but because they do not concern what is
essential in a group of living beings. Each great natural family has
requisites that deﬁne it, and the characters that make it recognizable are
the nearest to these fundamental conditions: thus, reproduction being
the major function of the plant, the embryo will be its most important
part, and it becomes possible to divide the vegetable kingdom into
three classes: acotyledons, monocotyledons, and dicotyledons. Against
the background of these essential and ‘primary’ characters, the others
can appear and introduce more detailed distinctions. It will be seen that
character is no longer drawn directly from the visible structure, and
without any criterion other than its presence or absence; it is based
upon the existence of functions essential to the living being, and upon
relations of importance that are no longer merely a matter of
description.
2. Characters are linked, therefore, to functions. In one sense, there
has been a return to the old theory of signatures or marks, which
supposed that each being bore the sign of what was most essential in
it upon the most visible point of its surface. But here the relations of
importance are relations of functional subordination. If the number
of cotyledons is decisive in the classiﬁcation of plants, that is because
they play a particular role in the reproductive function, and because
they are for that very reason linked to the plant’s entire internal
organic structure; they indicate a function that governs the individual’s entire arrangement.8 In the same way, Vicq d’Azyr showed
that in the case of animals it is the alimentary functions that are
without doubt the most important; it is for this reason that ‘there
exist constant relations between the structure of the carnivores’
teeth and that of their muscles, toes, claws, tongues, stomachs, and
intestines’.9 Character is not, then, established by a relation of the
visible to itself; it is nothing in itself but the visible point of a complex and hierarchized organic structure in which function plays an
essential governing and determining role. It is not because a character
occurs frequently in the structures observed that it is important; it is
because it is functionally important that it is often encountered. As
Cuvier was to point out, summing up the work of the century’s last
great methodists, the higher we move towards the more generalized
classes,

247

248 the order of things
the more the properties that remain common are constant; and as the
most constant relations are those that pertain to the most important
parts, so the characters of the higher divisions will be found to be
drawn from the most important parts . . . It is in this way that the
method will be natural, since it takes into account the importance of
the organs.10

3. Given these conditions, it is understandable how the notion of
life could become indispensable to the ordering of natural beings. It
became so for two reasons: ﬁrst, it was essential to be able to apprehend in the depths of the body the relations that link superﬁcial organs
to those whose existence and hidden forms perform the essential functions; thus Storr proposes classifying mammals according to the formation of their hoofs; the reason being that this is linked to methods
of locomotion and to the animal’s possibilities of movement; now,
these methods of locomotion can be correlated in turn with the form
of alimentation and the diﬀerent organs of the digestive system.11
Furthermore, the most important characters may also be the most
hidden; it had already proved possible to observe in the vegetable kingdom that it is not ﬂowers and fruits – the most easily visible parts of the
plant – that are the signiﬁcant elements, but the embryonic organization and such organs as the cotyledon. This phenomenon is even more
frequent in animals. Storr thought that the broader classiﬁcations ought
to be deﬁned according to the forms of circulation; and Lamarck,
though he himself did not practise dissection, rejects any principle of
classiﬁcation for the lower animals based solely upon visible form:
Consideration of the articulations of the bodies and limbs of the crustaceans has led all naturalists to regard them as true insects, and I
myself long followed the general opinion in this regard. But since it is
recognized that organic structure is of all considerations the most
essential as a guide in a methodical and natural distribution of animals, as well as in determining the true relations between them, it
follows that the crustaceans, which breathe solely by means of gills in
the same way as molluscs, and like them have a muscular heart, ought
to be placed immediately after them, before the arachnids and the
insects, which do not have a like organic structure.12

the limits of representation

To classify, therefore, will no longer mean to refer the visible back to
itself, while allotting one of its elements the task of representing the
others; it will mean, in a movement that makes analysis pivot on its
axis, to relate the visible, to the invisible, to its deeper cause, as it were,
then to rise upwards once more from that hidden architecture towards
the more obvious signs displayed on the surfaces of bodies. As Pinel
said, in his work as a naturalist, ‘to restrict oneself to the exterior
characters assigned by nomenclatures, is this not to ignore the most
fertile source of information, and to refuse to open, as it were, the great
book of nature which is precisely what one has set out to know?’13
Henceforth, character resumes its former role as a visible sign directing
us towards a buried depth; but what it indicates is not a secret text, a
muﬄed word, or a resemblance too precious to be revealed; it is the
coherent totality of an organic structure that weaves back into the
unique fabric of its sovereignty both the visible and the invisible.
4. The parallelism between classiﬁcation and nomenclature is thus,
by this very fact, dissolved. As long as classiﬁcation consisted of a
pattern of progressively smaller areas ﬁtted into a visible space, it was
quite conceivable that the delimitation and denomination of the resultant groups could be accomplished simultaneously. The problem of the
name and the problem of the genus were isomorphic. But now that
character can classify only by means of prior reference to the organic
structure of individuals, ‘distinction’ can no longer be achieved in
accordance with the same criteria, or by means of the same operations,
as ‘denomination’. In order to discover the fundamental groups into
which natural beings can be divided, it has become necessary to
explore in depth the space that lies between their superﬁcial organs and
their most concealed ones, and between these latter and the broad
functions that they perform. Any good nomenclature, on the other
hand, will continue to be deployed in the horizontal dimension of the
table: starting from the visible characters of the individual, one must
ﬁnd one’s way to that precise square in which is to be found the name
of its genus and its species. There is a fundamental distortion between
the space of organic structure and that of nomenclature: or rather,
instead of being exactly superimposed, they are now perpendicular to
one another; and at the point where they meet we ﬁnd the manifest
character, which indicates a function in the vertical plane and makes it

249

250 the order of things
possible to discover a name in the horizontal one. This distinction,
which within a few years will render natural history and the preeminence of taxinomia obsolescent, we owe to the genius of Lamarck: in
the Preliminary Discourse to La Flore française he set out the two tasks of
botany as two radically distinct entities: ‘determination’, which applies
the rules of analysis and makes it possible to discover the name of an
individual by the simple use of a binary method (either such and such
a character is present in the individual being examined, in which case
one must look for its location in the right-hand part of the table; or it is
not present, in which case one must look in the left-hand part; and so
on until the name has ﬁnally been determined); and the discovery of
the real relations of resemblance, which presupposes an examination
of the entire organic structure of species.14 Names and genera, designation and classiﬁcation, language and nature, cease to be automatically interlocked. The order of words and the order of beings no longer
intersect except along an artiﬁcially deﬁned line. Their old aﬃnity,
which had been the foundation of natural history in the Classical age,
and which had led structure to character, representation to denomination, and the visible individual to the abstract genus, all with one and
the same movement, is beginning to dissolve. There is talk of things
that take place in another space than that of words. By making such a
distinction, and by making it so early on, Lamarck brought the era of
natural history to a close and provided a much clearer, a much more
certain and radical glimpse of the era of biology than he did twenty
years later by taking up once more the already well-known theme of
the single series of species and their progressive transformation.
The concept of organic structure already existed in eighteenthcentury natural history – just as, in the sphere of the analysis of wealth,
the notion of labour was not invented at the end of the Classical age;
but it was a concept that served at that time to deﬁne a certain mode of
composition of complex individuals, on the basis of more elementary
materials; Linnaeus, for example, distinguished between ‘juxtaposition’, which causes growth in minerals, and ‘intussusception’,
which enables the vegetable kingdom to develop by feeding itself.15
Bonnet contrasted the ‘aggregation’ of ‘unreﬁned solids’ with the
‘composition of organic solids’, which ‘weaves together an almost
inﬁnite number of parts, some ﬂuid, others solid’.16 Now, this

the limits of representation

concept of organic structure had never been used before the end of the
century as a foundation for ordering nature, as a means of deﬁning its
space or delimiting its forms. It is through the works of Jussieu, Vicq
d’Azyr, and Lamarck that it begins to function for the ﬁrst time as a
method of characterization: it subordinates characters one to another;
it links them to functions; it arranges them in accordance with an
architecture that is internal as well as external, and no less invisible
than visible; it distributes them throughout a space that is other than
that of names, discourse, and language. It is thus no longer content to
designate one category of beings among other categories; it no longer
merely indicates a dividing-line running through the taxonomic space;
it deﬁnes for certain beings the internal law that enables a particular
one of their structures to take on the value of a character. Organic
structure intervenes between the articulating structures and the designating characters – creating between them a profound, interior, and
essential space.
This important mutation further exerts its inﬂuence upon the element of natural history; it modiﬁes the methods and the techniques of a
taxinomia; but it does not refute its fundamental conditions of possibility; it has not yet touched the mode of being of a natural order. It does,
however, entail one major consequence: the radicalization of the
dividing-line between organic and inorganic. In the table of beings
unfolded by natural history, the terms organized and non-organized
deﬁned merely two categories; these two categories overlapped, but
did not necessarily coincide with, the antithesis of living and nonliving. From the moment when organic structure becomes a basic concept of natural characterization, and makes possible the transition from
visible structure to designation, it must of course cease to be no more
than a character itself; it surrounds the taxonomic space in which it lay
before, and in turn provides the ground for a possible classiﬁcation.
This being so, the opposition between organic and inorganic becomes
fundamental. It is, in fact, from the period 1775–95 onward that the old
articulation of the three or four kingdoms disappears; the opposition of
the two kingdoms – organic and inorganic – does not replace that
articulation exactly; but rather, by imposing another division, at
another level and in another space, it makes the old articulation impossible. Pallas and Lamarck17 formulate this great dichotomy – a

251

252 the order of things
dichotomy with which the opposition of the living and the non-living
coincides. ‘There are only two kingdoms in nature,’ wrote Vicq d’Azyr
in 1786, ‘one enjoys life and the other is deprived of it’.18 The organic
becomes the living and the living is that which produces, grows, and
reproduces; the inorganic is the non-living, that which neither
develops nor reproduces; it lies at the frontiers of life, the inert, the
unfruitful – death. And although it is intermingled with life, it is so as
that element within it that destroys and kills it. ‘There exist in all living
beings two powerful forces, which are very distinct and always in
opposition to each other, so much so that each perpetually destroys the
eﬀects that the other succeeds in producing’.19 It can be seen how,
by fragmenting in depth the great table of natural history, something
resembling a biology was to become possible; and also how, in the
analyses of Bichat, the fundamental opposition of life and death was
able to emerge. What was to take place was not the more or less
precarious triumph of a vitalism over a mechanism; vitalism and its
attempt to deﬁne the speciﬁcity of life are merely the surface eﬀects of
those archaeological events.

IV WORD INFLECTION
The exact counterpart of these events is to be found in the area of
language analysis. Though it is true that they take a more discreet form
and obey a slower chronology than in the ﬁeld of natural history. There
is an easily discoverable reason for this; it is that, throughout the Classical age, language was posited and reﬂected upon as discourse, that is,
as the spontaneous analysis of representation. Of all the forms of nonquantitative order it was the most immediate, the least deliberate, the
most profoundly linked to the movement of representation itself.
And to that extent it was more ﬁrmly rooted in representation and in
the mode of being of representation than were the more intellectual
orders – disinterested or interested – based upon the classiﬁcation of
beings or the exchange of wealth. Technical modiﬁcations such as
those that aﬀected the measurement of exchange values, or the
methods of arriving at ‘characters’, were suﬃcient to change considerably the analysis of wealth or natural history. In order that the science
of language could undergo mutations as important as these, even

the limits of representation

profounder events were necessary, events capable of changing the very
being of representations in Western culture. Just as, in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, the theory of the name had its place as near
as possible to representation and thus governed, to a certain degree, the
analysis of structures and character in living beings, and that of price
and value in the sphere of wealth, so in the same way, at the end of the
Classical age, it was this theory that subsisted longest, breaking up only
late in the day, at the moment when representation itself was modiﬁed
at the deepest level of its archaeological organization.
Until the beginning of the nineteenth century, analyses of language
show little change. Words are still investigated on the basis of their
representative values, as virtual elements of discourse which prescribes
one and the same mode of being for them all. And yet, these representative contents are no longer analysed only in the dimension that
brings representation near to an absolute origin, whether mythical or
not. In general grammar, in its purest form, all the words of a language
were bearers of a more or less hidden, more or less derived, signiﬁcation whose original raison d’être lay in an initial designation. Every language, however complex, was situated in the opening that had been
created, once and for all, by archaic cries. Lateral resemblances with
other languages – similar sounds applied to analogous signiﬁcations –
were noted and listed only in order to conﬁrm the vertical relation of
each to these deeply buried, silted over, almost mute values. In the last
quarter of the eighteenth century, the horizontal comparison of languages acquires another function: it no longer makes it possible to
know what each language may still preserve of its ancestral memory,
what marks from before Babel have been preserved in the sounds of its
words; but it should make it possible to measure the extent to which
languages resemble one another, the density of their similitudes, the
limits within which they are transparent to one another. Hence those
great confrontations between various languages that we see appearing
at the end of the century – in some cases brought about by the pressure
of political motives, as with the attempts made in Russia20 to
establish an abstract of all the languages of the Empire; in 1787 there
appeared in Petersburg the ﬁrst volume of the Glossarium comparativum totius orbis; it had to include references to 279 languages: 171 in
Asia, 55 in Europe, 30 in Africa, 23 in America.21 The comparisons are

253

254 the order of things
still made exclusively on the basis of and in terms of representative
contents: a single kernel of signiﬁcation – which is used as an
invariable – is related to the words by means of which the various
languages are able to designate it (Adelung22 gives 500 diﬀerent
versions of Pater in diﬀerent languages and dialects); or one root is
selected as a constant element running through a variety of slightly
diﬀering forms, and the full array of meanings that it can take on is
progressively determined (these are the ﬁrst attempts at Lexicography,
such as that of Buthet de La Sarthe). All these analyses always refer back
to two principles, which were already those of general grammar: that of an
original and common language which supposedly provided the initial
batch of roots; and that of a series of historical events, foreign to
language, which, from outside, bend it, wear it away, reﬁne it, make it
more ﬂexible, by multiplying or combining its forms (invasions,
migrations, advances in learning, political freedom or slavery, etc.).
Now, the confrontation of languages at the end of the eighteenth
century brings to light a form intermediary between the articulation of
contents and the value of roots: namely, inﬂection. It is true that
grammarians had long been familiar with inﬂectional phenomena (just
as, in natural history, the concept of organic structure was familiar
before Pallas or Lamarck; and, in economics, the concept of labour was
known before Adam Smith); but inﬂections had been analysed only for
their representative value – whether they were considered as accessory
representations, or were seen as a way of linking representations
together (rather like another kind of word order). But when one compares, as Coeurdoux23 and William Jones24 did, the diﬀerent
forms of the verb to be in Sanskrit and Latin or Greek, one discovers a
relation of constancy the reverse of the one usually admitted: it is the
root that is modiﬁed, and the inﬂections that are analogous. The Sanskrit series asmi, asi, asti, smas, stha, santi corresponds exactly, but by
inﬂectional analogy, with the Latin series sum, es, est, sumus, estis, sunt. It is
true that Coeurdoux and Anquetil-Duperron remained at the level of
analysis as practised in general grammar, when the former saw this parallelism as evidence of the remains of an original common language, and
the latter saw it as the result of the historic mixture that may have
occurred between Hindus and Mediterranean peoples at the time of
the Bactrian kingdom. But what was at stake in this comparison of

the limits of representation

conjugations was no longer the link between original syllabic and
primary meaning; it was already a more complex relation between the
modiﬁcations of the radical and the functions of grammar; it was being
discovered that in two diﬀerent languages there was a constant relation
between a determinate series of formal modiﬁcations and an equally
determinate series of grammatical functions, syntactical values, or
modiﬁcations of meaning.
For this very reason, general grammar begins to change its conﬁguration: its various theoretical segments are no longer linked together in
exactly the same way; and the network that joins them already suggests
a slightly diﬀerent route. At the time of Bauzée or Condillac, the relation between roots, with their great lability of form, and the meaning
patterned out of representations, or again, the link between the power
to designate and the power to articulate, was assured by the sovereignty
of the Name. Now a new element intervenes: on the one hand, on the
side of meaning or representation, it indicates only an accessory and
necessarily secondary value (it is a question of the role played by the
individual or thing designated as either subject or complement; it is a
question of the time of the action); but on the other hand, on the side
of form, it constitutes the solid, constant, almost unalterable totality
whose sovereign law is so far imposed upon the representative roots as
to modify even those roots themselves. Moreover, this element, secondary in its signiﬁcative value, primary in its formal consistence, is
not itself an isolated syllable, like a sort of constant root; it is a system
of modiﬁcations of which the various segments are interdependent:
the letter s does not signify the second person in the way that the letter
e, according to Court de Gébelin, signiﬁed breathing, life, and existence; it is the totality of the modiﬁcations m, s, t that gives the verbal
root the values of the ﬁrst, second, and third person.
Until the end of the eighteenth century, this new analysis has its
place in the search for the representative values of language. It is still a
question of discourse. But already, through the inﬂectional system, the
dimension of the purely grammatical is appearing: language no longer
consists only of representations and of sounds that in turn represent the
representations and are ordered among them as the links of thought
require; it consists also of formal elements, grouped into a system,
which impose upon the sounds, syllables, and roots an organization

255

256 the order of things
that is not that of representation. Thus an element has been introduced
into the analysis of language that is not reducible to it (as labour was
introduced into the analysis of exchange, or organic structure into that
of characters). As a primary consequence of this, one may note the
appearance at the end of the eighteenth century of a phonetics that is
no longer an investigation of primary expressive values, but an analysis
of sounds, of their relations, and of their possible transformation one
into another; in 1781, we ﬁnd Helwag deﬁning the vocalic triangle.25 One can note also the beginnings of a comparative grammar: the object selected for comparison in the various languages is no
longer the couple formed by a group of letters and a meaning, but
groups of modiﬁcations of a grammatical nature (conjugations,
declensions, suﬃxes, and preﬁxes). Languages are no longer contrasted
in accordance with what their words designate, but in accordance with
the means whereby those words are linked together; from now on they
will communicate, not via the intermediary of that anonymous and
general thought they exist to represent, but directly from one to the
other, thanks to these delicate instruments, so fragile in appearance yet
so constant and so irreducible, by which words are arranged in relation
to each other. As Monboddo said:
The art of a language is less arbitrary and more determined by rule
than either the sound or sense of the words, it is one of the principal
things by which the connection of languages with one another is to be
discovered. And, therefore, when we ﬁnd that two languages practise
the three great arts of language, derivation, composition, and ﬂexion,
in the same way, we may conclude that the one language is the original
of the other, or that they are both dialects of the same language.26

As long as language was deﬁned as discourse, it could have no other
history than that of its representations: if ideas, things, knowledge, or
feelings happened to change, then and only then did a given language
undergo modiﬁcation, and in exactly the same proportion as the
changes in question. But from now on there is an interior ‘mechanism’
in languages which determines not only each one’s individuality but
also its resemblances to the others: it is this mechanism, the bearer of
identity and diﬀerence, the sign of adjacency, the mark of kinship, that

the limits of representation

is now to become the basis for history. By its means, historicity will be
able to introduce itself into the density of the spoken word itself.

V IDEOLOGY AND CRITICISM
There took place therefore, towards the last years of the eighteenth
century, in general grammar, in natural history, and in the analysis of wealth, an
event that is of the same type in all these spheres. The signs whose
representations were aﬀected, the analysis of identities and diﬀerences
that it was possible to establish at that time, the continuous, yet articulated, table that was set up in the teeming profusion of similitudes, the
clearly deﬁned order among the empirical multiplicities, none of these
can henceforth be based solely upon the duplication of representation
in relation to itself. From this event onward, what gives value to the
objects of desire is not solely the other objects that desire can represent
to itself, but an element that cannot be reduced to that representation:
labour; what makes it possible to characterize a natural being is no
longer the elements that we can analyse in the representations we make
for ourselves of it and other beings, it is a certain relation within this
being, which we call its organic structure; what makes it possible to deﬁne
a language is not the way in which it represents representations, but a
certain internal architecture, a certain manner of modifying the words
themselves in accordance with the grammatical position they take up
in relation to one another; in other words, its inﬂectional system. In all
these cases, the relation of representation to itself, and the relations of
order it becomes possible to determine apart from all quantitative
forms of measurement, now pass through conditions exterior to the
actuality of the representation itself. In order to link the representation
of a meaning with that of a word, it is necessary to refer to, and to have
recourse to, the purely grammatical laws of a language which, apart
from all power of representing representations, is subjected to the
rigorous system of its phonetic modiﬁcations and its synthetic subordinations; in the Classical age, languages had a grammar because they
had the power to represent; now they represent on the basis of that
grammar, which is for them a sort of historical reverse side, an interior
and necessary volume whose representative values are no more than
the glittering, visible exterior. In order to link together, in a deﬁned

257

258 the order of things
character, a partial structure and the visible totality of a living being, it
is now necessary to refer to the purely biological laws, which, apart
from all descriptive signs and as it were set back from them, organize
the relations between functions and organs; living beings no longer
deﬁne their resemblances, their aﬃnities, and their families on the
basis of their displayed descriptability; they possess characters which
language can scan and deﬁne because they have a structure that is, in a
way, the dark, concave, inner side of their visibility: it is on the clear
and discursive surface of this secret but sovereign mass that characters
emerge, a sort of storehouse exterior to the periphery of organisms
now bound in upon themselves. Finally, when it is a matter of linking
the representation of some object of need to all the others that can
confront it in the act of exchange, it is necessary to have recourse to the
form and quantity of a piece of work, which determine its value; what
creates a hierarchy among things in the continuous circulation of the
market is not other objects or other needs; it is the activity that has
produced them and has silently lodged itself within them; it is the days
and hours required for their manufacture, extraction, or transportation
that constitute their proper weight, their marketable solidity, their
internal law, and thus what one can call their real price; it is on the basis
of this essential nucleus that exchanges can be accomplished and that
market prices, after having ﬂuctuated, can ﬁnd their point of rest.
This somewhat enigmatic event, this event rising up from below
which occurred towards the end of the eighteenth century in these
three domains, subjecting them at one blow to one and the same break,
can now be located within the unity that forms a foundation for its
diverse forms. Quite obviously, it would be superﬁcial to seek this
unity in some progress made in rationality, or in the discovery of a new
cultural theme. The complex phenomena of biology, of the history of
languages, or of industrial production, were not, in the last years of the
eighteenth century, introduced into forms of rational analysis to which
until then they had remained entirely foreign; nor was there a sudden
interest – provoked by the ‘inﬂuence’ of a budding ‘romanticism’ – in
the complex forms of life, history, and society; there was no detachment, under the pressure of its problems, from a rationalism subjected
to the model of mechanics, to the rules of analysis and the laws of
understanding. Or rather, all this did in fact happen, but as a surface

the limits of representation

movement: a modiﬁcation and shifting of cultural interests, a redistribution of opinions and judgements, the appearance of new forms in
scientiﬁc discourse, wrinkles traced for the ﬁrst time upon the enlightened face of knowledge. In a more fundamental fashion, and at the
level where acquired knowledge is rooted in its positivity, the event
concerns, not the objects aimed at, analysed, and explained in knowledge, not even the manner of knowing them or rationalizing them,
but the relation of representation to that which is posited in it. What
came into being with Adam Smith, with the ﬁrst philologists, with
Jussieu, Vicq d’Azyr, or Lamarck, is a minuscule but absolutely essential
displacement, which toppled the whole of Western thought: representation has lost the power to provide a foundation – with its own being,
its own deployment and its power of doubling over on itself – for the
links that can join its various elements together. No composition, no
decomposition, no analysis into identities and diﬀerences can now
justify the connection of representations one to another; order, the
table in which it is spatialized, the adjacencies it deﬁnes, the successions it authorizes as so many possible routes between the points on
its surface – none of these is any longer in a position to link representations or the elements of a particular representation together. The
condition of these links resides henceforth outside representation,
beyond its immediate visibility, in a sort of behind-the-scenes world
even deeper and more dense than representation itself. In order to
ﬁnd a way back to the point where the visible forms of beings are
joined – the structure of living beings, the value of wealth, the syntax
of words – we must direct our search towards that peak, that necessary but always inaccessible point, which drives down, beyond our
gaze, towards the very heart of things. Withdrawn into their own
essence, taking up their place at last within the force that animates
them, within the organic structure that maintains them, within the
genesis that has never ceased to produce them, things, in their fundamental truth, have now escaped from the space of the table; instead
of being no more than the constancy that distributes their representations always in accordance with the same forms, they turn in upon
themselves, posit their own volumes, and deﬁne for themselves an
internal space which, to our representation, is on the exterior. It is from
the starting-point of the architecture they conceal, of the cohesion

259

260 the order of things
that maintains its sovereign and secret sway over each one of their
parts, it is from the depths of the force that brought them into being
and that remains in them, as though motionless yet still quivering,
that things – in fragments, outlines, pieces, shards – oﬀer themselves,
though very partially, to representation. And from their inaccessible
store, representation can draw out, piece by piece, only tenuous
elements whose unity, whose point of connection, always remains
hidden in that beyond. The space of order, which served as a common
place for representation and for things, for empirical visibility and for
the essential rules, which united the regularities of nature and the
resemblances of imagination in the grid of identities and diﬀerences,
which displayed the empirical sequence of representations in a simultaneous table, and made it possible to scan step by step, in accordance
with a logical sequence, the totality of nature’s elements thus rendered contemporaneous with one another – this space of order is
from now on shattered: there will be things, with their own organic
structures, their hidden veins, the space that articulates them, the
time that produces them; and then representation, a purely temporal
succession, in which those things address themselves (always partially) to a subjectivity, a consciousness, a singular eﬀort of cognition,
to the ‘psychological’ individual who from the depth of his own
history, or on the basis of the tradition handed on to him, is trying to
know. Representation is in the process of losing its power to deﬁne
the mode of being common to things and to knowledge. The very
being of that which is represented is now going to fall outside
representation itself.
Yet that proposition is imprudent. At any rate, it anticipates an
arrangement of the ﬁeld of knowledge that is not yet deﬁnitively established by the end of the eighteenth century. It must not be forgotten
that, though Smith, Jussieu, and W. Jones made use of the notions of
labour, organic structure, and grammatical system, their aim in doing
so was not to break out of the tabular space laid out by Classical
thought, or to ﬁnd a way around the visibility of things and to escape
from the play of representation representing itself; it was simply to
establish within it a form of connection that would be at the same time
analysable, constant, and well founded. It was still a matter of discovering the general order of identities and diﬀerences. The great detour,

the limits of representation

the great quest, beyond representation, for the very being of what is
represented has not yet been made; only the place from which that
quest will become possible has so far been established. But this place
still ﬁgures among the interior arrangements of representations. And
there is no doubt that there exists, corresponding to this ambiguous
epistemological conﬁguration, a philosophic duality which indicates
its imminent dissolution.
The coexistence of Ideology and critical philosophy at the end of the
eighteenth century – of Destutt de Tracy and Kant – divides, into two
forms of thought, exterior to one another, yet simultaneous, what
scientiﬁc forms of reﬂection, on the other hand, hold together in
a unity doomed to imminent dissociation. In Destutt or Gerando,
Ideology posits itself both as the only rational and scientiﬁc form that
philosophy can assume and as the sole philosophic foundation that can
be proposed for the sciences in general and for each particular sphere
of knowledge. Being a science of ideas, Ideology should be a kind of
knowledge of the same type as those that take as their object the beings
of nature, the words of language, or the laws of society. But precisely in
so far as its object is ideas, the manner in which they are expressed in
words and linked together in reasoning, it has validity as the Grammar
and the Logic of all possible science. Ideology does not question the
foundation, the limits, or the root of representation; it scans the
domain of representations in general; it determines the necessary
sequences that appear there; it deﬁnes the links that provide its connections; it expresses the laws of composition and decomposition that may
rule it. It situates all knowledge in the space of representations, and by
scanning that space it formulates the knowledge of the laws that provide its organization. It is in a sense the knowledge of all knowledge.
But this duplication upon which it is based does not cause it to emerge
from the ﬁeld of representation; the aim of that duplication is to superimpose all knowledge upon a representation from whose immediacy
one never escapes:
Have you ever understood at all precisely what thinking is, what you
experience when you think, anything at all? . . . You say to yourself: I
think that, when you have an opinion, when you form a judgement. In
fact, to pass a judgement, true or false, is an act of thought; this act

261

262 the order of things
consists in feeling that there is a connection, a relation . . . To think, as
you see, is always to feel, and is nothing other than to feel.27

We should note, however, that, in deﬁning the thought of a relation by
the sensation of that relation, or, in briefer terms, thought in general by
sensation, Destutt is indeed covering, without emerging from it, the
whole domain of representation; but he reaches the frontier where
sensation as the primary, completely simple form of representation, as
the minimum content of what can be given to thought, topples over
into the domain of the physiological conditions that can provide an
awareness of it. That which, when read in one sense, appears as the
most tenuous generality of thought, appears, when deciphered in
another direction, as the complex result of a zoological singularity: ‘We
have only an incomplete knowledge of an animal if we do not know its
intellectual faculties. Ideology is a part of zoology, and it is above all in
man that this part is important and merits delving into’.28 Analysis
of representation, at the moment when it attains its greatest degree of
extension, brushes with its very outermost edge a domain that is more
or less – or rather, that will be more or less, for it does not exist as yet –
that of a natural science of man.
Diﬀerent as they are in form, style, and aim, the Kantian question
and the question of the ‘Idéologues’ have the same point of application: the relation of representations to each other. But Kant does not
seek this relation – what gives it its foundation and justiﬁcation – on
the level of representation, even attenuated in its content so far as to be
nothing more, on the conﬁnes of passivity and consciousness, than
mere sensation; he questions it as to what renders it possible in general.
Instead of basing the connection between representations on a foundation arrived at by a sort of internal hollowing-out process, which
gradually whittles it away until there is nothing left but the pure
impression, he establishes it on the conditions that deﬁne its universally valid form. By directing his inquiry in this direction, Kant
avoids representation itself and what is given within it, in order to
address himself to that on the basis of which all representation, whatever its form, may be posited. It is therefore not representations themselves that, in accordance with their own laws, could be deployed and,
in one and the same movement, decomposed (by analysis) and

the limits of representation

recomposed (by synthesis): only judgements derived from experience
or empirical observations can be based upon the contents of representation. Any other connection, if it is to be universal, must have its
foundation beyond all experience, in the a priori that renders it possible.
Not that it is a question of another world, but of the conditions in
accordance with which any representation of the world in general can
exist.
There is thus a deﬁnite correspondence between the Kantian critique
and what in the same period was posited as the ﬁrst almost complete
form of ideological analysis. But Ideology, by extending its reﬂection
over the whole ﬁeld of knowledge – from primary impressions to
political economy, by way of logic, arithmetic, the sciences of nature,
and grammar – tried to resume in the form of representation precisely
what was being formed and re-formed outside representation. This
resumption could be accomplished only in the quasi-mythical form of
a simultaneously singular and universal genesis: an isolated, empty,
and abstract consciousness must, beginning with the most tenuous
form of representation, build up little by little the great table of all that
is representable. In this sense, Ideology is the last of the Classical philosophies – rather as Juliette is the last of the Classical narratives. Sade’s
scenes and reasoning recapture all the fresh violence of desire in the
deployment of a representation that is transparent and without ﬂaw;
the analyses of Ideology recapture in their narrative of a birth all the
forms of representation, even the most complex ones. Confronting
Ideology, the Kantian critique, on the other hand, marks the threshold
of our modernity; it questions representation, not in accordance with
the endless movement that proceeds from the simple element to all its
possible combinations, but on the basis of its rightful limits. Thus it
sanctions for the ﬁrst time that event in European culture which
coincides with the end of the eighteenth century: the withdrawal of
knowledge and thought outside the space of representation. That space
is brought into question in its foundation, its origin, and its limits: and
by this very fact, the unlimited ﬁeld of representation, which Classical
thought had established, which Ideology had attempted to scan in
accordance with a step-by-step, discursive, scientiﬁc method, now
appears as a metaphysics. But as a metaphysics that had never stepped
outside itself, that had posited itself in an uninformed dogmatism, and

263

264 the order of things
that had never brought out into the light the question of its right. In
this sense, Criticism brings out the metaphysical dimension that
eighteenth-century philosophy had attempted to reduce solely by
means of the analysis of representation. But it opens up at the same
time the possibility of another metaphysics; one whose purpose will be
to question, apart from representation, all that is the source and origin
of representation; it makes possible those philosophies of Life, of the
Will, and of the Word, that the nineteenth century is to deploy in the
wake of criticism.

VI OBJECTIVE SYNTHESES
From this, there springs an almost inﬁnite series of consequences – of
unlimited consequences, at least, since our thought today still belongs
to the same dynasty. In the ﬁrst rank, we must undoubtedly place the
simultaneous emergence of a transcendental theme and new empirical
ﬁelds – or, if not new, at least distributed and founded in a new way.
We have seen how, in the seventeenth century, the appearance of the
mathesis as a general science of order not only played a founding role
in the mathematical disciplines but was correlative in the formation of
various purely empirical domains, such as general grammar, natural
history, and the analysis of wealth; these latter were not constructed in
accordance with a ‘model’ supposedly prescribed for them by the
mathematicization or mechanization of nature; they were constituted
and arranged against the background of a general possibility: that
which made it possible to establish an ordered table of identities and
diﬀerences between representations. It was the dissolution of this
homogeneous ﬁeld of orderable representations, in the last years of the
eighteenth century, that brought about the correlative appearance of
two new forms of thought. The ﬁrst questions the conditions of a
relation between representations from the point of view of what in
general makes them possible: it thus uncovers a transcendental
ﬁeld in which the subject, which is never given to experience (since it
is not empirical), but which is ﬁnite (since there is no intellectual
intuition), determines in its relation to an object = x all the formal
conditions of experience in general; it is the analysis of the transcendental subject that isolates the foundation of a possible synthesis

the limits of representation

between representations. Opposite this opening to the transcendental,
and symmetrical to it, another form of thought questions the conditions of a relation between representations from the point of view of
the being itself that is represented: what is indicated, on the horizon of
all actual representations, as the foundation of their unity, is found to
be those never objectiﬁable objects, those never entirely representable
representations, those simultaneously evident and invisible visibilities,
those realities that are removed from reality to the degree to which
they are the foundation of what is given to us and reaches us: the force
of labour, the energy of life, the power of speech. It is on the basis of
these forms, which prowl around the outer boundaries of our experience, that the value of things, the organic structure of living beings, the
grammatical structure and historical aﬃnities of languages, attain our
representations and urge us on to the perhaps inﬁnite task of knowing.
In this case, the conditions of possibility of experience are being
sought in the conditions of possibility of the object and its existence,
whereas in transcendental reﬂection the conditions of possibility of
the objects of experience are identiﬁed with the conditions of possibility of experience itself. The new positivity of the sciences of life, language, and economics is in correspondence with the founding of a
transcendental philosophy.
Labour, life, and language appear as so many ‘transcendentals’ which
make possible the objective knowledge of living beings, of the laws of
production, and of the forms of language. In their being, they are
outside knowledge, but by that very fact they are conditions of knowledge; they correspond to Kant’s discovery of a transcendental ﬁeld and
yet they diﬀer from it in two essential points: they are situated with the
object, and, in a way, beyond it; like the Idea in the transcendental
Dialectic, they totalize phenomena and express the a priori coherence of
empirical multiplicities; but they provide them with a foundation in
the form of a being whose enigmatic reality constitutes, prior to all
knowledge, the order and the connection of what it has to know;
moreover, they concern the domain of a posteriori truths and the principles of their synthesis – and not the a priori synthesis of all possible
experience. The ﬁrst diﬀerence (the fact that the transcendentals are
situated with the object) explains the origin of those metaphysical
doctrines that, despite their post-Kantian chronology, appear as

265

266 the order of things
‘pre-critical’: they do, in fact, avoid any analysis of the conditions of
knowledge as they may be revealed at the level of transcendental subjectivity; but these metaphysics develop on the basis of transcendental
objectives (the Word of God, Will, Life) which are possible only in so
far as the domain of representation has been previously limited; they
therefore have the same archaeological subsoil as Criticism itself. The
second diﬀerence (the fact that these transcendentals concern a posteriori
syntheses) explains the appearance of a ‘positivism’: there is a whole
layer of phenomena given to experience whose rationality and interconnection rest upon an objective foundation which it is not possible
to bring to light; it is possible to know phenomena, but not substances;
laws, but not essences; regularities, but not the beings that obey them.
Thus, on the basis of criticism – or rather on the basis of this displacement of being in relation to representation, of which Kantian doctrine
is the ﬁrst philosophical statement – a fundamental correlation is established: on the one hand there are metaphysics of the object, or, more
exactly, metaphysics of that never objectiﬁable depth from which
objects rise up towards our superﬁcial knowledge; and, on the other
hand, there are philosophies that set themselves no other task than the
observation of precisely that which is given to positive knowledge. It
will be seen how the two terms of this opposition lend one another
support and reinforce one another; it is in the treasury of positive
branches of knowledge (and above all of those that biology, economics, or philology are able to release) that the metaphysics of the ‘depths’
or of the objective ‘transcendentals’ will ﬁnd their point of attack; and,
inversely, it is in the division between the unknowable depths and the
rationality of the knowable that the positivisms will ﬁnd their justiﬁcation. The criticism–positivism–metaphysics triangle of the object was
constitutive of European thought from the beginning of the nineteenth
century to Bergson.
Such a structure is linked, in its archaeological possibility, to the
emergence of those empirical ﬁelds of which mere internal analysis of
representation can now no longer provide an account. It is thus correlative with a certain number of arrangements proper to the modern
episteme.
To begin with, a theme comes to light which until this point had
remained unformulated, not to say non-existent. It may seem strange

the limits of representation

that no attempt was made during the Classical era to mathematicize the
sciences of observation, or grammatical learning, or the economic
experience. As though the Galilean mathematicization of nature and
the founding of mechanics were enough on their own to accomplish
the project of a mathesis. There is nothing paradoxical in this: the
analysis of representations in accordance with their identities and differences, their ordering into permanent tables, automatically situated
the sciences of the qualitative in the ﬁeld of a universal mathesis. At the
end of the eighteenth century, a new and fundamental division arises:
now that the link between representations is no longer established in
the very movement that decomposes them, the analytic disciplines are
found to be epistemologically distinct from those that are bound to
make use of synthesis. The result is that on the one hand we have a ﬁeld
of a priori sciences, pure formal sciences, deductive sciences based on
logic and mathematics, and on the other hand we see the separate
formation of a domain of a posteriori sciences, empirical sciences, which
employ the deductive forms only in fragments and in strictly localized
regions. Now, this division has as its consequence an epistemological
concern to discover at some other level the unity that has been lost with
the dissociation of the mathesis and the universal science of order.
Hence a certain number of eﬀorts that characterize modern reﬂection
on the sciences: the classiﬁcation of the domains of knowledge on the
basis of mathematics, and the hierarchy established to provide a progression towards the more complex and the less exact; reﬂection on
empirical methods of induction, and the eﬀort made to provide them
with both a philosophical foundation and a formal justiﬁcation; the
endeavour to purify, formalize, and possibly mathematicize the
domains of economics, biology, and ﬁnally linguistics itself. In counterpoint to these attempts to reconstitute a uniﬁed epistemological
ﬁeld, we ﬁnd at regular intervals the aﬃrmation of an impossibility:
this was thought to be due either to the irreducible speciﬁcity of life
(which there is an attempt to isolate especially in the early nineteenth
century) or to the particular character of the human sciences, which
were supposedly resistant to all methodological reduction (the attempt
to deﬁne and measure this resistance occurred mostly in the second
half of the nineteenth century). In this double aﬃrmation – alternating
or simultaneous – of being able and not being able to formalize the

267

268 the order of things
empirical, perhaps we should recognize the ground-plan of that profound event which, towards the end of the eighteenth century,
detached the possibility of synthesis from the space of representations.
It is this event that places formalization, or mathematicization, at the
very heart of any modern scientiﬁc project; it is this event, too, that
explains why all hasty mathematicization or naive formalization of the
empirical seems like ‘pre-critical’ dogmatism and a return to the platitudes of Ideology.
We should also evoke a second characteristic of the modern episteme.
During the Classical age, the constant, fundamental relation of knowledge, even empirical knowledge, to a universal mathesis justiﬁed the
project – constantly resumed in various forms – of a ﬁnally uniﬁed
corpus of learning; this project assumed in turn, though without its
foundation undergoing any modiﬁcation, the aspect of a general science of movement, that of a universal characteristic, that of a language
reﬂected upon and reconstituted in all its analytic values and all its
syntactical possibilities, and, ﬁnally, that of an alphabetical or analytical
Encyclopaedia of knowledge; it is of little importance that these
endeavours did not reach fulﬁlment or that they did not entirely
accomplish the purpose that had brought them into being: they all
expressed, on the visible surface of events or texts, the profound unity
that the Classical age had established by positing the analysis of identities and diﬀerences, and the universal possibility of tabulated order, as
the archaeological basis of knowledge. So that Descartes, Leibniz,
Diderot, and d’Alembert, even in what may be termed their failure, in
their unﬁnished or deﬂected achievements, remained as close as possible to what constituted Classical thought. At the beginning of the
nineteenth century, the unity of the mathesis was fractured. Doubly
fractured: ﬁrst, along the line dividing the pure forms of analysis from
the laws of synthesis, second, along the line that separates, when it is a
matter of establishing syntheses, transcendental subjectivity and the
mode of being of objects. These two forms of fracture give rise to two
series of endeavours which a certain striving towards universality
would seem to categorize as echoes of the Cartesian or Leibnizian
undertakings. But, if we look more closely, the uniﬁcation of the ﬁeld
of knowledge does not and cannot have the same forms, the same
claims, or the same foundations in the nineteenth century as in the

the limits of representation

Classical period. At the time of Descartes or Leibniz, the reciprocal
transparency of knowledge and philosophy was total, to the point that
the universalization of knowledge in a philosophical system of thought
did not require a speciﬁc mode of reﬂection. From Kant onward, the
problem is quite diﬀerent; knowledge can no longer be deployed
against the background of a uniﬁed and unifying mathesis. On the one
hand, there arises the problem of the relations between the formal ﬁeld
and the transcendental ﬁeld (and at this level all the empirical contents
of knowledge are placed between parentheses and remain suspended
from all validity); and, on the other hand, there arises the problem of
the relations between the domain of empiricity and the transcendental
foundation of knowledge (in which case the pure order of the formal
is set apart as non-pertinent to any account of that region in which all
experience, even that of the pure forms of thought, has its foundation).
But in both these cases the philosophical thought concerned with universality is on a diﬀerent level from that of the ﬁeld of real knowledge;
it is constituted either as pure reﬂection capable of providing a foundation,
or as a resumption capable of revealing. The ﬁrst of these forms of
philosophy manifested itself initially in Fichte’s undertaking to deduce
genetically the totality of the transcendental domain from the pure,
universal, and empty laws of thought; this opened up a ﬁeld of inquiry
in which an attempt is made either to reduce all transcendental reﬂection to the analysis of formalisms, or to discover, in transcendental
subjectivity, a basis for the possibility of all formalism. The second
philosophical path appeared ﬁrst of all with Hegelian phenomenology,
when the totality of the empirical domain was taken back into the
interior of a consciousness revealing itself to itself as spirit, in other
words, as an empirical and a transcendental ﬁeld simultaneously.
It is thus apparent how the phenomenological task that Husserl was
later to set himself is linked, in its profoundest possibilities and impossibilities, to the destiny of Western philosophy as it was established in
the nineteenth century. It is trying, in eﬀect, to anchor the rights and
limitations of a formal logic in a reﬂection of the transcendental
type, and also to link transcendental subjectivity to the implicit horizon
of empirical contents, which it alone contains the possibility of constituting, maintaining, and opening up by means of inﬁnite explicitations. But perhaps it does not escape the danger that, even before

269

270 the order of things
phenomenology, threatens every dialectical undertaking and causes it
to topple over, willy-nilly, into an anthropology. It is probably impossible to give empirical contents transcendental value, or to displace
them in the direction of a constituent subjectivity, without giving rise,
at least silently, to an anthropology – that is, to a mode of thought in
which the rightful limitations of acquired knowledge (and consequently of all empirical knowledge) are at the same time the concrete
forms of existence, precisely as they are given in that same empirical
knowledge.
The most distant consequences – and the most diﬃcult ones for us
to evade – of the fundamental event that occurred in the Western
episteme towards the end of the eighteenth century may be summed up
as follows: negatively, the domain of the pure forms of knowledge
becomes isolated, attaining both autonomy and sovereignty in relation
to all empirical knowledge, causing the endless birth and rebirth of a
project to formalize the concrete and to constitute, in spite of everything, pure sciences; positively, the empirical domains become linked
with reﬂections on subjectivity, the human being, and ﬁnitude, assuming the value and function of philosophy, as well as of the reduction of
philosophy or counter-philosophy.

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

A. Smith, The wealth of nations (1776; University Library edition, p. 1).
Ibid., p. 34.
Cantillon, Essai sur la nature du commerce en général, pp. 17–18.
Smith, op. cit., p. 34.
Ibid., p. 37.
Ibid., pp. 8–9.
Ibid., p. 21
A-L. de Jussieu, Genera plantarum, p. xviii.
Vicq d’Azyr, Systeme anatomique des quadrupèdes (1792, Discours préliminaire,
p. lxxxvii).
G. Cuvier, Tableau élémentaire de l’histoire naturelle (Paris, year VI, pp. 20–1).
Storr, Prodromus methodi mammalium (Tübingen, 1780, pp. 7–20).
Lamarck, Systéme des animaux sans vertèbres (Paris, 1801, pp. 143–4).
P. Pinel, Nouvelle méthode de classiﬁcation des quadrumanes (Actes de la Société
d’histoire naturelle, t. I, p. 52, quoted in Daudin, Les Classes zoologiques, p. 18).
Lamarck, La Flore française (Paris, 1778; Discours préliminaire, pp. xc–cii).
Linnaeus, Système sexuel des végétaux, p. 1.

the limits of representation
Bonnet, Contemplation de la nature, Ière partie (Œuvres complètes, t. IV, p. 40).
Lamarck, La Flore française, pp. 1–2.
Vicq d’Azyr, Premiers discours anatomiques (1786, pp. 17–18).
Lamarck, Mémoires de physique et d’histoire naturelle (1797, p. 248).
Bachmeister, Idea et desideria de colligendis linguarum specimenibus (Petersburg,
1773); Güldenstadt, Voyage dans le Caucase.
21 The second edition, in four volumes, appeared in 1790–1.
22 F. Adelung, Mithridates (4 vols., Berlin, 1806–17).
23 R-P. Coeurdoux, Memoires de l’Académie des inscriptions, t. XLIX, pp. 647–97.
24 W. Jones, Works (13 vols., London, 1807).
25 Helwag, De formatione loquelae (1781).
26 James Burnett (Lord Monboddo), Ancient metaphysics (1779–99, vol. IV, p. 326).
27 Destutt de Tracy, Eléments d’Ideologie, t. I, pp. 33–5.
28 Ibid., préface, p. 1.
16
17
18
19
20

271

8
LABOUR, LIFE, LANGUAGE
I THE NEW EMPIRICITIES
We have now advanced a long way beyond the historical event we were
concerned with situating – a long way beyond the chronological edges
of the rift that divides in depth the episteme of the Western world, and
isolates for us the beginning of a certain modern manner of knowing
empiricities. This is because the thought that is contemporaneous with
us, and with which, willy-nilly, we think, is still largely dominated by
the impossibility, brought to light towards the end of the eighteenth
century, of basing syntheses in the space of representation, and by the
correlative obligation – simultaneous but immediately divided against
itself – to open up the transcendental ﬁeld of subjectivity, and to constitute inversely, beyond the object, what are for us the ‘quasitranscendentals’ of Life, Labour, and Language. In order to bring about
the emergence of this obligation and this impossibility in all the harshness of their historical irruption, it was necessary to let analysis run
right through the thought that ﬁnds its source in such a chasm; it was
necessary that verbal formulation should waste no time in traversing
the destiny or slope of modern thought in order to reach at last the
point where it could turn back: this clarity of our day, still pale but
perhaps decisive, that enables us, if not to avoid entirely, at least to
dominate by fragments, and to master to some extent what, from that

labour, life, language

thought formed on the threshold of the modern age, still reaches us,
invests us, and serves as a continuous ground for our discourse. And yet
the other half of the event – probably the more important, for it concerns in their very being, in their roots, the positivities by which
our empirical forms of knowledge are sustained – has remained in
suspense; and it is this other half that we must now analyse.
In a ﬁrst phase – which extends chronologically from 1775 to 1795,
and whose conﬁguration we can indicate by means of the works of
Smith, Jussieu, and Wilkins – the concepts of labour, organism, and
grammatical system had been introduced – or reintroduced with a
particular status – into the analysis of representations and into the
tabulated space in which that analysis had hitherto been deployed. No
doubt their function was still only to provide authority for this analysis,
to allow the establishment of identities and diﬀerences, and to provide
the tool – a sort of qualitative yardstick – for the ordering of nature. But
neither labour, nor the grammatical system, nor organic structure
could be deﬁned, or established, by the simple process whereby representation was decomposed, analysed, and recomposed, thus representing itself to itself in a pure duplication; the space of analysis could not
fail, therefore, to lose its autonomy. Henceforth, the table, ceasing to be
the ground of all possible orders, the matrix of all relations, the form in
accordance with which all beings are distributed in their singular individuality, forms no more than a thin surface ﬁlm for knowledge; the
adjacencies it expresses, the elementary identities it circumscribes and
whose repetition it shows, the resemblances it dissolves by displaying
them, the constants it makes it possible to scan – these are nothing
more than the eﬀects of certain syntheses, or structures, or systems,
which reside far beyond all the divisions that can be ordered on the
basis of the visible. The visible order, with its permanent grid of
distinctions, is now only a superﬁcial glitter above an abyss.
The space of Western knowledge is now about to topple: the taxinomia, whose great, universal expanse extended in correlation with the
possibility of a mathesis, and which constituted the down-beat of
knowledge – at once its primary possibility and the end of its perfection – is now about to order itself in accordance with an obscure
verticality: a verticality that is to deﬁne the law of resemblances,
prescribe all adjacencies and discontinuities, provide the foundation

273

274 the order of things
for perceptible arrangements, and displace all the great horizontal
deployments of the taxinomia towards the somewhat accessory region of
consequences. Thus, European culture is inventing for itself a depth in
which what matters is no longer identities, distinctive characters, permanent tables with all their possible paths and routes, but great hidden
forces developed on the basis of their primitive and inaccessible
nucleus, origin, causality, and history. From now on things will be
represented only from the depths of this density withdrawn into itself,
perhaps blurred and darkened by its obscurity, but bound tightly to
themselves, assembled or divided, inescapably grouped by the vigour
that is hidden down below, in those depths. Visible forms, their
connections, the blank spaces that isolate them and surround their
outlines – all these will now be presented to our gaze only in an already
composed state, already articulated in that nether darkness that is
fomenting them with time.
Then – and this is the second phase of the event – knowledge in its
positivity changes its nature and its form. It would be false – and above
all inadequate – to attribute this mutation to the discovery of hitherto
unknown objects, such as the grammatical system of Sanskrit, or the
relation between anatomical arrangements and organic functions in
living beings, or the economic role of capital. And it would be no more
accurate to imagine that general grammar became philology, natural
history biology, and the analysis of wealth political economy, because
all these modes of knowledge corrected their methods, came closer to
their objects, rationalized their concepts, selected better models of
formalization – in short, because they freed themselves from their prehistories through a sort of auto-analysis achieved by reason itself. What
changed at the turn of the century, and underwent an irremediable
modiﬁcation, was knowledge itself as an anterior and indivisible mode
of being between the knowing subject and the object of knowledge; if
there were those who began to study the cost of production, and if the
ideal and primitive barter situation was no longer employed as a means
of analysing the creation of value, it is because, at the archaeological
level, exchange had been replaced as a fundamental ﬁgure in the space
of knowledge by production, bringing into view on the one hand new
knowable objects (such as capital) and prescribing, on the other,
new concepts and new methods (such as the analysis of forms of

labour, life, language

production). Similarly, if, after Cuvier, research was directed towards
the internal organic structure of living beings, and if in order to make
this possible the methods of comparative anatomy were used, it is
because Life, as a fundamental form of knowledge, had also produced
new objects (such as the relation of character to function) and new
methods (such as the search for analogies). Finally, if Grimm and Bopp
attempted to deﬁne the laws of vowel gradation or consonant mutation, it is because Discourse as a mode of knowledge had been replaced
by Language, which deﬁnes objects not hitherto apparent (such as
families of languages whose grammatical systems are analogous) and
prescribes methods that had not previously been employed (analysis of
the rules governing the modiﬁcations of consonants and vowels). Production, life, language – we must not seek to construe these as objects
that imposed themselves from the outside, as though by their own
weight and as a result of some autonomous pressure, upon a body of
learning that had ignored them for too long; nor must we see them as
concepts gradually built up, owing to new methods, through the progress of sciences advancing towards their own rationality. They are
fundamental modes of knowledge which sustain in their ﬂawless unity
the secondary and derived correlation of new sciences and techniques
with unprecedented objects. The constitution of these fundamental
modes is doubtless buried deep down in the dense archaeological
layers: one can, nevertheless, discern some signs of them in the works
of Ricardo, in the case of economics, of Cuvier, in the case of biology,
and of Bopp, in the case of philology.

II RICARDO
In Adam Smith’s analysis, labour owed its privileged position to the
power it was recognized to possess to establish a constant measure
between the values of things; it made it possible to achieve equivalence
in the exchange of objects of need whose standardization would
otherwise have been exposed to change, or subjected to an essential
relativity. But it could assume such a role only at the price of one
condition: it was necessary to suppose that the quantity of labour
indispensable for the production of a thing was equal to the quantity of
labour that the thing, in return, could buy in the process of exchange.

275

276 the order of things
Now, how could this identity be justiﬁed? On what could it be based, if
not on a certain assimilation accepted as taking place in the more than
illumined shadow lying between labour as productive activity and
labour as a commodity that can be bought and sold? In the second
sense, labour cannot be used as a constant measure, since it ‘is subject
to as many ﬂuctuations as the commodities compared with it’.1 In
Adam Smith, this confusion originated in the precedence accorded to
representation: all merchandise represented a certain labour, and all
labour could represent a certain quantity of merchandise. Men’s activity and the value of things were seen as communicating in the transparent element of representation. It is here that Ricardo’s analysis ﬁnds
its place and the reason for its decisive importance. It is not the ﬁrst to
give labour an important place in the economic process; but it explodes
the unity of that notion, and singles out in a radical fashion, for the ﬁrst
time, the worker’s energy, toil, and time that are bought and sold, and
the activity that is at the origin of the value of things. On the one hand,
then, we are left with the labour contributed by the workers, accepted
or demanded by the entrepreneurs, and remunerated by wages; on the
other, we have the labour that extracts metals, produces commodities,
manufactures objects, transports merchandise, and thus forms
exchangeable values which did not exist before it and would never
have arisen without it.
It is true that, for Ricardo as for Smith, labour can measure the
equivalence of merchandise which takes part in the circulation of
exchanges:
In the early stages of society, the exchangeable value of these commodities, or the rule which determines how much of one should be
given in exchange for another, depends almost exclusively on the
comparative quantity of labour expended on each.2

But the diﬀerence between Smith and Ricardo is this: for the ﬁrst,
labour, because it is analysable into days of subsistence, can be used as a
unit common to all other merchandise (including even the commodities necessary to subsistence themselves); for the second, the quantity
of labour makes it possible to determine the value of a thing, not
only because the thing is representable in units of work, but ﬁrst and

labour, life, language

foremost because labour as a producing activity is ‘the source of all
value’. Value can no longer be deﬁned, as in the Classical age, on the
basis of a total system of equivalences, and of the capacity that commodities have of representing one another. Value has ceased to be a
sign, it has become a product. If things are worth as much as the labour
devoted to them, or if their value is at least proportionate to that labour,
it is not that labour is a ﬁxed and constant value exchangeable as such
in all places and all times, it is because any value, whatever it may be,
has its origin in labour. And the best proof of this is that the value of
things increases with the quantity of labour that must be devoted to
them if we wish to produce them; but it does not change with the
increase or decrease of the wages for which labour, like all other commodities, is exchanged.3 As they circulate through the market, while
they are being exchanged for one another, values still have a power of
representation. But this power is drawn from elsewhere – from the
labour that is more primitive and more radical than all representation,
and that cannot, in consequence, be deﬁned by exchange. Whereas in
Classical thought trade and exchange serve as an indispensable basis for
the analysis of wealth (and this is still true of Smith’s analysis, in which
the division of labour is governed by the criteria of barter), after
Ricardo, the possibility of exchange is based upon labour; and henceforth the theory of production must always precede that of circulation.
Hence three consequences to be borne in mind. The ﬁrst is the
establishing of a causal series which is radically new in its form. The
eighteenth century was not ignorant – far from it – of the play of
economic determinations: it had provided explanations of how money
could ﬂow into a country or out of it, how prices rose or fell, how
production grew, stagnated, or diminished; but all these movements
were deﬁned on the basis of a tabulated space in which all values were
able to represent one another; prices increased when the representing
elements increased faster than the elements represented; production
diminished when the instruments of representation diminished in relation to the things to be represented, etc. It was always a question of a
circular and surface causality, since it was never concerned with anything but the reciprocal powers of that which was analysing and that
which was analysed. From Ricardo on, labour, having been displaced
in its relation to representation, and installed in a region where

277

278 the order of things
representation has no power, is organized in accordance with a causality peculiar to itself. The quantity of labour necessary for the manufacture (or harvesting, or transporting) of a thing, and determining its
value, depends upon the forms of production: production will be
modiﬁed according to the degree of division of labour, the quantity
and nature of the tools used, the mass of capital the entrepreneur has at
his disposal, and the amount he has invested in the ﬁtting out of his
factory; in certain cases it will be costly; in others it will be less so.4
But since this cost (wages, capital and income, proﬁts) is in every case
determined by labour already accomplished and applied to this new
production, we see the emergence of a great linear, homogeneous
series, which is that of production. All labour gives a result which, in
one form or another, is applied to a further labour whose cost it
deﬁnes; and this new labour participates in turn in the creation of a
value, etc. This accumulation in series breaks for the ﬁrst time with the
reciprocal determinations that were the sole active factors in the Classical analysis of wealth. It introduces, by its very existence, the possibility of a continuous historical time, even if in fact, as we shall see,
Ricardo conceives of the evolution ahead only as a slowing down and,
at most, a total suspension of history. At the level of the conditions of
possibility pertaining to thought, Ricardo, by dissociating the creation
of value from its representativity, made possible the articulation of
economics upon history. ‘Wealth’, instead of being distributed over a
table and thereby constituting a system of equivalences, is organized
and accumulated in a temporal sequence: all value is determined, not
according to the instruments that permit its analysis, but according to
the conditions of production that have brought it into being; and, even
prior to that, the conditions in question are determined by the quantities of labour applied in producing them. Even before economic
reﬂection was linked to the history of events or societies in an explicit
discourse, the mode of being of economics had been penetrated, and
probably for a long while, by historicity. The mode of being of economics is no longer linked to a simultaneous space of diﬀerences and
identities, but to the time of successive productions.
The second, no less decisive, consequence is concerned with the
notion of scarcity. For Classical analysis, scarcity was deﬁned in relation
to need: it was accepted that scarcity became more pronounced, or was

labour, life, language

displaced, as needs increased or took on new forms; for those who are
hungry, wheat is scarce; but for the rich who make up society, diamonds are scarce. The economists of the eighteenth century – whether
Physiocrats or not – thought that land, or labour applied to the land,
made it possible to overcome this scarcity, at least in part: this was
because the land had the marvellous property of being able to account
for far more needs than those of the men cultivating it. In Classical
thought, scarcity comes about because men represent to themselves
objects that they do not have; but there is wealth because the land
produces, in some abundance, objects that are not immediately consumed and that can therefore represent others in the processes of
exchange and the circulation of wealth. Ricardo inverts the terms of
this analysis: the apparent generosity of the land is due, in fact, to its
growing avarice; what is primary is not need and the representation of
need in men’s minds, it is merely a fundamental insuﬃciency.
In fact, labour – that is, economic activity – did not make its appearance in world history until men became too numerous to be able to
subsist on the spontaneous fruits of the land. Some, lacking the means
of subsistence, died, and many others would have died had they not
begun to work the land. And as the population increased, new areas of
forest had to be felled, cleared, and brought under cultivation. At every
moment of its history, humanity is henceforth labouring under the
threat of death: any population that cannot ﬁnd new resources is
doomed to extinction; and, inversely, to the degree that men multiply,
so they undertake more numerous, more distant, more diﬃcult, and
less immediately fruitful labours. Since the prospect of death becomes
proportionately more fearful as the necessary means of subsistence
become more diﬃcult of access, so, inversely, labour must grow in
intensity and employ all possible means to make itself more proliﬁc.
What makes economics possible, and necessary, then, is a perpetual
and fundamental situation of scarcity: confronted by a nature that in
itself is inert and, save for one very small part, barren, man risks his
life. It is no longer in the interplay of representation that economics
ﬁnds its principle, but near that perilous region where life is in confrontation with death. And thus economics refers us to that order of
somewhat ambiguous considerations which may be termed anthropological: it is related, in fact, to the biological properties of a human

279

280 the order of things
species, which, as Malthus showed in the same period as Ricardo, tends
always to increase unless prevented by some remedy or constraint; it is
related also to the situation of those living beings that run the risk of
not ﬁnding in their natural environment enough to ensure their existence; lastly, it designates in labour, and in the very hardship of that
labour, the only means of overcoming the fundamental insuﬃciency of
nature and of triumphing for an instant over death. The positivity of
economics is situated in that anthropological hollow. Homo oeconomicus is
not the human being who represents his own needs to himself, and the
objects capable of satisfying them; he is the human being who spends,
wears out, and wastes his life in evading the imminence of death. He is
a ﬁnite being: and just as, since Kant, the question of ﬁnitude has
become more fundamental than the analysis of representations (the
latter now being necessarily a derivation of the former), since Ricardo,
economics has rested, in a more or less explicit fashion, upon an
anthropology that attempts to assign concrete forms to ﬁnitude.
Eighteenth-century economics stood in relation to a mathesis as to a
general science of all possible orders; nineteenth-century economics
will be referred to an anthropology as to a discourse on man’s natural
ﬁnitude. By this very fact, need and desire withdraw towards the subjective sphere – that sphere which, in the same period, is becoming an
object of psychology. It is precisely here that in the second half of the
nineteenth century the marginalists will seek the notion of utility. The
belief will then arise that Condillac, or Graslin, or Fortbonnais, was
‘already’ a ‘psychologist’, since he analysed value in terms of need;
similarly, it will be believed that the Physiocrats were the ﬁrst ancestors
of an economics which, from Ricardo onwards, analysed value in
terms of production costs. What will have happened, in fact, is that the
conﬁguration that made Quesnay and Condillac simultaneously possible will have been left behind; the reign of the episteme that based
knowledge upon the ordering of representations will have been
broken; and a new epistemological arrangement will have replaced it,
an arrangement that distinguishes, though not without referring them
to one another, between a psychology of needs represented and an
anthropology of natural ﬁnitude.
Finally, the last consequence concerns the evolution of economics.
Ricardo shows that we should not interpret as a sign of nature’s

labour, life, language

fruitfulness that which indicates, and in an ever more insistent manner,
its essential avarice. The ‘rent of land’, which all economists, up to and
including Adam Smith himself,5 saw as the sign of a fruitfulness
proper to land, exists precisely in so far as agricultural labour becomes
increasingly hard and less and less ‘rentable’. As one is forced by the
uninterrupted growth of the population to clear and cultivate less fertile tracts of land, so the harvesting of these new units of wheat
requires more and more labour: either because the land must be
ploughed more deeply, or because a greater surface must be sown, or
because more fertilizer is needed; the cost of production is thus much
higher for these later harvests than it was for the ﬁrst ones, which were
obtained originally from rich and fertile lands. Now, these commodities, though so diﬃcult to produce, are no less indispensable than
the others if one does not wish a certain portion of humanity to die of
hunger. It is therefore the cost of production of wheat grown on the
most barren of the available land that will determine the price of wheat
in general, even though it may have been obtained with two or three
times less labour. This leads to an increased proﬁt for the easily cultivable lands, which will enable the owners of those lands to lease them
out in return for considerable rents. Ground rent is the eﬀect, not of a
proliﬁc nature, but of the avarice of the land. Now, this avarice becomes
more perceptible every day: the population, in fact, increases; progressively poorer land is brought under cultivation; the costs of production
increase; the prices of agricultural products increase, and ground rents
with them. Under this pressure, it is very possible – indeed necessary –
that the nominal wage of the labourers will also begin to rise, in order
to cover the minimum costs of their subsistence; but, for the same
reason, their real wage can never rise in practice above the sum that is
indispensable to provide them with clothing, shelter, and food. And
ﬁnally, the proﬁt of the entrepreneurs will decrease in exactly the same
proportion as ground rent increases, and as the labourers’ remuneration remains ﬁxed. It would continue to decrease indeﬁnitely, until it
disappeared altogether, were it not that there is a limit to the process:
after a certain point, in fact, industrial proﬁts will be so low that it will
become impossible to provide work for new workers; for lack of
additional wages, the labour force will no longer be able to grow, and
the population will remain constant; it will no longer be necessary to

281

282 the order of things
clear and cultivate fresh tracts of land even more infertile than the
previous ones; ground rent will reach a ceiling and will cease to exert
its customary pressure upon industrial proﬁts, which will then become
stabilized. The tide of History will at last become slack. Man’s ﬁnitude
will have been deﬁned – once and for all, that is, for an indeﬁnite time.
Paradoxically, it is the historicity introduced into economics by
Ricardo that makes it possible to conceive of this immobilization of
History. Classical thought, of course, conceived of the economy as
possessing an ever open, ever-changing future; but the type of modiﬁcation in question was, in fact, spatial: the table that wealth was supposed to form as it was displayed, exchanged, and arranged in order,
could very well be enlarged; in which case it remained the same table,
with each element losing some of its relative surface, but entering into
relations with new elements. On the other hand, it is the cumulative
time of population and production, the uninterrupted history of scarcity, that makes it possible from the nineteenth century to conceive of
the impoverishment of History, its progressive inertia, its petriﬁcation,
and, ultimately, its stony immobility. We see what roles History and
anthropology are playing in relation to one another. History exists (that
is, labour, production, accumulation, and growth of real costs) only in
so far as man as a natural being is ﬁnite: a ﬁnitude that is prolonged far
beyond the original limits of the species and its immediate bodily
needs, but that never ceases to accompany, at least in secret, the whole
development of civilizations. The more man makes himself at home in
the heart of the world, the further he advances in his possession of
nature, the more strongly also does he feel the pressure of his ﬁnitude,
and the closer he comes to his own death. History does not allow man
to escape from his initial limitations – except in appearance, and if we
take the word limitation in its superﬁcial sense; but if we consider the
fundamental ﬁnitude of man, we perceive that his anthropological
situation never ceases its progressive dramatization of his History,
never ceases to render it more perilous, and to bring it closer, as it were,
to its own impossibility. The moment History reaches such boundaries, it can do nothing but stop, quiver for an instant upon its axis, and
immobilize itself forever. But this can occur in two diﬀerent ways:
either it can move gradually, and with increasing slowness, towards a
state of stability that justiﬁes, in the indeﬁniteness of time, what it has

labour, life, language

always been advancing towards, what it has never really ceased to be
from the start; or it may attain a point of reversal at which it becomes
ﬁxed only in so far as it suppresses what it had always and continuously
been beforehand.
In the ﬁrst solution (represented by Ricardo’s ‘pessimism’), History
functions with regard to anthropological determinations as a sort of
vast compensating mechanism; true, it is situated within human ﬁnitude, but its aspect is that of a positive form, appearing in relief; it
enables man to overcome the scarcity to which he is doomed. As this
scarcity becomes daily more constricting, so labour becomes more
intense; production increases in absolute ﬁgures, but, at the same time,
and driven by the same forces, the costs of production – that is, the
quantities of labour necessary to produce the same object – also
increase. So that there must inevitably come a time when labour is no
longer supported by the commodity it produces (the latter costing no
more than the food of the labourer producing it). Production can no
longer make good the deﬁcit. In which case scarcity will limit itself (by
a process of demographic stabilization) and labour will adjust itself
exactly to needs (by a determined distribution of wealth). From then
on, ﬁnitude and production will be exactly superimposed to form a
single ﬁgure. Any additional agricultural labour would be useless; any
excess population would perish. Life and death will ﬁt exactly one
against the other, surface to surface, both immobilized and as it were
reinforced by their reciprocal antagonism. History will have led man’s
ﬁnitude to that boundary-point at which it will appear at last in its pure
form; it will have no more margin permitting it to escape from itself, it
will have no more eﬀort to make to provide a future for itself, and no
new lands to open up for future men; subjected to the great erosion of
History, man will gradually be stripped of everything that might hide
him from his own eyes; he will have exhausted all the possible elements that tend to blur and disguise beneath the promises of time his
anthropological nakedness; by long, but inevitable and tyrannical
paths, History will have led man to the truth that brings him to a halt,
face to face with himself.
In the second solution (represented by Marx), the relation of History
to anthropological ﬁnitude is construed in the opposite direction. History, in this case, plays a negative role: it is History itself, in fact, that

283

284 the order of things
augments the pressures of need, that causes want to increase, obliging
men constantly to work and to produce more and more, although they
receive no more than what is indispensable to them to subsist, and
sometimes a little less. So that, with time, the product of labour
accumulates, while ceaselessly eluding those who accomplish that
labour: these latter produce inﬁnitely more than the share of value that
returns to them in the form of wages, and thus provide capital with the
possibility of buying further labour. In this way the number of those
maintained by History at the limit of their conditions of existence
ceaselessly grows; and because of this, those conditions become
increasingly more precarious until they approach the point where
existence itself will be impossible; the accumulation of capital, the
growth of enterprises and of their capacities, the constant pressure on
wages, the excess of production, all cause the labour market to shrink,
lowering wages and increasing unemployment. Thrust back by poverty
to the very brink of death, a whole class of men experience, nakedly, as
it were, what need, hunger, and labour are. What others attribute to
nature or to the spontaneous order of things, these men are able to
recognize as the result of a history and the alienation of a ﬁnitude that
does not have this form. For this reason they are able – they alone are
able – to re-apprehend this truth of the human essence and so restore
it. But this can be achieved only by the suppression, or at least the
reversal, of History as it has developed up to the present: then alone
will a time begin which will have neither the same form, nor the same
laws, nor the same mode of passing.
But the alternatives oﬀered by Ricardo’s ‘pessimism’ and Marx’s
revolutionary promise are probably of little importance. Such a system
of options represents nothing more than the two possible ways of
examining the relations of anthropology and History as they are established by economics through the notions of scarcity and labour. For
Ricardo, History ﬁlls the void produced by anthropological ﬁnitude
and expressed in a perpetual scarcity, until the moment when a point
of deﬁnitive stabilization is attained; according to the Marxist interpretation, History, by dispossessing man of his labour, causes the positive form of his ﬁnitude to spring into relief – his material truth is
ﬁnally liberated. There is certainly no diﬃculty in understanding, on
the level of opinion, how such real choices were distributed, and why

labour, life, language

some opted for the ﬁrst type of analysis and others for the second. But
these are merely derived diﬀerences which stem ﬁrst and last from a
doxological investigation and treatment. At the deepest level of Western
knowledge, Marxism introduced no real discontinuity; it found its
place without diﬃculty, as a full, quiet, comfortable and, goodness
knows, satisfying form for a time (its own), within an epistemological
arrangement that welcomed it gladly (since it was this arrangement
that was in fact making room for it) and that it, in return, had no
intention of disturbing and, above all, no power to modify, even one
jot, since it rested entirely upon it. Marxism exists in nineteenthcentury thought like a ﬁsh in water: that is, it is unable to breathe
anywhere else. Though it is in opposition to the ‘bourgeois’ theories of
economics, and though this opposition leads it to use the project of a
radical reversal of History as a weapon against them, that conﬂict and
that project nevertheless have as their condition of possibility, not the
reworking of all History, but an event that any archaeology can situate
with precision, and that prescribed simultaneously, and according to
the same mode, both nineteenth-century bourgeois economics and
nineteenth-century revolutionary economics. Their controversies may
have stirred up a few waves and caused a few surface ripples; but they
are no more than storms in a children’s paddling pool.
What is essential is that at the beginning of the nineteenth century a
new arrangement of knowledge was constituted, which accommodated
simultaneously the historicity of economics (in relation to the forms of
production), the ﬁnitude of human existence (in relation to scarcity
and labour), and the fulﬁlment of an end to History – whether in the
form of an indeﬁnite deceleration or in that of a radical reversal. History, anthropology, and the suspension of development are all linked
together in accordance with a ﬁgure that deﬁnes one of the major
networks of nineteenth-century thought. We know, for example, the
role that this arrangement played in reviving the weary good intentions
of the humanisms; we know how it brought the Utopias of ultimate
development back to life. In Classical thought, the Utopia functioned
rather as a fantasy of origins: this was because the freshness of the
world had to provide the ideal unfolding of a table in which everything
would be present and in its proper place, with its adjacencies, its peculiar diﬀerences, and its immediate equivalences; in this primal light,

285

286 the order of things
representations could not yet have been separated from the living,
sharp, perceptible presence of what they represent. In the nineteenth
century, the Utopia is concerned with the ﬁnal decline of time rather
than with its morning: this is because knowledge is no longer constituted in the form of a table but in that of a series, of sequential connection, and of development: when, with the promised evening, the
shadow of the dénouement comes, the slow erosion or violent eruption of
History will cause man’s anthropological truth to spring forth in its
stony immobility; calendar time will be able to continue; but it will be,
as it were, void, for historicity will have been superimposed exactly
upon the human essence. The ﬂow of development, with all its
resources of drama, oblivion, alienation, will be held within an
anthropological ﬁnitude which ﬁnds in them, in turn, its own illuminated expression. Finitude, with its truth, is posited in time; and time is
therefore ﬁnite. The great dream of an end to History is the Utopia of
causal systems of thought, just as the dream of the world’s beginnings
was the Utopia of the classifying systems of thought.
This arrangement maintained its ﬁrm grip on thought for a long
while; and Nietzsche, at the end of the nineteenth century, made it
glow into brightness again for the last time by setting ﬁre to it. He took
the end of time and transformed it into the death of God and the
odyssey of the last man; he took up anthropological ﬁnitude once
again, but in order to use it as a basis for the prodigious leap of the
superman; he took up once again the great continuous chain of History, but in order to bend it round into the inﬁnity of the eternal
return. It is in vain that the death of God, the imminence of the superman, and the promise and terror of the great year take up once more, as
it were term by term, the elements that are arranged in nineteenthcentury thought and form its archaeological framework. The fact
remains that they sent all these stable forms up in ﬂames, that they used
their charred remains to draw strange and perhaps impossible faces;
and by a light that may be either – we do not yet know which – the
reviving ﬂame of the last great ﬁre or an indication of the dawn, we see
the emergence of what may perhaps be the space of contemporary
thought. It was Nietzsche, in any case, who burned for us, even before
we were born, the intermingled promises of the dialectic and
anthropology.

labour, life, language

III CUVIER
In his project for establishing a classiﬁcation that would be as faithful as
a method and as strict as a system, Jussieu had discovered the rule of
the subordination of characters, just as Smith had used the constant
value of labour to establish the natural price of things in the play of
equivalences. And just as Ricardo freed labour from its role as a measure in order to introduce it, prior to all exchange, into the general
forms of production, so Cuvier freed the subordination of characters
from its taxonomic function in order to introduce it, prior to any
classiﬁcation that might occur, into the various organic structural plans
of living beings. The internal link by which structures are dependent
upon one another is no longer situated solely at the level of frequency;
it becomes the very foundation of all correlation. It is this displacement
and this inversion that Geoﬀroy Saint-Hilaire expressed when he said:
‘Organic structure is becoming an abstract being . . . capable of assuming numerous forms’.6 The space of living beings pivots around this
notion, and everything that until then had been able to make itself
visible through the grid of natural history (genera, species, individuals,
structures, organs), everything that had been presented to view, now
takes on a new mode of being.
First and foremost are those distinct groups of elements that the eye
is able to articulate as it scans the bodies of individuals, and that are
called organs. In Classical analysis, the organ was deﬁned by both its
structure and its function; it was like a double-entry system which
could be read exhaustively either from the point of view of the role it
played (reproduction, for example), or from that of its morphological
variables (form, magnitude, arrangement, and number): the two
modes of decipherment coincided exactly, but they were nevertheless
independent of one another – the ﬁrst expressing the utilizable, the
second the identiﬁable. It is this arrangement that Cuvier overthrows:
doing away with the postulates of both their coincidence and their
independence, he gives function prominence over the organ – and to a
large extent – and subjects the arrangement of the organ to the sovereignty of function. He rejects, if not the individuality of the organ, at
least its independence: it is an error to believe that ‘everything is
important in an important organ’; our attention must be directed

287

288 the order of things
‘rather upon the functions themselves than upon the organs’;7
before deﬁning organs by their variables, we must relate them to the
functions they perform. Now, these functions are relatively few in
number: respiration, digestion, circulation, locomotion . . . So the visible diversity of structures no longer emerges from the background of
a table of variables, but from the background of a few great functional
units capable of being realized and of accomplishing their aims in
various ways:
What is common in all animals to each kind of organ considered
reduces itself to very little indeed, and often organs resemble one
another only in the effect they produce. This must have been especially
striking as regards respiration, which operates in the different classes
by means of organs so various that their structures offer no points in
common.8

When we consider the organ in relation to its function, we see, therefore, the emergence of ‘resemblances’ where there is no ‘identical’
element; a resemblance that is constituted by the transition of the
function into evident invisibility. It matters little, after all, that gills and
lungs may have a few variables of form, magnitude, or number in
common: they resemble one another because they are two varieties of
that non-existent, abstract, unreal, unassignable organ, absent from all
describable species, yet present in the animal kingdom in its entirety,
which serves for respiration in general. Thus there is a return in the analysis
of living beings to Aristotelian analogies: the gills are to respiration in
water what the lungs are to respiration in air. True, such relations were
perfectly well known in the Classical age; but they were used only to
determine functions; they were not used to establish the order of
things within the space of nature. From Cuvier onward, function,
deﬁned according to its non-perceptible form as an eﬀect to be
attained, is to serve as a constant middle term and to make it possible to
relate together totalities of elements without the slightest visible identity. What to Classical eyes were merely diﬀerences juxtaposed with
identities must now be ordered and conceived on the basis of a functional homogeneity which is their hidden foundation. When the Same
and the Other both belong to a single space, there is natural history;

labour, life, language

something like biology becomes possible when this unity of level begins
to break up, and when diﬀerences stand out against the background of
an identity that is deeper and, as it were, more serious than that unity.
This reference to function, and this uncoupling of the level of identities from that of diﬀerences, give rise to new relations: those of
coexistence, of internal hierarchy, and of dependence with regard to the level of
organic structure. Coexistence designates the fact that an organ or system of
organs cannot be present in a living being unless another organ or
another system of organs, of a particular nature and form, is also
present:
All the organs of one and the same animal form a single system of
which all the parts hold together, act, and react upon each other; and
there can be no modiﬁcations in any one of them that will not bring
about analogous modiﬁcations in them all.9

Within the digestive system, the form of the teeth (whether they are
incisors or molars) varies with the ‘length, convolutions, and dilations
of the alimentary system’; or again, as an example of coexistence
between diﬀerent systems, the digestive organs cannot vary independently of the morphology of the limbs (and especially of the form of
the nails); according to whether they will be provided with claws or
hoofs – and therefore whether the animal will be able to grasp and tear
up its food or not – so the alimentary canal, the ‘dissolving juices’, and
the form of the teeth will also diﬀer.10 These are lateral correlations that establish relations of concomitance, based upon functional
necessities, between elements on the same level: since it is necessary
that the animal should feed itself, the nature of its prey and its mode
of capture cannot remain irrelevant to the masticatory and digestive
systems (and vice versa).
Nevertheless, there is a hierarchy of levels. We know how Classical
analysis had been brought to the point of suspending the privileged
position of the most important organs in order to concentrate attention
on their taxonomic eﬃcacity. Now that we are no longer dealing with
independent variables, but with systems governed by one another, we
are confronted once again with the problem of reciprocal importance.
Thus the alimentary canal of mammals is not merely in a relation of

289

290 the order of things
possible covariation with the organs of locomotion and prehension; it
is also determined, at least in part, by the mode of reproduction.
Indeed, in its viviparous form, reproduction does not merely imply the
presence of those organs immediately connected with it; it also
requires the existence of organs of lactation, and the possession of lips
and a ﬂeshy tongue; on the other hand, it prescribes the existence of
warm, circulating blood and the bilocularity of the heart.11 The
analysis of organisms, and the possibility of resemblances and distinctions between them, presupposes, therefore, a table, composed not of
the elements, which may vary from species to species, but of the functions, which, in living beings in general, govern, complement, and
order one another: not a polygon of possible modiﬁcations, but a
hierarchical pyramid of importance. At ﬁrst, Cuvier thought that the
functions of existence preceded those of relationships (‘for the animal
is ﬁrst, then it feels and acts’): he supposed, therefore, that reproduction
and circulation must in the ﬁrst place determine a certain number of
organs to whose arrangement others would ﬁnd themselves subject;
the former organs would form the primary characters, and the latter
the secondary ones.12 Then he subordinated circulation to digestion,
because the latter exists in all animals (the polyp’s entire body is no
more than a sort of digestive apparatus), whereas blood and blood
vessels are found ‘only in the higher animals and progressively disappear in those of the lower classes’.13 Later still, it was the nervous
system (together with the presence or absence of a spinal cord) that
seemed to him the determining factor in all organic arrangements: ‘It
is really the whole animal: the other systems are there only to serve and
maintain it’.14
This pre-eminence of one function over the others implies that the
organism, in its visible arrangements, obeys a plan. Such a plan ensures
the control of the essential functions and brings under that control,
though with a greater degree of freedom, the organs that perform less
vital functions. As a hierarchical principle, this plan deﬁnes the most
important functions, arranges the anatomical elements that enable it to
operate, and places them in the appropriate parts of the body; thus,
within the vast group of the Articulata, the class of Insects reveals the
paramount importance of the locomotive functions and the organs of
movement; in the other three classes, on the other hand, it is the vital

labour, life, language

functions that are most important.15 In the regional control it exercises over the less fundamental organs, the plan of organic structure
plays a less determining role; it becomes more liberal, as it were, as
it moves further away from the centre, permitting of modiﬁcations,
alterations, changes in the possible form or utilization. It is still there,
but it has become more ﬂexible, and more permeable to other forms of
determination. This process is easily observed in the locomotive system
of mammals. The four propulsive limbs belong to the plan of the
organic structure, but only as a secondary character; they are therefore
never eliminated, or absent or replaced, but they are ‘masked sometimes as in the wings of the bat and the posterior ﬁns of seals’; it may
even happen that they are ‘denatured by use as in the pectoral ﬁns of
the cetaceans . . . Nature has made a ﬁn out of an arm. You perceive that
there is always a sort of constancy in the secondary characters in
accordance with their disguise’.16 It is understandable, then, how
the species can at the same time resemble one another (so as to form
groups such as the genera, the classes, and what Cuvier calls the subkingdoms) and be distinct from one another. What draws them
together is not a certain quantity of coincident elements; it is a sort of
focus of identity which cannot be analysed into visible areas because it
deﬁnes the reciprocal importance of the various functions; on the basis
of this imperceptible centre of identities, the organs are arranged in the
body, and the further they are from the centre, the more they gain in
ﬂexibility, in possibilities of variation, and in distinctive characters.
Animal species diﬀer at their peripheries, and resemble each other at
their centres; they are connected by the inaccessible, and separated by
the apparent. Their generality lies in that which is essential to their life;
their singularity in that which is most accessory to it. The more extensive the groups one wishes to ﬁnd, the deeper must one penetrate into
the organism’s inner darkness, towards the less and less visible, into
that dimension that eludes perception; the more one wishes to isolate
the individuality of the organism, the further must one go towards its
surface, and allow the perceptible forms to shine in all their visibility;
for multiplicity is apparent and unity is hidden. In short, living species
‘escape’ from the teeming profusion of individuals and species; they
can be classiﬁed only because they are alive and on the basis of what
they conceal.

291

292 the order of things
It must now be apparent what an immense reversal all this presupposes in relation to the Classical taxonomy. This taxonomy was constructed entirely upon the basis of the four variables of description
(forms, number, arrangement, magnitude), which could be scanned,
as it were in one and the same movement, by language and by the eye;
and in this deployment of the visible, life appeared as the eﬀect of a
patterning process – a mere classifying boundary. From Cuvier
onward, it is life in its non-perceptible, purely functional aspect that
provides the basis for the exterior possibility of a classiﬁcation. The
classiﬁcation of living beings is no longer to be found in the great
expanse of order; the possibility of classiﬁcation now arises from the
depths of life, from those elements most hidden from view. Before, the
living being was a locality of natural classiﬁcation; now, the fact of
being classiﬁable is a property of the living being. So the project of a
general taxinomia disappears; the possibility of deploying a great natural
order which would extend continuously from the simplest and most
inert of things to the most living and the most complex disappears; and
the search for order as the ground and foundation of a general science
of nature also disappears. ‘Nature’, too, disappears – it being understood that nature, throughout the Classical age, did not exist in the ﬁrst
place as a ‘theme’, as an ‘idea’, as an endless source of knowledge, but
as a homogeneous space of orderable identities and diﬀerences.
This space has now been dissociated and as it were opened up in
depth. Instead of a unitary ﬁeld of visibility and order, whose elements
have a distinctive value in relation to each other, we have a series of
oppositions, of which the two terms are never on the same level: on the
one hand, there are the secondary organs, which are visible on the
surface of the body and oﬀer themselves without intervention to
immediate perception, and, on the other, the primary organs, which
are essential, central, hidden, and unreachable except by dissection –
that is, by materially removing the coloured envelope formed by the
secondary organs. There is also, at an even deeper level, the opposition
between the organs in general, which are spatial, solid, directly or
indirectly visible, and the functions, which are not perceptible, but
determine, as though from below, the arrangement of what we do
perceive. Lastly, and at the furthest extreme, there is the opposition
between identities and diﬀerences: they are no longer of the same

labour, life, language

fabric, they are no longer established in relation to each other on a
homogeneous surface: the diﬀerences proliferate on the surface, but
deeper down they fade, merge, and mingle, as they approach the great,
mysterious, invisible focal unity, from which the multiple seems to
derive, as though by ceaseless dispersion. Life is no longer that which
can be distinguished in a more or less certain fashion from the mechanical; it is that in which all the possible distinctions between living
beings have their basis. It is this transition from the taxonomic to the
synthetic notion of life which is indicated, in the chronology of ideas
and sciences, by the recrudescence, in the early nineteenth century, of
vitalist themes. From the archaeological point of view, what is being
established at this particular moment is the conditions of possibility of
a biology.
In any case, this series of oppositions, dissociating the space of natural history, has had important consequences. In practice, this means
the appearance of two correlated techniques which are connected and
support each other. The ﬁrst of these techniques is constituted by comparative anatomy: this discipline gives rise to an interior space,
bounded on the one hand by the superﬁcial stratum of teguments and
shells, and on the other by the quasi-invisibility of that which is inﬁnitely small. For comparative anatomy is not merely a deepening of the
descriptive techniques employed in the Classical age; it is not content
with seeking to look underneath, more precisely and more closely; it
establishes a space which is neither that of visible characters nor that of
microscopic elements.17 Within that space it reveals the reciprocal
arrangement of the organs, their correlation, and the way in which the
principal stages of any function are broken down, spatialized, and
ordered in relation to one another. And thus, in contrast with the mere
gaze, which by scanning organisms in their wholeness sees unfolding
before it the teeming profusion of their diﬀerences, anatomy, by really
cutting up bodies into patterns, by dividing them up into distinct
portions, by fragmenting them in space, discloses the great resemblances that would otherwise have remained invisible; it reconstitutes
the unities that underlie the great dispersion of visible diﬀerences. The
creation of the vast taxonomic unities (classes and orders) in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was a problem of linguistic patterning: a
name had to be found that would be both general and justiﬁed; now, it

293

294 the order of things
is a matter of an anatomic disarticulation; the major functional system has to
be isolated; it is now the real divisions of anatomy that will make it
possible to form the great families of living beings.
The second technique is based on anatomy (since it is a result of it),
but is in opposition to it (because it makes it possible to dispense with
it); this technique consists in establishing indicative relations between
superﬁcial, and therefore visible, elements and others that are concealed in the depths of the body. Through the law of the interdependence of the parts of an organism, we know that such and such a
peripheral and accessory organ implies such and such a structure in a
more essential organ; thus, it is possible ‘to establish the correspondence between exterior and interior forms which are all integral parts
of the animal’s essence’.18 Among insects, for example, the location
of the antennae has no distinctive value because it is not in correlation
with any of the main internal structures; the form of the lower jaw, on
the other hand, can play a leading role in arranging them according to
their resemblances and diﬀerences; for it is connected with the insect’s
food and digestion, and thus with its essential functions: ‘the organs of
mastication must be related to those of digestion, consequently to the
whole mode of life, and consequently to the whole organic structure’.19 As a matter of fact, this technique of indications does not
necessarily work only from the visible periphery to the grey forms of
organic interiority: it can establish necessary networks connecting any
point in the body with any other: thus, in certain cases, a single element may be enough to suggest the general architecture of an organism;
an entire animal may be recognized ‘from a single bone, from a single
facet of a bone: a method that has given such curious results when
applied to fossilized animals’.20 Whereas for eighteenth-century
thought the fossil was a preﬁguration of existing forms, and thus an
indication of the great continuity of time, it was henceforth to be the
indication of the form to which it once really belonged. Anatomy has
not only shattered the tabular and homogeneous space of identities; it
has broken the supposed continuity of time.
This is because, from the theoretical point of view, Cuvier’s analyses
entirely recompose the organization of natural continuities and discontinuities. Comparative anatomy makes it possible, in eﬀect, to establish two quite distinct forms of continuity in the living world. The ﬁrst

labour, life, language

concerns the great functions to be found in the majority of species
(respiration, digestion, circulation, reproduction, locomotion . . .): it
establishes in the whole living world a vast resemblance which can be
arranged in a scale of decreasing complexity, from man down to the
zoophyte; in the higher species all these functions are present; but as
we move down the scale, so we see them disappear one after the other,
until ﬁnally, in the zoophyte, there is ‘no centre of circulation, no
nerves, no centre of sensation; each point seems to feed itself by
suction’.21 But this mode of continuity is weak and relatively
loose, forming, by means of the restricted number of essential
functions, a simple table of presences and absences. The other
continuity is much more closely knit: it deals with the greater or lesser
perfection of the organs. But one can establish only limited series on
this basis, regional continuities which are soon interrupted and
which, moreover, intertwine with one another in diﬀerent directions;
this is because, in the various species, ‘the organs do not all follow the
same order of degradation: one organ is at its highest degree of perfection in one species, while another reaches that same degree of
perfection in a diﬀerent species’.22 We are left, therefore, with what
might be called ‘micro-series’, limited and partial series which relate
not so much to the species themselves as to a particular organ; and, at
the other extreme, with a ‘macro-series’, a discontinuous, loose series
which relates not so much to the organisms themselves as to the great
fundamental gamut of functions.
Between these two continuities, which are neither superimposed
nor ﬁtted together, we ﬁnd great discontinuous masses being distributed. These masses obey diﬀerent structural plans, the same functions
being ordered in accordance with varying hierarchies, and realized by
organs of various types. It is easy, for example, to discover in the
octopus ‘all the functions that occur in ﬁshes, and yet there is no
resemblance, no analogy of arrangement’.23 Each of these groups
must therefore be analysed in itself. We must consider not the narrow
thread of resemblances that may attach it to another group, but the
cohesive force that folds it so tightly in upon itself. We shall not seek to
know whether red-blooded animals are part of the same series as
white-blooded animals, with nothing more than supplementary
improvements; we shall establish the fact that any animal with red

295

296 the order of things
blood – and it is in this that it is based on an autonomous plan – always
has a bony head, a vertebral column, limbs (with the exception of
snakes), arteries, veins, a liver, a pancreas, a spleen, and kidneys.24
Vertebrates and invertebrates form absolutely isolated subareas,
between which it is impossible to ﬁnd intermediate forms providing a
transition in either direction:
Whatever arrangement one attributes to animals with vertebrae and
those without vertebrae, it will never prove possible to ﬁnd at the end
of one of these great classes, or at the head of the other, two animals
that resemble one another sufﬁciently to serve as a link between
them.25

It is thus apparent that the theory of sub-kingdoms does not simply
add a supplementary taxonomic frame to the previous traditional
classiﬁcations; it is linked to the constitution of a new space of identities and diﬀerences. A space without essential continuity. A space
that is posited from the very outset in the form of fragmentation. A
space crossed by lines which sometimes diverge and sometimes intersect. In order to designate its general form, then, it is necessary to
substitute for the image of the continuous scale which had been
traditional in the eighteenth century, from Bonnet to Lamarck, that of
a radiation, or rather of a group of centres from which there spreads
outwards a multiplicity of beams; thus each being could be placed ‘in
this vast network, which constitutes organized nature . . . but ten
or twenty beams would not suﬃce to express these innumerable
relations’.26
Whereupon it is the entire Classical experience of diﬀerence that
topples and falls, and with it the relation between being and nature. In
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it was the function of diﬀerence to connect all the species together, and thus to ﬁll in the hiatus
between the extremities of being; diﬀerence played a ‘concatenating’
role: it was as restricted and as tenuous as possible; it was situated in
the very tightest possible grid; it was always divisible, and could occur
even below the threshold of perception. From Cuvier onward, on the
other hand, it multiplies itself, adds up diverse forms, reverberates and
is diﬀused throughout the organism, isolating it from all the others in

labour, life, language

various simultaneous ways; for it no longer resides in the interstices
between beings in order to connect them together; it functions in
relation to the organism itself, so that it can ‘integrate’ with itself and
maintain itself in life; it does not ﬁll up the interval between beings
with successive tenuities; it makes it deeper by making itself deeper, in
order to deﬁne in isolation the great types of compatibility.
Nineteenth-century nature is discontinuous exactly in so far as it is
alive.
The importance of this upheaval can be appreciated; in the Classical
period, natural beings formed a continuous totality because they were
beings and because there was no reason for any interruption in their
deployment. It was not possible to represent what separated the being
from itself; the continuity of representation (signs and characters) and
the continuity of beings (the extreme proximity of structures) were
thus correlative. It is this fabric, ontological and representative at the
same time, that is deﬁnitively torn apart with Cuvier: living beings,
because they are alive, can no longer form a tissue of progressive and
graduated diﬀerences; they must group themselves around nuclei of
coherence which are totally distinct from one another, and which are
like so many diﬀerent plans for the maintenance of life. Classical being
was without ﬂaw; life, on the other hand, is without edges or shading.
Being was spread out over an immense table; life isolates forms that are
bound in upon themselves. Being was posited in the perpetually analysable space of representation; life withdraws into the enigma of a
force inaccessible in its essence, apprehendable only in the eﬀorts it
makes here and there to manifest and maintain itself. In short,
throughout the Classical age, life was the province of an ontology
which dealt in the same way with all material beings, all of which were
subject to extension, weight, and movement; and it was in this sense
that all the sciences of nature, and especially that of living beings, had a
profound mechanistic vocation; from Cuvier onward, living beings
escape, in the ﬁrst instance at least, the general laws of extensive being;
biological being becomes regional and autonomous; life, on the conﬁnes of being, is what is exterior to it and also, at the same time, what
manifests itself within it. And though the question of its relations with
the non-living, or that of its physico-chemical determinations,
does arise, it does so not along the lines of a ‘mechanism’ stubbornly

297

298 the order of things
clinging to its Classical modalities, but in an entirely new way, in order
to articulate two natures one upon the other.
But since the discontinuities must be explained by the maintenance
of life and its conditions, we see the emergence of an unexpected
continuity – or at least a play of as yet unanalysed interactions –
between the organism and that which enables it to live. If the Ruminants are distinct from the Rodents, and if that distinction rests upon a
whole system of massive diﬀerences that there can be no question of
attenuating, it is because they possess diﬀerent kinds of dentition, different digestive systems, diﬀerently formed extremities and nails; it is
because they cannot capture the same kinds of food, or deal with it in
the same way; it is because they do not have to digest the same forms of
nourishment. The living being must therefore no longer be understood
merely as a certain combination of particles bearing deﬁnite characters;
it provides the outline of an organic structure, which maintains
uninterrupted relations with exterior elements that it utilizes (by
breathing and eating) in order to maintain or develop its own structure. Around the living being, or rather through it and by means of the
ﬁltering action of its surface, there is eﬀected ‘a continual circulation
from the outside to the inside, and from the inside to the outside,
constantly maintained and yet ﬁxed within certain limits. Thus, living
bodies should be considered as kinds of furnaces into which dead
substances are successively introduced in order to be combined
together in various ways’.27 The living being, by the action and
sovereignty of the same force that keeps it in discontinuity with itself,
ﬁnds itself subjected to a continuous relation with all that surrounds it.
In order that the living being can live, there must exist several functional structures, all irreducible one to another, and also an uninterrupted movement between each one of those structures and the air it
breathes, the water it drinks, the food it absorbs. Breaking the old
Classical continuity of being and nature, the divided force of life will
reveal forms that are scattered, yet all linked to the conditions of existence. In a few years, at the end of the eighteenth century and the
beginning of the nineteenth, European culture completely changed the
fundamental spatialization of the living being: for the Classical experience, the living being was a square, or a series of squares, in the
universal taxinomia of being; if geographical localization had a role (as it

labour, life, language

did in Buﬀon), it was that of revealing variations that were already
possible. From Cuvier onward, the living being wraps itself in its own
existence, breaks oﬀ its taxonomic links of adjacency, tears itself free
from the vast, tyrannical plan of continuities, and constitutes itself as a
new space: a double space, in fact – since it is both the interior one of
anatomical coherences and physiological compatibilities, and the
exterior one of the elements in which it resides and of which it forms
its own body. But both these spaces are subject to a common control: it
is no longer that of the possibilities of being, it is that of the conditions
of life.
The whole historical a priori of a science of living beings is thus
overthrown and then renewed. Seen in its archaeological depth, and
not at the more visible level of discoveries, discussion, theories, or
philosophical options, Cuvier’s work dominates from afar what was to
be the future of biology. An opposition is often set up between
Lamarck’s ‘transformist’ intuitions, which seem to ‘preﬁgure’ what
was to be evolutionism, and the old ﬁxism, impregnated through and
through with traditional prejudices and theological postulates, in
which Cuvier stubbornly persisted. And through a whole series of
amalgams, metaphors, and inadequately tested analogies, the outline
emerges of a ‘reactionary’ system of thought which clings passionately
to the immobility of things in order to preserve the precarious order of
human life; this, it is claimed, is the philosophy of Cuvier, the man
possessed of all the powers; opposite is depicted the diﬃcult destiny of
a progressive system of thought which believes in the energy of
movement, in ceaseless renewal, in the vitality of adaptation: Lamarck,
the revolutionary, is supposed to be in this camp. Thus, under pretext
of writing the history of ideas in a strictly historical sense, a ﬁne
example of simple-mindedness is perpetuated. For what counts, in the
historicity of knowledge, is not opinions, nor the resemblances that
can be established between them from period to period (there is
indeed a ‘resemblance’ between Lamarck and a certain kind of evolutionism, as there is between the latter and the ideas of Diderot, or
Robinet, or Benoît de Maillet); what is important, what makes it possible to articulate the history of thought within itself, is its internal
conditions of possibility. Now, one has only to attempt an analysis
of his work to perceive immediately that Lamarck conceived of

299

300 the order of things
the transformations of species only upon the basis of ontological continuity, which was that of Classical natural history. He presupposed
a progressive gradation, an unbroken process of improvement, an
uninterrupted continuum of beings which could form themselves
upon one another. What makes Lamarck’s thought possible is not the
distant apprehension of a future evolutionism; it is the continuity of
beings as discovered and presupposed by the ‘methods’ of natural
history. Lamarck is a contemporary of A-L. de Jussieu, not of Cuvier.
For the latter introduced a radical discontinuity into the Classical
scale of beings; and by that very fact he gave rise to such notions as
biological incompatibility, relations with external elements, and conditions of existence; he also caused the emergence of a certain energy,
necessary to maintain life, and a certain threat, which imposes upon it
the sanction of death; here, we ﬁnd gathered together several of the
conditions that make possible something like the idea of evolution. The
discontinuity of living forms made it possible to conceive of a great
temporal current for which the continuity of structures and characters,
despite the superﬁcial analogies, could not provide a basis. With spatial
discontinuity, the breaking up of the great table, and the fragmentation
of the surface upon which all natural beings had taken their ordered
places, it became possible to replace natural history with a ‘history’ of
nature. It is true that the Classical space, as we have seen, did not
exclude the possibility of development, but that development did no
more than provide a means of traversing the discreetly preordained
table of possible variations. The breaking up of that space made it
possible to reveal a historicity proper to life itself: that of its maintenance in its conditions of existence. Cuvier’s ‘ﬁxism’, as the analysis of
such a maintenance, was the earliest mode of reﬂecting upon that
historicity, when it ﬁrst emerged in Western knowledge.
Historicity, then, has now been introduced into nature – or rather
into the realm of living beings; but it exists there as much more than a
probable form of succession; it constitutes a sort of fundamental mode
of being. It is no doubt true that in Cuvier’s time there did not yet exist
a history of living beings such as was to be described by evolutionism;
but from the outset the living being is conceived of in terms of the
conditions that enable it to have a history. Similarly, at the time of
Ricardo, wealth was accorded a status of historicity which had not yet

labour, life, language

been formulated as economic history. The approaching stability of
industrial incomes, population, and rent, as predicted by Ricardo, and
the ﬁxity of animal species, as aﬃrmed by Cuvier, might pass, on a
superﬁcial examination, as a rejection of history; in fact, Ricardo and
Cuvier were rejecting only the modalities of chronological succession
as conceived in the eighteenth century; they were breaking the link
between time and the hierarchical or classifying order of representations. On the other hand, the actual or future immobility they
described or heralded could be conceived only on the basis of the
possibility of a history; and that history was provided for them either
by the conditions of existence of the living being, or by the conditions
of the production of value. Paradoxically, Ricardo’s pessimism and
Cuvier’s ﬁxism can arise only against a historical background: they
deﬁne the stability of beings, which henceforth have the right, at the
level of their profound modality, to possess a history; whereas the
Classical idea, that wealth could grow in a continuous process, or that
species could, with time, transform themselves into one another,
deﬁned the mobility of beings, which, even before any kind of history,
already obeyed a system of variables, identities, or equivalences. It took
the suspension, and, as it were, the placing between parentheses, of
that kind of history to give the beings of nature and the products of
labour a historicity that would enable modern thought to encompass
them, and subsequently to deploy the discursive science of their succession. For eighteenth-century thought, chronological sequences are
merely a property and a more or less blurred expression of the order
of beings; from the nineteenth century, they express, in a more or
less direct fashion, and even in their interruptions, the profoundly
historical mode of being of things and men.
In any case, the constitution of a living historicity has had vast consequences for European thought. Quite as vast, without any doubt, as
those brought about by the formation of an economic historicity. At
the superﬁcial level of the great imaginative values, life, henceforth
pledged to history, is expressed in the form of animality. The animal,
whose great threat or radical strangeness had been left suspended and
as it were disarmed at the end of the Middle Ages, or at least at the end
of the Renaissance, discovers fantastic new powers in the nineteenth
century. In the interval, Classical nature had given precedence to

301

302 the order of things
vegetable values – since the plant bears upon its visible form the overt
mark of every possible order; with all its forms on display, from stem
to seed, from root to fruit, with all its secrets generously made visible,
the vegetable kingdom formed a pure and transparent object for
thought as tabulation. But when characters and structures are arranged
in vertical steps towards life – that sovereign vanishing-point, indeﬁnitely distant but constituent – then it is the animal that becomes the
privileged form, with its hidden structures, its buried organs, so many
invisible functions, and that distant force, at the foundation of its being,
which keeps it alive. If living beings are a classiﬁcation, the plant is best
able to express its limpid essence; but if they are a manifestation of life,
the animal is better equipped to make its enigma perceptible. Rather
than the calm image of characters, it shows us the incessant transition
from the inorganic to the organic by means of respiration or digestion,
and the inverse transformation, brought about by death, of the great
functional structures into lifeless dust:
Dead substances are borne towards living bodies in order to take up a
place and exert an action within them determined by the nature of the
combinations into which they have entered, and in order to escape
from them again one day so as to fall once more under the laws of
inanimate nature.28

The plant held sway on the frontiers of movement and immobility, of
the sentient and the non-sentient; whereas the animal maintains its
existence on the frontiers of life and death. Death besieges it on all
sides; furthermore, it threatens it also from within, for only the organism can die, and it is from the depth of their lives that death overtakes
living beings. Hence, no doubt, the ambiguous values assumed by
animality towards the end of the eighteenth century: the animal
appears as the bearer of that death to which it is, at the same time,
subjected; it contains a perpetual devouring of life by life. It belongs to
nature only at the price of containing within itself a nucleus of antinature. Transferring its most secret essence from the vegetable to the
animal kingdom, life has left the tabulated space of order and become
wild once more. The same movement that dooms it to death reveals it
as murderous. It kills because it lives. Nature can no longer be good.

labour, life, language

That life can no longer be separated from murder, nature from evil, or
desires from anti-nature, Sade proclaimed to the eighteenth century,
whose language he drained dry, and to the modern age, which has for
so long attempted to stiﬂe his voice. I hope the insolence (for whom?)
is excusable, but Les 120 Journées is the velvety, marvellous obverse of the
Leçons d’anatomie comparée. At all events, in our archaeological calendar,
they are the same age.
But this imaginative status of animality burdened with disturbing
and nocturnal powers refers more profoundly to the multiple and simultaneous functions of life in nineteenth-century thought. Perhaps for
the ﬁrst time in Western culture, life is escaping from the general laws
of being as it is posited and analysed in representation. On the other
side of all the things that are, even beyond those that can be, supporting
them to make them visible, and ceaselessly destroying them with the
violence of death, life becomes a fundamental force, and one that is
opposed to being in the same way as movement to immobility, as time
to space, as the secret wish to the visible expression. Life is the root of
all existence, and the non-living, nature in its inert form, is merely spent
life; mere being is the non-being of life. For life – and this is why it has
a radical value in nineteenth-century thought – is at the same time the
nucleus of being and of non-being: there is being only because there is
life, and in that fundamental movement that dooms them to death, the
scattered beings, stable for an instant, are formed, halt, hold life
immobile – and in a sense kill it – but are then in turn destroyed by that
inexhaustible force. The experience of life is thus posited as the most
general law of beings, the revelation of that primitive force on the basis
of which they are; it functions as an untamed ontology, one trying to
express the indissociable being and non-being of all beings. But this
ontology discloses not so much what gives beings their foundation as
what bears them for an instant towards a precarious form and yet is
already secretly sapping them from within in order to destroy them. In
relation to life, beings are no more than transitory ﬁgures, and the
being that they maintain, during the brief period of their existence, is
no more than their presumption, their will to survive. And so, for
knowledge, the being of things is an illusion, a veil that must be torn
aside in order to reveal the mute and invisible violence that is devouring them in the darkness. The ontology of the annihilation of beings

303

304 the order of things
assumes therefore validity as a critique of knowledge: but it is not so
much a question of giving the phenomenon a foundation, of expressing both its limit and its law, of relating it to the ﬁnitude that renders it
possible, as of dissipating it and destroying it in the same way as life
itself destroys beings: for its whole being is mere appearance.
Thus a system of thought is being formed that is opposed in almost
all its terms to the system that was linked to the formation of an
economic historicity. The latter, as we have seen, took as its foundation
a triple theory of irreducible needs, the objectivity of labour, and the
end of history. Here, on the contrary, a system of thought is being
developed in which individuality, with its forms, limits, and needs, is
no more than a precarious moment, doomed to destruction, forming
ﬁrst and last a simple obstacle that must be removed from the path of
that annihilation; a system of thought in which the objectivity of
things is mere appearance, a chimera of the perceptions, an illusion
that must be dissipated and returned to the pure will, without phenomenon, that brought those things into being and maintained them
there for an instant; lastly, a system of thought for which the recommencement of life, its incessant resumptions, and its stubbornness,
preclude the possibility of imposing a limit of duration upon it, especially since time itself, with its chronological divisions and its quasispatial calendar, is doubtless nothing but an illusion of knowledge.
Where one mode of thought predicts the end of history, the other
proclaims the inﬁnity of life; where one recognizes the real production
of things by labour, the other dissipates the chimeras of consciousness;
where one aﬃrms, with the limits of the individual, the exigencies of
his life, the other masks them beneath the murmuring of death. Is this
opposition the sign that from the nineteenth century the ﬁeld of knowledge can no longer provide the ground for a reﬂection that will be
homogeneous and uniform at all points? Must we admit that from now
on each form of positivity will have the ‘philosophy’ that suits it?
Economics, that of a labour stamped with the sign of need, but with
the eventual promise of the great reward of time? Biology, that of a life
marked by the continuity that forms beings only in order to dissolve
them again, and so ﬁnds itself emancipated from all the limitations of
History? And the sciences of language a philosophy of cultures, of their
relativity and their individual power of expression?

labour, life, language

IV BOPP
There is, however, one single point, the investigation of which ought to
decide every doubt, and elucidate every difﬁculty; the structure or
comparative grammar of languages furnishes as certain a key of their
genealogy as the study of comparative anatomy has done to the loftiest branch of natural science.29

Schlegel was well aware of it: the constitution of historicity in the
sphere of grammar took place in accordance with the same model as in
the science of living beings. And there is nothing surprising in this, in
fact, since, throughout the Classical age, the words that languages were
thought to be composed of, and the characters that were used in the
attempt to constitute a natural order, had had the same, the identical,
status: they existed only by virtue of the representative value they possessed, and the power of analysis, of duplication, of composition and
arrangement that they were accorded with regard to the things represented. With Jussieu and Lamarck in the ﬁrst place, and then with
Cuvier, the character had lost its representative function, or rather,
though it could still ‘represent’ and make possible the establishment of
relations of adjacency or kinship, it did so not by the virtue proper to
its visible structure or to the describable elements of which it was
composed, but because it had been related, at ﬁrst, to a total organic
structure and to a function that it could perform in a direct or indirect,
major or collateral, ‘primary’ or ‘secondary’ way. In the domain of
language, the word undergoes, more or less at the same period, an
analogous transformation: needless to say, it does not cease to have a
meaning and to be able to ‘represent’ something in the mind that
employs or understands it; but this role is no longer constitutive of the
word in its very being, in its essential architecture, in what enables it to
take its place within a sentence and to link itself there with other more
or less diﬀerent words. If the word is able to ﬁgure in a discourse in
which it means something, it will no longer be by virtue of some
immediate discursivity that it is thought to possess in itself, and by
right of birth, but because, in its very form, in the sounds that compose
it, in the changes it undergoes in accordance with the grammatical
function it is performing, and ﬁnally in the modiﬁcations to which it

305

306 the order of things
ﬁnds itself subject in the course of time, it obeys a certain number of
strict laws which regulate, in a similar way, all the other elements of the
same language; so that the word is no longer attached to a representation except in so far as it is previously a part of the grammatical organization by means of which the language deﬁnes and guarantees its own
coherence. For the word to be able to say what it says, it must belong
to a grammatical totality which, in relation to the word, is primary,
fundamental, and determining.
This displacement of the word, this backward jump, as it were, away
from its representative functions, was certainly one of the important
events of Western culture towards the end of the eighteenth century.
And it is also one of those that have passed most unperceived. A great
deal of attention is willingly paid to the beginnings of political economy, to Ricardo’s analysis of ground rent and the cost of production:
that event is recognized as having reached vast dimensions, since, in the
course of its progress, it has not only made possible the development of
a science but also brought in its wake a certain number of economic
and political mutations. The new forms taken by the sciences of nature
have not been neglected either; and though it is true that Lamarck, by
the inﬂuence of a retrospective illusion, has been overestimated at the
expense of Cuvier, though it is true that there is little awareness of the
fact that ‘life’ reached the threshold of its positivity for the ﬁrst time
with the Leçons d’anatomie comparée, there is nevertheless at least a diﬀused
consciousness of the fact that Western culture began, from that
moment onward, to look at the world of living beings with new eyes.
On the other hand, the isolation of the Indo-European languages, the
constitution of a comparative grammar, the study of inﬂections, the
formulation of the laws of vowel gradation and consonantal changes –
in short, the whole body of philological work accomplished by
Grimm, Schlegel, Rask, and Bopp, has remained on the fringes of our
historical awareness, as though it had merely provided the basis for a
somewhat lateral and esoteric discipline – as though, in fact, it was not
the whole mode of being of language (and of our own language) that
had been modiﬁed through it. Certainly we ought not to attempt a
justiﬁcation of this neglect in spite of the importance of the change,
but, on the contrary, on the basis of its importance, and on that of the
blind proximity that the event still preserves for our eyes, in their

labour, life, language

continuing attachment to their customary lights. The fact is that, even
at the time when it occurred, this event was already enveloped, if not in
secret, at least in a certain discretion. Perhaps changes in the mode of
being of language are like alterations that aﬀect pronunciation, grammar, or semantics: swift as they are, they are never clearly grasped by
those who are speaking and whose language is nevertheless already
spreading these mutations; they are noticed only indirectly, for brief
moments; and then the decision is ﬁnally indicated only in the negative
mode – by the radical and immediately perceptible obsoleteness of the
language one has been using. It is probably impossible for a culture to
become aware in a thematic and positive manner that its language is
ceasing to be transparent to its representations, because it is thickening
and taking on a peculiar heaviness. As one is in the act of discoursing,
how is one to know – unless by means of some obscure indices that can
interpret only with diﬃculty and badly – that language (the very language one is using) is acquiring a dimension irreducible to pure discursivity? Perhaps for all of these reasons the birth of philology has
remained much more hidden from Western consciousness than that of
biology and that of economics – even though it was part of the same
archaeological upheaval; and even though its consequences have
extended much further in our culture, at least in the subterranean strata
that run through it and support it.
How was this philological positivity formed? There are four
theoretical segments that provide us with indications of its constitution early in the nineteenth century – at the time of Schlegel’s
essay on the language and philosophy of the Indians (1808), Grimm’s
Deutsche Grammatik (1818), and Bopp’s book on the conjugation system
of Sanskrit (1816).
1. The ﬁrst of these segments concerns the manner in which a
language can be characterized from within and distinguished from
other languages. In the Classical period, it was possible to deﬁne the
individuality of a language on the basis of several criteria: the proportions of the diﬀerent sounds employed to form the words (there are
languages with a majority of vowels and others with a majority of
consonants), the precedence accorded certain categories of words
(languages favouring concrete substantives, languages favouring
abstract substantives, etc.), the manner of representing relations (by

307

308 the order of things
prepositions or by declensions), the preferred order of the words
(whether the logical subject is placed ﬁrst, as in French, or precedence
is given to the most important words, as in Latin); in these ways distinctions were made between Northern languages and Mediterranean
languages, languages of feeling and languages of need, languages of
freedom and languages of slavery, barbarous languages and civilized
languages, languages of logical reasoning and languages of rhetorical
argumentation; none of these distinctions, however, was concerned
with anything but the way in which languages were able to analyse
representation, and subsequently to combine its elements. But beginning with Schlegel, languages are deﬁned, at least in their most general
typology, according to the way in which they link together the
properly verbal elements that compose them; among these elements
there are some, needless to say, that are representative: they do, at any
rate, possess a visible representative value; whereas there are others that
contain no meaning, and that serve only by means of a certain composition to determine the meaning of some other element in the unity
of the discourse. It is this material – made up of nouns, verbs, words in
general, but also of syllables and sounds – that languages join together
to form propositions and sentences. But the material unity constituted
by the arrangement of sounds, syllables, and words is not governed by
the mere combination of the element of representation. It has its own
principles, which diﬀer from language to language: grammatical composition has regularities which are not transparent to the signiﬁcation
of the discourse. Moreover, since signiﬁcation can be transformed,
practically unimpaired, from one language to another, it is these regularities that will make it possible to deﬁne the individuality of a language. Each one has an autonomous grammatical space; these spaces
can be compared laterally, that is, from one language to another, without its being necessary to pass through the common ‘middle ground’
of the ﬁeld of representation with all its possible subdivisions.
It is easy to distinguish right away two broad modes of combination
between grammatical elements. The ﬁrst consists in juxtaposing them
in such a way that they determine one another; in this case, the language is made up of fragmented elements – generally very short –
which can be combined in diﬀerent ways, but with each of the
units preserving its autonomy, and thus the possibility of breaking the

labour, life, language

transitory link it has just established with another unit inside a sentence
or proposition. The language is then deﬁned by the number of its units,
and by all the possible combinations that can be established between
them in discourse; so that it is a question of an ‘agglomeration of
atoms . . . with no internal connection beyond the purely mechanical
adaptation of particles and aﬃxes’.30 The second mode of connection between the elements of a language is the inﬂectional system,
which modiﬁes the essential syllables or words – the root forms – from
within. Each of these root forms carries with it a certain number of
possible variations, determined in advance; and according to the other
words in the sentence, according to the relations of dependence or
correlation between those words, according to the adjacencies and
associations that occur, so one variation or another will be used. On the
surface, this mode of connection appears less rich than the ﬁrst, since
the number of combinative possibilities is much more restricted; but,
in reality, the inﬂectional system never exists in its pure and most
skeletal form; the internal modiﬁcation of the root enables it to have
other elements added to it, themselves susceptible of internal modiﬁcation, so that ‘each root is like a living and productive germ, every
modiﬁcation of circumstance or degree being produced by internal
changes; freer scope is thus given to its development, and its rich
productiveness is in truth almost illimitable’.31
Corresponding to these two broad types of linguistic organization,
we ﬁnd, on the one hand, Chinese, in which ‘all particles indicating
modiﬁcation of time, person, etc., are monosyllables, perfect in themselves, and independent of the root’, and, on the other, Sanskrit, whose
structure is highly organized, formed by inﬂection, or the change and
transposition of its primary radical signs, carried through every ramiﬁcation of meaning and expression, and not by the merely mechanical
process of annexing words or particles to the same lifeless and
unproductive root.32

Between these major and extreme models, any language whatever can
be situated; every language will necessarily possess an organization that
will approximate it to one of the two, or will place it at an equal
distance from both, at the centre of the ﬁeld thus deﬁned. Nearest to

309

310 the order of things
Chinese, we ﬁnd Basque, Coptic, and the American languages; these all
use separable elements as a means of connection; but those elements,
instead of remaining always in a free state, like so many irreducible
verbal atoms, ‘are already beginning to melt into the word’; Arabic is
deﬁned by its mixture of the system of aﬃxes and that of inﬂections;
Celtic is almost exclusively an inﬂectional language, though one still
ﬁnds in it ‘vestiges of aﬃxive languages’. It may perhaps be objected
that this opposition was already known in the eighteenth century, and
that the ability to distinguish between the combinative structure of
Chinese and the declensions and conjugations of languages like Latin
and Greek was by no means new. It may also be objected that the
absolute distinction established by Schlegel was criticized very shortly
afterwards by Bopp: where Schlegel saw two types of language that
were radically inassimilable to one another, Bopp searched for a common origin; he attempts to establish33 that inﬂections are not a sort
of internal and spontaneous development of the primitive element, but
particles that have been agglomerated to the root syllable: the m of the
ﬁrst person in Sanskrit (bhavâmi) or the t of the third person (bhavâti) are
the eﬀect of the adjunction to the verbal root of the pronoun mâm (1)
or the pronoun tâm (he). But what is important for the constitution of
philology is not so much knowing whether the elements of conjugation may, at some more or less distant period in the past, have enjoyed
the beneﬁt of an isolated existence carrying with it an autonomous
value; what is essential, and what distinguishes the analyses of Schlegel
and Bopp from those that may perhaps have seemed to anticipate them
in the eighteenth century,34 is that the original syllables do not grow
(by means of internal adjunctions or proliferations) without a certain
number of modiﬁcations regulated within the root. In a language like
Chinese, there are simply laws of juxtaposition; but in languages in
which the roots are subjected to growth (whether they be monosyllabic, as in Sanskrit, or polysyllabic, as in Hebrew), one always
ﬁnds internal variations governed by regular forms. It is therefore
understandable that the new philology, since it now has these criteria
of internal structure with which to characterize languages, should have
abandoned the hierarchic classiﬁcations practised in the eighteenth
century: at that time, it was accepted that there were some languages
that were more important than others, because they were able to

labour, life, language

analyse representations more precisely or more delicately. From now
on, all languages have an equal value: they simply have diﬀerent
internal structures. Hence that curiosity for rare, little spoken, poorly
‘civilized’ languages, of which Rask gave an example with his great
voyage of inquiry through Scandinavia, Russia, the Caucasus, Persia,
and India.
2. The study of these internal variations constitutes the second important theoretical segment. In its etymological investigations, general
grammar did of course study transformations of words and syllables
over time; but this study was limited for three reasons. It bore more
upon the metamorphosis of the letters of the alphabet than upon the
manner in which the sounds actually pronounced could be modiﬁed.
Moreover, the transformations were considered as the eﬀect – always
possible, at any time and under any conditions – of a certain aﬃnity
between the letters themselves; it was accepted that p and b, and m and
n, were suﬃciently close to one another for the one to be substituted
for the other; such changes were provoked or determined exclusively
by this doubtful proximity and the confusion that could result in pronouncing or hearing those letters. Finally, vowels were treated as the
most ﬂuid and unstable element of language, whereas the consonants
were thought of as forming its solid framework (does not Hebrew, for
example, dispense with the writing of its vowels?).
With Rask, Grimm, and Bopp, language is treated for the ﬁrst time
(even though there is no longer any attempt to refer it back to the cries
from which it originated) as a totality of phonetic elements. Whereas,
for general grammar, language arose when the noise produced by the
mouth or the lips had become a letter, it is accepted from now on that
language exists when noises have been articulated and divided into a
series of distinct sounds. The whole being of language is now one of
sound. This explains the new interest, shown by Raynouard and the
brothers Grimm, in non-written literature, in folk tales and spoken
dialects. Language is sought in its most authentic state: in the spoken
word – the word that is dried up and frozen into immobility by writing. A whole mystique is being born: that of the verb, of the pure poetic
ﬂash that disappears without trace, leaving nothing behind it but a
vibration suspended in the air for one brief moment. By means of the
ephemeral and profound sound it produces, the spoken word accedes

311

312 the order of things
to sovereignty. And its secret powers, drawing new life from the breath
of the prophets, rise up in fundamental opposition (even though they
do tolerate some overlapping) to the esoteric nature of writing, which,
on the other hand, presupposes some secret permanently lurking at the
centre of its visible labyrinths. Language is no longer to the same extent
that sign – more or less distant, similar, and arbitrary – for which the
Logique de Port-Royal proposed as an immediate and evident model the
portrait of a man, or a map. It has acquired a vibratory nature which
has separated it from the visible sign and made it more nearly proximate to the note in music. And it was for this very reason that Saussure
had to by-pass this moment in the history of the spoken word, which
was a major event for the whole of nineteenth-century philology, in
order to restore, beyond its historical forms, the dimension of language
in general, and to reopen, after such neglect, the old problem of the
sign, which had continued to animate the whole of thought from
Port-Royal to the last of the ‘Idéologues’.
Thus, in the nineteenth century, there begins an analysis of language
treated as a totality of sounds emancipated from the letters that may be
used to transcribe them.35 This analysis was made in three directions. First, the typology of the various sounds employed in a language:
in the case of vowels, for example, the opposition between simple and
double vowels (lengthened as in ā, ō; or diphthongized as in æ, ai);
among simple vowels, the opposition between those that are pure (a, i,
o, u) and those that are modiﬁed (e, ö, ü); among those that are pure,
there are those that are susceptible of various pronunciations (such as
o), and those that have only one (a, i, u); ﬁnally, among this last group,
some are subject to change and can receive an umlaut (a and u); the i, on
the other hand, always remains the same.36 The second form of
analysis bears upon the conditions that may determine a sound change;
the place of the sound within the word is in itself an important factor: a
syllable is less easily able to protect its permanence if it is an ending
than if it is a root; root letters, Grimm tells us, are long lived; the
sounds in inﬂectional endings are shorter lived. But there are positive
determinations as well, for ‘the preservation or modiﬁcation’ of a given
sound ‘is never arbitrary’.37 This absence of arbitrariness was for
Grimm the determination of a meaning (in the root of a great many
German verbs a stands in the same opposition to i as the preterite does

labour, life, language

to the present). For Bopp, it is the eﬀect of a certain number of laws.
Some of these deﬁne the rules governing the changes that occur when
two consonants are adjacent: ‘Thus when one says in Sanskrit at-ti (he
eats) instead of ad-ti (from the root ad, to eat), the changing of the d
into t has a physical law as its cause.’ Others deﬁne the mode in which a
termination acts upon the sounds of the root: ‘By mechanical laws, I
mean principally the laws of weight and in particular the inﬂuence
exerted by the weight of inﬂectional verb endings upon the preceding
syllable’.38 Lastly, the third form of analysis bears upon the invariability of these transformations throughout History. Grimm, for
example, drew up a table of correspondences for labials, dentals, and
gutturals between Greek, ‘Gothic’, and High German: the p, b, and f of
the Greeks become respectively f, p, and b in Gothic and b or v, f, and p in
High German; t,d,th in Greek become th,t,d in Gothic, and d,z,t in High
German. The totality of these relationships determines the courses of
history; and instead of languages being subject to that external yardstick, to those things in human history that should, according to Classical thought, explain the changes in them, they themselves contain a
principle of evolution. Here, as elsewhere, it is ‘anatomy’39 that
determines fate.
3. This deﬁnition of a law for consonantal or vocalic modiﬁcations
makes it possible to establish a new theory of the root. In the Classical
period, roots were distinguished by a double system of constants:
alphabetical constants, which bore upon an arbitrary number of letters
(in some cases only one), and signiﬁcative constants, which grouped
together under one general theme an indeﬁnitely extensible number of
adjacent meanings; at the intersection of these two constants, at the
point where an identical meaning was expressed by an identical letter
or an identical syllable, a root was taken to have been isolated. The root
was an expressive nucleus transformable to inﬁnity from the startingpoint of one original sound. But if vowels and consonants change only
in accordance with certain laws and under certain conditions, the radical must be a stable linguistic entity (between certain limits), which
can be isolated with its possible variations, and which constitutes, with
its diﬀerent possible forms, an element of language. In order to determine the primary and quite simple elements of a language, general
grammar was obliged to work backwards towards that imaginary point

313

314 the order of things
of contact where the sound, as yet not verbal, was in some sort of
contact with the vital energy of representation. From now on, however,
the elements of a language are interior to it (even if they also belong to
other languages): there exist purely linguistic means of establishing the
constants according to which they can be combined and the table of
their possible modiﬁcations. Etymology will therefore cease to be an
endless regress towards a primitive language entirely stocked with
primal, natural cries; it becomes a deﬁnite, limited method of analysis,
the aim of which is to discover within any given word the radical from
which it has been formed: ‘The roots of words were brought to light
only after the successful analysis of inﬂections and derivations’.40
It thus becomes possible to establish that in certain languages, such
as the Semitic ones, the roots are bisyllabic (and generally of three
letters); that in others (the Indo-Germanic ones) they are regularly
monosyllabic; some are constituted by a single vowel (i is the root of
verbs meaning ‘to go’, u of those meaning ‘to reverberate’); but in
general, in these languages, the root comprises at least one consonant
and one vowel – the consonant being either terminal or initial; in the
ﬁrst case, the vowel is necessarily initial; in the second, it may be
followed by a second consonant which serves it as a support (as in the
root ma, mad, which gives metiri in Latin and messen in German).41
These monosyllabic roots may also be duplicated, as do is duplicated in
the Sanskrit dadami and the Greek didomi, or sta in tishtami and istemi.42
Above all, the nature of the root and its constituent role in language are
conceived in an absolutely new mode: in the eighteenth century, the
root was a rudimentary name which designated, in its origin, a concrete thing, an immediate representation, an object that was given to
man’s sight or to any other of his senses. Language was constructed on
the basis of the interaction of its nominal characterizations: derivation
extended its scope; abstraction gave rise to adjectives; and then it was
suﬃcient to add to the latter that other irreducible element, the broad
monotonous function of the verb to be, to bring about the formation of
the category of conjugable words – a sort of squeezing together in
verbal form of being and epithet. Bopp too accepts that verbs are mixtures obtained by the coagulation of verb with root. But his analysis
diﬀers in several essential points from the Classical schema: there is
no question of the potential, underlying, invisible addition of the

labour, life, language

attributive function, and of the propositional meaning attributed to the
verb to be; it is a question primarily of a material junction between a
radical and the forms of the verb to be: the Sanskrit as is to be found in
the sigma of the Greek aorist, in the er of the Latin pluperfect and future
perfect; the Sanskrit bhu is to be found in the b of the Latin future and
imperfect. Moreover, this adjunction of the verb to be makes possible,
essentially, the attribution of a tense and a person to the radical (the
inﬂectional ending constituted by the radical of the verb to be also
carrying with it that denoting the personal pronoun, as in scrip-s-i).43
As a result, it is not the adjunction of the to be that transforms an epithet
into a verb; the radical itself contains a verbal signiﬁcation, to which
the derived inﬂectional endings of the conjugation of to be add merely
modiﬁcations of person and tense. Originally, therefore, the roots of
verbs designate not ‘things’, but actions, processes, desires, wills; and it
is these that, when they receive certain inﬂectional endings proceeding
from the verb to be and from the personal pronouns, become susceptible of conjugation, whereas, when they receive other suﬃxes – themselves modiﬁable – they become nouns susceptible of declension.
Hence the ‘nouns/verb to be’ bipolarity that characterized classical
analysis must be replaced by a more complex arrangement: roots with
a verbal signiﬁcation, able to receive inﬂectional endings of diﬀerent
types, and thus capable of giving rise to conjugable verbs or to substantives. Verbs (and personal pronouns) thus become the primordial
element of language – the element from which it can develop. ‘The
verb and the personal pronouns appear to be the true levers of
language’.44
Bopp’s analyses were to be of major importance, not only in breaking down the internal composition of a language, but also in deﬁning
what language may be in its essence. It is no longer a system of representations which has the power to pattern and recompose other representations; it designates in its roots the most constant of actions, states,
and wishes; what it is trying to say, originally, is not so much what one
sees as what one does or what one undergoes; and though it does
eventually indicate things as though by pointing at them, it does so
only in so far as they are the result, or the object, or the instrument of
that action; nouns do not so much pattern the complex table of a
representation as pattern and arrest and ﬁx the process of an action.

315

316 the order of things
Language is ‘rooted’ not in the things perceived, but in the active
subject. And perhaps, in that case, it is a product of will and energy,
rather than of the memory that duplicates representation. We speak
because we act, and not because recognition is a means of cognition.
Like action, language expresses a profound will to something. And this
has two consequences. The ﬁrst is paradoxical at ﬁrst sight: it is that at
the moment when philology is constituted by the discovery of a
dimension of pure grammar, there arises once more the tendency to
attribute to language profound powers of expression (Humboldt is
not merely Bopp’s contemporary; he knew his work, and in detail);
whereas in the Classical period the expressive function of language was
required only at its point of origin, and in order to explain how a
sound could represent a thing, language in the nineteenth century,
throughout its development and even in its most complex forms, was
to have an irreducible expressive value; no arbitrariness, no grammatical convention is able to obliterate that value, for, if language expresses,
it does so not in so far as it is an imitation and duplication of things,
but in so far as it manifests and translates the fundamental will of those
who speak it. The second consequence is that language is no longer
linked to civilizations by the level of learning to which they have
attained (the delicacy of their representative grid, the multiplicity of
the connections it is possible to establish between its elements), but by
the mind of the peoples who have given rise to it, animate it, and are
recognizable in it. Just as the living organism manifests, by its inner
coherence, the functions that keep it alive, so language, in the whole
architecture of its grammar, makes visible the fundamental will that
keeps a whole people alive and gives it the power to speak a language
belonging solely to itself. This means that the conditions of historicity
of language are changed at once: its mutations no longer come from
above (from the learned elite, from the small group of merchants and
travellers, from victorious armies, from an invading aristocracy), but
take their being obscurely from below, for language is neither an
instrument nor a product – an ergon, as Humboldt termed it – but a
ceaseless activity – an energeïa. In any language, the speaker, who never
ceases to speak in a murmur that is not heard although it provides all
the vividness of the language, is the people. Grimm thought that he
overheard such a murmur when he listened to the altdeutsche Meistergesang,

labour, life, language

and Raynouard when he transcribed the Poésies originales des troubadours.
Language is no longer linked to the knowing of things, but to men’s
freedom: ‘Language is human: it owes its origin and progress to our
full freedom; it is our history, our heritage’.45 By deﬁning the
internal laws of grammar, one is simultaneously linking language
and the free destiny of men in a profound kinship. Throughout the
nineteenth century, philology was to have profound political
reverberations.
4. The analysis of roots made possible a new deﬁnition of the systems
of kinship between languages. And this is the fourth broad theoretical
segment that characterizes the appearance of philology. In the ﬁrst
place, this deﬁnition presupposes that languages are divided into broad
groups which are discontinuous in relation to one another. General
grammar excluded comparison in so far as it accepted the presence in
any language whatever of two orders of continuity: one, a vertical
continuity, permitted the arrangement of the most primitive of the
allotment of roots, which, at the expense of a few transformations,
bound each language to its initial articulations; the other, a horizontal
one, enabled languages to communicate in the universality of representation: all languages had as their task the analysis, decomposition, and
recomposition of representations, which, within fairly broad limits,
were the same for the entire human race. So that it was possible to
compare languages only in an indirect way, and by a triangular route,
as it were; it was possible to analyse the way in which a particular
language had treated and modiﬁed the common allocation of primitive
roots; it was also possible to compare the way in which two languages
patterned and linked together the same representations. But what
becomes possible after Grimm and Bopp is the direct and lateral comparison of two or more languages. Direct, because it is no longer necessary to pass through pure representations of the absolutely primitive
root; it is enough to study the modiﬁcations of the radical, the system
of inﬂections, the series of variable terminations. Lateral, because the
comparison does not reach back to the elements shared by all languages or to the representative stock upon which they draw; it is therefore not possible to relate a language to the form or the principles that
render all other languages possible; they must be grouped according to
their formal proximity: ‘This resemblance or aﬃnity does not exist

317

318 the order of things
only in the numerous roots, which it has in common with both those
nations, but extends also to the grammar and internal structure’.46
Now, these grammatical structures that it is possible to compare
directly with one another present two special characteristics. First, that
of existing only as systems: with monosyllabic radicals, a certain number of inﬂections are possible; the weight of the terminations may have
eﬀects whose number and nature are determinable; the modes of
aﬃxation correspond to a few completely ﬁxed models; whereas, in
languages with polysyllabic radicals, all the modiﬁcations and combinations will obey other laws. Between two systems like these (the one
being characteristic of the Indo-European languages, the other of the
Semitic languages), we ﬁnd no intermediate type and no transitional
forms. There is a discontinuity from one family to the other. But, on the
other hand, grammatical systems, since they lay down a certain number of laws of evolution and mutation, make it possible, up to a certain
point, to ﬁx the age-scale of a language; for such and such a form to be
produced from a certain radical, such and such a transformation must
have occurred. In the Classical age, when two languages resembled one
another, it was necessary either to link them both to the absolutely
primitive language they both sprang from, or to admit that one
developed from the other (but the criterion was external, the more
derived of the two languages being that which had appeared historically at the more recent date) or, again, to admit that there had been
exchanges between them (due to extralinguistic events: invasion, trade,
migration). Now, when two languages present analogous systems, one
must be able to decide either that one of them is derived from the
other, or that they have both issued from a third, from which they have
each developed systems which are partly diﬀerent and also partly
analogous. It was in this way, in the case of Sanskrit and Greek, that the
hypothesis of Coeurdoux, who believed in traces of the primitive language, and that of Anquetil, who posited a mixture at the time of the
Bactrian kingdom, were abandoned; and Bopp was also able to refute
Schlegel, for whom the Indian language was the most ancient, and the
others (Latin, Greek, Germanic and Persian languages) were more
modern and derived from the ﬁrst. He showed that there was a relation
of ‘fraternity’ between Sanskrit, Latin, Greek, and the Germanic languages, Sanskrit being, not the mother-language of the others, but

labour, life, language

rather their elder sister, the nearest of them to a language which had
apparently been the source of this entire family.
It is apparent, then, that historicity was introduced into the domain
of languages in the same way as into that of living beings. For an
evolution – other than one that is solely the traversal of ontological
continuities – to be conceived, the smooth unbroken plan of natural
history had to be broken, the discontinuity of the sub-kingdoms had to
reveal the plans of organic structure in all their diversity and without
any intermediary, organisms had to be ordered in accordance with the
functional arrangements they were to perform, and thus establish the
relations of the living being with what enables it to exist. In the same
way, for the history of languages to be conceived, they had to be
detached from the broad chronological continuity that had linked
them without interruption as far back as their origin; they also had to
be freed from the common expanse of representations in which they
were caught; by means of this double break, the heterogeneity of the
various grammatical systems emerged with its peculiar patternings, the
laws prescribing change within each one, and the paths ﬁxing possible
lines of development. Once the history of the species had been suspended as a chronological sequence of all possible forms, then, and
only then, the living being was able to assume its historicity; in the
same way, in the sphere of language, if there had not been a suspension
of the analysis of those endless derivations and limitless mixtures that
general grammar perpetually presupposed, then language would never
have been aﬀected by an internal historicity. Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, and
German had to be treated in accordance with a systematic simultaneity;
breaking with all chronology, they had to be inserted into a fraternal
time-system so that their structures could become transparent and a
history of languages could become legible in them. Here, as elsewhere,
the arrangements into chronological series had to be broken up, and
their elements redistributed, then a new history was constituted, one
that does not merely express the mode of succession of beings and
their connection in time, but the modality of their formation. Empiricity – and this is equally true of natural individuals and of the words by
which they can be named – is henceforth traversed by History, through
the whole density of its being. The order of time is beginning.
There is one major diﬀerence, however, between languages and

319

320 the order of things
living beings. The latter have no true history except by means of a
certain relation between their functions and the conditions of their
existence. And though their internal composition as structured individuals makes their historicity possible, that historicity becomes real
history only by means of the external world in which they live. Thus,
to enable this history to emerge clearly, and to be described in discourse, there had to be, in addition to Cuvier’s comparative anatomy,
an analysis of the environment and conditions that act on the living
being. The ‘anatomy’ of language, to use Grimm’s expression, functions on the other hand within the element of History: for it is an
anatomy of possible changes, one that expresses not the real coexistence of organs, or their mutual exclusion, but the direction in which
mutations will or will not be able to occur. The new grammar is
immediately diachronic. How could it have been otherwise, since its
positivity could be established only by a break between language and
representation? The internal structure of languages – what they sanction and what they exclude in order to function – could be reapprehended only in the form of words; but, in itself, this form can
express its own law only if it is related back to its previous states, to the
changes of which it is susceptible, to the modiﬁcations that never
occur. By being cut oﬀ from what it represents, language was certainly
made to emerge for the ﬁrst time in its own particular legality, and at
the same time it was doomed to be re-apprehensible only within
history. It is well known that Saussure was able to escape from this
diachronic vocation of philology only by restoring the relation of language to representation, at the expense of reconstituting a ‘semiology’
which, like general grammar, deﬁned the sign as the connection
between two ideas. The same archaeological event was expressed therefore in a partially diﬀerent fashion in the cases of natural history and
language. By separating the characters of the living being or the rules
of grammar from the laws of a self-analysing representation, the historicity of life and language was made possible. But, in the sphere of
biology, this historicity needed a supplementary history to express the
relations of the individual with the environment; in one sense the
history of life is exterior to the historicity of the living being; this is
why evolutionism is a biological theory, of which the condition of
possibility was a biology without evolution – that of Cuvier. The

labour, life, language

historicity of language, on the contrary, reveals its history immediately,
and without intermediary; they communicate with one another
internally. Whereas nineteenth-century biology was to advance more
and more towards the exterior of the living being, towards what lay
beyond it, rendering progressively more permeable that surface of the
body at which the naturalist’s gaze had once halted, philology was to
untie the relations that the grammarian had established between language and external history in order to deﬁne an internal history. And
the latter, once secure in its objectivity, could serve as a guiding-thread,
making it possible to reconstitute – for the beneﬁt of History proper –
events long since forgotten.

V LANGUAGE BECOME OBJECT
It may be observed that the four theoretical segments that have just
been analysed, perhaps because they constitute the archaeological
ground of philology, correspond and contrast, term by term, with
those that made it possible to deﬁne general grammar.47 Working
backwards from the last of these four segments to the ﬁrst, we ﬁnd that
the theory of the kinship between languages (discontinuity between the
broad families, and internal analogies in the system of changes) is
opposed by the theory of derivation, which presupposed constant factors
of attrition and admixture, acting in the same way on all languages of
whatever kind, as an external principle and with unlimited eﬀects. The
theory of the radical contrasts with that of designation: for the radical is an
isolable linguistic individuality, inside a group of languages, and serving above all as a nucleus of verbal forms; whereas the root, encroaching upon language from the side of nature and the primitive cry,
exhausted itself till it was no more than an endlessly transformable
sound which had as its function a primary nominal patterning of
things. The study of the internal variations of language is also opposed by
the theory of representative articulation: the latter deﬁned words and
gave them an individuality that distinguished them from each other by
relating them to the content they were able to signify; the articulation
of language was the visible analysis of representation; now words are
characterized in the ﬁrst place by their morphology and by the totality
of the mutations each of their sounds is capable of undergoing. Above

321

322 the order of things
all, the internal analysis of language is opposed by the primacy accorded
in Classical thought to the verb to be: the latter held sway on the frontiers of language, both because it was the primary link between words
and because it possessed the fundamental power of aﬃrmation; it
marked the threshold of language, indicated its speciﬁcity, and connected it, in an ineﬀaceable way, to the forms of thought. On the other
hand, the independent analysis of grammatical structures, as practised
from the nineteenth century, isolates language, treats it as an autonomous organic structure, and breaks its bonds with judgements, attribution, and aﬃrmation. The ontological transition provided by the verb to
be between speaking and thinking is removed; whereupon language
acquires a being proper to itself. And it is this being that contains the
laws that govern it.
The Classical order of language has now drawn to a close. It has lost
its transparency and its major function in the domain of knowledge. In
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it was the immediate and
spontaneous unfolding of representations; it was in that order in the
ﬁrst place that representations received their primary signs, patterned
and regrouped their common features, and established their relations
of identity or attribution; language was a form of knowing and knowing was automatically discourse. Thus, language occupied a fundamental situation in relation to all knowledge: it was only by the
medium of language that the things of the world could be known. Not
because it was a part of the world, ontologically interwoven with it (as
in the Renaissance), but because it was the ﬁrst sketch of an order in
representations of the world; because it was the initial, inevitable way
of representing representations. It was in language that all generality
was formed. Classical knowledge was profoundly nominalist. From the
nineteenth century, language began to fold in upon itself, to acquire its
own particular density, to deploy a history, an objectivity, and laws of
its own. It became one object of knowledge among others, on the same
level as living beings, wealth and value, and the history of events and
men. It may possess its own concepts, but the analyses that bear upon it
have their roots at the same level as those that deal with other empirical
forms of knowledge. The pre-eminence that enabled general grammar to be
logic while at the same time intersecting with it has now been lost. To
know language is no longer to come as close as possible to knowledge

labour, life, language

itself; it is merely to apply the methods of understanding in general to a
particular domain of objectivity.
This demotion of language to the mere status of an object is compensated for, however, in three ways. First, by the fact that it is a necessary medium for any scientiﬁc knowledge that wishes to be expressed
in discourse. It cannot itself be arranged, deployed, and analysed
beneath the gaze of a science, because it always re-emerges on the side
of the knowing subject – as soon as that subject expresses what he
knows. Hence two constant concerns throughout the nineteenth century. The ﬁrst is the wish to neutralize, and as it were polish, scientiﬁc
language to the point at which, stripped of all its singularity, puriﬁed
of all its accidents and alien elements – as though they did not belong
to its essence – it could become the exact reﬂection, the perfect double,
the unmisted mirror of a non-verbal knowledge. This is the positivist
dream of a language keeping strictly to the level of what is known: a
table-language, like the one Cuvier was probably dreaming of when he
attributed to science the project of forming a ‘copy’ of nature; scientiﬁc
discourse was to be the ‘table’ of things; but ‘table’ here has a fundamentally diﬀerent meaning from the one it possessed in the eighteenth
century; then, it was a matter of dividing nature up by means of a
constant table of identities and diﬀerences for which language provided a primary, approximative, and rectiﬁable grid; now, language is
not so much a table as a picture, in the sense that, freed from the
intricacy that gives it its immediately classifying role, it stands a certain
distance apart from nature in order to draw some of it into itself by
means of its own passivity, and ﬁnally to become nature’s faithful
portrait.48 The other concern – entirely diﬀerent from the ﬁrst, even
though in correlation with it – was the search for a logic independent
of grammars, vocabularies, synthetic forms, and words: a logic that
could clarify and utilize the universal implications of thought while
protecting them from the singularities of a constituted language in
which they might be obscured. It was inevitable that a symbolic logic
should come into being, with Boole, at precisely that period when
languages were becoming philological objects: for, despite some
superﬁcial resemblances and a few technical analogies, it was not a
question, as it had been in the Classical age, of constituting a universal
language, but of representing the forms and connections of thought

323

324 the order of things
outside all language. And since language was becoming an object of
science, a language had to be invented that would be a symbolism
rather than a language, and would for that reason be transparent to
thought in the very movement that permits it to know. One might say
in one sense that logical algebra and the Indo-European languages are two
products of the dissociation of general grammar: the Indo-European languages expressing the shift of language in the direction of the known
object, logical algebra the movement that makes it swing towards the
act of knowing, stripping it in the process of all its already constituted
form. But it would be inadequate to express the fact in this purely
negative form: at the archaeological level, the conditions of possibility
of a non-verbal logic and a historical grammar are the same. The
ground of their positivity is identical.
The second compensation for this demotion of language is the
critical value bestowed upon its study. Having become a dense and consistent historical reality, language forms the locus of tradition, of the
unspoken habits of thought, of what lies hidden in a people’s mind; it
accumulates an ineluctable memory which does not even know itself as
memory. Expressing their thoughts in words of which they are not the
masters, enclosing them in verbal forms whose historical dimensions
they are unaware of, men believe that their speech is their servant and
do not realize that they are submitting themselves to its demands. The
grammatical arrangements of a language are the a priori of what can be
expressed in it. The truth of discourse is caught in the trap of philology.
Hence the need to work one’s way back from opinions, philosophies,
and perhaps even from sciences, to the words that made them possible,
and, beyond that, to a thought whose essential life has not yet been
caught in the network of any grammar. This is how we must understand the revival, so marked in the nineteenth century, of all the techniques of exegesis. This reappearance is due to the fact that language
has resumed the enigmatic density it possessed at the time of the
Renaissance. But now it is not a matter of rediscovering some primary
word that has been buried in it, but of disturbing the words we speak,
of denouncing the grammatical habits of our thinking, of dissipating
the myths that animate our words, of rendering once more noisy and
audible the element of silence that all discourse carries with it as it is
spoken. The ﬁrst book of Das Kapital is an exegesis of ‘value’; all

labour, life, language

Nietzsche is an exegesis of a few Greek words; Freud, the exegesis of
all those unspoken phrases that support and at the same time undermine our apparent discourse, our fantasies, our dreams, our bodies.
Philology, as the analysis of what is said in the depths of discourse, has
become the modern form of criticism. Where, at the end of the eighteenth century, it was a matter of ﬁxing the frontiers of knowledge, it
will now be one of seeking to destroy syntax, to shatter tyrannical
modes of speech, to turn words around in order to perceive all that is
being said through them and despite them. God is perhaps not so
much a region beyond knowledge as something prior to the sentences
we speak; and if Western man is inseparable from him, it is not because
of some invincible propensity to go beyond the frontiers of experience,
but because his language ceaselessly foments him in the shadow of his
laws: ‘I fear indeed that we shall never rid ourselves of God, since we
still believe in grammar’.49 In the sixteenth century, interpretation
proceeded from the world (things and texts together) towards the
divine Word that could be deciphered in it; our interpretation, or at all
events that which was formed in the nineteenth century, proceeds
from men, from God, from knowledge or fantasies, towards the words
that make them possible; and what it reveals is not the sovereignty of a
primal discourse, but the fact that we are already, before the very least
of our words, governed and paralysed by language. Modern criticism
has devoted itself to a strange kind of commentary, since it does not
proceed from the observation that there is language towards the discovery of what that language means, but from the deployment of manifest discourse towards a revelation of language in its crude being.
Thus the methods of interpretation of modern thought are opposed
by the techniques of formalization: the ﬁrst claiming to make language
speak as it were below itself, and as near as possible to what is being
said in it, without it; the second claiming to control any language that
may arise, and to impose upon it from above the law of what it is
possible to say. Interpretation and formalization have become the two
great forms of analysis of our time – in fact, we know no others. But do
we know what the relations of exegesis and formalization are? Are we
capable of controlling and mastering them? For if exegesis leads us not
so much towards a primal discourse as towards the naked existence of
something like a language, will it not be obliged to express only the

325

326 the order of things
pure forms of language even before it has taken on a meaning? And in
order to formalize what we suppose to be a language, is it not necessary
to have practised some minimum of exegesis, and at least interpreted
all those mute forms as having the intention of meaning something? It
is true that the division between interpretation and formalization
presses upon us and dominates us today. But it is not rigorous enough:
the fork it forms has not been driven far enough down into our culture,
its two branches are too contemporaneous for us to be able to say even
that it is prescribing a simple option or that it is inviting us to choose
between the past, which believed in meaning, and the present (the
future), which has discovered the signiﬁcant. In fact, it is a matter of
two correlative techniques whose common ground of possibility is
formed by the being of language, as it was constituted on the threshold
of the modern age. The critical elevation of language, which was a
compensation for its subsidence within the object, implied that it had
been brought nearer both to an act of knowing, pure of all words, and
to the unconscious element in our discourse. It had to be either made
transparent to the forms of knowledge, or thrust down into the contents of the unconscious. This certainly explains the nineteenth century’s double advance, on the one hand towards formalism in thought
and on the other towards the discovery of the unconscious – towards
Russell and Freud. It also explains the tendency of one to move
towards the other, and of these two directions to cross: the attempt, for
example, to discover the pure forms that are imposed upon our
unconscious before all content; or again, the endeavour to raise the
ground of experience, the sense of being, the lived horizon of all our
knowledge to the level of our discourse. It is here that structuralism and
phenomenology ﬁnd, together with the arrangements proper to them,
the general space that deﬁnes their common ground.
Finally, the last of the compensations for the demotion of language,
the most important, and also the most unexpected, is the appearance of
literature, of literature as such – for there has of course existed in the
Western world, since Dante, since Homer, a form of language that we
now call ‘literature’. But the word is of recent date, as is also, in our
culture, the isolation of a particular language whose peculiar mode of
being is ‘literary’. This is because at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, at a time when language was burying itself within its own

labour, life, language

density as an object and allowing itself to be traversed, through and
through, by knowledge, it was also reconstituting itself elsewhere, in
an independent form, diﬃcult of access, folded back upon the enigma
of its own origin and existing wholly in reference to the pure act of
writing. Literature is the contestation of philology (of which it is nevertheless the twin ﬁgure): it leads language back from grammar to the
naked power of speech, and there it encounters the untamed, imperious being of words. From the Romantic revolt against a discourse
frozen in its own ritual pomp, to the Mallarméan discovery of the word
in its impotent power, it becomes clear what the function of literature
was, in the nineteenth century, in relation to the modern mode of
being of language. Against the background of this essential interaction,
the rest is merely eﬀect: literature becomes progressively more differentiated from the discourse of ideas, and encloses itself within a
radical intransitivity; it becomes detached from all the values that were
able to keep it in general circulation during the Classical age (taste,
pleasure, naturalness, truth), and creates within its own space everything that will ensure a ludic denial of them (the scandalous, the ugly,
the impossible); it breaks with the whole deﬁnition of genres as forms
adapted to an order of representations, and becomes merely a manifestation of a language which has no other law than that of aﬃrming –
in opposition to all other forms of discourse – its own precipitous
existence; and so there is nothing for it to do but to curve back in a
perpetual return upon itself, as if its discourse could have no other
content than the expression of its own form; it addresses itself to itself
as a writing subjectivity, or seeks to re-apprehend the essence of all
literature in the movement that brought it into being; and thus all its
threads converge upon the ﬁnest of points – singular, instantaneous,
and yet absolutely universal – upon the simple act of writing. At the
moment when language, as spoken and scattered words, becomes an
object of knowledge, we see it reappearing in a strictly opposite modality: a silent, cautious deposition of the word upon the whiteness of a
piece of paper, where it can possess neither sound nor interlocutor,
where it has nothing to say but itself, nothing to do but shine in the
brightness of its being.

327

328 the order of things
NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Ricardo, Works (London, 1846, p. 11).
Ibid., p. 10.
Ibid., p. 25.
Ibid., p. 16.
Cf. Adam Smith, The wealth of nations, book I, chap. XI, part II.
Quoted by T. Cahn, La Vie et l’æuvre d’E. Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (Paris, 1962,
p. 138).
G. Cuvier, Leçons d’anatomie comparée, t. I, pp. 63–4.
Ibid., pp. 34–5.
Cuvier, Rapport historique sur le progrès des sciences naturelles, p. 330.
Cuvier, Leçons d’anatomie comparée, t. I, p. 55.
Cuvier, Second mémoire sur les animaux à sang blanc (1795; Magasin encyclopédique, II, p. 441).
Ibid., p. 441.
Cuvier, Lecons d’anatomie comparée, t. III, pp. 4–5.
Cuvier, Sur un nouveau rapprochement à établir (Annales du Muséum, t. XIX,
p. 76).
Ibid., p. 76.
Cuvier, Second mémoire sur les animaux à sang blanc, loc. cit.
On this rejection of the microscope, which is identical in Cuvier and in the
anatomo-pathologists, cf. Leçons d’anatomie comparée, t. V, p. 180, and Le
Règne animal distribué d’après son organisation, t. I, p. xxviii.
Cuvier, Le Règne animal distribuè d’après son organisation, t. I, p. xiv.
Cuvier, Lettre à Hartmann, quoted by Daudin, Les Classes zoologiques, t. II, p. 20,
n. 1.
Cuvier, Rapport historique sur le progrès des sciences naturelles, pp. 329–30.
Cuvier, Tableau élémentaire d’histoire naturelle, p. 6 et seq.
Cuvier, Leçons d’anatomie comparée, t. I, p. 59.
Cuvier, Mémoire sur les céphalopodes (1817, pp. 42–3).
Cuvier, Tableau élémentaire d’histoire naturelle, pp. 84–5.
Cuvier, Leçons d’anatomie comparée, t. I, p. 60.
Cuvier, Histoire des poissons (Paris, 1828, t. I, p. 569).
Cuvier, Leçons d’anatomie comparée, t. I, pp. 4–5.
Cuvier, Cours d’anatomie pathologique, t. I, p. 5.
F. von Schlegel, On the language and philosophy of the Indians (1808; Aesthetic
and miscellaneous works, London, 1849, p. 439).
Ibid., p. 449.
Ibid.
Ibid, pp. 445–7.
Bopp, Über das Konjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache (1816, p. 147).
J. Horne Tooke, On the study of language (London, 1798).
Grimm has often been criticized for having confused letters and sounds (he

labour, life, language

36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

analyses Schrift into eight elements because he divides the f into p and h). That
is how difﬁcult it was to treat language as an element composed purely of
sounds.
J. Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik (2nd edn., 1822, vol. I, p. 5). These analyses do
not occur in the ﬁrst edition (1818).
Ibid., p. 5.
Bopp, A comparative grammar (London, 1845, p. 1, note).
J. Grimm, L’Origine du langage (Fr. trans. Paris, 1859, p. 7).
Ibid., p. 37. Cf. also Deutsche Grammatik, I, p. 588.
J. Grimm, L’Origine du langage, p. 41.
Bopp, Über das Konjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache.
Ibid., p. 147 et seq.
J. Grimm, L’Origine du langage, p. 39.
Ibid., p. 50.
F. von Schlegel, On the language and philosophy of the Indians, p. 429.
Cf. p. 115 above.
Cf. G. Cuvier, Rapport historique sur le progrès des sciences naturelles, p. 4.
Nietzsche, The twilight of the idols (First German edn. 1889; Fr. trans. 1911,
p. 130).

329

9
MAN AND HIS DOUBLES
I THE RETURN OF LANGUAGE
With the appearance of literature, with the return of exegesis and the
concern for formalization, with the development of philology – in
short, with the reappearance of language as a multiple profusion, the
order of Classical thought can now be eclipsed. At this time, from any
retrospective viewpoint, it enters a region of shade. Even so, we should
speak not of darkness but of a somewhat blurred light, deceptive in its
apparent clarity, and hiding more than it reveals: it seems to us, in fact,
that we know all there is to be known about Classical knowledge if we
understand that it is rationalistic, that, since Galileo and Descartes, it
has accorded an absolute privilege to Mechanism, that it presupposes a
general ordering of nature, that it accepts the possibility of an analysis
suﬃciently radical to discover elements or origins, but that it already
has a presentiment, beyond and despite all these concepts of understanding, of the movement of life, of the density of history, and of the
disorder, so diﬃcult to master, in nature. But to recognize Classical
thought by such signs alone is to misunderstand its fundamental
arrangement; it is to neglect entirely the relation between such manifestations and what made them possible. And how, after all (if not by a
slow and laborious technique), are we to discover the complex relation
of representations, identities, orders, words, natural beings, desires,

man and his doubles

and interests, once that vast grid has been dismantled, once needs
have organized their production for themselves, once living beings
have turned in towards the essential functions of life, once words have
become weighed down with their own material history in short, once
the identities of representation have ceased to express the order of
beings completely and openly? The entire system of grids which analysed the sequence of representations (a thin temporal series unfolding
in men’s minds), arresting its movement, fragmenting it, spreading it
out and redistributing it in a permanent table, all these distinctions
created by words and discourse, characters and classiﬁcation, equivalences and exchange, have been so completely abolished that it is difﬁcult today to rediscover how that structure was able to function. The
last ‘bastion’ to fall – and the one whose disappearance cut us oﬀ from
Classical thought forever – was precisely the ﬁrst of all those grids:
discourse, which ensured the initial, spontaneous, unconsidered
deployment of representation in a table. When discourse ceased to
exist and to function within representation as the ﬁrst means of
ordering it, Classical thought ceased at the same time to be directly
accessible to us.
The threshold between Classicism and modernity (though the terms
themselves have no importance – let us say between our prehistory and
what is still contemporary) had been deﬁnitively crossed when words
ceased to intersect with representations and to provide a spontaneous
grid for the knowledge of things. At the beginning of the nineteenth
century, they rediscovered their ancient, enigmatic density; though not
in order to restore the curve of the world which had harboured them
during the Renaissance, nor in order to mingle with things in a circular
system of signs. Once detached from representation, language has
existed, right up to our own day, only in a dispersed way: for philologists, words are like so many objects formed and deposited by history;
for those who wish to achieve a formalization, language must strip
itself of its concrete content and leave nothing visible but those forms
of discourse that are universally valid; if one’s intent is to interpret,
then words become a text to be broken down, so as to allow that other
meaning hidden in them to emerge and become clearly visible; lastly,
language may sometimes arise for its own sake in an act of writing that
designates nothing other than itself. This dispersion imposes upon

331

332 the order of things
language, if not a privileged position, at least a destiny that seems
singular when compared with that of labour or of life. When the table
of natural history was dissociated, the living beings within it were not
dispersed, but, on the contrary, regrouped around the central enigma
of life; when the analysis of wealth had disappeared, all economic
processes were regrouped around the central fact of production and all
that rendered it possible; on the other hand, when the unity of general
grammar – discourse – was broken up, language appeared in a multiplicity of modes of being, whose unity was probably irrecoverable. It is
for this reason, perhaps, that philosophical reﬂection for so long held
itself aloof from language. Whereas it sought tirelessly in the regions of
life or labour for something that might provide it with an object, or
with its conceptual models, or its real and fundamental ground, it paid
relatively little attention to language; its main concern was to clear
away the obstacles that might oppose it in its task; for example, words
had to be freed from the silent content that rendered them alien, or
language had to be made more ﬂexible and more ﬂuid, as it were, from
within, so that once emancipated from the spatializations of the understanding it would be able to express the movement and temporality of
life. Language did not return into the ﬁeld of thought directly and in its
own right until the end of the nineteenth century. We might even have
said until the twentieth, had not Nietzsche the philologist – and even
in that ﬁeld he was so wise, he knew so much, he wrote such good
books – been the ﬁrst to connect the philosophical task with a radical
reﬂection upon language.
And now, in this philosophical–philological space opened up for us
by Nietzsche, language wells up in an enigmatic multiplicity that must
be mastered. There appear, like so many projects (or chimeras, who can
tell as yet?), the themes of a universal formalization of all discourse, or
the themes of an integral exegesis of the world which would at the
same time be its total demystiﬁcation, or those of a general theory of
signs; or again, the theme (historically probably the ﬁrst) of a transformation without residuum, of a total reabsorption of all forms of
discourse into a single word, of all books into a single page, of the
whole world into one book. The great task to which Mallarmé dedicated himself, right up to his death, is the one that dominates us now;
in its stammerings, it embraces all our current eﬀorts to conﬁne the

man and his doubles

fragmented being of language once more within a perhaps impossible
unity. Mallarmé’s project – that of enclosing all possible discourse
within the fragile density of the word, within that slim, material black
line traced by ink upon paper – is fundamentally a reply to the question
imposed upon philosophy by Nietzsche. For Nietzsche, it was not a
matter of knowing what good and evil were in themselves, but of who
was being designated, or rather who was speaking when one said Agathos to
designate oneself and Deilos to designate others.1 For it is there, in the
holder of the discourse and, more profoundly still, in the possessor of the
word, that language is gathered together in its entirety. To the
Nietzschean question: ‘Who is speaking?’, Mallarmé replies – and constantly reverts to that reply – by saying that what is speaking is, in its
solitude, in its fragile vibration, in its nothingness, the word itself – not
the meaning of the word, but its enigmatic and precarious being.
Whereas Nietzsche maintained his questioning as to who is speaking
right up to the end, though forced, in the last resort, to irrupt into that
questioning himself and to base it upon himself as the speaking and
questioning subject: Ecce homo, Mallarmé was constantly eﬀacing himself from his own language, to the point of not wishing to ﬁgure in it
except as an executant in a pure ceremony of the Book in which the
discourse would compose itself. It is quite possible that all those questions now confronting our curiosity (What is language? What is a sign?
What is unspoken in the world, in our gestures, in the whole enigmatic
heraldry of our behaviour, our dreams, our sicknesses – does all that
speak, and if so in what language and in obedience to what grammar?
Is everything signiﬁcant, and, if not, what is, and for whom, and in
accordance with what rules? What relation is there between language
and being, and is it really to being that language is always addressed –
at least, language that speaks truly? What, then, is this language that
says nothing, is never silent, and is called ‘literature’?) – it is quite
possible that all these questions are presented today in the distance that
was never crossed between Nietzsche’s question and Mallarmé’s reply.
We know now where these questions come from. They were made
possible by the fact that, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, the
law of discourse having been detached from representation, the being
of language itself became, as it were, fragmented; but they became
inevitable when, with Nietzsche, and Mallarmé, thought was brought

333

334 the order of things
back, and violently so, towards language itself, towards its unique and
diﬃcult being. The whole curiosity of our thought now resides in the
question: What is language, how can we ﬁnd a way round it in order to
make it appear in itself, in all its plenitude? In a sense, this question
takes up from those other questions that, in the nineteenth century,
were concerned with life or labour. But the status of this inquiry and of
all the questions into which it breaks down is not perfectly clear. Is it a
sign of the approaching birth, or, even less than that, of the very ﬁrst
glow, low in the sky, of a day scarcely even heralded as yet, but in
which we can already divine that thought – the thought that has been
speaking for thousands of years without knowing what speaking is or
even that it is speaking – is about to re-apprehend itself in its entirety,
and to illumine itself once more in the lightning ﬂash of being? Is that
not what Nietzsche was paving the way for when, in the interior space
of his language, he killed man and God both at the same time, and
thereby promised with the Return the multiple and re-illumined light
of the gods? Or must we quite simply admit that such a plethora of
questions on the subject of language is no more than a continuance, or
at most a culmination, of the event that, as archaeology has shown,
came into existence and began to take eﬀect at the end of the eighteenth century? The fragmentation of language, occurring at the same
time as its transition to philological objectivity, would in that case be
no more than the most recently visible (because the most secret and
most fundamental) consequence of the breaking up of Classical order;
by making the eﬀort to master this schism and to make language
visible in its entirety, we would bring to completion what had
occurred before us, and without us, towards the end of the eighteenth
century. But what, in that case, would that culmination be? In attempting to reconstitute the lost unity of language, is one carrying to its
conclusion a thought which is that of the nineteenth century, or is one
pursuing forms that are already incompatible with it? The dispersion of
language is linked, in fact, in a fundamental way, with the archaeological event we may designate as the disappearance of Discourse. To
discover the vast play of language contained once more within a single
space might be just as decisive a leap towards a wholly new form of
thought as to draw to a close a mode of knowing constituted during
the previous century.

man and his doubles

It is true that I do not know what to reply to such questions, or,
given these alternatives, what term I should choose. I cannot even guess
whether I shall ever be able to answer them, or whether the day will
come when I shall have reasons enough to make any such choice.
Nevertheless, I now know why I am able, like everyone else, to ask
them – and I am unable not to ask them today. Only those who cannot
read will be surprised that I have learned such a thing more clearly
from Cuvier, Bopp, and Ricardo than from Kant or Hegel.

II THE PLACE OF THE KING
Faced with so many instances of ignorance, so many questions remaining in suspense, no doubt some decision must be made. One must say:
there is where discourse ends, and perhaps labour begins again. Yet
there are still a few more words to be said – words whose status it is
probably diﬃcult to justify, since it is a matter of introducing at the last
moment, rather like some deus ex machina, a character who has not yet
appeared in the great Classical interplay of representations. And let us,
if we may, look for the previously existing law of that interplay in the
painting of Las Meninas, in which representation is represented at every
point: the painter, the palette, the broad dark surface of the canvas with
its back to us, the paintings hanging on the wall, the spectators watching, who are framed, in turn, by those who are watching them; and
lastly, in the centre, in the very heart of the representation, nearest to
what is essential, the mirror, showing us what is represented, but as a
reﬂection so distant, so deeply buried in an unreal space, so foreign to
all the gazes being directed elsewhere, that it is no more than the
frailest duplication of representation. All the interior lines of the painting, and above all those that come from the central reﬂection, point
towards the very thing that is represented, but absent. At once object –
since it is what the artist represented is copying onto his canvas – and
subject – since what the painter had in front of his eyes, as he represented himself in the course of his work, was himself, since the gazes
portrayed in the picture are all directed towards the ﬁctitious position
occupied by the royal personage, which is also the painter’s real place,
since the occupier of that ambiguous place in which the painter and
the sovereign alternate, in a never-ending ﬂicker, as it were, is the

335

336 the order of things
spectator, whose gaze transforms the painting into an object, the pure
representation of that essential absence. Even so, that absence is not a
lacuna, except for the discourse laboriously decomposing the painting,
for it never ceases to be inhabited, and really too, as is proved by the
concentration of the painter thus represented, by the respect of the
characters portrayed in the picture, by the presence of the great canvas
with its back to us, and by our gaze, for which the painting exists and
for which, in the depths of time, it was arranged.
In Classical thought, the personage for whom the representation
exists, and who represents himself within it, recognizing himself
therein as an image or reﬂection, he who ties together all the interlacing threads of the ‘representation in the form of a picture or table’ –
he is never to be found in that table himself. Before the end of the
eighteenth century, man did not exist – any more than the potency of
life, the fecundity of labour, or the historical density of language. He is
a quite recent creature, which the demiurge of knowledge fabricated
with its own hands less than two hundred years ago: but he has grown
old so quickly that it has been only too easy to imagine that he had
been waiting for thousands of years in the darkness for that moment of
illumination in which he would ﬁnally be known. Of course, it is
possible to object that general grammar, natural history, and the analysis of wealth were all, in a sense, ways of recognizing the existence of
man – but there is a distinction to be made. There is no doubt that the
natural sciences dealt with man as with a species or a genus: the controversy about the problem of races in the eighteenth century testiﬁes
to that. Again, general grammar and economics made use of such
notions as need and desire, or memory and imagination. But there was
no epistemological consciousness of man as such. The Classical episteme
is articulated along lines that do not isolate, in any way, a speciﬁc
domain proper to man. And if that is not suﬃcient, if it is still objected
that, even so, no period has accorded more attention to human nature,
has given it a more stable, more deﬁnitive status, or one more directly
presented to discourse – one can reply by saying that the very concept
of human nature, and the way in which it functioned, excluded any
possibility of a Classical science of man.
It is essential to observe that the functions of ‘nature’ and ‘human
nature’ are in opposition to one another, term by term, in the Classical

man and his doubles

episteme: nature, through the action of a real and disordered juxtaposition, causes diﬀerence to appear in the ordered continuity of
beings; human nature causes the identical to appear in the disordered
chain of representations, and does so by the action of a display of
images. The one implies the fragmentation of a history in order to
constitute actual landscapes; the other implies the comparison of nonactual elements which destroy the fabric of a chronological sequence.
Despite this opposition, however, or rather through it, we see the positive relation of nature to human nature beginning to take shape. They
act, in fact, upon identical elements (the same, the continuous, the
imperceptible diﬀerence, the unbroken sequence); both reveal against
the background of an uninterrupted fabric the possibility of a general
analysis which makes possible the distribution of isolable identities and
visible diﬀerences over a tabulated space and in an ordered sequence.
But they cannot succeed in doing this without each other, and it is
there that the communication between them occurs. The chain of
representations can, in eﬀect, by means of the power it possesses to
duplicate itself (in imagination and memory, and in the multiple attention employed in comparison), rediscover, below the disorder of the
earth, the unbroken expanse of beings; memory, random at ﬁrst, and at
the mercy of representations as they capriciously present themselves to
it, is gradually immobilized in the form of a general table of all that
exists; man is then able to include the world in the sovereignty of a
discourse that has the power to represent its representation. In the act
of speaking, or rather (keeping as close as possible to what is essential
in the Classical experience of language), in the act of naming, human
nature – like the folding of representation back upon itself – transforms
the linear sequence of thoughts into a constant table of partially diﬀerent beings: the discourse in which it duplicates its representations and
expresses them is what links it to nature. Inversely, the chain of being is
linked to human nature by the play of nature: for since the real world,
as it presents itself to the gaze, is not merely the unwinding of the
fundamental chain of being, but oﬀers jumbled fragments of it,
repeated and discontinuous, the series of representations in the mind is
not obliged to follow the continuous path of imperceptible diﬀerences;
extremes meet within it, the same things occur more than once; identical traits are superimposed in the memory; diﬀerences stand out. Thus

337

338 the order of things
the great, endless, continuous surface is printed with distinct characters, in more or less general features, in marks of identiﬁcation – and,
consequently, in words. The chain of being becomes discourse, thereby
linking itself to human nature and to the sequence of representations.
This establishing of communication between nature and human
nature, on the basis of two opposite but complementary functions –
since neither can take place without the other – carries with it broad
theoretical consequences. For Classical thought, man does not occupy
a place in nature through the intermediary of the regional, limited,
speciﬁc ‘nature’ that is granted to him, as to all other beings, as a
birthright. If human nature is interwoven with nature, it is by the
mechanisms of knowledge and by their functioning; or rather, in the
general arrangement of the Classical episteme, nature, human nature, and
their relations, are deﬁnite and predictable functional moments. And
man, as a primary reality with his own density, as the diﬃcult object
and sovereign subject of all possible knowledge, has no place in it. The
modern themes of an individual who lives, speaks, and works in
accordance with the laws of an economics, a philology, and a biology,
but who also, by a sort of internal torsion and overlapping, has
acquired the right, through the interplay of those very laws, to know
them and to subject them to total clariﬁcation – all these themes so
familiar to us today and linked to the existence of the ‘human sciences’
are excluded by Classical thought: it was not possible at that time that
there should arise, on the boundary of the world, the strange stature of
a being whose nature (that which determines it, contains it, and has
traversed it from the beginning of time) is to know nature, and itself, in
consequence, as a natural being.
In return, however, at the meeting-point between representation and
being, at the point where nature and human nature intersect – at the
place in which we believe nowadays that we can recognize the primary, irrefutable, and enigmatic existence of man – what Classical
thought reveals is the power of discourse. In other words, language in
so far as it represents – language that names, patterns, combines, and
connects and disconnects things as it makes them visible in the transparency of words. In this role, language transforms the sequence of
perceptions into a table, and cuts up the continuum of beings into a
pattern of characters. Where there is discourse, representations are laid

man and his doubles

out and juxtaposed; and things are grouped together and articulated.
The profound vocation of Classical language has always been to create a
table – a ‘picture’: whether it be in the form of natural discourse, the
accumulation of truth, descriptions of things, a body of exact knowledge, or an encyclopaedic dictionary. It exists, therefore, only in order
to be transparent; it has lost that secret consistency which, in the sixteenth century, inspissated it into a word to be deciphered, and interwove it with all the things of the world; it has not yet acquired the
multiple existence about which we question ourselves today; in the
Classical age, discourse is that translucent necessity through which
representation and beings must pass – as beings are represented to the
mind’s eye, and as representation renders beings visible in their truth.
The possibility of knowing things and their order passes, in the Classical experience, through the sovereignty of words: words are, in fact,
neither marks to be deciphered (as in the Renaissance period) nor
more or less faithful and masterable instruments (as in the positivist
period); they form rather a colourless network on the basis of which
beings manifest themselves and representations are ordered. This
would account for the fact that Classical reﬂection upon language, even
though comprised within a general arrangement of which it forms
part by the same right as do the analysis of wealth and natural history,
exercises, in relation to them, a regulating role.
But the essential consequence is that Classical language, as the common
discourse of representation and things, as the place within which nature
and human nature intersect, absolutely excludes anything that could be
a ‘science of man’. As long as that language was spoken in Western
culture it was not possible for human existence to be called in question
on its own account, since it contained the nexus of representation and
being. The discourse that, in the seventeenth century, provided the link
between the ‘I think’ and the ‘I am’ of the being undertaking it – that
very discourse remained, in a visible form, the very essence of Classical
language, for what was being linked together in it was representation
and being. The transition from the ‘I think’ to the ‘I am’ was accomplished in the light of evidence, within a discourse whose whole
domain and functioning consisted in articulating one upon the other
what one represents to oneself and what is. It cannot, therefore, be
objected to this transition either that being in general is not contained

339

340 the order of things
in thought, or that the singular being as designated by the ‘I am’ has
not been interrogated or analysed on his own account. Or rather, these
objections may well arise and command respect, but only on the basis
of a discourse which is profoundly other, and which does not have for
its raison d’être the link between representation and being; only a problematics able to by-pass representation would formulate such objections. But as long as Classical discourse lasted, no interrogation as to the
mode of being implied by the cogito could be articulated.

III THE ANALYTIC OF FINITUDE
When natural history becomes biology, when the analysis of wealth
becomes economics, when, above all, reﬂection upon language
becomes philology, and Classical discourse, in which being and representation found their common locus, is eclipsed, then, in the profound
upheaval of such an archaeological mutation, man appears in his
ambiguous position as an object of knowledge and as a subject that
knows: enslaved sovereign, observed spectator, he appears in the place
belonging to the king, which was assigned to him in advance by Las
Meninas, but from which his real presence has for so long been
excluded. As if, in that vacant space towards which Velázquez’s whole
painting was directed, but which it was nevertheless reﬂecting only in
the chance presence of a mirror, and as though by stealth, all the ﬁgures
whose alternation, reciprocal exclusion, interweaving, and ﬂuttering
one imagined (the model, the painter, the king, the spectator) suddenly
stopped their imperceptible dance, immobilized into one substantial
ﬁgure, and demanded that the entire space of the representation should
at last be related to one corporeal gaze.
The motive of this new presence, the modality proper to it, the
particular arrangement of the episteme that justiﬁes it, the new relation
that is established by means of it between words, things, and their
order – all this can now be clariﬁed. Cuvier and his contemporaries had
required of life that it should itself deﬁne, in the depths of its being, the
conditions of possibility of the living being; in the same way, Ricardo
had required labour to provide the conditions of possibility of
exchange, proﬁt, and production; the ﬁrst philologists, too, had
searched in the historical depths of languages for the possibility of

man and his doubles

discourse and of grammar. This meant that representation ceased, ipso
facto, to have validity as the locus of origin of living beings, needs, and
words, or as the primitive seat of their truth; henceforth, it is nothing
more in relation to them than an eﬀect, their more or less blurred
counterpart in a consciousness which apprehends and reconstitutes
them. The representation one makes to oneself of things no longer has
to deploy, in a sovereign space, the table into which they have been
ordered; it is, for that empirical individual who is man, the phenomenon – perhaps even less, the appearance – of an order that now
belongs to things themselves and to their interior law. It is no longer
their identity that beings manifest in representation, but the external
relation they establish with the human being. The latter, with his own
being, with his power to present himself with representations, arises in
a space hollowed out by living beings, objects of exchange, and words,
when, abandoning representation, which had been their natural site
hitherto, they withdraw into the depths of things and roll up upon
themselves in accordance with the laws of life, production, and language. In the middle of them all, compressed within the circle they
form, man is designated – more, required – by them, since it is he who
speaks, since he is seen to reside among the animals (and in a position
that is not merely privileged, but a source of order for the totality they
form: even though he is not conceived as the end-product of evolution,
he is recognized to be one extremity of a long series), and since, lastly,
the relation between his needs and the means he possesses to satisfy
them is such that he is necessarily the principle and means of all
production. But this imperious designation is ambiguous. In one sense,
man is governed by labour, life, and language: his concrete existence
ﬁnds its determinations in them; it is possible to have access to him
only through his words, his organism, the objects he makes – as
though it is they who possess the truth in the ﬁrst place (and they alone
perhaps); and he, as soon as he thinks, merely unveils himself to his
own eyes in the form of a being who is already, in a necessarily subjacent density, in an irreducible anteriority, a living being, an instrument of production, a vehicle for words which exist before him. All
these contents that his knowledge reveals to him as exterior to himself,
and older than his own birth, anticipate him, overhang him with all
their solidity, and traverse him as though he were merely an object of

341

342 the order of things
nature, a face doomed to be erased in the course of history. Man’s
ﬁnitude is heralded – and imperiously so – in the positivity of knowledge; we know that man is ﬁnite, as we know the anatomy of the
brain, the mechanics of production costs, or the system of IndoEuropean conjugation; or rather, like a watermark running through all
these solid, positive, and full forms, we perceive the ﬁnitude and limits
they impose, we sense, as though on their blank reverse sides, all that
they make impossible.
But this primary discovery of ﬁnitude is really an unstable one;
nothing allows it to contemplate itself; and would it not be possible to
suppose that it also promises that very inﬁnity it refuses, according to
the system of actuality? The evolution of the species has perhaps not
reached its culmination; forms of production and labour are still being
modiﬁed, and perhaps one day man will no longer ﬁnd the principle of
his alienation in his labour, or the constant reminder of his limitations
in his needs; nor is there any proof that he will not discover symbolic
systems suﬃciently pure to dissolve the ancient opacity of historical
languages. Heralded in positivity, man’s ﬁnitude is outlined in the
paradoxical form of the endless; rather than the rigour of a limitation,
it indicates the monotony of a journey which, though it probably has
no end, is nevertheless perhaps not without hope. And yet all these
contents, with what they conceal and what they also leave pointing
towards the frontiers of time, have positivity within the space of knowledge and approach the task of a possible acquisition of knowledge
only because they are thoroughly imbued with ﬁnitude. For they
would not be there, in the light that partly illumines them, if man, who
discovers himself through them, was trapped in the mute, nocturnal,
immediate and happy opening of animal life; but nor would they posit
themselves in the acute angle that hides them from their own direction
if man could traverse them without residuum in the lightning ﬂash of
an inﬁnite understanding. But to man’s experience a body has been
given, a body which is his body – a fragment of ambiguous space,
whose peculiar and irreducible spatiality is nevertheless articulated
upon the space of things; to this same experience, desire is given as a
primordial appetite on the basis of which all things assume value, and
relative value; to this same experience, a language is given in the
thread of which all the discourses of all times, all successions and all

man and his doubles

simultaneities may be given. This is to say that each of these positive
forms in which man can learn that he is ﬁnite is given to him only
against the background of its own ﬁnitude. Moreover, the latter is not
the most completely puriﬁed essence of positivity, but that upon the
basis of which it is possible for positivity to arise. The mode of being of
life, and even that which determines the fact that life cannot exist
without prescribing its forms for me, are given to me, fundamentally,
by my body; the mode of being of production, the weight of its
determinations upon my existence, are given to me by my desire; and
the mode of being of language, the whole backwash of history to
which words lend their glow at the instant they are pronounced, and
perhaps even in a time more imperceptible still, are given to me only
along the slender chain of my speaking thought. At the foundation of
all the empirical positivities, and of everything that can indicate itself as
a concrete limitation of man’s existence, we discover a ﬁnitude –
which is in a sense the same: it is marked by the spatiality of the body,
the yawning of desire, and the time of language; and yet it is radically
other: in this sense, the limitation is expressed not as a determination
imposed upon man from outside (because he has a nature or a
history), but as a fundamental ﬁnitude which rests on nothing but its
own existence as fact, and opens upon the positivity of all concrete
limitation.
Thus, in the very heart of empiricity, there is indicated the obligation to work backwards – or downwards – to an analytic of ﬁnitude, in
which man’s being will be able to provide a foundation in their own
positivity for all those forms that indicate to him that he is not inﬁnite.
And the ﬁrst characteristic with which this analytic will mark man’s
mode of being, or rather the space in which that mode of being will be
deployed in its entirety, will be that of repetition – of the identity and
the diﬀerence between the positive and the fundamental: the death that
anonymously gnaws at the daily existence of the living being is the
same as that fundamental death on the basis of which my empirical life
is given to me; the desire that links and separates men in the neutrality
of the economic process is the same as that on the basis of which
everything is desirable for me; the time that bears languages along
upon it, that takes up its place within them and ﬁnally wears them out,
is the same time that draws my discourse out, even before I have

343

344 the order of things
pronounced it, into a succession that no man can master. From one end
of experience to the other, ﬁnitude answers itself; it is the identity and
the diﬀerence of the positivities, and of their foundation, within the
ﬁgure of the Same. It is apparent how modern reﬂection, as soon as the
ﬁrst shoot of this analytic appears, by-passes the display of representation, together with its culmination in the form of a table as ordered by
Classical knowledge, and moves towards a certain thought of the Same –
in which Diﬀerence is the same thing as Identity. It is within this vast
but narrow space, opened up by the repetition of the positive within
the fundamental, that the whole of this analytic of ﬁnitude – so closely
linked to the future of modern thought – will be deployed; it is there
that we shall see in succession the transcendental repeat the empirical,
the cogito repeat the unthought, the return of the origin repeat its
retreat; it is there, from itself as starting-point, that a thought of the
Same irreducible to Classical philosophy is about to aﬃrm itself.
It may perhaps be remarked that there was no need to wait until the
nineteenth century for the idea of ﬁnitude to be revealed. It is true that
the nineteenth century perhaps only displaced it within the space of
thought, making it play a more complex, more ambiguous, less easily
by-passed role: for seventeenth- and eighteenth-century thought, it
was his ﬁnitude that forced man to live an animal existence, to work by
the sweat of his brow, to think with opaque words; it was this same
ﬁnitude that prevented him from attaining any absolute knowledge of
the mechanisms of his body, the means of satisfying his needs, the
method of thinking without the perilous aid of a language woven
wholly of habits and imagination. As an inadequation extending to
inﬁnity, man’s limitation accounted both for the existence of the
empirical contents and for the impossibility of knowing them immediately. And thus the negative relation to inﬁnity – whether conceived of
as creation, or fall, or conjunction of body and soul, or determination
within the inﬁnite being, or individual point of view of the totality, or
link between representation and impression – was posited as anterior
to man’s empiricity and to die knowledge he may gain of it. In a single
movement, but without reciprocal return or circularity, it provided the
foundation for the existence of bodies, needs, and words, and for
the impossibility of subjugating them within an absolute knowledge.
The experience taking form at the beginning of the nineteenth century

man and his doubles

situates the discovery of ﬁnitude not within the thought of the inﬁnite,
but at the very heart of those contents that are given, by a ﬁnite act of
knowing, as the concrete forms of ﬁnite existence. Hence the interminable to and fro of a double system of reference: if man’s knowledge is
ﬁnite, it is because he is trapped, without possibility of liberation,
within the positive contents of language, labour, and life; and inversely,
if life, labour, and language may be posited in their positivity, it is
because knowledge has ﬁnite forms. For Classical thought, in other
words, ﬁnitude (as a determination positively constituted on the basis
of the inﬁnite) provides an account of those negative forms, which are
body, needs, language, and the limited knowledge it is possible to have
of them; for modern thought, the positivity of life, of production and
labour (which have their own existence, historicity, and laws) provides
a foundation for the limited character of knowledge as their negative
correlation; and, inversely, the limits of knowledge provide a positive
foundation for the possibility of knowing, though in an experience
that is always limited, what life, labour, and language are. As long as
these empirical contents were situated within the space of representation, a metaphysics of the inﬁnite was not only possible but necessary:
it was necessary, in fact, that they should be the manifest forms of
human ﬁnitude, and yet that they should be able to have their locus and
their truth within representation; the idea of inﬁnity, and the idea of its
determination in ﬁnitude, made one another possible. But when these
empirical contents were detached from representation and contained
the principle of their existence within themselves, then the metaphysics of inﬁnity became useless; from that point on, ﬁnitude never
ceased to refer back to itself (from the positivity of the contents to the
limitations of knowledge, and from the limited positivity of knowledge to the limited knowledge of the contents). Whereupon the entire
ﬁeld of Western thought was inverted. Where there had formerly been
a correlation between a metaphysics of representation and of the inﬁnite
and an analysis of living beings, of man’s desires, and of the words of his
language, we ﬁnd being constituted an analytic of ﬁnitude and human
existence, and in opposition to it (though in correlative opposition) a
perpetual tendency to constitute a metaphysics of life, labour, and language. But these are never anything more than tendencies, immediately
opposed and as it were undermined from within, for there can be no

345

346 the order of things
question of anything but metaphysics reduced to the scale of human
ﬁnitudes: the metaphysic of a life that converges upon man even if it
does not stop with him; the metaphysic of a labour that frees man so
that man, in turn, can free himself from it; the metaphysic of a language that man can reappropriate in the consciousness of his own
culture. Modern thought, then, will contest even its own metaphysical
impulses, and show that reﬂections upon life, labour, and language, in
so far as they have value as analytics of ﬁnitude, express the end of
metaphysics: the philosophy of life denounces metaphysics as a veil of
illusion, that of labour denounces it as an alienated form of thought
and an ideology, that of language as a cultural episode.
But the end of metaphysics is only the negative side of a much more
complex event in Western thought. This event is the appearance of
man. However, it must not be supposed that he suddenly appeared
upon our horizon, imposing the brutal fact of his body, his labour, and
his language in a manner so irruptive as to be absolutely baﬄing to our
reﬂection. It is not man’s lack of positivity that reduced the space of
metaphysics so violently. No doubt, on the level of appearances, modernity begins when the human being begins to exist within his organism, inside the shell of his head, inside the armature of his limbs, and
in the whole structure of his physiology; when he begins to exist at the
centre of a labour by whose principles he is governed and whose
product eludes him; when he lodges his thought in the folds of a
language so much older than himself that he cannot master its signiﬁcations, even though they have been called back to life by the insistence
of his words. But, more fundamentally, our culture crossed the threshold beyond which we recognize our modernity when ﬁnitude was
conceived in an interminable cross-reference with itself. Though it is
true, at the level of the various branches of knowledge, that ﬁnitude is
always designated on the basis of man as a concrete being and on the
basis of the empirical forms that can be assigned to his existence,
nevertheless, at the archaeological level, which reveals the general,
historical a priori of each of those branches of knowledge, modern
man – that man assignable in his corporeal, labouring, and speaking
existence – is possible only as a ﬁguration of ﬁnitude. Modern culture
can conceive of man because it conceives of the ﬁnite on the basis of
itself. Given these conditions, it is understandable that Classical

man and his doubles

thought, and all the forms of thought that preceded it, were able to
speak of the mind and the body, of the human being, of how restricted
a place he occupies in the universe, of all the limitations by which his
knowledge or his freedom must be measured, but that not one of them
was ever able to know man as he is posited in modern knowledge.
Renaissance ‘humanism’ and Classical ‘rationalism’ were indeed able to
allot human beings a privileged position in the order of the world, but
they were not able to conceive of man.

IV THE EMPIRICAL AND THE TRANSCENDENTAL
Man, in the analytic of ﬁnitude, is a strange empirico-transcendental
doublet, since he is a being such that knowledge will be attained in
him of what renders all knowledge possible. But did not the human
nature of the eighteenth-century empiricists play the same role? In fact,
what was being analysed then was the properties and forms of representation which made knowledge in general possible (it was thus that
Condillac deﬁned the necessary and suﬃcient operations for representation to deploy itself as knowledge: reminiscence, self-consciousness,
imagination, memory); now that the site of the analysis is no longer
representation but man in his ﬁnitude, it is a question of revealing the
conditions of knowledge on the basis of the empirical contents given
in it. It is of little importance, for the general movement of modern
thought, where these contents happened to be localized: knowing
whether they were sought in introspection or in other forms of analysis
is not the point. For the threshold of our modernity is situated not by
the attempt to apply objective methods to the study of man, but rather
by the constitution of an empirico-transcendental doublet which was
called man. Two kinds of analysis then came into being. There are those
that operate within the space of the body, and – by studying perception, sensorial mechanisms, neuro-motor diagrams, and the articulation common to things and to the organism – function as a sort of
transcendental aesthetic; these led to the discovery that knowledge has
anatomo-physiological conditions, that it is formed gradually within
the structures of the body, that it may have a privileged place within it,
but that its forms cannot be dissociated from its peculiar functioning;
in short, that there is a nature of human knowledge that determines its

347

348 the order of things
forms and that can at the same time be made manifest to it in its own
empirical contents. There were also analyses that – by studying
humanity’s more or less ancient, more or less easily vanquished illusions – functioned as a sort of transcendental dialectic; by this means it
was shown that knowledge had historical, social, or economic conditions, that it was formed within the relations that are woven between
men, and that it was not independent of the particular form they might
take here or there; in short, that there was a history of human knowledge
which could both be given to empirical knowledge and prescribe its
forms.
Now, these analyses have this in particular about them: they apparently do not need one another in any way; moreover, they can dispense
with the need for an analytic (or a theory of the subject): they claim to
be able to rest entirely on themselves, since it is the contents themselves
that function as transcendental reﬂection. But in fact the search for a
nature or a history of knowledge, in the movement by which the
dimension proper to a critique is ﬁtted over the contents of empirical
knowledge, already presupposes the use of a certain critique – a critique that is not the exercise of pure reﬂection, but the result of a series
of more or less obscure divisions. And, in the ﬁrst place, these divisions
are relatively clearly elucidated, even though they are arbitrary: the
division that distinguishes rudimentary, imperfect, unequal, emergent
knowledge from knowledge that may be called, if not complete, at least
constituted in its stable and deﬁnitive forms (this division makes possible the study of the natural conditions of knowledge); the division
that distinguishes illusion from truth, the ideological fantasy from the
scientiﬁc theory (this division makes possible the study of the historical conditions of knowledge); but there is a more obscure and more
fundamental division: that of truth itself; there must, in fact, exist a
truth that is of the same order as the object – the truth that is gradually
outlined, formed, stabilized, and expressed through the body and the
rudiments of perception; the truth that appears as illusions are dissipated, and as history establishes a disalienated status for itself; but there
must also exist a truth that is of the order of discourse – a truth that
makes it possible to employ, when dealing with the nature or history
of knowledge, a language that will be true. It is the status of this true
discourse that remains ambiguous. These two things lead to one

man and his doubles

conclusion: either this true discourse ﬁnds its foundation and model in
the empirical truth whose genesis in nature and in history it retraces,
so that one has an analysis of the positivist type (the truth of the object
determines the truth of the discourse that describes its formation); or
the true discourse anticipates the truth whose nature and history it
deﬁnes; it sketches it out in advance and foments it from a distance, so
that one has a discourse of the eschatological type (the truth of the
philosophical discourse constitutes the truth in formation). In fact, it is
a question not so much of an alternative as of a ﬂuctuation inherent in
all analysis, which brings out the value of the empirical at the transcendental level. Comte and Marx both bear out the fact that eschatology (as the objective truth proceeding from man’s discourse) and
positivism (as the truth of discourse deﬁned on the basis of the truth of
the object) are archaeologically indissociable: a discourse attempting to
be both empirical and critical cannot but be both positivist and
eschatological; man appears within it as a truth both reduced and
promised. Pre-critical naïveté holds undivided rule.
This is why modern thought has been unable to avoid – and precisely from the starting-point of this naïve discourse – searching for the
locus of a discourse that would be neither of the order of reduction nor
of the order of promise: a discourse whose tension would keep separate the empirical and the transcendental, while being directed at both;
a discourse that would make it possible to analyse man as a subject, that
is, as a locus of knowledge which has been empirically acquired but
referred back as closely as possible to what makes it possible, and as a
pure form immediately present to those contents; a discourse, in short,
which in relation to to quasi-aesthetics and quasi-dialectics would play
the role of an analytic which would at the same time give them a
foundation in a theory of the subject and perhaps enable them to
articulate themselves in that third and intermediary term in which
both the experience of the body and that of culture would be rooted.
Such a complex, over-determined, and necessary role has been performed in modern thought by the analysis of actual experience. Actual
experience is, in fact, both the space in which all empirical contents are
given to experience and the original form that makes them possible in
general and designates their primary roots; it does indeed provide a
means of communication between the space of the body and the time

349

350 the order of things
of culture, between the determinations of nature and the weight of
history, but only on condition that the body, and, through it, nature,
should ﬁrst be posited in the experience of an irreducible spatiality,
and that culture, the carrier of history, should be experienced ﬁrst of all
in the immediacy of its sedimented signiﬁcations. It is easy enough to
understand how the analysis of actual experience has established itself,
in modern reﬂection, as a radical contestation of positivism and
eschatology; how it has tried to restore the forgotten dimension of the
transcendental; how it has attempted to exorcise the naïve discourse of
a truth reduced wholly to the empirical, and the prophetic discourse
which with similar naïveté promises at last the eventual attainment by
man of experience. Nevertheless, the analysis of actual experience is a
discourse of mixed nature: it is directed to a speciﬁc yet ambiguous
stratum, concrete enough for it to be possible to apply to it a meticulous and descriptive language, yet suﬃciently removed from the positivity of things for it to be possible, from that starting-point, to escape
from that naïveté, to contest it and seek foundations for it. This analysis
seeks to articulate the possible objectivity of a knowledge of nature
upon the original experience of which the body provides an outline;
and to articulate the possible history of a culture upon the semantic
density which is both hidden and revealed in actual experience. It is
doing no more, then, than fulﬁlling with greater care the hasty
demands laid down when the attempt was made to make the empirical,
in man, stand for the transcendental. Despite appearances to the contrary, it is evident how closely knit is the network that links thoughts of
the positivist or eschatological type (Marxism being in the ﬁrst rank
of these) and reﬂections inspired by phenomenology. Their recent
rapprochement is not of the order of a tardy reconciliation: at the level of
archaeological conﬁgurations they were both necessary – and necessary to one another – from the moment the anthropological postulate
was constituted, that is, from the moment when man appeared as an
empirico-transcendental doublet.
The true contestation of positivism and eschatology does not lie,
therefore, in a return to actual experience (which rather, in fact, provides them with conﬁrmation by giving them roots); but if such a
contestation could be made, it would be from the starting-point of a
question which may well seem aberrant, so opposed is it to what has

man and his doubles

rendered the whole of our thought historically possible. This question
would be: Does man really exist? To imagine, for an instant, what the
world and thought and truth might be if man did not exist, is considered to be merely indulging in paradox. This is because we are so
blinded by the recent manifestation of man that we can no longer
remember a time – and it is not so long ago – when the world, its
order, and human beings existed, but man did not. It is easy to see why
Nietzsche’s thought should have had, and still has for us, such a disturbing power when it introduced in the form of an imminent event,
the Promise-Threat, the notion that man would soon be no more – but
would be replaced by the superman; in a philosophy of the Return, this
meant that man had long since disappeared and would continue to
disappear, and that our modern thought about man, our concern for
him, our humanism, were all sleeping serenely over the threatening
rumble of his non-existence. Ought we not to remind ourselves – we
who believe ourselves bound to a ﬁnitude which belongs only to us,
and which opens up the truth of the world to us by means of our
cognition – ought we not to remind ourselves that we are bound to the
back of a tiger?

V THE ‘COGITO’ AND THE UNTHOUGHT
If man is indeed, in the world, the locus of an empirico-transcendental
doublet, if he is that paradoxical ﬁgure in which the empirical contents
of knowledge necessarily release, of themselves, the conditions that
have made them possible, then man cannot posit himself in the
immediate and sovereign transparency of a cogito; nor, on the other
hand, can he inhabit the objective inertia of something that, by rights,
does not and never can lead to self-consciousness. Man is a mode of
being which accommodates that dimension – always open, never
ﬁnally delimited, yet constantly traversed – which extends from a part
of himself not reﬂected in a cogito to the act of thought by which he
apprehends that part; and which, in the inverse direction, extends from
that pure apprehension to the empirical clutter, the chaotic accumulation of contents, the weight of experiences constantly eluding themselves, the whole silent horizon of what is posited in the sandy
stretches of non-thought. Because he is an empirico-transcendental

351

352 the order of things
doublet, man is also the locus of misunderstanding – of misunderstanding that constantly exposes his thought to the risk of being
swamped by his own being, and also enables him to recover his integrity on the basis of what eludes him. This is why transcendental reﬂection in its modern form does not, as in Kant, ﬁnd its fundamental
necessity in the existence of a science of nature (opposed by the
perpetual conﬂicts and uncertainties of philosophers), but in the
existence – mute, yet ready to speak, and secretly impregnated with a
potential discourse – of that not-known from which man is perpetually
summoned towards self-knowledge. The question is no longer:
How can experience of nature give rise to necessary judgements? But
rather: How can man think what he does not think, inhabit as though
by a mute occupation something that eludes him, animate with a
kind of frozen movement that ﬁgure of himself that takes the form
of a stubborn exteriority? How can man be that life whose web, pulsations, and buried energy constantly exceed the experience that he is
immediately given of them? How can he be that labour whose laws and
demands are imposed upon him like some alien system? How can he
be the subject of a language that for thousands of years has been
formed without him, a language whose organization escapes him,
whose meaning sleeps an almost invincible sleep in the words he
momentarily activates by means of discourse, and within which he is
obliged, from the very outset, to lodge his speech and thought, as
though they were doing no more than animate, for a brief period, one
segment of that web of in numerable possibilities? – There has been a
fourfold displacement in relation to the Kantian position, for it is now a
question not of truth, but of being; not of nature, but of man; not of
the possibility of understanding, but of the possibility of a primary
misunderstanding; not of the unaccountable nature of philosophical
theories as opposed to science, but of the resumption in a clear
philosophical awareness of that whole realm of unaccounted-for
experiences in which man does not recognize himself.
Given this displacement of the question of transcendence, contemporary thought could not avoid reviving the theme of the cogito.
Was it not also on the basis of error, illusion, dreams and madness, all
the experiences of unaccounted-for thought, that Descartes discovered
the impossibility of there not being thoughts – to such eﬀect that the

man and his doubles

thought of the ill-thought, of the non-true, of the chimerical, of the
purely imaginary, emerged as the possible locus and the primary,
irrefutable proof of all those experiences? But the modern cogito is as
diﬀerent from Descartes’ as our notion of transcendence is remote
from Kantian analysis. For Descartes was concerned to reveal thought as
the most general form of all those thoughts we term error or illusion,
thereby rendering them harmless, so that he would be free, once
that step had been taken, to return to them, to explain them, and
then to provide a method of guarding against them. In the modern
cogito, on the other hand, we are concerned to grant the highest value,
the greatest dimension, to the distance that both separates and links
thought-conscious-of-itself and whatever, within thought, is rooted in
non-thought. The modern cogito (and this is why it is not so much the
discovery of an evident truth as a ceaseless task constantly to be undertaken afresh) must traverse, duplicate, and reactivate in an explicit form
the articulation of thought on everything within it, around it, and
beneath it which is not thought, yet which is nevertheless not foreign
to thought, in the sense of an irreducible, an insuperable exteriority. In
this form, the cogito will not therefore be the sudden and illuminating
discovery that all thought is thought, but the constantly renewed
interrogation as to how thought can reside elsewhere than here, and
yet so very close to itself; how it can be in the forms of non-thinking.
The modern cogito does not reduce the whole being of things to
thought without ramifying the being of thought right down to the
inert network of what does not think.
This double movement proper to the modern cogito explains why the
‘I think’ does not, in its case, lead to the evident truth of the ‘I am’.
Indeed, as soon as the ‘I think’ has shown itself to be embedded in a
density throughout which it is quasi-present, and which it animates,
though in an equivocal semi-dormant, semi-wakeful fashion, it is no
longer possible to make it lead on to the aﬃrmation ‘I am’. For can I, in
fact, say that I am this language I speak, into which my thought insinuates itself to the point of ﬁnding in it the system of all its own possibilities, yet which exists only in the weight of sedimentations my
thought will never be capable of actualizing altogether? Can I say that I
am this labour I perform with my hands, yet which eludes me not only
when I have ﬁnished it, but even before I have begun it? Can I say that I

353

354 the order of things
am this life I sense deep within me, but which envelops me both in the
irresistible time that grows side by side with it and poses me for a
moment on its crest, and in the imminent time that prescribes my
death? I can say, equally well, that I am and that I am not all this; the
cogito does not lead to an aﬃrmation of being, but it does lead to a
whole series of questions concerned with being: What must I be, I
who think and who am my thought, in order to be what I do not think,
in order for my thought to be what I am not? What is this being, then,
that shimmers and, as it were, glitters in the opening of the cogito, yet is
not sovereignly given in it or by it? What, then, is the connection, the
diﬃcult link, between being and thought? What is man’s being, and
how can it be that that being, which could so easily be characterized by
the fact that ‘it has thoughts’ and is possibly alone in having them, has
an ineradicable and fundamental relation to the unthought? A form of
reﬂection is established far removed from both Cartesianism and Kantian analysis, a form that involves, for the ﬁrst time, man’s being in that
dimension where thought addresses the unthought and articulates
itself upon it.
This has two consequences. The ﬁrst is negative, and of a purely
historical order. It may seem that phenomenology has eﬀected a union
between the Cartesian theme of the cogito and the transcendental motif
that Kant had derived from Hume’s critique; according to this view,
Husserl has revived the deepest vocation of the Western ratio, bending it
back upon itself in a reﬂection which is a radicalization of pure philosophy and a basis for the possibility of its own history. In fact, Husserl
was able to eﬀect this union only in so far as transcendental analysis
had changed its point of application (the latter has shifted from the
possibility of a science of nature to the possibility for man to conceive
of himself), and in so far as the cogito had modiﬁed its function (which
is no longer to lead to an apodictic existence, starting from a thought
that aﬃrms itself wherever it thinks, but to show how thought can
elude itself and thus lead to a many-sided and proliferating interrogation concerning being). Phenomenology is therefore much less the
resumption of an old rational goal of the West than the sensitive and
precisely formulated acknowledgment of the great hiatus that occurred
in the modern episteme at the turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. If phenomenology has any allegiance, it is to the discovery of

man and his doubles

life, work, and language; and also to the new ﬁgure which, under the
old name of man, ﬁrst appeared less than two centuries ago; it is to
interrogation concerning man’s mode of being and his relation to the
unthought. This is why phenomenology – even though it was ﬁrst
suggested by way of anti-psychologism, or, rather, precisely in so far as,
in opposition to anti-psychologism, it revived the problem of the a
priori and the transcendental motif – has never been able to exorcize
its insidious kinship, its simultaneously promising and threatening
proximity, to empirical analyses of man; it is also why, though it
was inaugurated by a reduction to the cogito, it has always been led to
questions, to the question of ontology. The phenomenological project
continually resolves itself, before our eyes, into a description – empirical despite itself – of actual experience, and into an ontology of the
unthought that automatically short-circuits the primacy of the ‘I
think’.
The second consequence is a positive one. It concerns the relation of
man to the unthought, or, more precisely, their twin appearance in
Western culture. It seems obvious enough that, from the moment
when man ﬁrst constituted himself as a positive ﬁgure in the ﬁeld of
knowledge, the old privilege of reﬂexive knowledge, of thought thinking itself, could not but disappear; but that it became possible, by this
very fact, for an objective form of thought to investigate man in his
entirety – at the risk of discovering what could never be reached by his
reﬂection or even by his consciousness: dim mechanisms, faceless
determinations, a whole landscape of shadow that has been termed,
directly or indirectly, the unconscious. For is not the unconscious what
necessarily yields itself up to the scientiﬁc thought man applies to
himself when he ceases to conceive of himself in the form of reﬂection? As a matter of fact, the unconscious, and the forms of the
unthought in general, have not been the reward granted to a positive
knowledge of man. Man and the unthought are, at the archaeological
level, contemporaries. Man has not been able to describe himself as a
conﬁguration in the episteme without thought at the same time discovering, both in itself and outside itself, at its borders yet also in its very
warp and woof, an element of darkness, an apparently inert density in
which it is embedded, an unthought which it contains entirely, yet
in which it is also caught. The unthought (whatever name we give it) is

355

356 the order of things
not lodged in man like a shrivelled-up nature or a stratiﬁed history; it
is, in relation to man, the Other: the Other that is not only a brother but
a twin, born, not of man, nor in man, but beside him and at the same
time, in an identical newness, in an unavoidable duality. This obscure
space so readily interpreted as an abyssal region in man’s nature, or as a
uniquely impregnable fortress in his history, is linked to him in an
entirely diﬀerent way; it is both exterior to him and indispensable to
him: in one sense, the shadow cast by man as he emerged in the ﬁeld of
knowledge; in another, the blind stain by which it is possible to know
him. In any case, the unthought has accompanied man, mutely and
uninterruptedly, since the nineteenth century. Since it was really never
more than an insistent double, it has never been the object of reﬂection
in an autonomous way; it has received the complementary form and
the inverted name of that for which it was the Other and the shadow:
in Hegelian phenomenology, it was the An sich as opposed to the Für
sich; for Schopenhauer it was the Unbewusste; for Marx it was alienated
man; in Husserl’s analyses it was the implicit, the inactual, the sedimented, the non-eﬀected – in every case, the inexhaustible double that
presents itself to reﬂection as the blurred projection of what man is in
his truth, but that also plays the role of a preliminary ground upon
which man must collect himself and recall himself in order to attain his
truth. For though this double may be close, it is alien, and the role, the
true undertaking, of thought will be to bring it as close to itself as
possible; the whole of modern thought is imbued with the necessity of
thinking the unthought – of reﬂecting the contents of the In-itself in the
form of the For-itself, of ending man’s alienation by reconciling him
with his own essence, of making explicit the horizon that provides
experience with its background of immediate and disarmed proof, of
lifting the veil of the Unconscious, of becoming absorbed in its silence,
or of straining to catch its endless murmur.
In modern experience, the possibility of establishing man within
knowledge and the mere emergence of this new ﬁgure in the ﬁeld of
the episteme imply an imperative that haunts thought from within; it matters little whether it be given currency in the form of ethics, politics,
humanism, a duty to assume responsibility for the fate of the West,
or the mere consciousness of performing, in history, a bureaucratic
function. What is essential is that thought, both for itself and in the

man and his doubles

density of its workings, should be both knowledge and a modiﬁcation
of what it knows, reﬂection and a transformation of the mode of being
of that on which it reﬂects. Whatever it touches it immediately causes
to move: it cannot discover the unthought, or at least move towards it,
without immediately bringing the unthought nearer to itself – or even,
perhaps, without pushing it further away, and in any case without
causing man’s own being to undergo a change by that very fact, since it
is deployed in the distance between them. There is something here
profoundly bound up with our modernity: apart from its religious
moralities, it is clear that the West has known only two ethical forms.
The old one (in the form of Stoicism or Epicureanism) was articulated
upon the order of the world, and by discovering the law of that order it
could deduce from it the principle of a code of wisdom or a conception of the city; even the political thought of the eighteenth century
still belongs to this general form. The modern one, on the other hand,
formulates no morality, since any imperative is lodged within thought
and its movement towards the apprehension of the unthought;2 it is
reﬂection, the act of consciousness, the elucidation of what is silent,
language restored to what is mute, the illumination of the element of
darkness that cuts man oﬀ from himself, the reanimation of the inert –
it is all this and this alone that constituted the content and form of the
ethical. Modern thought has never, in fact, been able to propose a
morality. But the reason for this is not because it is pure speculation; on
the contrary, modern thought, from its inception and in its very density, is a certain mode of action. Let those who urge thought to leave its
retreat and to formulate its choices talk on; and let those who seek,
without any pledge and in the absence of virtue, to establish a morality
do as they wish. For modern thought, no morality is possible. Thought
had already ‘left’ itself in its own being as early as the nineteenth
century; it is no longer theoretical. As soon as it functions it oﬀends or
reconciles, attracts or repels, breaks, dissociates, unites or reunites; it
cannot help but liberate and enslave. Even before prescribing, suggesting a future, saying what must be done, even before exhorting or
merely sounding an alarm, thought, at the level of its existence, in its
very dawning, is in itself an action – a perilous act. Sade, Nietzsche,
Artaud, and Bataille have understood this on behalf of all those who
tried to ignore it; but it is also certain that Hegel, Marx, and Freud

357

358 the order of things
knew it. Can we say that it is not known by those who, in their profound stupidity, assert that there is no philosophy without political
choice, that all thought is either ‘progressive’ or ‘reactionary’? Their
foolishness is to believe that all thought ‘expresses’ the ideology of a
class; their involuntary profundity is that they point directly at the
modern mode of being of thought. Superﬁcially, one might say that
knowledge of man, unlike the sciences of nature, is always linked, even
in its vaguest form, to ethics or politics; more fundamentally, modern
thought is advancing towards that region where man’s Other must
become the Same as himself.

VI THE RETREAT AND RETURN OF THE ORIGIN
The last feature that characterizes both man’s mode of being and the
reﬂection addressed to him is the relation to the origin – a relation very
diﬀerent from that which Classical thought tried to establish in its ideal
geneses. In the eighteenth century, to return to the origin was to place
oneself once more as near as possible to the mere duplication of representation. Economics was conceived on the basis of barter, because in
barter the two representations that each party made to himself of his
property and the other’s property were equivalent; since they were
oﬀering satisfaction for almost identical desires, they were, in sum,
‘alike’. The order of nature was conceived, prior to any catastrophe, as a
table in which beings followed one another in so tightly knit an order,
and upon so continuous a fabric, that in going from one point of this
succession to another one would have moved within a quasi-identity,
and in going from one extremity of it to the other one would have
been led by the smooth expanse of ‘likeness’. The origin of language
was conceived as the transparency between the representation of a
thing and the representation of the cry, sound, or gesture (the language
of action) that accompanied it. Finally, the origin of knowledge was
sought within this pure sequence of representations – a sequence so
perfect and so linear that the second had replaced the ﬁrst without
one’s becoming conscious of the fact, since they were not simultaneous, since it was not possible to establish any diﬀerence between
them, and since one could not experience the second as other than
‘like’ the ﬁrst; and it was only when a sensation appeared to be more

man and his doubles

‘like’ a previous one than all the others that reminiscence could come
into play, that imagination could represent a representation afresh, and
that knowledge could gain a foothold in this duplication. It was of little
importance whether this origin was considered ﬁctitious or real,
whether it possessed the value of an explanatory hypothesis or a historical event: in fact, these distinctions exist only for us; in a system of
thought for which chronological development resides within a table,
upon which it constitutes no more than a line of a certain length, its
starting-point is at the same time outside real time and inside it: it is
the ﬁrst fold that enables all historical events to take place.
In modern thought, such an origin is no longer conceivable: we
have seen how labour, life, and language acquired their own historicity,
in which they were embedded; they could never, therefore, truly
express their origin, even though, from the inside, their whole history
is, as it were, directed towards it. It is no longer origin that gives rise to
historicity; it is historicity that, in its very fabric, makes possible the
necessity of an origin which must be both internal and foreign to it:
like the virtual tip of a cone in which all diﬀerences, all dispersions, all
discontinuities would be knitted together so as to form no more than a
single point of identity, the impalpable ﬁgure of the Same, yet possessing the power, nevertheless, to burst open upon itself and become
Other.
Man was constituted at the beginning of the nineteenth century in
correlation with these historicities, with all these things involuted
upon themselves and indicating, through their display but by means of
their own laws, the inaccessible identity of their origin. Yet man’s own
relation to his origin does not occur in the same way. This is because
man, in fact, can be revealed only when bound to a previously existing
historicity: he is never contemporaneous with that origin which is
outlined through the time of things even as it eludes the gaze; when he
tries to deﬁne himself as a living being, he can uncover his own beginning only against the background of a life which itself began long
before him; when he attempts to re-apprehend himself as a labouring
being, he cannot bring even the most rudimentary forms of such a
being to light except within a human time and space which have been
previously institutionalized, and previously subjugated by society; and
when he attempts to deﬁne his essence as a speaking subject, prior to

359

360 the order of things
any eﬀectively constituted language, all he ever ﬁnds is the previously
unfolded possibility of language, and not the stumbling sound, the ﬁrst
word upon the basis of which all languages and even language itself
became possible. It is always against a background of the already begun
that man is able to reﬂect on what may serve for him as origin. For
man, then, origin is by no means the beginning – a sort of dawn of
history from which his ulterior acquisitions would have accumulated.
Origin, for man, is much more the way in which man in general, any
man, articulates himself upon the already-begun of labour, life, and
language; it must be sought for in that fold where man in all simplicity
applies his labour to a world that has been worked for thousands of
years, lives in the freshness of his unique, recent, and precarious existence a life that has its roots in the ﬁrst organic formations, and composes into sentences which have never before been spoken (even
though generation after generation has repeated them) words that are
older than all memory. In this sense, the level of the original is probably that which is closest to man: the surface he traverses so innocently,
always for the ﬁrst time, and upon which his scarcely opened eyes
discern ﬁgures as young as his own gaze – ﬁgures that must necessarily
be just as ageless as he himself, though for an opposite reason; it is not
because they are always equally young, it is because they belong to a
time that has neither the same standards of measurement nor the same
foundations as him. But this thin surface of the original, which accompanies our entire existence and never deserts it (not even, indeed especially not, at the moment of death, when, on the contrary, it reveals
itself, as it were, naked) is not the immediacy of a birth; it is populated
entirely by those complex mediations formed and laid down as a sediment in their own history by labour, life, and language; so that in this
simple contact, from the moment the ﬁrst object is manipulated, the
simplest need expressed, the most neutral word emitted, what man is
reviving, without knowing it, is all the intermediaries of a time that
governs him almost to inﬁnity. Without knowing it, and yet it must
be known, in a certain way, since it is by this means that men enter
into communication and ﬁnd themselves in the already constructed
network of comprehension. Nevertheless, this knowledge is limited,
diagonal, partial, since it is surrounded on all sides by an immense
region of shadow in which labour, life, and language conceal their

man and his doubles

truth (and their own origin) from those very beings who speak, who
exist, and who are at work.
The original, as modern thought has never ceased to describe it since
The phenomenology of mind, is thus very diﬀerent from that ideal genesis
that the Classical age had attempted to reconstitute; but it is also diﬀerent (though linked to it by a fundamental correlation) from the origin
that is outlined, in a sort of retrospective beyond, through the historicity of beings. Far from leading back, or even merely pointing,
towards a peak – whether real or virtual – of identity, far from indicating the moment of the Same at which the dispersion of the Other has
not yet come into play, the original in man is that which articulates
him from the very outset upon something other than himself; it is that
which introduces into his experience contents and forms older than
him, which he cannot master; it is that which, by binding him to
multiple, intersecting, often mutually irreducible chronologies, scatters
him through time and pinions him at the centre of the duration of
things. Paradoxically, the original, in man, does not herald the time of
his birth, or the most ancient kernel of his experience: it links him to
that which does not have the same time as himself; and it sets free in
him everything that is not contemporaneous with him; it indicates
ceaselessly, and in an ever-renewed proliferation, that things began
long before him, and that for this very reason, and since his experience
is wholly constituted and limited by things, no one can ever assign him
an origin. Now, this impossibility itself has two aspects: on the one
hand, it signiﬁes that the origin of things is always pushed further
back, since it goes back to a calendar upon which man does not ﬁgure;
but, on the other hand, it signiﬁes that man, as opposed to the things
whose glittering birth time allows to show in all its density, is the
being without origin, who has ‘neither country nor date’, whose birth
is never accessible because it never took ‘place’. What is conveyed in
the immediacy of the original is, therefore, that man is cut oﬀ from the
origin that would make him contemporaneous with his own existence:
amid all the things that are born in time and no doubt die in time, he,
cut oﬀ from all origin, is already there. So that it is in him that things
(those same things that hang over him) ﬁnd their beginning: rather
than a cut, made at some given moment in duration, he is the opening
from which time in general can be reconstituted, duration can ﬂow,

361

362 the order of things
and things, at the appropriate moment, can make their appearance.
Though, in the empirical order, things are always set back from him, so
that they are unapprehendable at their zero point, nevertheless man
ﬁnds himself fundamentally set back in relation to that setting back of
things, and it is by this means that they are able to weigh down upon
the immediacy of the original experience with their solid anteriority.
A task is thereby set for thought: that of contesting the origin of
things, but of contesting it in order to give it a foundation, by
rediscovering the mode upon which the possibility of time is constituted – that origin without origin or beginning, on the basis of which
everything is able to come into being. Such a task implies the calling
into question of everything that pertains to time, everything that has
formed within it, everything that resides within its mobile element, in
such a way as to make visible that rent, devoid of chronology and
history, from which time issued. Time would then be suspended
within that thought, which nevertheless cannot escape from it since it
is never contemporaneous with the origin; but this suspension would
have the power to revolve the reciprocal relation of origin and thought;
and as it pivoted upon itself, the origin, becoming what thought has
yet to think, and always afresh, would be forever promised in an imminence always nearer yet never accomplished. In that case the origin is
that which is returning, the repetition towards which thought is moving, the return of that which has already always begun, the proximity
of a light that has been shining since the beginning of time. Thus, for
the third time, the origin is visible through time; but this time it is the
recession into the future, the injunction that thought receives and
imposes upon itself to advance with dove-like steps towards that which
has never ceased to render it possible, to keep watch in front of itself,
on the ever-receding line of its horizon, for the day from which it came
and from which it is coming in such profusion.
At the very moment when it became possible for it to denounce as
fantasies the ideal geneses described in the eighteenth century, modern
thought was establishing a problematics of the origin at once extremely
complex and extremely tangled; this problematics has served as the
foundation for our experience of time, and, since the nineteenth century, as the starting-point of all our attempts to re-apprehend what
beginning and re-beginning, the recession and the presence of the

man and his doubles

beginning, the return and the end, could be in the human sphere. In
fact, modern thought established a relation to the origin that was
inverse for man and for things: in this way it sanctioned – but outwitted in advance and preserved all its power of contestation with regard
to them – the positivist attempts to insert man’s chronology within
that of things, in such a way that the unity of time would be restored
and that man’s origin would be no more than a date, a fold, in the
sequential series of beings (placing that origin, and with it the appearance of culture, the dawn of civilizations, within the stream of biological evolution); it sanctioned also the inverse and complementary
endeavour to align the experience man has of things, the knowledge he
has acquired of them, and the sciences he has thus been able to constitute, in accordance with chronology (so that though all man’s beginnings have their locus within the time of things, his individual or
cultural time makes it possible, in a psychological or historical genesis,
to deﬁne the moment at which things meet the face of their truth for
the ﬁrst time); in each of these two alignments, the origin of things
and the origin of man are subordinated to each other; but the mere fact
that there are two possible and irreconcilable alignments indicates the
fundamental asymmetry that characterizes modern thought on origin.
Moreover, this thought brings into a ﬁnal light and, as it were, into an
essentially reticent clarity, a certain stratum of the original in which no
origin was in fact present, but in which man’s time (which has no
beginning) made manifest, for a possible memory, the time of things
(which has no memory). This leads to a double temptation: to psychologize all knowledge, of whatever kind, and to make psychology into a
sort of general science of all the sciences; or, inversely, to describe this
original stratum in a style that avoids all positivism in such a way as to
make it possible, on this basis, to disturb the positivity of all science
and to use the fundamental, insuperable character of this experience as
a weapon against it. But in setting itself the task of restoring the domain
of the original, modern thought immediately encounters the recession
of the origin; and, paradoxically, it proposes the solution of advancing
in the direction of this ever-deepening recession; it tries to make it
appear on the far side of experience, as that which sustains it by its very
retreat, as that which is nearest to its most visible possibility, as that
which is, within thought, imminent; and if the recession of the origin

363

364 the order of things
is thus posited in its greatest clarity, is it not the origin itself that is set
free and travels backwards until it reaches itself again, in the dynasty of
its archaism? This is why modern thought is doomed, at every level, to
its great preoccupation with recurrence, to its concern with recommencement, to that strange, stationary anxiety which forces upon it the
duty of repeating repetition. Thus from Hegel to Marx and Spengler we
ﬁnd the developing theme of a thought which, by the movement in
which it is accomplished – totality attained, violent recovery at the
extreme point of poverty, solar decline – curves over upon itself,
illuminates its own plenitude, brings its circle to completion, recognizes itself in all the strange ﬁgures of its odyssey, and accepts its
disappearance into that same ocean from which it sprang; in opposition to this return, which, even though it is not happy, is perfect, we
ﬁnd the experience of Hölderlin, Nietzsche, and Heidegger, in which
the return is posited only in the extreme recession of the origin – in
that region where the gods have turned away, where the desert is
increasing, where the τεχν has established the dominion of its will;
so that what we are concerned with here is neither a completion nor a
curve, but rather that ceaseless rending open which frees the origin in
exactly that degree to which it recedes; the extreme is therefore what is
nearest. But whether this stratum of the original, revealed by modern
thought in the very movement in which it invented man, is a promise
of fulﬁlment and perfect plenitude or restores the void of the origin –
the void created both by its recession and by its approach – in any case,
what it prescribes as thought is something like the ‘Same’: through the
domain of the original, which articulates human experience upon the
time of nature and life, upon history, upon the sedimented past of
cultures, modern thought makes it its task to return to man in his
identity, in that plenitude or in that nothing which he is himself, to
history and time in the repetition which they render impossible but
which they force us to conceive, and to being in that which it is.
And by this means, in this inﬁnite task of conceiving of the origin
in what is nearest to it and what is furthest from it, thought reveals that
man is not contemporaneous with what makes him be – or with
that upon the basis of which he is; but that he is within a power that
disperses him, draws him far away from his own origin, but promises it
to him in an imminence that will perhaps be forever snatched from

man and his doubles

him; now, this power is not foreign to him; it does not reside outside
him in the serenity of eternal and ceaselessly recommenced origins, for
then the origin would be eﬀectively posited; this power is that of his
own being. Time – the time that he himself is – cuts him oﬀ not only
from the dawn from which he sprang but also from that other dawn
promised him as still to come. It is clear how this fundamental time –
this time on the basis of which time can be given to experience – is
diﬀerent from that which was active in the philosophy of representation: then, time dispersed representation, since it imposed the form
of a linear sequence upon it; but representation was able to reconstitute itself for itself in imagination, and thus to duplicate itself
perfectly and to subjugate time; the image made it possible to reapprehend time in its entirety, to recover what had been conceded to
succession, and to construct a knowledge as true as that of an eternal
understanding. In the modern experience, on the contrary, the retreat
of the origin is more fundamental than all experience, since it is in it
that experience shines and manifests its positivity; it is because man
is not contemporaneous with his being that things are presented to
him with a time that is proper to them. And here we meet once again
the initial theme of ﬁnitude. But this ﬁnitude, which was expressed
ﬁrst of all by the weight of things upon man – by the fact that he was
dominated by life, history, and language – now appears at a more
fundamental level: it is the insurmountable relation of man’s being
with time.
Thus, by rediscovering ﬁnitude in its interrogation of the origin,
modern thought closes the great quadrilateral it began to outline when
the Western episteme broke up at the end of the eighteenth century: the
connection of the positivities with ﬁnitude, the reduplication of the
empirical and the transcendental, the perpetual relation of the cogito to
the unthought, the retreat and return of the origin, deﬁne for us man’s
mode of being. It is in the analysis of that mode of being, and no longer
in the analysis of representation, that reﬂection since the nineteenth
century has sought a philosophical foundation for the possibility of
knowledge.

365

366 the order of things
VII DISCOURSE AND MAN’S BEING
It may be observed that these four theoretical segments (analysis of
ﬁnitude, of empirico-transcendental repetition, of the unthought, and
of origin) stand in a certain relation to the four subordinate domains
which together constituted the general theory of language in the Classical age.3 A relation which is at ﬁrst glance one of resemblance and
symmetry. It will be remembered that the theory of the verb explained
how language could overﬂow its own boundaries and aﬃrm being – in
a movement which, in return, assured the very being of language, since
the latter could establish itself and open up its space only where there
already existed, at least in a hidden form, a foundation provided by the
verb to be; the analysis of ﬁnitude explains in the same way how man’s
being ﬁnds itself determined by positivities which are exterior to it and
which link it to the density of things, but how, in return, it is ﬁnite
being that gives any determination the possibility of appearing in its
positive truth. Whereas the theory of articulation showed how the patterning of words and of the things they represent could occur without
a hiatus between them, the analysis of the empirico-transcendental reduplication shows how what is given in experience and what renders experience possible correspond to one another in an endless oscillation. The
quest for the primary designations of language drew out from the silent
and innermost heart of words, syllables, and sounds themselves, a
dormant representation that formed, as it were, their forgotten soul
(which it was necessary to bring back to light, to make speak and sing
once more, in order to attain a greater exactitude of thought, a more
miraculous power of poetry); in a similar way, for modern thought,
the inert density of the unthought is always inhabited in a certain manner
by a cogito, and this thought, dormant within what is not thought, must
be brought to life again and stretched out in the sovereignty of the ‘I
think’. Lastly, there was a theory of derivation in Classical reﬂection on
language: this showed how language, from the beginning of its history
and perhaps in the instant of its origin, at the very point when it began
to speak, shifted inside its own space, pivoted around on itself away
from its primary representation, and deposited its words, even the very
oldest of them, only when they had already been deployed in the
ﬁgures of rhetoric; corresponding to that analysis, we now ﬁnd the

man and his doubles

eﬀort to conceive of an ever-elusive origin, to advance towards that place
where man’s being is always maintained, in relation to man himself, in
a remoteness and a distance that constitute him.
But this play of correspondences must not be allowed to delude us.
We must not imagine that the Classical analysis of discourse has continued without modiﬁcation through the ages merely by applying itself
to a new object; that the force of some historical weight has maintained
it in its identity, despite so many adjacent mutations. In fact, the four
theoretical segments that outlined the space of general grammar have
not been preserved: but they were dissociated, they changed both their
function and their level, they modiﬁed the entire domain of their validity when, at the end of the eighteenth century, the theory of representation was eclipsed. In the Classical age, the function of general
grammar was to show how a language could be introduced into the
sequential chain of representations, a language that, while manifesting
itself in the simple and absolutely tenuous line of discourse, presupposed forms of simultaneity (aﬃrmation of existences and coexistences; patterning of things represented and formation of generalities;
original and inerasable relation between words and things; displacement of words within their rhetorical space). In contrast, the analysis
of man’s mode of being as it has developed since the nineteenth century does not reside within a theory of representation; its task, on the
contrary, is to show how things in general can be given to representation, in what conditions, upon what ground, within what limits they
can appear in a positivity more profound than the various modes of
perception; and what is then revealed, in this coexistence of man and
things, through the great spatial expanse opened up by representation,
is man’s radical ﬁnitude, the dispersion that at the same time separates
him from his origin and promises it to him, and the insuperable distance of time. The analytic of man is not a resumption of the analysis of
discourse as constituted elsewhere and handed down by tradition. The
presence or absence of a theory of representation, or, more exactly, the
primary character or derived position of that theory, modiﬁes the equilibrium of the system from top to bottom. As long as representation
goes without question as the general element of thought, the theory of
discourse serves at the same time, and in one and the same movement,
as the foundation of all possible grammar and as a theory of knowledge.

367

368 the order of things
But as soon as the primacy of representation disappears, then the theory of discourse is dissociated, and one can encounter its disincarnated
and metamorphosed form on two separate levels. On the empirical
level, the four constituent segments are still to be found, but the function they perform has been wholly inverted:4 replacing the analysis
of the verb’s privileged position, of its power to make discourse
emerge from itself and become rooted in the being of representation,
we ﬁnd the analysis of an internal grammatical structure which is
immanent in each language and constitutes it as an autonomous being,
in other words upon itself; similarly, the analysis of the articulation
common to words and things has been replaced by the theory of
inﬂections and the attempt to establish laws of mutation proper to
words alone; the theory of the radical has been substituted for the
analysis of the representative root; ﬁnally, where before there was the
search for the boundless continuity of derivation, the lateral kinship of
languages has been revealed. In other words, everything that had functioned within the dimension of the relation between things (as they are
represented) and words (with their representative value) has now been
drawn back into language and given the task of providing it with an
internal legality. At foundation level, the four segments of the theory of
discourse are still to be found: as in the Classical age, they still serve in
this new analytic of the human being to express the relation to things;
but this time the modiﬁcation is the inverse of what it was previously;
it is no longer a matter of replacing them in a space interior to language, but of freeing them from the domain of representation within
which they were trapped, and of bringing them into play in that
dimension of exteriority in which man appears as a ﬁnite, determined
being, trapped in the density of what he does not think, and subject, in
his very being, to the dispersion of time.
From the moment when it was no longer in continuity with a theory
of representation, the Classical analysis of discourse found itself, as it
were, split in two: on the one hand, it invested itself in an empirical
knowledge of grammatical forms; and, on the other, it became an
analytic of ﬁnitude; but neither of these two transferences could
take place without a total inversion of function. We are now in a
position to understand, in all its implications, the incompatibility that
reigns between the existence of Classical discourse (based upon the

man and his doubles

unquestioned evidence of representation) and the existence of man as it
is presented in modern thought (and with the anthropological reﬂection that it sanctions): something like an analytic of man’s mode of
being became possible only after the analysis of representative discourse had been dissociated, transferred, and inverted. And we can also
sense how man’s being, thus deﬁned and posited, is weighed down by
the contemporary reappearance of language in the enigma of its unity
and its being as by a threat. Is the task ahead of us to advance towards a
mode of thought, unknown hitherto in our culture, that will make it
possible to reﬂect at the same time, without discontinuity or contradiction, upon man’s being and the being of language? – If that is so, we
must take the very greatest precautions to avoid anything that might be
a naïve return to the Classical theory of discourse (a return all the more
tempting, it must be said, because we are so ill-equipped to conceive of
the shining but crude being of language, whereas the old theory of
representation is there, already constituted, oﬀering us a place in which
that being can be lodged and allowed to dissolve into pure function).
But the right to conceive both of the being of language and of the being
of man may be forever excluded; there may be, as it were, an inerasable
hiatus at that point (precisely that hiatus in which we exist and talk), so
that it would be necessary to dismiss as fantasy any anthropology in
which there was any question of the being of language, or any conception of language or signiﬁcation which attempted to connect with,
manifest, and free the being proper to man. It is perhaps here that the
most important philosophical choice of our period has its roots – a
choice that can be made only in the test of a future reﬂection. For
nothing can tell us in advance upon which side the through road lies.
The only thing we know at the moment, in all certainty, is that in
Western culture the being of man and the being of language have never,
at any time, been able to coexist and to articulate themselves one upon
the other. Their incompatibility has been one of the fundamental
features of our thought.
However, the mutation of the analysis of Discourse into an analytic
of ﬁnitude has one other consequence. The Classical theory of the sign
and the word had to show how representations, which succeeded one
another in a chain so narrow and so tightly knit that distinctions did
not appear, with the result that they were all, in short, alike, could be

369

370 the order of things
spread out to form a permanent table of stable diﬀerences and limited
identities; it was a matter of a genesis of Diﬀerence starting from the
secretly varied monotony of the Like. The analytic of ﬁnitude has an
exactly inverse role: in showing that man is determined, it is concerned
with showing that the foundation of those determinations is man’s
very being in its radical limitations; it must also show that the contents
of experience are already their own conditions, that thought, from the
very beginning, haunts the unthought that eludes them, and that it is
always striving to recover; it shows how that origin of which man is
never the contemporary is at the same time withdrawn and given as an
imminence: in short, it is always concerned with showing how the
Other, the Distant, is also the Near and the Same. Thus we have moved
from a reﬂection upon the order of Diﬀerences (with the analysis it
presupposes and that ontology of continuity and that insistence upon a
full, unbroken being deployed in its perfection that presuppose a
metaphysics) to a thought of the Same, still to be conquered in its
contradiction: which implies (apart from the ethics already mentioned) a dialectic and that form of ontology which, since it has no
need of continuity and has to reﬂect upon being only in its limited
forms or in its distance, can and must do without metaphysics. Calling
to one another and answering one another throughout modern
thought and throughout its history, we ﬁnd a dialectical interplay and
an ontology without metaphysics: for modern thought is one that
moves no longer towards the never-completed formation of Diﬀerence, but towards the ever-to-be-accomplished unveiling of the Same.
Now, such an unveiling is not accomplished without the simultaneous
appearance of the Double, and that hiatus, minuscule and yet invincible, which resides in the ‘and’ of retreat and return, of thought and the
unthought, of the empirical and the transcendental, of what belongs to
the order of positivity and what belongs to the order of foundations.
Identity separated from itself by a distance which, in one sense, is
interior to it, but, in another, constitutes it, and repetition which posits
identity as a datum, but in the form of distance, are without doubt at
the heart of that modern thought to which the discovery of time has so
hastily been attributed. In fact, if we look a little more closely, we
perceive that Classical thought related the possibility of spatializing
things in a table to that property possessed by pure representative

man and his doubles

succession to recall itself on the basis of itself, to fold back upon itself,
and to constitute a simultaneity on the basis of a continuous time: time
became the foundation of space. In modern thought, what is revealed
at the foundation of the history of things and of the historicity proper
to man is the distance creating a vacuum within the Same, it is the
hiatus that disperses and regroups it at the two ends of itself. It is this
profound spatiality that makes it possible for modern thought still to
conceive of time – to know it as succession, to promise it to itself as
fulﬁlment, origin, or return.

VIII THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL SLEEP
Anthropology as an analytic of man has certainly played a constituent
role in modern thought, since to a large extent we are still not free
from it. It became necessary at the moment when representation lost
the power to determine, on its own and in a single movement, the
interplay of its syntheses and analyses. It was necessary for empirical
syntheses to be performed elsewhere than within the sovereignty of
the ‘I think’. They had to be required at precisely the point at
which that sovereignty reached its limit, that is, in man’s ﬁnitude – a
ﬁnitude that is as much that of consciousness as that of the living,
speaking, labouring individual. This had already been formulated by
Kant in his Logic, when to his traditional trilogy of questions he added
an ultimate one: the three critical questions (What can I know? What
must I do? What am I permitted to hope?) then found themselves
referred to a fourth, and inscribed, as it were, ‘to its account’: Was ist der
Mensch?5
This question, as we have seen, runs through thought from the early
nineteenth century: this is because it produces, surreptitiously and in
advance, the confusion of the empirical and the transcendental, even
though Kant had demonstrated the division between them. By means
of this question, a form of reﬂection was constituted which is mixed in
its levels and characteristic of modern philosophy. The concern it has
for man, which it lays claim to not only in its discourse but in its
pathos, the care with which it attempts to deﬁne him as a living being,
an individual at work, or a speaking subject, herald the long-awaited
return of a human reign only to the high-minded few; in fact, it

371

372 the order of things
concerns, rather more prosaically and less morally, an empirico-critical
reduplication by means of which an attempt is made to make the man
of nature, of exchange, or of discourse, serve as the foundation of his
own ﬁnitude. In this Fold, the transcendental function is doubled over
so that it covers with its dominating network the inert, grey space of
empiricity; inversely, empirical contents are given life, gradually pull
themselves upright, and are immediately subsumed in a discourse
which carries their transcendental presumption into the distance.
And so we ﬁnd philosophy falling asleep once more in the hollow of
this Fold; this time not the sleep of Dogmatism, but that of Anthropology. All empirical knowledge, provided it concerns man, can serve
as a possible philosophical ﬁeld in which the foundation of knowledge, the deﬁnition of its limits, and, in the end, the truth of all truth
must be discoverable. The anthropological conﬁguration of modern
philosophy consists in doubling over dogmatism, in dividing it into
two diﬀerent levels each lending support to and limiting the other:
the pre-critical analysis of what man is in his essence becomes the
analytic of everything that can, in general, be presented to man’s
experience.
In order to awaken thought from such a sleep – so deep that thought
experiences it paradoxically as vigilance, so wholly does it confuse the
circularity of a dogmatism folded over upon itself in order to ﬁnd a
basis for itself within itself with the agility and anxiety of a radically
philosophical thought – in order to recall it to the possibilities of its
earliest dawning, there is no other way than to destroy the anthropological ‘quadrilateral’ in its very foundations. We know, in any case, that
all eﬀorts to think afresh are in fact directed at that obstacle: whether it
is a matter of crossing the anthropological ﬁeld, tearing ourselves free
from it with the help of what it expresses, and rediscovering a puriﬁed
ontology or a radical thought of being; or whether, rejecting not only
psychologism and historicism, but all concrete forms of the anthropological prejudice, we attempt to question afresh the limits of thought,
and to renew contact in this way with the project for a general critique
of reason. Perhaps we should see the ﬁrst attempt at this uprooting of
Anthropology – to which, no doubt, contemporary thought is dedicated – in the Nietzschean experience: by means of a philological
critique, by means of a certain form of biologism, Nietzsche

man and his doubles

rediscovered the point at which man and God belong to one another, at
which the death of the second is synonymous with the disappearance
of the ﬁrst, and at which the promise of the superman signiﬁes ﬁrst and
foremost the imminence of the death of man. In this, Nietzsche, oﬀering this future to us as both promise and task, marks the threshold
beyond which contemporary philosophy can begin thinking again;
and he will no doubt continue for a long while to dominate its
advance. If the discovery of the Return is indeed the end of philosophy,
then the end of man, for its part, is the return of the beginning of
philosophy. It is no longer possible to think in our day other than in
the void left by man’s disappearance. For this void does not create a
deﬁciency; it does not constitute a lacuna that must be ﬁlled. It is
nothing more, and nothing less, than the unfolding of a space in which
it is once more possible to think.
Anthropology constitutes perhaps the fundamental arrangement
that has governed and controlled the path of philosophical thought
from Kant until our own day. This arrangement is essential, since it
forms part of our history; but it is disintegrating before our eyes, since
we are beginning to recognize and denounce in it, in a critical mode,
both a forgetfulness of the opening that made it possible and a stubborn obstacle standing obstinately in the way of an imminent new
form of thought. To all those who still wish to talk about man, about
his reign or his liberation, to all those who still ask themselves questions about what man is in his essence, to all those who wish to take
him as their starting-point in their attempts to reach the truth, to all
those who, on the other hand, refer all knowledge back to the truths of
man himself, to all those who refuse to formalize without anthropologizing, who refuse to mythologize without demystifying, who refuse
to think without immediately thinking that it is man who is thinking,
to all these warped and twisted forms of reﬂection we can answer
only with a philosophical laugh – which means, to a certain extent, a
silent one.

NOTES
1 Nietzsche, Genealogy of morals, I, section 5.
2 The Kantian moment is the link between the two: it is the discovery that the

373

374 the order of things
subject, in so far as he is reasonable, applies to himself his own law, which is the
universal law.
3 Cf. p. 115 above.
4 Cf. p. 295 above.
5 Kant, Logik (Werke, ed. Cassirer, vol. VIII, p. 343).

10
THE HUMAN SCIENCES
I THE THREE FACES OF KNOWLEDGE
Man’s mode of being as constituted in modern thought enables him to
play two roles: he is at the same time at the foundation of all positivities
and present, in a way that cannot even be termed privileged, in the
element of empirical things. This fact – it is not a matter here of man’s
essence in general, but simply of that historical a priori which, since the
nineteenth century, has served as an almost self-evident ground for our
thought – this fact is no doubt decisive in the matter of the status to be
accorded to the ‘human sciences’, to the body of knowledge (though
even that word is perhaps a little too strong: let us say, to be more
neutral still, to the body of discourse) that takes as its object man as an
empirical entity.
The ﬁrst thing to be observed is that the human sciences did not
inherit a certain domain, already outlined, perhaps surveyed as a
whole, but allowed to lie fallow, which it was then their task to elaborate with positive methods and with concepts that had at last become
scientiﬁc; the eighteenth century did not hand down to them, in the
name of man or human nature, a space, circumscribed on the outside
but still empty, which it was then their role to cover and analyse. The
epistemological ﬁeld traversed by the human sciences was not laid
down in advance: no philosophy, no political or moral option, no

376 the order of things
empirical science of any kind, no observation of the human body, no
analysis of sensation, imagination, or the passions, had ever
encountered, in the seventeenth or eighteenth century, anything like
man; for man did not exist (any more than life, or language, or labour);
and the human sciences did not appear when, as a result of some
pressing rationalism, some unresolved scientiﬁc problem, some practical concern, it was decided to include man (willy-nilly, and with a
greater or lesser degree of success) among the objects of science –
among which it has perhaps not been proved even yet that it is absolutely possible to class him; they appeared when man constituted himself in Western culture as both that which must be conceived of and
that which is to be known. There can be no doubt, certainly, that the
historical emergence of each one of the human sciences was occasioned by a problem, a requirement, an obstacle of a theoretical or
practical order: the new norms imposed by industrial society upon
individuals were certainly necessary before psychology, slowly, in the
course of the nineteenth century, could constitute itself as a science;
and the threats that, since the French Revolution, have weighed so
heavily on the social balances, and even on the equilibrium established
by the bourgeoisie, were no doubt also necessary before a reﬂection of
the sociological type could appear. But though these references may
well explain why it was in fact in such and such a determined set of
circumstances and in answer to such and such a precise question that
these sciences were articulated, nevertheless, their intrinsic possibility,
the simple fact that man, whether in isolation or as a group, and for the
ﬁrst time since human beings have existed and have lived together in
societies, should have become the object of science – that cannot be
considered or treated as a phenomenon of opinion: it is an event in the
order of knowledge.
And this event was itself produced in a general redistribution of the
episteme: when, abandoning the space of representation, living beings
took up their places in the speciﬁc depths of life, wealth in the onward
thrust of new forms of production, and words in the development of
languages. It was indeed necessary, given these conditions, that the
knowledge of man should appear, in its scientiﬁc aims, as contemporaneous and of the same origin as biology, economics, and philology,
so that it has been viewed, quite naturally, as one of the most decisive

the human sciences

forward steps made in the history of European culture by empirical
rationality. But since the general theory of representation was disappearing at the same time, and the necessity of interrogating man’s
being as the foundation of all positivities was imposing itself in its
place, an imbalance could not fail to occur: man became that upon the
basis of which all knowledge could be constituted as immediate and
non-problematized evidence; he became, a fortiori, that which justiﬁed
the calling into question of all knowledge of man. Hence that double
and inevitable contestation: that which lies at the root of the perpetual
controversy between the sciences of man and the sciences proper – the
ﬁrst laying an invincible claim to be the foundation of the second,
which are ceaselessly obliged in turn to seek their own foundation, the
justiﬁcation of their method, and the puriﬁcation of their history, in
the teeth of ‘psychologism’, ‘sociologism’, and ‘historicism’; and that
which lies at the root of the endless controversy between philosophy,
which objects to the naïveté with which the human sciences try to
provide their own foundation, and those same human sciences which
claim as their rightful object what would formerly have constituted the
domain of philosophy.
But the fact that all these observations must be made does not necessarily mean that their development occurs within the element of pure
contradiction; their existence, and their untiring repetition for more
than a century, do not indicate the permanence of an ever-open question; they refer back to a precise and extremely well-determined epistemological arrangement in history. In the Classical period, the ﬁeld
of knowledge, from the project of an analysis of representation to the
theme of the mathesis universalis, was perfectly homogeneous: all knowledge, of whatever kind, proceeded to the ordering of its material by
the establishment of diﬀerences and deﬁned those diﬀerences by the
establishment of an order; this was true for mathematics, true also for
taxonomies (in the broad sense) and for the sciences of nature; but it was
equally true for all those approximative, imperfect, and largely spontaneous kinds of knowledge which are brought into play in the construction of the least fragment of discourse or in the daily processes of
exchange; and it was true, ﬁnally, for philosophical thought and for
those long chains of order that the ‘Idéologues’, no less than Descartes
or Spinoza, though in a diﬀerent way, attempted to establish in order to

377

378 the order of things
create a path leading necessarily from the very simplest and most evident of ideas to the most composite truths. But, from the nineteenth
century, the epistemological ﬁeld became fragmented, or rather
exploded in diﬀerent directions. It is diﬃcult to escape the preeminence of linear classiﬁcations and hierarchies in the manner of
Comte; but to seek to align all the branches of modern knowledge on
the basis of mathematics is to subject to the single point of view of
objectivity in knowledge the question of the positivity of each branch
of knowledge, of its mode of being, and its roots in those conditions of
possibility that give it, in history, both its object and its form.
Questioned at this archaeological level, the ﬁeld of the modern episteme is not ordered in accordance with the ideal of a perfect mathematicization, nor does it unfold, on the basis of a formal purity, a long,
descending sequence of knowledge progressively more burdened with
empiricity. The domain of the modern episteme should be represented
rather as a volume of space open in three dimensions. In one of these
we would situate the mathematical and physical sciences, for which
order is always a deductive and linear linking together of evident or
veriﬁed propositions; in a second dimension there would be the sciences (such as those of language, life, and the production and distribution of wealth) that proceed by relating discontinuous but analogous
elements in such a way that they are then able to establish causal
relations and structural constants between them. These ﬁrst two
dimensions together deﬁne a common plane: that which can appear,
according to the direction in which one traverses it, as a ﬁeld of application of mathematics to these empirical sciences, or as the domain of
the mathematicizable in linguistics, biology, and economics. The third
dimension would be that of philosophical reﬂection, which develops
as a thought of the Same; it forms a common plane with the dimension
of linguistics, biology, and economics: it is here that we may meet,
and indeed have met, the various philosophies of life, of alienated man,
of symbolical forms (when concepts and problems that ﬁrst arose in
diﬀerent empirical domains are transposed into the philosophical
dimension); but we have also encountered here, if we question the
foundation of these empiricities from a radically philosophical point of
view, those regional ontologies which attempt to deﬁne what life,
labour, and language are in their own being; lastly, the philosophical

the human sciences

dimension and that of the mathematical disciplines combine to deﬁne
another common plane: that of the formalization of thought.
From this epistemological trihedron the human sciences are
excluded, at least in the sense that they cannot be found along any of its
dimensions or on the surface of any of the planes thus deﬁned. But one
can equally well say that they are included in it, since it is in the
interstices of these branches of knowledge, or, more exactly, in the
volume deﬁned by their three dimensions, that the human sciences
have their place. This situation (in one sense minor, in another sense
privileged) places them in relation to all the other forms of knowledge:
they have the more or less deferred, but constant, aim of giving themselves, or in any case of utilizing, at one level or another, a mathematical formalization; they proceed in accordance with models or concepts
borrowed from biology, economics, and the sciences of language; and
they address themselves to that mode of being of man which philosophy is attempting to conceive at the level of radical ﬁnitude,
whereas their aim is to traverse all its empirical manifestations. It is
perhaps this cloudy distribution within a three-dimensional space that
renders the human sciences so diﬃcult to situate, that gives their localization in the epistemological domain its irreducible precariousness,
that makes them appear at once perilous and in peril. Perilous, because
they represent, as it were, a permanent danger to all the other branches
of knowledge: true, neither the deductive sciences, nor the empirical
sciences, nor philosophical reﬂection run any risk, if they remain
within their own dimensions, of ‘defecting’ to the human sciences,
or of being contaminated by their impurity; but we know what
diﬃculties may be encountered, at times, in the establishing of those
intermediary planes that link together the three dimensions of the
epistemological space; for the slightest deviation from these rigorously
deﬁned planes sends thought tumbling over into the domain occupied
by the human sciences: hence the danger of ‘psychologism’, of ‘sociologism’, – of what we might term, in a word, ‘anthropologism’ –
which becomes a threat as soon as the relations of thought to formalization are not reﬂected upon correctly, for example, or as soon as the
modes of being of life, labour, and language are incorrectly analysed.
‘Anthropologization’ is the great internal threat to knowledge in our
day. We are inclined to believe that man has emancipated himself from

379

380 the order of things
himself since his discovery that he is not at the centre of creation, nor
in the middle of space, nor even, perhaps, the summit and culmination
of life; but though man is no longer sovereign in the kingdom of the
world, though he no longer reigns at the centre of being, the ‘human
sciences’ are dangerous intermediaries in the space of knowledge. The
truth of the matter is, however, that this very posture dooms them to an
essential instability. What explains the diﬃculty of the ‘human sciences’, their precariousness, their uncertainty as sciences, their dangerous familiarity with philosophy, their ill-deﬁned reliance upon
other domains of knowledge, their perpetually secondary and derived
character, and also their claim to universality, is not, as is often stated,
the extreme density of their object; it is not the metaphysical status or
the inerasable transcendence of this man they speak of, but rather the
complexity of the epistemological conﬁguration in which they ﬁnd
themselves placed, their constant relation to the three dimensions that
give them their space.

II THE FORM OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES
We must now sketch out the form of this positivity. Usually, the
attempt is made to deﬁne it in terms of mathematics: either by trying
to bring it as near to mathematics as possible, by drawing up an inventory of everything in the sciences of man that is mathematicizable, and
supposing that everything that is not susceptible of such a formalization has, not yet attained to scientiﬁc positivity; or, on the contrary, by
trying to distinguish very carefully between the domain of the mathematicizable and that other domain which is regarded as irreducible to
the former because it is the locus of interpretation, because the
methods applied to it are above all those of comprehension, because it
ﬁnds itself wound around the clinical pole of knowledge. Such analyses
are wearisome not only because they are hackneyed but, above all,
because they lack relevance. Certainly there can be no doubt that this
form of empirical knowledge which is applicable to man (and which,
in order to conform to convention, we may still term ‘human sciences’
even before we know in what sense and within what limits they can be
called ‘sciences’) has a relation to mathematics: like any other domain
of knowledge, these sciences may, in certain conditions, make use of

the human sciences

mathematics as a tool; some of their procedures and a certain number
of their results can be formalized. It is undoubtedly of the greatest
importance to know those tools, to be able to practise those formalizations and to deﬁne the levels upon which they can be performed; it is
no doubt of interest historically to know how Condorcet was able to
apply the calculation of probabilities to politics, how Fechner deﬁned
the logarithmic relation between the growth of sensation and that of
excitation, how contemporary psychologists make use of information
theory in order to understand the phenomena of learning. But despite
the speciﬁcity of the problems posed, it is unlikely that the relation to
mathematics (the possibilities of mathematicization, or the resistance
to all eﬀorts at formalization) is constitutive of the human sciences in
their particular positivity. And for two reasons: because, essentially,
they share these problems with many other disciplines (such as biology and genetics) even if these problems are not always identical; and,
above all, because archaeological analysis has not revealed, in the historical a priori of the human sciences, any new form of mathematics, or
any sudden advance by mathematics into the domain of the human,
but rather a sort of retreat of the mathesis, a dissociation of its unitary
ﬁeld, and the emancipation, in relation to the linear order of the
smallest possible diﬀerences, of empirical organizations such as life,
language, and labour. In this sense, the appearance of man and the
constitution of the human sciences (even if it were only in the form of a
project) would be correlated to a sort of ‘de-mathematicization’. It may
well be objected that this dissociation of a body of knowledge conceived in its entirety as mathesis was not in fact a recession on the part
of mathematics, for the very good reason that the knowledge in question had never led (except in the case of astronomy and certain areas of
physics) to an eﬀective mathematicization; rather, by disappearing, it
left nature and the entire ﬁeld of empiricities free for an application,
limited and controlled moment by moment, of mathematics; for do
not the ﬁrst great advances of mathematical physics, the ﬁrst massive
utilizations of the calculation of probabilities, date from the time when
the attempt at an immediate constitution of a general science of nonquantiﬁable orders was abandoned? It cannot really be denied that the
renunciation of a mathesis (provisionally at least) made it possible, in
certain domains of knowledge, to remove the obstacle of quality, and

381

382 the order of things
to apply mathematical tools where they had been unable to penetrate
hitherto. But if, on the level of physics, the dissociation of the project to
create a mathesis came to exactly the same thing as the discovery of
new applications for mathematics, this was not so in all the domains
of knowledge: biology, for example, was constituted, outside a science
of qualitative orders, as an analysis of the relations between organs and
functions, as a study of structures and balances, as research into their
formation and development in the history of individuals or species; all
of this did not prevent biology from making use of mathematics, or the
latter from being much more broadly applicable to biology than it had
been in the past. But it is not in its relation to mathematics that biology
acquired its autonomy and deﬁned its particular positivity. And the
same was true for the human sciences: it was the retreat of the mathesis, and not the advance of mathematics, that made it possible for man
to constitute himself as an object of knowledge; it was the involution of
labour, life, and language upon themselves that determined the appearance of this new domain of knowledge from outside; and it was the
appearance of that empirico-transcendental being, of that being whose
thought is constantly interwoven with the unthought, of that being
always cut oﬀ from an origin which is promised to him in the immediacy of the return – it was this appearance that gave the human sciences
their particular form. Here again, as with other disciplines, it is very
possible that the application of mathematics was facilitated (and is
increasingly so) by all the modiﬁcations that occurred in Western
knowledge at the beginning of the nineteenth century. But to imagine
that the human sciences deﬁned their most radical project and
inaugurated their positive history when it was decided to apply the
calculation of probabilities to the phenomena of political opinion, and
to employ logarithms as a means of measuring the increase of intensity
in sensations, that would be to take a superﬁcial counter-eﬀect for the
fundamental event.
In other words, of the three dimensions that provide the human
sciences with their particular space and produce the volume in which
those sciences exist as a mass, that of mathematics is perhaps the least
problematical; it is with mathematics, in any case, that the human
sciences maintain the clearest, the most untroubled, and, as it were, the
most transparent, relations: indeed, the recourse to mathematics, in

the human sciences

one form or another, has always been the simplest way of providing
positive knowledge about man with a scientiﬁc style, form, and justiﬁcation. On the other hand, the most fundamental diﬃculties, those that
make it possible to deﬁne most clearly what the human sciences are in
their essence, are situated in the direction of the two other dimensions
of knowledge: that in which the analytic of ﬁnitude is deployed, and
that along which are distributed the empirical sciences which have as
their objects language, life, and labour.
In fact, the human sciences are addressed to man in so far as he lives,
speaks, and produces. It is as a living being that he grows, that he has
functions and needs, that he sees opening up a space whose movable
coordinates meet in him; in a general fashion, his corporeal existence
interlaces him through and through with the rest of the living world;
since he produces objects and tools, exchanges the things he needs,
organizes a whole network of circulation along which what he is able
to consume ﬂows, and in which he himself is deﬁned as an intermediary stage, he appears in his existence immediately interwoven with
others; lastly, because he has a language, he can constitute a whole
symbolic universe for himself, within which he has a relation to his
past, to things, to other men, and on the basis of which he is able
equally to build something like a body of knowledge (in particular, that
knowledge of himself, of which the human sciences outline one of the
possible forms). The site of the sciences of man may therefore be ﬁxed
in the vicinity, on the immediate frontiers, and along the whole length
of those sciences that deal with life, labour, and language. Were they
not formed, after all, at precisely that period when, for the ﬁrst time,
man oﬀered himself to the possibility of a positive knowledge? Nevertheless, biology, economics, and philology must not be regarded as the
ﬁrst human sciences, or the most fundamental. This is easily recognized in the case of biology, since it is addressed to many other living
beings besides man; but it is more diﬃcult to accept in the cases of
economics and philology, which have as their particular and exclusive
domain activities that are speciﬁc to man. But we do not ask ourselves
why human biology or physiology, why the anatomy of the cortical
centres of language, cannot in any way be considered as sciences of
man. This is because the object of those sciences is never posited in the
mode of being of a biological function (or even in that of its particular

383

384 the order of things
form, and, as it were, its extension into man); it is rather its reverse, or
the hollow it would leave; it begins at the point, not where the action
or the eﬀects stop, but where that function’s own being stops – at that
point where representations are set free, true or false, clear or obscure,
perfectly conscious or rooted in some deep sleep, observable directly or
indirectly, presented within what man himself expresses, or discoverable only from the outside; research into the intracortical connections
between the diﬀerent centres of linguistic integration (auditive, visual,
motor) is not the province of the human sciences; but those sciences
will ﬁnd their ﬁeld of action as soon as we question that space of
words, that presence or that forgetfulness of their meaning, that hiatus
between what one wishes to say and the articulation in which that aim
is invested, whose subject may not be conscious, but which would
have no assignable mode of being if that subject did not have
representations.
In a more general fashion, man for the human sciences is not that
living being with a very particular form (a somewhat special physiology and an almost unique autonomy); he is that living being who,
from within the life to which he entirely belongs and by which he is
traversed in his whole being, constitutes representations by means of
which he lives, and on the basis of which he possesses that strange
capacity of being able to represent to himself precisely that life. Similarly, even though man is, if not the only species in the world that
works, at least the one in whom the production, distribution, and
consumption of goods have taken on so great an importance and
acquired so many and such diﬀerentiated forms, economics is still not
a human science. It may perhaps be objected that in order to deﬁne
certain laws, even though they are interior to the mechanics of production (such as the accumulation of capital or the relations between wage
rates and prices), economics has recourse to human behaviour patterns
and a representation that provide its foundation (interest, the search for
maximum proﬁt, the tendency to accumulate savings); but, in doing
so, it is utilizing representations as the requisite of a function (which
occurs, in eﬀect, within an explicitly human activity); on the other
hand, there will be no science of man unless we examine the way in
which individuals or groups represent to themselves the partners with
whom they produce or exchange, the mode in which they clarify or

the human sciences

ignore or mask this function and the position they occupy in it, the
manner in which they represent to themselves the society in which it
takes place, the way in which they feel themselves integrated with it or
isolated from it, dependent, subject, or free; the object of the human
sciences is not that man who, since the dawn of the world, or the ﬁrst
cry of his golden age, is doomed to work; it is that being who, from
within the forms of production by which his whole existence is governed, forms the representation of those needs, of the society by
which, with which, or against which he satisﬁes them, so that upon
that basis he can ﬁnally provide himself with a representation of economics itself. The same is true of language: although man is the only
being in the world who speaks, inquiry into phonetic mutations, relationships between languages, and semantic shifts, does not constitute a
human science; on the other hand, it will be possible to speak of human
science when an attempt is made to deﬁne the way in which individuals or groups represent words to themselves, utilize their forms
and their meanings, compose real discourse, reveal and conceal in it
what they are thinking or saying, perhaps unknown to themselves,
more or less than they wish, but in any case leave a mass of verbal traces
of those thoughts, which must be deciphered and restored as far as
possible to their representative vivacity. The object of the human sciences is not language (though it is spoken by men alone); it is that
being which, from the interior of the language by which he is surrounded, represents to himself, by speaking, the sense of the words or
propositions he utters, and ﬁnally provides himself with a representation of language itself.
The human sciences are not, then, an analysis of what man is by
nature; but rather an analysis that extends from what man is in his
positivity (living, speaking, labouring being) to what enables this same
being to know (or seek to know) what life is, in what the essence of
labour and its laws consist, and in what way he is able to speak. The
human sciences thus occupy the distance that separates (though not
without connecting them) biology, economics, and philology from
that which gives them possibility in the very being of man. It would
therefore be wrong to see the human sciences as an extension, interiorized within the human species, within its complex organism, within its
behaviour and consciousness, of biological mechanisms; and it would

385

386 the order of things
be no less wrong to place within the human sciences the science of
economics or the science of language (whose irreducibility to the
human sciences is expressed in the eﬀort to constitute a pure economics and a pure linguistics). In fact, the human sciences are no more
within these sciences than they give them interiority by deﬂecting
them towards man’s subjectivity; if they take them up again in the
dimension of representation, it is rather by re-apprehending them
upon their outer slope, by leaving them their opacity, by accepting as
things the mechanisms and functions they isolate, by questioning those
functions and mechanisms not in terms of what they are but in terms
of what they cease to be when the space of representation is opened up;
and upon that basis they show how a representation of what they are
can come into being and be deployed. Surreptitiously, they lead the
sciences of life, labour, and language back to that analytic of ﬁnitude
which shows how man, in his being, can be concerned with the things
he knows, and know the things that, in positivity, determine his mode
of being. But what the analytic requires in the interiority, or at least in
the profound kinship, of a being who owes his ﬁnitude only to himself,
the human sciences develop in the exteriority of knowledge. This is
why what characterizes the human sciences is not that they are directed
at a certain content (that singular object, the human being); it is much
more a purely formal characteristic: the simple fact that, in relation to
the sciences in which the human being is given as object (exclusive in
the case of economics and philology, or partial in that of biology), they
are in a position of duplication, and that this duplication can serve a
fortiori for themselves.
This position is made perceptible on two levels: the human sciences
do not treat man’s life, labour, and language in the most transparent
state in which they could be posited, but in that stratum of conduct,
behaviour, attitudes, gestures already made, sentences already pronounced or written, within which they have already been given once
to those who act, behave, exchange, work, and speak; at another level
(it is still the same formal property, but carried to its furthest, rarest
point), it is always possible to treat in the style of the human sciences
(of psychology, sociology, and the history of culture, ideas, or science)
the fact that for certain individuals or certain societies there is something like a speculative knowledge of life, production, and language –

the human sciences

at most, a biology, an economics, and a philology. This is probably no
more than the indication of a possibility which is rarely realized and is
perhaps not capable, at the level of the empiricities, of yielding much
of value; but the fact that it exists as a possible distance, as a space given
to the human sciences to withdraw into, away from what they spring
from, and the fact, too, that this action can be applied to themselves (it
is always possible to make human sciences of human sciences – the
psychology of psychology, the sociology of sociology, etc.) suﬃce to
demonstrate their peculiar conﬁguration. In relation to biology, to
economics, to the sciences of language, they are not, therefore, lacking
in exactitude and rigour; they are rather like sciences of duplication, in
a ‘meta-epistemological’ position. Though even that preﬁx is perhaps
not very well chosen: for one can speak of meta-language only when
deﬁning the rules of interpretation of a primary language. Here, the
human sciences, when they duplicate the sciences of language, labour,
and life, when at their ﬁnest point they duplicate themselves, are
directed not at the establishment of a formalized discourse: on the
contrary, they thrust man, whom they take as their object in the area
of ﬁnitude, relativity, and perspective, down into the area of the endless
erosion of time. It would perhaps be better to speak in their case of an
‘ana-’ or ‘hypo-epistemological’ position; if the pejorative connotations
of this last preﬁx were removed, it would no doubt provide a good
account of the facts: it would suggest how the invincible impression of
haziness, inexactitude, and imprecision left by almost all the human
sciences is merely a surface eﬀect of what makes it possible to deﬁne
them in their positivity.

III THE THREE MODELS
At ﬁrst glance, one could say that the domain of the human sciences is
covered by three ‘sciences’ – or rather by three epistemological
regions, all subdivided within themselves, and all interlocking with
one another; these regions are deﬁned by the triple relation of the
human sciences in general to biology, economics, and philology. Thus
one could admit that the ‘psychological region’ has found its locus in
that place where the living being, in the extension of its functions,
in its neuro-motor blueprints, its physiological regulations, but also in

387

388 the order of things
the suspense that interrupts and limits them, opens itself to the possibility of representation; in the same way, the ‘sociological region’
would be situated where the labouring, producing, and consuming
individual oﬀers himself a representation of the society in which this
activity occurs, of the groups and individuals among which it is
divided, of the imperatives, sanctions, rites, festivities, and beliefs by
which it is upheld or regulated; lastly, in that region where the laws
and forms of a language hold sway, but where, nevertheless, they
remain on the edge of themselves, enabling man to introduce into
them the play of his representations, in that region arise the study of
literature and myths, the analysis of all oral expressions and written
documents, in short, the analysis of the verbal traces that a culture or an
individual may leave behind them. This division, though very summary, is probably not too inexact. It does, however, leave two fundamental problems unsolved: one concerns the form of positivity proper
to the human sciences (the concepts around which they are organized,
the type of rationality to which they refer and by means of which they
seek to constitute themselves as knowledge); the other is their relation
to representation (and the paradoxical fact that even while they take
place only where there is representation, it is to unconscious mechanisms, forms, and processes, or at least to the exterior boundaries of
consciousness, that they address themselves).
The controversies to which the search for a speciﬁc positivity in the
ﬁeld of the human sciences has given rise are only too well known:
Genetic or structural analysis? Explanation or comprehension?
Recourse to what is ‘underneath’ or decipherment kept strictly to the
level of reading? In fact, all these theoretical discussions did not arise
and were not pursued throughout the history of the human sciences
because the latter had to deal, in man, with an object so complex that it
was not yet possible to ﬁnd a unique mode of access towards it, or
because it was necessary to use several in turn. These discussions were
able to exist only in so far as the positivity of the human sciences rests
simultaneously upon the transference of three distinct models. This
transference is not a marginal phenomenon for the human sciences (a
sort of supporting framework, a detour to include some exterior intelligibility, a conﬁrmation derived from sciences already constituted);
nor is it a limited episode in their history (a crisis of formation, at a

the human sciences

time when they were still so young that they could not ﬁx their concepts and their laws themselves). On the contrary, it is a matter of an
ineﬀaceable fact, which is bound up, forever, with their particular
arrangement in the epistemological space. We should, indeed, distinguish between two diﬀerent sorts of model utilized by the human
sciences (leaving aside models of formalization). On the one hand,
there were – and often still are – concepts introduced from another
domain of knowledge, which, losing all operational eﬃcacity in the
process, now play only the role of an image (organic metaphors in
nineteenth-century sociology; energy metaphors in Janet; geometrical
and dynamic metaphors in Lewin). But there are also constituent
models, which are not just techniques of formalization for the human
sciences, or simple means of devising methods of operation with less
eﬀort; they make it possible to create groups of phenomena as so many
‘objects’ for a possible branch of knowledge; they ensure their connection in the empirical sphere, but they oﬀer them to experience already
linked together. They play the role of ‘categories’ in the area of
knowledge particular to the human sciences.
These constituent models are borrowed from the three domains of
biology, economics, and the study of language. It is upon the projected
surface of biology that man appears as a being possessing functions –
receiving stimuli (physiological ones, but also social, interhuman, and
cultural ones), reacting to them, adapting himself, evolving, submitting to the demands of an environment, coming to terms with the
modiﬁcations it imposes, seeking to erase imbalances, acting in
accordance with regularities, having, in short, conditions of existence
and the possibility of ﬁnding average norms of adjustment which permit
him to perform his functions. On the projected surface of economics,
man appears as having needs and desires, as seeking to satisfy them,
and therefore as having interests, desiring proﬁts, entering into opposition with other men; in short, he appears in an irreducible situation
of conﬂict; he evades these conﬂicts, he escapes from them or succeeds in
dominating them, in ﬁnding a solution that will – on one level at least,
and for a time – appease their contradictions; he establishes a body of
rules which are both a limitation of the conﬂict and a result of it. Lastly,
on the projected surface of language, man’s behaviour appears as an
attempt to say something; his slightest gestures, even their involuntary

389

390 the order of things
mechanisms and their failures, have a meaning; and everything he
arranges around him by way of objects, rites, customs, discourse, all
the traces he leaves behind him, constitute a coherent whole and a
system of signs. Thus, these three pairs of function and norm, conﬂict and rule,
signiﬁcation and system completely cover the entire domain of what can be
known about man.
It must not be supposed, however, that any of these pairs of concepts
remains localized on the projected surface on which it may have
appeared: function and norm are not psychological concepts
exclusively; conﬂict and rule do not have an application limited wholly
to the sociological domain; signiﬁcation and system are not valid solely
for phenomena more or less akin to language. All these concepts occur
throughout the entire volume common to the human sciences and are
valid in each of the regions included within it: hence the frequent
diﬃculty in ﬁxing limits, not merely between the objects, but also
between the methods proper to psychology, sociology, and the analysis of literature and myth. Nevertheless, we can say in a general way that
psychology is fundamentally a study of man in terms of functions and
norms (functions and norms which can, in a secondary fashion, be
interpreted on the basis of conﬂicts and signiﬁcations, rules and systems); sociology is fundamentally a study of man in terms of rules and
conﬂicts (but these may be interpreted, and one is constantly led to
interpret them, in a secondary way, either on the basis of functions, as
though they were individuals organically connected to themselves, or
on the basis of systems of signiﬁcations, as though they were written or
spoken texts); lastly, the study of literature and myth is essentially the
province of an analysis of signiﬁcations and signifying systems, but we
all know that this analysis may be carried out in terms of functional
coherence or of conﬂicts and rules. In this way all the human sciences
interlock and can always be used to interpret one another: their frontiers become blurred, intermediary and composite disciplines multiply
endlessly, and in the end their proper object may even disappear
altogether. But whatever the nature of the analysis and the domain to
which it is applied, we have a formal criterion for knowing what is on
the level of psychology, what on that of sociology, and what on that of
language analysis: this is the choice of the fundamental model and the
position of the secondary models, which make it possible to know at

the human sciences

what point one begins to ‘psychologize’ or ‘sociologize’ in the study of
literature and myth, or at what point in psychology one has moved
over into the decipherment of texts or into sociological analysis. But
this superimposition of several models is not a defect of method. It
becomes a defect only if the models have not been precisely ordered
and explicitly articulated in relation to one another. As we know, it
proved possible to conduct an admirably precise study of the IndoEuropean mythologies by using the sociological model superimposed
upon the basic analysis of signiﬁcant and signiﬁcations. We know also,
on the other hand, to what syncretic platitudes the still mediocre
undertaking of founding a so-called ‘clinical’ psychology has led.
Whether properly founded and controlled, or carried out in confusion, this interlocking of constituent models explains the discussions of
method referred to above. They do not have their origin and justiﬁcation in a sometimes contradictory complexity which we know as the
character proper to man; but in the play of oppositions, which makes it
possible to deﬁne each of the three models in relation to the two
others. To oppose genesis to structure is to oppose function (in its
development, in its progressively diversiﬁed operations, in the powers
of adaptation it has acquired and balanced in time) to the synchronism
of conﬂict and rule, of signiﬁcation and system; to oppose analysis by
means of that which is ‘underneath’ to analysis on the same level as its
object is to oppose conﬂict (a primary, archaic datum inscribed at the
same time as man’s fundamental needs) to function and signiﬁcation
as they are deployed in their particular realization; to oppose comprehension to explanation is to oppose the technique that makes it
possible to decipher a meaning on the basis of a signifying system to
those that make it possible to give an account of a conﬂict together
with its consequences, or of the forms and deformations that a function and its organs may assume or undergo. But we must go further. We
know that in the human sciences the point of view of discontinuity
(the threshold between nature and culture, the irreducibility one to
another of the balances or solutions found by each society or each
individual, the absence of intermediary forms, the non-existence of a
continuum existing in space or time) is in opposition to the point of
view of continuity. The existence of this opposition is to be explained
by the bipolar character of the models: analysis in a continuous mode

391

392 the order of things
relies upon the permanence of function (which is to be found in the
very depths of life in an identity that authorizes and provides roots for
succeeding adaptations), upon the interconnection of conﬂicts (they
may take various forms, but they are always present in the background), upon the fabric of signiﬁcations (which link up with one
another and constitute, as it were, the continuous expanse of a discourse); on the contrary, the analysis of discontinuities seeks rather to
draw out the internal coherence of signifying systems, the speciﬁcity of
bodies of rules and the decisive character they assume in relation to
what must be regulated, and the emergence of the norm above the level
of functional ﬂuctuations.
It might be possible to retrace the entire history of the human sciences, from the nineteenth century onward, on the basis of these three
models. They have, in fact, covered the whole of that history, since we
can follow the dynasty of their privileges for more than a century: ﬁrst,
the reign of the biological model (man, his psyche, his group, his
society, the language he speaks – all these exist in the Romantic period
as living beings and in so far as they were, in fact, alive; their mode of
being is organic and is analysed in terms of function); then comes the
reign of the economic model (man and his entire activity are the locus
of conﬂicts of which they are both the more or less manifest expression
and the more or less successful solution); lastly – just as Freud comes
after Comte and Marx – there begins the reign of the philological
(when it is a matter of interpretation and the discovery of hidden
meanings) and linguistic model (when it is a matter of giving a structure to and clarifying the signifying system). Thus a vast shift has led
the human sciences from a form more dense in living models to
another more saturated with models borrowed from language. But this
shift was paralleled by another: that which caused the ﬁrst term in each
of the constituent pairs (function, conﬂict, signiﬁcation) to recede, and
the second term (norm, rule, system) to emerge with a correspondingly greater intensity and importance: Goldstein, Mauss, Dumezil may
be taken to represent, as near as makes no diﬀerence, the moment at
which the reversal took place within each of the models. Such a reversal
has two series of noteworthy consequences: as long as the functional
point of view continued to carry more weight than the normative point
of view (as long as it was not on the basis of the norm and the interior

the human sciences

of the activity determining that norm that the attempt was made to
understand how a function was performed), it was of course necessary,
de facto, to share the normal functions with the non-normal; thus a
pathological psychology was accepted side by side with normal psychology, but forming as it were an inverted image of it (hence the
importance of the Jacksonian notion of disintegration in Ribot or
Janet); in the same way, a pathology of societies (Durkheim), of
irrational and quasi-morbid forms of belief (Lévy-Bruhl, Blondel) was
also accepted; similarly, as long as the point of view of conﬂict carried
more weight than that of the rule, it was supposed that certain conﬂicts
could not be overcome, that individuals and societies ran the risk of
destroying themselves by them; ﬁnally, as long as the point of view of
signiﬁcation carried more weight than that of system, a division was
made between signiﬁcant and non-signiﬁcant: it was accepted that there
was meaning in certain domains of human behaviour or certain
regions of the social area, but not in others. So that the human sciences
laid down an essential division within their own ﬁeld: they always extended between a positive pole and a negative pole; they always designated an alterity (based, furthermore, on the continuity they were
analysing). When, on the other hand, the analysis was conducted from
the point of view of the norm, the rule, and the system, each area
provided its own coherence and its own validity; it was no longer
possible to speak of ‘morbid consciousness’ (even referring to the
sick), of ‘primitive mentalities’ (even with reference to societies left
behind by history), or of ‘insigniﬁcant discourse’ (even when referring
to absurd stories, or to apparently incoherent legends). Everything may
be thought within the order of the system, the rule, and the norm. By
pluralizing itself – since systems are isolated, since rules form closed
wholes, since norms are posited in their autonomy – the ﬁeld of the
human sciences found itself uniﬁed: suddenly, it was no longer ﬁssured along its former dichotomy of values. And bearing in mind that
Freud more than anyone else brought the knowledge of man closer to
its philological and linguistic model, and that he was also the ﬁrst to
undertake the radical erasure of the division between positive and
negative (between the normal and the pathological, the comprehensible and the incommunicable, the signiﬁcant and the non-signiﬁcant),
it is easy to see how he preﬁgures the transition from an analysis in

393

394 the order of things
terms of functions, conﬂicts, and signiﬁcations to an analysis in terms
of norms, rules, and systems: thus all this knowledge, within which
Western culture had given itself in one century a certain image of man,
pivots on the work of Freud, though without, for all that, leaving its
fundamental arrangement. But even so, it is not here – as we shall see
later on – that the most decisive importance of psychoanalysis lies.
In any case, this transition to the point of view of the norm, the rule,
and the system brings us to a problem that has been left in suspense:
that of the role of representation in the human sciences. It might
already appear extremely contestable to include the human sciences (as
opposed to biology, economics, and philology) within the space of
representation: was it not already necessary to point out that a function
can be performed, a conﬂict can develop its consequences, a signiﬁcation can impose its intelligibility, without passing through the stage of
explicit consciousness? And now, is it not necessary to recognize that
the peculiar property of the norm in relation to the function it determines, of the rule in relation to the conﬂict it regulates, of the system
in relation to the signiﬁcation it makes possible, is precisely that of not
being given to consciousness? Are we not forced to add a third historical gradient to the two already isolated, and to say that since the
nineteenth century the human sciences have never ceased to approach
that region of the unconscious where the action of representation is
held in suspense? In fact, representation is not consciousness, and there
is nothing to prove that this bringing to light of elements or structures
that are never presented to consciousness as such enables the human
sciences to escape the law of representation. The role of the concept of
signiﬁcation is, in fact, to show how something like a language, even if
it is not in the form of explicit discourse, and even if it has not been
deployed for a consciousness, can in general be given to representation; the role of the complementary concept of system is to show how
signiﬁcation is never primary and contemporaneous with itself, but
always secondary and as it were derived in relation to a system that
precedes it, constitutes its positive origin, and posits itself, little by
little, in fragments and outlines through signiﬁcation; in relation to the
consciousness of a signiﬁcation, the system is indeed always
unconscious since it was there before the signiﬁcation, since it is
within it that the signiﬁcation resides and on the basis of it that it

the human sciences

becomes eﬀective; but because the system is always promised to a
future consciousness which will perhaps never add it up. In other
words, the signiﬁcation/system pair is what ensures both the representability of language (as text or structure analysed by philology and
linguistics) and the near but withdrawn presence of the origin (as it is
manifested as man’s mode of being by means of the analytic of ﬁnitude). In the same way, the notion of conﬂict shows how need, desire,
and interest, even if they are not presented to the consciousness experiencing them, can take form in representation; and the role of the
inverse concept of rule is to show how the violence of conﬂict, the
apparently untamed insistence of need, the lawless inﬁnity of desire are
in fact already organized by an unthought which not only prescribes
their rules, but renders them possible upon the basis of a rule. The
conﬂict/rule pair ensures the representability of need (of the need that
economics studies as an objective process in labour and production)
and the representability of the unthought that is unveiled by the analytic of ﬁnitude. Lastly, the concept of function has the role of showing
how the structures of life may give rise to representation (even though
they are not conscious), and the concept of norm how function provides its own conditions of possibility and the frontiers within which it
is eﬀective.
Thus it can be understood why these broad categories can structure
the entire ﬁeld of the human sciences: it is because they span it from
end to end, because they both hold apart and link together the empirical positivities of life, labour, and language (on the basis of which man
ﬁrst detached himself historically as a form of possible knowledge) and
the forms of ﬁnitude that characterize man’s mode of being (as he
constituted himself when representation ceased to deﬁne the general
space of knowledge). These categories are not, therefore, mere empirical concepts of rather broad generality; they are indeed the basis on
which man is able to present himself to a possible knowledge; they
traverse the entire ﬁeld of his possibility and articulate it boldly in
accordance with the two dimensions that form its frame.
But that is not all: they also permit the dissociation, which is characteristic of all contemporary knowledge about man, of consciousness
and representation. They deﬁne the manner in which the empiricities
can be given to representation but in a form that is not present to the

395

396 the order of things
consciousness (function, conﬂict, and signiﬁcation are indeed the
manner in which life, need, and language are doubled over in representation, but in a form that may be completely unconscious); on the
other hand, they deﬁne the manner in which the fundamental ﬁnitude
can be given to representation in a form both positive and empirical,
yet not transparent to the naïve consciousness (neither norm, not rule,
not system is given in daily experience: they run through it, give rise to
partial consciousnesses of themselves, but can never be wholly illumined except by a reﬂexive form of knowledge). So the human sciences speak only within the element of the representable, but in
accordance with a conscious/unconscious dimension, a dimension
that becomes more and more marked as one attempts to bring the
order of systems, rules, and norms to light. It is as though the dichotomy between normal and pathological were tending to be eclipsed in
favour of the bipolarity of consciousness and the unconscious.
It must not be forgotten, therefore, that the increasingly marked
importance of the unconscious in no way compromises the primacy
of representation. This primacy does, however, raise an important
problem. Now that the empirical forms of knowledge, such as those
of life, labour, and language, have escaped from its law, now that
the attempt to deﬁne man’s mode of being is being made outside the
ﬁeld of representation, what is representation, if not a phenomenon
of an empirical order which occurs within man, and could be
analysed as such? And if representation occurs within man, what
diﬀerence is there between it and consciousness? But representation is
not simply an object for the human sciences; it is, as we have just seen,
the very ﬁeld upon which the human sciences occur, and to their fullest
extent; it is the general pedestal of that form of knowledge, the basis
that makes it possible. Two consequences emerge from this. One is of a
historical order: it is the fact that the human sciences, unlike the empirical sciences since the nineteenth century, and unlike modern thought,
have been unable to ﬁnd a way around the primacy of representation;
like the whole of Classical knowledge, they reside within it; but they
are in no way its heirs or its continuation, for the whole conﬁguration
of knowledge has been modiﬁed and they came into being only to the
degree to which there appeared, with man, a being who did not exist
before in the ﬁeld of the episteme. However, it is easy to understand why

the human sciences

every time one tries to use the human sciences to philosophize, to pour
back into the space of thought what one has been able to learn of man,
one ﬁnds oneself imitating the philosophical posture of the eighteenth
century, in which, nevertheless, man had no place; for by extending
the domain of knowledge about man beyond its limits one is similarly
extending the reign of representation beyond itself, and thus taking up
one’s position once more in a philosophy of the Classical type. The
other consequence is that the human sciences, when dealing with what
is representation (in either conscious or unconscious form), ﬁnd
themselves treating as their object what is in fact their condition of
possibility. They are always animated, therefore, by a sort of transcendental mobility. They never cease to exercise a critical examination of
themselves. They proceed from that which is given to representation to
that which renders representation possible, but which is still representation. So that, unlike other sciences, they seek not so much to generalize themselves or make themselves more precise as to be constantly
demystifying themselves: to make the transition from an immediate
and non-controlled evidence to less transparent but more fundamental
forms. This quasi-transcendental process is always given in the form of
an unveiling. It is always by an unveiling that they are able, as a consequence, to become suﬃciently generalized or reﬁned to conceive of
individual phenomena. On the horizon of any human science, there is
the project of bringing man’s consciousness back to its real conditions,
of restoring it to the contents and forms that brought it into being, and
elude us within it; this is why the problem of the unconscious – its
possibility, status, mode of existence, the means of knowing it and of
bringing it to light – is not simply a problem within the human sciences which they can be thought of as encountering by chance in their
steps; it is a problem that is ultimately coextensive with their very
existence. A transcendental raising of level that is, on the other side, an
unveiling of the non-conscious is constitutive of all the sciences of
man.
We may ﬁnd in this the means of isolating them in their essential
property. In any case, we can see that what manifests this peculiar
property of the human sciences is not that privileged and singularly
blurred object which is man. For the good reason that it is not man
who constitutes them and provides them with a speciﬁc domain; it is

397

398 the order of things
the general arrangement of the episteme that provides them with a site,
summons them, and establishes them – thus enabling them to constitute man as their object. We shall say, therefore, that a ‘human science’
exists, not wherever man is in question, but wherever there is analysis –
within the dimension proper to the unconscious – of norms, rules, and
signifying totalities which unveil to consciousness the conditions of its
forms and contents. To speak of ‘sciences of man’ in any other case is
simply an abuse of language. We can see, then, how vain and idle are all
those wearisome discussions as to whether such and such forms of
knowledge may be termed truly scientiﬁc, and to what conditions they
ought to be subjected in order to become so. The ‘sciences of man’ are
part of the modern episteme in the same way as chemistry or medicine or
any other such science; or again, in the same way as grammar and
natural history were part of the Classical episteme. But to say that they are
part of the epistemological ﬁeld means simply that their positivity is
rooted in it, that that is where they ﬁnd their condition of existence,
that they are therefore not merely illusions, pseudo-scientiﬁc fantasies
motivated at the level of opinions, interests, or beliefs, that they are not
what others call by the bizarre name of ‘ideology’. But that does not
necessarily mean that they are sciences.
Although it is true that any science, any science whatever, when it is
questioned on the archaeological level and when an attempt is made to
clear the ground of its positivity, always reveals the epistemological
conﬁguration that made it possible, any epistemological conﬁguration,
on the other hand, even if it is completely assignable in its positivity,
may very well not be a science: it does not thereby reduce itself,
ipso facto, to the status of an imposture. We must distinguish carefully
between three things. There are themes with scientiﬁc pretensions that
one may encounter at the level of opinion and that are not (or are no
longer) part of a culture’s epistemological network: from the seventeenth century, for example, natural magic ceased to belong to the
Western episteme, but it persisted for a long time in the interaction of
beliefs and aﬀective valorizations. Then there are epistemological
ﬁgures whose outline, position, and function can be reconstituted in
their positivity by means of an analysis of the archaeological type; and
these, in turn, may obey two diﬀerent organizations: some present
characteristics of objectivity and systematicity which make it possible

the human sciences

to deﬁne them as sciences; others do not answer to those criteria, that
is, their form of coherence and their relation to their object are
determined by their positivity alone. The fact that these latter do not
possess the formal criteria of a scientiﬁc form of knowledge does not
prevent them from belonging, nevertheless, to the positive domain of
knowledge. It would thus be as futile and unjust to analyse them as
phenomena of opinion as to contrast them historically or critically
with scientiﬁc formations proper; it would be more absurd still to treat
them as a combination which mixes together in variable proportions
‘rational elements’ and other elements that are not rational. They must
be replaced on the level of positivity that renders them possible and
necessarily determines their form. Archaeology, then, has two tasks
with regard to these ﬁgures: to determine the manner in which they
are arranged in the episteme in which they have their roots; and to show,
also, in what respect their conﬁguration is radically diﬀerent from that
of the sciences in the strict sense. There is no reason to treat this
peculiar conﬁguration of theirs as a negative phenomenon: it is not the
presence of an obstacle nor some internal deﬁciency which has left
them stranded across the threshold of scientiﬁc forms. They constitute,
in their own form, side by side with the sciences and on the same
archaeological ground, other conﬁgurations of knowledge.
We have already encountered examples of such conﬁgurations in
general grammar or in the Classical theory of value; they possessed the
same ground of positivity as Cartesian mathematics, but they were
not sciences, at least for the majority of those who were their contemporaries. Such is also the case with what we today call the human
sciences; when analysed archaeologically, they provide the outlines of
completely positive conﬁgurations; but as soon as these conﬁgurations
and the way in which they are arranged within the modern episteme are
determined, we understand why they cannot be sciences: what renders
them possible, in fact, is a certain situation of ‘vicinity’ with regard to
biology, economics, and philology (or linguistics); they exist only in
so far as they dwell side by side with those sciences – or rather beneath
them, in the space of their projections. However, they maintain a relationship with those sciences that is radically diﬀerent from that which
can be established between two ‘related’ or ‘germane’ sciences: this
relationship presupposes, in fact, the transposition of external models

399

400 the order of things
within the dimension of the unconscious and consciousness, and the
ﬂowing back of critical reﬂection towards the very place from which
those models come. It is useless, then, to say that the ‘human sciences’
are false sciences; they are not sciences at all; the conﬁguration that
deﬁnes their positivity and gives them their roots in the modern episteme
at the same time makes it impossible for them to be sciences; and if it is
then asked why they assumed that title, it is suﬃcient to recall that it
pertains to the archaeological deﬁnition of their roots that they summon and receive the transference of models borrowed from the sciences. It is therefore not man’s irreducibility, what is designated as his
invincible transcendence, nor even his excessively great complexity,
that prevents him from becoming an object of science. Western culture
has constituted, under the name of man, a being who, by one and the
same interplay of reasons, must be a positive domain of knowledge and
cannot be an object of science.

IV HISTORY
We have spoken of the human sciences; we have spoken of those broad
regions delimited more or less by psychology, sociology, and the
analysis of literature and mythology. We have not yet mentioned history, though it is the ﬁrst and as it were the mother of all the sciences of
man, and is perhaps as old as human memory. Or rather, it is for that
very reason that we have until now passed it over in silence. Perhaps
history has no place, in fact, among the human sciences, or beside
them: it may well be that it maintains with them all a relation that
is strange, undeﬁned, ineﬀaceable, and more fundamental than any
relation of adjacency in a common space would be.
It is true that History existed long before the constitution of the
human sciences; from the beginnings of the Ancient Greek civilization,
it has performed a certain number of major functions in Western
culture: memory, myth, transmission of the Word and of Example,
vehicle of tradition, critical awareness of the present, decipherment of
humanity’s destiny, anticipation of the future, or promise of a return.
What characterized this History – or at least what may be used to
deﬁne it in its general features, as opposed to our own – was that by
ordering the time of human beings upon the world’s development (in

the human sciences

a sort of great cosmic chronology such as we ﬁnd in the works of the
Stoics), or inversely by extending the principle and movement of a
human destiny to even the smallest particles of nature (rather in the
same way as Christian Providence), it was conceived of as a vast historical stream, uniform in each of its points, drawing with it in one and
the same current, in one and the same fall or ascension, or cycle, all
men, and with them things and animals, every living or inert being,
even the most unmoved aspects of the earth. And it was this unity that
was shattered at the beginning of the nineteenth century, in the great
upheaval that occurred in the Western episteme: it was discovered that
there existed a historicity proper to nature; forms of adaptation to the
environment were deﬁned for each broad type of living being, which
would make possible a subsequent deﬁnition of its evolutionary outline; moreover, it became possible to show that activities as peculiarly
human as labour or language contained within themselves a historicity
that could not be placed within the great narrative common to things
and to men: production has its modes of development, capital its
modes of accumulation, prices their laws of ﬂuctuation and change
which cannot be ﬁtted over natural laws or reduced to the general
progress of humanity; in the same way, language is not modiﬁed as
much by migrations, trade, and wars, by what happens to man or what
his imagination is able to invent, as by conditions that properly belong
to the phonetic and grammatical forms of which it is constituted; and
if it has been possible to say that the various languages are born, live,
lose their energy as they age, and ﬁnally die, this biological metaphor is
not intended to dissolve their history in a time which would be that of
life, but rather to underline the fact that they too have internal laws of
functioning, and that their chronology unfolds in accordance with a
time that refers in the ﬁrst place to their own particular coherence.
We are usually inclined to believe that the nineteenth century,
largely for political and social reasons, paid closer attention to human
history, that the idea of an order or a continuous level of time was
abandoned, as well as that of an uninterrupted progress, and that the
bourgeoisie, in attempting to recount its own ascension, encountered,
in the calendar of its victory, the historical density of institutions, the
speciﬁc gravity of habits and beliefs, the violence of struggles, the
alternation of success and failure. And we suppose that, on this basis,

401

402 the order of things
the historicity discovered within man was extended to the objects he
had made, the language he spoke, and – even further still – to life.
According to this point of view, the study of economies, the history of
literatures and grammars, and even the evolution of living beings are
merely eﬀects of the diﬀusion, over increasingly more distant areas of
knowledge, of a historicity ﬁrst revealed in man. In reality, it was the
opposite that happened. Things ﬁrst of all received a historicity proper
to them, which freed them from the continuous space that imposed
the same chronology upon them as upon men. So that man found
himself dispossessed of what constituted the most manifest contents of
his history: nature no longer speaks to him of the creation or the end of
the world, of his dependency or his approaching judgement; it no
longer speaks of anything but a natural time; its wealth no longer
indicates to him the antiquity or the imminent return of a Golden Age;
it speaks only of conditions of production being modiﬁed in the course
of history; language no longer bears the marks of a time before Babel
or of the ﬁrst cries that rang through the jungle; it carries the weapons
of its own aﬃliation. The human being no longer has any history: or
rather, since he speaks, works, and lives, he ﬁnds himself interwoven in
his own being with histories that are neither subordinate to him nor
homogeneous with him. By the fragmentation of the space over which
Classical knowledge extended in its continuity, by the folding over of
each separated domain upon its own development, the man who
appears at the beginning of the nineteenth century is ‘dehistoricized’.
And the imaginative values then assumed by the past, the whole
lyrical halo that surrounded the consciousness of history at that period,
the lively curiosity shown for documents or for traces left behind by
time – all this is a surface expression of the simple fact that man found
himself emptied of history, but that he was already beginning to
recover in the depths of his own being, and among all the things that
were still capable of reﬂecting his image (the others have fallen silent
and folded back upon themselves), a historicity linked essentially to
man himself. But this historicity is immediately ambiguous. Since man
posits himself in the ﬁeld of positive knowledge only in so far as he
speaks, works, and lives, can his history ever be anything but the
inextricable nexus of diﬀerent times, which are foreign to him and
heterogeneous in respect of one another? Will the history of man ever

the human sciences

be more than a sort of modulation common to changes in the conditions of life (climate, soil fertility, methods of agriculture, exploitation
of wealth), to transformations in the economy (and consequently in
society and its institutions), and to the succession of forms and usages
in language? But, in that case, man is not himself historical: since time
comes to him from somewhere other than himself, he constitutes himself as a subject of history only by the superimposition of the history of
living beings, the history of things, and the history of words. He is
subjected to the pure events those histories contain. But this relation of
simple passivity is immediately reversed; for what speaks in language,
what works and consumes in economics, what lives in human life, is
man himself; and, this being so, he too has a right to a development
quite as positive as that of beings and things, one no less autonomous –
and perhaps even more fundamental: is it not a historicity proper to
man, one inscribed in the very depths of his being, that enables him to
adapt himself like any living being, and to evolve like any living being
(though with the help of tools, techniques, and organizations belonging to no other living being), that enables him to invent forms of
production, to stabilize, prolong, or abridge the validity of economic
laws by means of the consciousness he attains of them and by means of
the institutions he constructs upon or around them, and that enables
him to exercise upon language, with every word he speaks, a sort of
constant interior pressure which makes it shift imperceptibly upon
itself at any given moment in time. Thus, behind the history of the
positivities, there appears another, more radical, history, that of man
himself – a history that now concerns man’s very being, since he now
realizes that he not only ‘has history’ all around him, but is himself, in
his own historicity, that by means of which a history of human life, a
history of economics, and a history of languages are given their form.
In which case, at a very deep level, there exists a historicity of man
which is itself its own history but also the radical dispersion that provides a foundation for all other histories. It was just this primary erosion that the nineteenth century sought in its concern to historicize
everything, to write a general history of everything, to go back ceaselessly through time, and to place the most stable of things in the liberating stream of time. Here again, we should no doubt revise the way in
which we traditionally write the history of History; we are accustomed

403

404 the order of things
to saying that the nineteenth century brought an end to the pure chronicle of events, the simple memory of a past peopled only by individuals
and accidents, and that it began the search for the general laws of
development. In fact, no history was ever more ‘explanatory’, more
preoccupied with general laws and constants, than were the histories of
the Classical age – when the world and man were inextricably linked in
a single history. What ﬁrst comes to light in the nineteenth century is a
simple form of human historicity – the fact that man as such is exposed
to the event. Hence the concern either to ﬁnd laws for this pure form
(which gives us philosophies such as that of Spengler) or to deﬁne it
on the basis of the fact that man lives, works, speaks, and thinks: and
this gives us interpretations of history from the standpoint of man
envisaged as a living species, or from the standpoint of economic laws,
or from that of cultural totalities.
In any case, this arrangement of history within the epistemological
space is of great importance for its relation with the human sciences.
Since historical man is living, working, and speaking man, any content
of History is the province of psychology, sociology, or the sciences of
language. But, inversely, since the human being has become historical,
through and through, none of the contents analysed by the human
sciences can remain stable in itself or escape the movement of History.
And this for two reasons: because psychology, sociology, and philosophy, even when applied to objects – that is, men – which are contemporaneous with them, are never directed at anything other than
synchronological patternings within a historicity that constitutes and
traverses them; and because the forms successively taken by the human
sciences, the choice of objects they make, and the methods they apply
to them, are all provided by History, ceaselessly borne along by it, and
modiﬁed at its pleasure. The more History attempts to transcend its
own rootedness in historicity, and the greater the eﬀorts it makes to
attain, beyond the historical relativity of its origin and its choices, the
sphere of universality, the more clearly it bears the marks of its historical birth, and the more evidently there appears through it the history
of which it is itself a part (and this, again, is to be found in Spengler
and all the philosophers of history); inversely, the more it accepts its
relativity, and the more deeply it sinks into the movement it shares
with what it is recounting, then the more it tends to the slenderness of

the human sciences

the narrative, and all the positive content it obtained for itself through
the human sciences is dissipated.
History constitutes, therefore, for the human sciences, a favourable
environment which is both privileged and dangerous. To each of the
sciences of man it oﬀers a background, which establishes it and provides it with a ﬁxed ground and, as it were, a homeland; it determines
the cultural area – the chronological and geographical boundaries – in
which that branch of knowledge can be recognized as having validity;
but it also surrounds the sciences of man with a frontier that limits
them and destroys, from the outset, their claim to validity within the
element of universality. It reveals in this way that though man – even
before knowing it – has always been subjected to the determinations
that can be expressed by psychology, sociology, and the analysis of
language, he is not therefore the intemporal object of a knowledge
which, at least at the level of its rights, must itself be thought of as
ageless. Even when they avoid all reference to history, the human sciences (and history may be included among them) never do anything
but relate one cultural episode to another (that to which they apply
themselves as their object, and that in which their existence, their
mode of being, their methods, and their concepts have their roots); and
though they apply themselves to their own synchronology, they relate
the cultural episode from which they emerged to itself. Man, therefore,
never appears in his positivity and that positivity is not immediately
limited by the limitlessness of History.
Here we see being reconstituted a movement analogous to that
which animated from within the entire domain of the human sciences:
as analysed above, this movement perpetually referred certain positivities determining man’s being to the ﬁnitude that caused those same
positivities to appear; so that the sciences were themselves taken up in
that great oscillation, but in such a way that they in turn took it up in
the form of their own positivity by seeking to move ceaselessly backwards and forwards between the conscious and the unconscious. And
now we ﬁnd the beginning of a similar oscillation in the case of History; but this time it does not move between the positivity of man
taken as object (and empirically manifested by labour, life, and language) and the radical limits of his being; it moves instead between the
temporal limits that deﬁne the particular forms of labour, life, and

405

406 the order of things
language, and the historical positivity of the subject which, by means
of knowledge, gains access to them. Here again, the subject and the
object are bound together in a reciprocal questioning of one another;
but whereas, before, this questioning took place within positive knowledge itself, and by the progressive unveiling of the unconscious by
consciousness, here it takes place on the outer limits of the object and
subject; it designates the erosion to which both are subjected, the
dispersion that creates a hiatus between them, wrenching them loose
from a calm, rooted, and deﬁnitive positivity. By unveiling the
unconscious as their most fundamental object, the human sciences
showed that there was always something still to be thought in what had
already been thought on a manifest level; by revealing the law of time
as the external boundary of the human sciences. History shows that
everything that has been thought will be thought again by a thought
that does not yet exist. But perhaps all we have here, in the concrete
forms of the unconscious and History, is the two faces of that ﬁnitude
which, by discovering that it was its own foundation, caused the ﬁgure
of man to appear in the nineteenth century: a ﬁnitude without inﬁnity
is no doubt a ﬁnitude that has never ﬁnished, that is always in recession
with relation to itself, that always has something still to think at the
very moment when it thinks, that always has time to think again what it
has thought.
In modern thought, historicism and the analytic of ﬁnitude confront
one another. Historicism is a means of validating for itself the perpetual
critical relation at play between History and the human sciences. But it
establishes it solely at the level of the positivities: the positive knowledge of man is limited by the historical positivity of the knowing
subject, so that the moment of ﬁnitude is dissolved in the play of a
relativity from which it cannot escape, and which itself has value as an
absolute. To be ﬁnite, then, would simply be to be trapped in the laws
of a perspective which, while allowing a certain apprehension – of the
type of perception or understanding – prevents it from ever being
universal and deﬁnitive intellection. All knowledge is rooted in a life, a
society, and a language that have a history; and it is in that very history
that knowledge ﬁnds the element enabling it to communicate with
other forms of life, other types of society, other signiﬁcations: that is
why historicism always implies a certain philosophy, or at least a

the human sciences

certain methodology, of living comprehension (in the element of the
Lebenswelt), of interhuman communication (against a background of
social structures), and of hermeneutics (as the re-apprehension
through the manifest meaning of the discourse of another meaning at
once secondary and primary, that is, more hidden but also more fundamental). By this means, the diﬀerent positivities formed by History
and laid down in it are able to enter into contact with one another,
surround one another in the form of knowledge, and free the content dormant within them; it is not, then, the limits themselves that
appear, in their absolute rigour, but partial totalities, totalities that
turn out to be limited by fact, totalities whose frontiers can be made
to move, up to a certain point, but which will never extend into the
space of a deﬁnitive analysis, and will never raise themselves to the
status of absolute totality. This is why the analysis of ﬁnitude never
ceases to use, as a weapon against historicism, the part of itself that
historicism has neglected: its aim is to reveal, at the foundation of
all the positivities and before them, the ﬁnitude that makes them
possible; where historicism sought for the possibility and justiﬁcation of concrete relations between limited totalities, whose mode of
being was predetermined by life, or by social forms, or by the
signiﬁcations of language, the analytic of ﬁnitude tries to question
this relation of the human being to the being which, by designating
ﬁnitude, renders the positivities possible in their concrete mode of
being.

V PSYCHOANALYSIS AND ETHNOLOGY
Psychoanalysis and ethnology occupy a privileged position in our
knowledge – not because they have established the foundations of their
positivity better than any other human science, and at last accomplished the old attempt to be truly scientiﬁc; but rather because, on the
conﬁnes of all the branches of knowledge investigating man, they form
an undoubted and inexhaustible treasure-hoard of experiences and
concepts, and above all a perpetual principle of dissatisfaction, of calling into question, of criticism and contestation of what may seem, in
other respects, to be established. Now, there is a reason for this that
concerns the object they respectively give to one another, but concerns

407

408 the order of things
even more the position they occupy and the function they perform
within the general space of the episteme.
Psychoanalysis stands as close as possible, in fact, to that critical
function which, as we have seen, exists within all the human sciences.
In setting itself the task of making the discourse of the unconscious
speak through consciousness, psychoanalysis is advancing in the direction of that fundamental region in which the relations of representation and ﬁnitude come into play. Whereas all the human sciences
advance towards the unconscious only with their back to it, waiting for
it to unveil itself as fast as consciousness is analysed, as it were backwards, psychoanalysis, on the other hand, points directly towards it,
with a deliberate purpose – not towards that which must be rendered
gradually more explicit by the progressive illumination of the implicit,
but towards what is there and yet is hidden, towards what exists with
the mute solidity of a thing, of a text closed in upon itself, or of a blank
space in a visible text, and uses that quality to defend itself. It must not
be supposed that the Freudian approach is the combination of an
interpretation of meaning and a dynamics of resistance or defence; by
following the same path as the human sciences, but with its gaze
turned the other way, psychoanalysis moves towards the moment –
by deﬁnition inaccessible to any theoretical knowledge of man, to
any continuous apprehension in terms of signiﬁcation, conﬂict, or
function – at which the contents of consciousness articulate themselves, or rather stand gaping, upon man’s ﬁnitude. This means that,
unlike the human sciences, which, even while turning back towards
the unconscious, always remain within the space of the representable,
psychoanalysis advances and leaps over representation, overﬂows it on
the side of ﬁnitude, and thus reveals, where one had expected functions
bearing their norms, conﬂicts burdened with rules, and signiﬁcations
forming a system, the simple fact that it is possible for there to be
system (therefore signiﬁcation), rule (therefore conﬂict), norm (therefore function). And in this region where representation remains in
suspense, on the edge of itself, open, in a sense, to the closed boundary
of ﬁnitude, we ﬁnd outlined the three ﬁgures by means of which life,
with its function and norms, attains its foundation in the mute repetition of Death, conﬂicts and rules their foundation in the naked opening
of Desire, signiﬁcations and systems their foundation in a language

the human sciences

which is at the same time Law. We know that psychologists and philosophers have dismissed all this as Freudian mythology. It was indeed
inevitable that this approach of Freud’s should have appeared to them
in this way; to a knowledge situated within the representable, all that
frames and deﬁnes, on the outside, the very possibility of representation can be nothing other than mythology. But when one follows the
movement of psychoanalysis as it progresses, or when one traverses the
epistemological space as a whole, one sees that these ﬁgures are in fact –
though imaginary no doubt to the myopic gaze – the very forms of
ﬁnitude, as it is analysed in modern thought. Is death not that upon the
basis of which knowledge in general is possible – so much so that we
can think of it as being, in the area of psychoanalysis, the ﬁgure of that
empirico-transcendental duplication that characterizes man’s mode of
being within ﬁnitude? Is desire not that which remains always unthought
at the heart of thought? And the law-language (at once word and wordsystem) that psychoanalysis takes such pains to make speak, is it not
that in which all signiﬁcation assumes an origin more distant than itself,
but also that whose return is promised in the very act of analysis?
It is indeed true that this Death, and this Desire, and this Law can
never meet within the knowledge that traverses in its positivity the
empirical domain of man; but the reason for this is that they designate
the conditions of possibility of all knowledge about man.
And precisely when this language emerges in all its nudity, yet at the
same time eludes all signiﬁcation as if it were a vast and empty despotic
system, when Desire reigns in the wild state, as if the rigour of its rule
had levelled all opposition, when Death dominates every psychological
function and stands above it as its unique and devastating norm – then
we recognize madness in its present form, madness as it is posited in
the modern experience, as its truth and its alterity. In this ﬁgure, which
is at once empirical and yet foreign to (and in) all that we can experience, our consciousness no longer ﬁnds – as it did in the sixteenth
century – the trace of another world; it no longer observes the wandering of a straying reason; it sees welling up that which is, perilously,
nearest to us – as if, suddenly, the very hollowness of our existence is
outlined in relief; the ﬁnitude upon the basis of which we are, and
think, and know, is suddenly there before us: an existence at once real
and impossible, thought that we cannot think, an object for our

409

410 the order of things
knowledge that always eludes it. This is why psychoanalysis ﬁnds in
that madness par excellence – which psychiatrists term schizophrenia – its
intimate, its most invincible torture: for, given in this form of madness,
in an absolutely manifest and absolutely withdrawn form, are the
forms of ﬁnitude towards which it usually advances unceasingly (and
interminably) from the starting-point of that which is voluntarilyinvoluntarily oﬀered to it in the patient’s language. So psychoanalysis
‘recognizes itself’ when it is confronted with those very psychoses
which nevertheless (or rather, for that very reason) it has scarcely any
means of reaching: as if the psychosis were displaying in a savage
illumination, and oﬀering in a mode not too distant but just too close,
that towards which analysis must make its laborious way.
But this relation of psychoanalysis with what makes all knowledge in
general possible in the sphere of the human sciences has yet another
consequence – namely, that psychoanalysis cannot be deployed as pure
speculative knowledge or as a general theory of man. It cannot span the
entire ﬁeld of representation, attempt to evade its frontiers, or point
towards what is more fundamental, in the form of an empirical science
constructed on the basis of careful observation; that breakthrough can
be made only within the limits of a praxis in which it is not only the
knowledge we have of man that is involved, but man himself – man
together with the Death that is at work in his suﬀering, the Desire that
has lost its object, and the language by means of which, through
which, his Law is silently articulated. All analytic knowledge is thus
invincibly linked with a praxis, with that strangulation produced by the
relation between two individuals, one of whom is listening to the
other’s language, thus freeing his desire from the object it has lost
(making him understand he has lost it), liberating him from the everrepeated proximity of death (making him understand that one day he
will die). This is why nothing is more alien to psychoanalysis than
anything resembling a general theory of man or an anthropology.
Just as psychoanalysis situates itself in the dimension of the
unconscious (of that critical animation which disturbs from within the
entire domain of the sciences of man), so ethnology situates itself in
the dimension of historicity (of that perpetual oscillation which is the
reason why the human sciences are always being contested, from
without, by their own history). It is no doubt diﬃcult to maintain

the human sciences

that ethnology has a fundamental relation with historicity since it is
traditionally the knowledge we have of peoples without histories; in
any case, it studies (both by systematic choice and because of the lack
of documents) the structural invariables of cultures rather than the
succession of events. It suspends the long ‘chronological’ discourse by
means of which we try to reﬂect our own culture within itself and
instead it reveals synchronological correlations in other cultural forms.
And yet ethnology itself is possible only on the basis of a certain
situation, of an absolutely singular event which involves not only our
historicity but also that of all men who can constitute the object of an
ethnology (it being understood that we can perfectly well apprehend
our own society’s ethnology): ethnology has its roots, in fact, in a
possibility that properly belongs to the history of our culture, even
more to its fundamental relation with the whole of history, and enables
it to link itself to other cultures in a mode of pure theory. There is a
certain position of the Western ratio that was constituted in its history
and provides a foundation for the relation it can have with all other
societies, even with the society in which it historically appeared. Obviously, this does not mean that the colonizing situation is indispensable
to ethnology: neither hypnosis, nor the patient’s alienation within the
fantasmatic character of the doctor, is constitutive of psychoanalysis;
but just as the latter can be deployed only in the calm violence of a
particular relationship and the transference it produces, so ethnology
can assume its proper dimensions only within the historical sovereignty – always restrained, but always present – of European thought
and the relation that can bring it face to face with all other cultures as
well as with itself.
But this relation (in so far as ethnology does not seek to eﬀace it, but
on the contrary deepens it by establishing itself deﬁnitively within it)
does not imprison it within the circular system of actions and reactions
proper to historicism; rather, it places it in a position to ﬁnd a way
round that danger by inverting the movement that gave rise to it; in
fact, instead of relating empirical contents – as revealed in psychology,
sociology, or the analysis of literature and myth – to the historical
positivity of the subject perceiving them, ethnology places the particular forms of each culture, the diﬀerences that contrast it with others,
the limits by which it deﬁnes itself and encloses itself upon its own

411

412 the order of things
coherence, within the dimension in which its relations occur with each
of the three great positivities (life, need and labour, and language):
thus, ethnology shows how, within a given culture, there occur the
normalization of the broad biological functions, the rules that render
possible or obligatory all the forms of exchange, production, and consumption, and the systems that are organized around or on the model
of linguistic structures. Ethnology, then, advances towards that region
where the human sciences are articulated upon that biology, that economics, and that philology and linguistics which, as we have seen,
dominate the human sciences from such a very great height: this is
why the general problem of all ethnology is in fact that of the relations
(of continuity or discontinuity) between nature and culture. But in this
mode of questioning, the problem of history is found to have been
reversed: for it then becomes a matter of determining, according to the
symbolic systems employed, according to the prescribed rules, according to the functional norms chosen and laid down, what sort of historical development each culture is susceptible of; it is seeking to
re-apprehend, in its very roots, the mode of historicity that may occur
within that culture, and the reasons why its history must inevitably be
cumulative or circular, progressive or subjected to regulating ﬂuctuations, capable of spontaneous adjustments or subject to crises. And
thus is revealed the foundation of that historical ﬂow within which the
diﬀerent human sciences assume their validity and can be applied to a
given culture and upon a given synchronological area.
Ethnology, like psychoanalysis, questions not man himself, as he
appears in the human sciences, but the region that makes possible
knowledge about man in general; like psychoanalysis, it spans the
whole ﬁeld of that knowledge in a movement that tends to reach its
boundaries. But psychoanalysis makes use of the particular relation of
the transference in order to reveal, on the outer conﬁnes of representation, Desire, Law, and Death, which outline, at the extremity of analytic
language and practice, the concrete ﬁgures of ﬁnitude; ethnology, on
the other hand, is situated within the particular relation that the Western ratio establishes with all other cultures; and from that starting-point
it avoids the representations that men in any civilization may give
themselves of themselves, of their life, of their needs, of the signiﬁcations laid down in their language; and it sees emerging behind those

the human sciences

representations the norms by which men perform the functions of life,
although they reject their immediate pressure, the rules through which
they experience and maintain their needs, the systems against the
background of which all signiﬁcation is given to them. The privilege of
ethnology and psychoanalysis, the reason for their profound kinship
and symmetry, must not be sought, therefore, in some common concern to pierce the profound enigma, the most secret part of human
nature; in fact, what illuminates the space of their discourse is much
more the historical a priori of all the sciences of man – those great
caesuras, furrows, and dividing-lines which traced man’s outline in the
Western episteme and made him a possible area of knowledge. It was
quite inevitable, then, that they should both be sciences of the
unconscious: not because they reach down to what is below consciousness in man, but because they are directed towards that which,
outside man, makes it possible to know, with a positive knowledge,
that which is given to or eludes his consciousness.
On this basis, a certain number of decisive facts become comprehensible. And the ﬁrst is this: that psychoanalysis and ethnology are not so
much two human sciences among others, but that they span the entire
domain of those sciences, that they animate its whole surface, spread
their concepts throughout it, and are able to propound their methods
of decipherment and their interpretations everywhere. No human science can be sure that it is out of their debt, or entirely independent of
what they may have discovered, or certain of not being beholden to
them in one way or another. But their development has one particular
feature, which is that, despite their quasi-universal ‘bearing’, they
never, for all that, come near to a general concept of man: at no
moment do they come near to isolating a quality in him that is speciﬁc,
irreducible, and uniformly valid wherever he is given to experience.
The idea of a ‘psychoanalytic anthropology’, and the idea of a ‘human
nature’ reconstituted by ethnology, are no more than pious wishes.
Not only are they able to do without the concept of man, they are also
unable to pass through it, for they always address themselves to that
which constitutes his outer limits. One may say of both of them what
Lévi-Strauss said of ethnology: that they dissolve man. Not that there is
any question of revealing him in a better, purer, and as it were more
liberated state; but because they go back towards that which foments

413

414 the order of things
his positivity. In relation to the ‘human sciences’, psychoanalysis and
ethnology are rather ‘counter-sciences’; which does not mean that they
are less ‘rational’ or ‘objective’ than the others, but that they ﬂow in the
opposite direction, that they lead them back to their epistemological
basis, and that they ceaselessly ‘unmake’ that very man who is creating
and re-creating his positivity in the human sciences. Lastly, we can
understand why psychoanalysis and ethnology should have been constituted in confrontation, in a fundamental correlation: since Totem and
taboo, the establishment of a common ﬁeld for these two, the possibility
of a discourse that could move from one to the other without discontinuity, the double articulation of the history of individuals upon
the unconscious of culture, and of the historicity of those cultures
upon the unconscious of individuals, has opened up, without doubt,
the most general problems that can be posed with regard to man.
One can imagine what prestige and importance ethnology could
possess if, instead of deﬁning itself in the ﬁrst place – as it has done
until now – as the study of societies without history, it were deliberately to seek its object in the area of the unconscious processes that
characterize the system of a given culture; in this way it would bring
the relation of historicity, which is constitutive of all ethnology in
general, into play within the dimension in which psychoanalysis has
always been deployed. In so doing it would not assimilate the mechanisms and forms of a society to the pressure and repression of collective
hallucinations, thus discovering – though on a larger scale – what
analysis can discover at the level of the individual; it would deﬁne as a
system of cultural unconsciouses the totality of formal structures
which render mythical discourse signiﬁcant, give their coherence and
necessity to the rules that regulate needs, and provide the norms of life
with a foundation other than that to be found in nature, or in pure
biological functions. One can imagine the similar importance that a
psychoanalysis would have if it were to share the dimension of an
ethnology, not by the establishment of a ‘cultural psychology’, not by
the sociological explanation of phenomena manifested at the level of
individuals, but by the discovery that the unconscious also possesses,
or rather that it is in itself, a certain formal structure. By this means,
ethnology and psychoanalysis would succeed, not in superimposing
themselves on one another, nor even perhaps in coming together, but

the human sciences

in intersecting like two lines diﬀerently oriented: one proceeding from
the apparent elision of the signiﬁed in a neurosis to the lacuna in the
signifying system through which the neurosis found expression; the
other proceeding from the analogy between the multiple things signiﬁed (in mythologies, for example) to the unity of a structure whose
formal transformations would yield up the diversity existing in the
actual stories. It would thus not be at the level of the relations between
the individual and society, as has often been believed, that psychoanalysis and ethnology could be articulated one upon the other; it is
not because the individual is a part of his group, it is not because a
culture is reﬂected and expressed in a more or less deviant manner in
the individual, that these two forms of knowledge are neighbours. In
fact, they have only one point in common, but it is an essential and
inevitable one: the one at which they intersect at right angles; for the
signifying chain by which the unique experience of the individual is
constituted is perpendicular to the formal system on the basis of which
the signiﬁcations of a culture are constituted: at any given instant, the
structure proper to individual experience ﬁnds a certain number of
possible choices (and of excluded possibilities) in the systems of the
society; inversely, at each of their points of choice the social structures
encounter a certain number of possible individuals (and others who
are not) – just as the linear structure of language always produces a
possible choice between several words or several phonemes at any
given moment (but excludes all others).
Whereupon there is formed the theme of a pure theory of language
which would provide the ethnology and the psychoanalysis thus conceived with their formal model. There would thus be a discipline that
could cover in a single movement both the dimension of ethnology
that relates the human sciences to the positivities in which they are
framed and the dimension of psychoanalysis that relates the knowledge
of man to the ﬁnitude that gives it its foundation. In linguistics, one
would have a science perfectly founded in the order of positivities
exterior to man (since it is a question of pure language), which, after
traversing the whole space of the human sciences, would encounter the
question of ﬁnitude (since it is through language, and within it, that
thought is able to think: so that it is in itself a positivity with the value
of a fundamental). Above ethnology and psychoanalysis, or, more

415

416 the order of things
exactly, interwoven with them, a third ‘counter-science’ would appear
to traverse, animate, and disturb the whole constituted ﬁeld of the
human sciences; and by overﬂowing it both on the side of positivities
and on that of ﬁnitude, it would form the most general contestation of
that ﬁeld. Like the two other counter-sciences, it would make visible, in
a discursive mode, the frontier-forms of the human sciences; like them,
it would situate its experience in those enlightened and dangerous
regions where the knowledge of man acts out, in the form of the
unconscious and of historicity, its relation with what renders them
possible. In ‘exposing’ it, these three counter-sciences threaten the very
thing that made it possible for man to be known. Thus we see the
destiny of man being spun before our very eyes, but being spun backwards; it is being led back, by those strange bobbins, to the forms of its
birth, to the homeland that made it possible. And is that not one way of
bringing about its end? For linguistics no more speak of man himself
than do psychoanalysis and ethnology.
It may be said that, in playing this role, linguistics is doing no more
than resuming the functions that had once been those of biology or of
economics, when, in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, an
attempt was made to unify the human sciences under concepts borrowed from biology or economics. But linguistics may have a much
more fundamental role. And for several reasons. First, because it permits – or in any case strives to render possible – the structuration of
contents themselves; it is therefore not a theoretical reworking of
knowledge acquired elsewhere, the interpretation of an already
accomplished reading of phenomena; it does not oﬀer a ‘linguistic
version’ of the facts observed in the human sciences, it is rather the
principle of a primary decipherment: to a gaze forearmed by linguistics, things attain to existence only in so far as they are able to form
the elements of a signifying system. Linguistic analysis is more a perception than an explanation: that is, it is constitutive of its very object.
Moreover, we ﬁnd that by means of this emergence of structure (as an
invariable relation within a totality of elements) the relation of the
human sciences to mathematics has been opened up once more, and in
a wholly new dimension; it is no longer a matter of knowing whether
one can quantify results, or whether human behaviour is susceptible
of being introduced into the ﬁeld of a measurable probability; the

the human sciences

question that arises is that of knowing whether it is possible without a
play on words to employ the notion of structure, or at least whether it
is the same structure that is referred to in mathematics and in the
human sciences: a question that is central if one wishes to know the
possibilities and rights, the conditions and limitations, of a justiﬁed
formalization; it will be seen that the relation of the sciences of man to
the axis of the formal and a priori disciplines – a relation that had not
been essential till then, and as long as the attempt was made to identify
it with the right to measure – returns to life and perhaps becomes
fundamental now that within the space of the human sciences there
emerges their relation both to the empirical positivity of language and
to the analytic of ﬁnitude; the three axes which deﬁne the volume
proper to the sciences of man thus become visible, and almost simultaneously so, in the questions they pose. Lastly, as a result of the
importance of linguistics and of its application to the knowledge of
man, the question of the being of language, which, as we have seen, is
so intimately linked with the fundamental problems of our culture,
reappears in all its enigmatic insistence. With the continually extended
use of linguistic categories, it is a question of growing importance,
since we must henceforth ask ourselves what language must be in
order to structure in this way what is nevertheless not in itself either
word or discourse, and in order to articulate itself on the pure forms of
knowledge. By a much longer and much more unexpected path, we are
led back to the place that Nietzsche and Mallarmé signposted when the
ﬁrst asked: Who speaks?, and the second saw his glittering answer in
the Word itself. The question as to what language is in its being is once
more of the greatest urgency.
At this point, where the question of language arises again with such
heavy over-determination, and where it seems to lay siege on every
side to the ﬁgure of man (that ﬁgure which had once taken the place of
Classical Discourse), contemporary culture is struggling to create an
important part of its present, and perhaps of its future. On the one
hand, suddenly very near to all these empirical domains, questions
arise which before had seemed very distant from them: these questions
concern a general formalization of thought and knowledge; and at a
time when they were still thought to be dedicated solely to the relation
between logic and mathematics, they suddenly open up the possibility,

417

418 the order of things
and the task, of purifying the old empirical reason by constituting
formal languages, and of applying a second critique of pure reason on
the basis of new forms of the mathematical a priori. However, at the
other extremity of our culture, the question of language is entrusted to
that form of speech which has no doubt never ceased to pose it, but
which is now, for the ﬁrst time, posing it to itself. That literature in our
day is fascinated by the being of language is neither the sign of an
imminent end nor proof of a radicalization: it is a phenomenon whose
necessity has its roots in a vast conﬁguration in which the whole structure of our thought and our knowledge is traced. But if the question of
formal languages gives prominence to the possibility or impossibility
of structuring positive contents, a literature dedicated to language gives
prominence, in all their empirical vivacity, to the fundamental forms of
ﬁnitude. From within language experienced and traversed as language,
in the play of its possibilities extended to their furthest point, what
emerges is that man has ‘come to an end’, and that, by reaching the
summit of all possible speech, he arrives not at the very heart of himself but at the brink of that which limits him; in that region where
death prowls, where thought is extinguished, where the promise of the
origin interminably recedes. It was inevitable that this new mode of
being of literature should have been revealed in works like those of
Artaud or Roussel – and by men like them; in Artaud’s work, language,
having been rejected as discourse and re-apprehended in the plastic
violence of the shock, is referred back to the cry, to the tortured body,
to the materiality of thought, to the ﬂesh; in Roussel’s work, language,
having been reduced to powder by a systematically fabricated chance,
recounts interminably the repetition of death and the enigma of
divided origins. And as if this experiencing of the forms of ﬁnitude
in language were insupportable, or inadequate (perhaps its very inadequacy was insupportable), it is within madness that it manifested
itself – the ﬁgure of ﬁnitude thus positing itself in language (as that
which unveils itself within it), but also before it, preceding it, as that
formless, mute, unsignifying region where language can ﬁnd its freedom. And it is indeed in this space thus revealed that literature, ﬁrst
with surrealism (though still in a very much disguised form), then,
more and more purely, with Kafka, Bataille, and Blanchot, posited itself
as experience: as experience of death (and in the element of death), of

the human sciences

unthinkable thought (and in its inaccessible presence), of repetition
(of original innocence, always there at the nearest and yet always the
most distant limit of language); as experience of ﬁnitude (trapped in
the opening and the tyranny of that ﬁnitude).
It is clear that this ‘return’ of language is not a sudden interruption
in our culture; it is not the irruptive discovery of some long-buried
evidence; it does not indicate a folding back of thought upon itself, in
the movement by which it emancipates itself from all content, or a
narcissism occurring within a literature freeing itself at last from what
it has to say in order to speak henceforth only about the fact that it is
language stripped naked. It is, in fact, the strict unfolding of Western
culture in accordance with the necessity it imposed upon itself at the
beginning of the nineteenth century. It would be false to see in this
general indication of our experience, which may be termed ‘formalism’, the sign of a drying up, of a rarefaction of thought losing its
capacity for re-apprehending the plenitude of contents; it would be no
less false to place it from the outset upon the horizon of some new
thought or new knowledge. It is within the very tight-knit, very coherent outlines of the modern episteme that this contemporary experience
found its possibility; it is even that episteme which, by its logic, gave rise
to such an experience, constituted it through and through, and made it
impossible for it not to exist. What occurred at the time of Ricardo,
Cuvier, and Bopp, the form of knowledge that was established with the
appearance of economics, biology, and philology, the thought of ﬁnitude laid down by the Kantian critique as philosophy’s task – all that
still forms the immediate space of our reﬂection. We think in that area.
And yet the impression of fulﬁlment and of end, the muﬄed feeling
that carries and animates our thought, and perhaps lulls it to sleep with
the facility of its promises, and makes us believe that something new is
about to begin, something we glimpse only as a thin line of light low
on the horizon – that feeling and that impression are perhaps not ill
founded. It will be said that they exist, that they have never ceased to be
formulated over and over again since the early nineteenth century; it
will be said that Hölderlin, Hegel, Feuerbach, and Marx all felt this
certainty that in them a thought and perhaps a culture were coming to
a close, and that from the depths of a distance, which was perhaps not
invincible, another was approaching – in the dim light of dawn, in the

419

420 the order of things
brilliance of noon, or in the dissension of the falling day. But this close,
this perilous imminence whose promise we fear today, whose danger
we welcome, is probably not of the same order. Then, the task enjoined
upon thought by that annunciation was to establish for man a stable
sojourn upon this earth from which the gods had turned away or
vanished. In our day, and once again Nietzsche indicated the turningpoint from a long way oﬀ, it is not so much the absence or the death of
God that is aﬃrmed as the end of man (that narrow, imperceptible
displacement, that recession in the form of identity, which are the
reason why man’s ﬁnitude has become his end); it becomes apparent,
then, that the death of God and the last man are engaged in a contest
with more than one round: is it not the last man who announces that
he has killed God, thus situating his language, his thought, his laughter
in the space of that already dead God, yet positing himself also as he
who has killed God and whose existence includes the freedom and the
decision of that murder? Thus, the last man is at the same time older
and yet younger than the death of God; since he has killed God, it is he
himself who must answer for his own ﬁnitude; but since it is in the
death of God that he speaks, thinks, and exists, his murder itself is
doomed to die; new gods, the same gods, are already swelling the
future Ocean; man will disappear. Rather than the death of God – or,
rather, in the wake of that death and in a profound correlation with it –
what Nietzsche’s thought heralds is the end of his murderer; it is the
explosion of man’s face in laughter, and the return of masks; it is the
scattering of the profound stream of time by which he felt himself
carried along and whose pressure he suspected in the very being of
things; it is the identity of the Return of the Same with the absolute
dispersion of man. Throughout the nineteenth century, the end of
philosophy and the promise of an approaching culture were no doubt
one and the same thing as the thought of ﬁnitude and the appearance
of man in the ﬁeld of knowledge; in our day, the fact that philosophy is
still – and again – in the process of coming to an end, and the fact that
in it perhaps, though even more outside and against it, in literature as
well as in formal reﬂection, the question of language is being posed,
prove no doubt that man is in the process of disappearing.
For the entire modern episteme – that which was formed towards the
end of the eighteenth century and still serves as the positive ground of

the human sciences

our knowledge, that which constituted man’s particular mode of being
and the possibility of knowing him empirically – that entire episteme was
bound up with the disappearance of Discourse and its featureless reign,
with the shift of language towards objectivity, and with its reappearance in multiple form. If this same language is now emerging with
greater and greater insistence in a unity that we ought to think but
cannot as yet do so, is this not the sign that the whole of this conﬁguration is now about to topple, and that man is in the process of perishing as the being of language continues to shine ever brighter upon our
horizon? Since man was constituted at a time when language was
doomed to dispersion, will he not be dispersed when language regains
its unity? And if that were true, would it not be an error – a profound
error, since it could hide from us what should now be thought – to
interpret our actual experience as an application of the forms of language to the human order? Ought we not rather to give up thinking of
man, or, to be more strict, to think of this disappearance of man – and
the ground of possibility of all the sciences of man – as closely as
possible in correlation with our concern with language? Ought we not
to admit that, since language is here once more, man will return to that
serene non-existence in which he was formerly maintained by the
imperious unity of Discourse? Man had been a ﬁgure occurring
between two modes of language; or, rather, he was constituted only
when language, having been situated within representation and, as it
were, dissolved in it, freed itself from that situation at the cost of its
own fragmentation: man composed his own ﬁgure in the interstices of
that fragmented language. Of course, these are not aﬃrmations; they
are at most questions to which it is not possible to reply; they must be
left in suspense, where they pose themselves, only with the knowledge
that the possibility of posing them may well open the way to a future
thought.

VI IN CONCLUSION
One thing in any case is certain: man is neither the oldest nor the most
constant problem that has been posed for human knowledge. Taking a
relatively short chronological sample within a restricted geographical
area – European culture since the sixteenth century – one can be

421

422 the order of things
certain that man is a recent invention within it. It is not around him
and his secrets that knowledge prowled for so long in the darkness. In
fact, among all the mutations that have aﬀected the knowledge of
things and their order, the knowledge of identities, diﬀerences, characters, equivalences, words – in short, in the midst of all the episodes
of that profound history of the Same – only one, that which began
a century and a half ago and is now perhaps drawing to a close,
has made it possible for the ﬁgure of man to appear. And that
appearance was not the liberation of an old anxiety, the transition
into luminous consciousness of an age-old concern, the entry into
objectivity of something that had long remained trapped within beliefs
and philosophies: it was the eﬀect of a change in the fundamental
arrangements of knowledge. As the archaeology of our thought easily
shows, man is an invention of recent date. And one perhaps nearing
its end.
If those arrangements were to disappear as they appeared, if some
event of which we can at the moment do no more than sense the
possibility – without knowing either what its form will be or what it
promises – were to cause them to crumble, as the ground of Classical
thought did, at the end of the eighteenth century, then one can certainly wager that man would be erased, like a face drawn in sand at the
edge of the sea.

