Phenornerwlogy
o{8pirit

TRANSLATED BY A.V. MILLER
WITH ANALYSIS OF THE TEXT
AND FOREWORD BY J. N. FINDLAY

HEGEL'S
PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

J

\

PHENOME'NOLOGY
OF SPIRIT
BY

G.

w~

F. HEGEL

Translated by A. V. Miller
with Analysis of the Text
and Foreword by
J. N. Findlay, F.B.A., F.A.A.A.S.

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Oxford

New York

Toronto

Melbourne

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Oxford
London
Glasgow
New York
Toronto
Melbourne
Wellington
Nairobi
Dar es Salaam
Cape Lown
Kuala Lumpur
Singapore
Jakarta
Hong Kong
Tokyo
Delhi
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Karachi
@OxJDrd University Press 1977

printing, last digit: 39 38 37 36 35
All rights rese.rved. No part oj this publicatinn may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any Jorm or by any means, electronic, mechanical, plwtocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of 0 xford University Press
This translation of Hegel's Phdnomenologie des Geistes has been made from the fifth edition, edited by J. Hoffmeister, Philosophische Bibliothek Band [14@Felix Meiner
Verlag, Hamburg, 1952

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
Phenomenology of spirit.
Index.
ISBN -13 978-0-19-8!.l4597-rPbk
I. Title 2. Miller, Arnold Vincent 3. Findlay,
John Niemeyer
liD

MetaphYSiCS

Printed in the United States of America

FOREWORD
J. N. FINDLAY
THE Phenomenology of Spirit, firs t pu blished in 1807, is a work
seen by Hegel as a necessary forepiece to his philosophical system (as later set forth in the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical
Sciences in Outline of 1817, 1827, and 1830), but it is meant to
be a forepiece that can be dropped and discarded once the
student, through deep immersion in its contents, has advanced
through confus~ons and misunderstanding to the properly
philosophical point of view. It~ task is to run through, in a scientifically purged order, the stages in the mind's necessary progress from immediate sense-consciousness to the position of a
scientific philosophy, showing thereby that this position is the
only one that the .mind c;;t.n take, when it comes to the end of
the intellectual and spiritqaJ adventures described in the book.
But this sort of history, he tells us in Encyclopaedia §2S, necessarily
had to drag in, more or less out of place and inadequately
cQaracterized, much that wOl,lld afterwards be adequately sC':t
forth in the system, and it ~lso had to bringjn many motivating
connections of w~ich the adventuring mind was unaware,
which explained why it passed from one phase of experience
Of action to another, and yet could not be set forth in the full
manner whicp. alone would render them intelligible.
Heg~l also, in preparing for repubJication of the work before
his death in 1831) wrote a note which throws great light on
his ultimate conception ofit. It was, he writes, a peculiar earlier
work (eigentumlichefr#bere Arbeit) which ought not to be revised,
since it related to the time at which it was written, a time
at which an abstractAbsolute dominated philosophy, (See the
final pOlragraphof the first section of Hoffmeister's Appendix
Zur Feststellung des Textes in the 1952 edition.) This note indicates that, while Hegel undoubtedly thought that the sequence
of thollght-phases described in the Phenom~nolQgy-phases experienced by humanity in the past and recapitulated by Hegel
in ~is own thought-adventures up to and including his own advance to the position of Science in about 1805-was a necessary

vi

FOREWORD

sequence, he still did not think it the only possible necessary
sequence or pathway to Science, and certainly not the pathway
to Science that would be taken by men in the future, or that
might have been taken in other cultural and historical settings.
For Hegel makes plain by his practice, as well as in some of
his utterances, that he does not confuse the necessary with the
unique, that he does not identify a necessary sequence of phases
with the only possible sequence that can be taken. Hegel was
obviously familiar with the branching variety of alternative
proofs, all involving strictly necessary steps, that are possible
in mathematics, and it is plain that he did not think that a
similar branching of proofs was impossible in his dialectical
reasoning. Dialectic is, in fact, a richer and more supple form
ofthought,.advance than mathematical inference, for while the
latter proceeds on lines of strict identity, educing only what is
explicit or almost explicit in some thought-position's content,
dialectic always makes higher~order comments upon its various
thought-positions, stating relations that carry us far beyond
theif obvious content. What is obvious, for example, in Being
is not its identity with Nothing, and what is obvious in Sensecertainty is ootits total lack ofdetermin:::tteness. If mathematical identities can thus follow different routes to the same or to
different goals, dialectical commentaries can even more obviously do the same, and Hegel in his varying treatment of the
same material in the two Logics andin the Phenomenology shows
plain recognition of this fact. A necessary connection, whether
mathematical or dialectical, is not psychologically compUlsive:
it represents a track that the mind mayor may not take, or
that it mayor may not prefer to other tracks, on its journey
to a given concJusion. Thereis no reason then to think that Hegel
thought that the path traced'in the Phenomenology, though consisting throughout of necessary steps, was the only path that
the conscious spirit could have taken in rising from sensuous
immediacy to a bsolu te knowledge, I t was the pa th that had been
taken by the World Spirit in past history, and that had been
rehearsed in the consciousness of Hegel, in whom the notion
of Science first became actual. But this involved no pronounce~
ment as to what pathway to Science would be taken by men
in the future, nor as to what pathway would have been taken
in other thinkable world~situations. For Hegel admits an ele~

FOREWORD

vii

ment of the sheerly contingent, and therefore also of the sheerly
possible, in nature and history.
The sequence of phases to be studied in the Phenomenology
therefore involves a fine blend of the contingently historical and
the logically necessary. Its successive phases bring out what is
logically implicit in its earlier phases, in the Hegelian sense of
representing throughout an insightful, higher-order comment
on previous contents, but they also only bring out a series of
implications actually embodied in past history and in Hegel's
own thought-history. Hegel, we know, did not desire to step
out of his own time and his own thought-situation: the philosopher, as he was later to say on page 35 of the Preface to the
Philosophy qf Right, is necessarily a son of his own time, and his
philosophy is that time 'comprehended in thought. To seek to
transcend one's time is only, he says, to venture into the 'soft
element' of fancy and opinion. The pathway to Science taken
in the future may therefore differ profoundly from the one
studied in the Phenomenology: it may involve many abbreviations
and a1ternative routings. It is not, however, profitable to consider such for us empty possibilities. The path to be considered
is the one actually taken in the past and terminating in the
present. It is, however, for all that, a path involving necessary
implications and developments which will be preserved in all
paths taken in the future and in the terminus to which these
lead. For, on Hegel's view, all dialectical thought-paths lead
to the Absolute Idea and to the knowledge of it which is itself.
It is necessary, in considering the Phenomenology, as in considering al1 Hegel's other writings, to stress this initial point
that, though Hegel may mention much that is contingent and
historical, and may refuse to break wholly loose from this, his
concern is always with the BegrijJe or universal notional shapes
that are evinced in fact and history, and with the ways in which
these align themselves and lead on to one another, and can in
fact ultimately be regarded as distinguishable facets ofa single
all-inclusive universal or concept. (See, for example, Phenomenology, §§6, 12 (pp. 12, 16)1; Encyclopaedia §§I 63-4.) For Hegel
1 Page references to Hegel's Phmommo!ogy oiSpirit given within parentheses in the Fore·
word are to the German edition edited by J. Hoffmeister (F. Meiner, Hamburg, 1952).
The paragraph numbers arc those used in A. V. Miller's translation published in this
volume,

viii

FOREWORD

the universal is no strengthless, arbitrary distillation of the common features of what is individual and empirical; it iSI rather
what must be conceived as realizing itself in what is individual
and empirical, and as responsible both for the being and intelligibility of the latter. But what is thus universal will not necessarilyalign together what are contiguous in space and history,
and hence in the Phenomenology the conceptual treatment can
jump wildly from one factual, empirical scene to the other,
from, for example, the scientific universals behind phenomena
to the fellow minds which discover them in phenomena, from
the antique Stoics and Sceptics, who entrenched themselves in
cogitative abstraction from contingent content, to the medieval
devotees who located their explanatory abstractions beyond all
such content, from the compassion which enables the man of
conscience to forgive the sin-soiled man of action to the religious
spirit which can see the divine in all men, and so on.
It is also necessary to stress here that the dialectical development which Hegel sees as connecting his phenomenological
phases is a logical growth of notions out of notions, given to
us who consider the cultural past of humanity as resumed in
ourselves, but not given 'as a l'ogical growth to those who, including ourselves, went through the actual cases of such notions,
and not even exactly following the order of the corresponding
particularizations. The mind of humanity in the past did not,
for example, see the necessary logical step from the kingdom
of laws behind nature to the kingdom of subjects who consider
nature, nor did they in fact historically pass from the one to
the other. It is we, the phenomenological students of the shapes
of Spirit, who see the logical connections between them, and
therefore also for phenomenological purposes the order in
which they must be arranged. It is important, therefore, that
from tbe very beginning we frame viable conceptions of the logical 'movements' our notional shapes of Spirit must undergo,
movements of which temporal sequences are often only inadequatelyand misplaced reflections. (See, for example, Phenomenology, §80 I) (p. 558); Encyclopaedia &258.) Subjectively, of
course, as we have said, all these movements involve a species
of reflection, a retreat to the vantage-point of a higher-order
and, as we might now say, metalogical examination, and the
consequent bringing into view of what can be truly predicated

FOREWORD

ix

of a thought-phase, though not necessarily what is 'meant' or
intended in its explicit content. But objectively what are thus
brought into view are other thought-phases, thought-phases
which in a very wide sense negate it or go beyond it, and which
involve relations as various to the thought-phase in question
as being its necessary correlate or complement or opposite, or
as being what is true of it though not at all part of its content
and perhaps contradicting the latter, or as being a more explicit
and perfect form of what some phase obscurely prefigures, or
as being some inclusive whole or unity of which the phase in
question can only be an excerpt. The logical 'movement' which
the Phenomenology, like the rest of the system, exhibits, is
throughout the logic of the 'side' or 'aspect' or 'moment', of
that which, while it can be legitimately distinguished in some
unity, and must in fact be so distinguished, nevertheless
represents something basically incapable of self-sufficiency and
independence, properties which can only be attributed to the
whole into which sides, aspects, or moments enter, and a
reference to which is accordingly 'built into' each such side.
On Hegel's basic assumptions negation, in a wide sense that
covers difference, opposition, and reflection or relation, is essential to conception and being: we can conceive nothing and have
nothing if we attempt to dispense with it. But negation in this
wide sense always operates within a unity, which is not as such
divisible into self-sufficient elements, but is totally present in
each and all of its aspects, and we conceive nothing and have
nothing if we attempt to dispense with this unity. This unity
in a sense negates the former or primary negation: it changes
what in a sense tried to be an independent element into a mere
aspect or moment. This second sort ofnegation is not, however,
comparable with the first: it involves a reversal of direction,
which does not, however, annul the primary direction that it
reverses. The distinctions are still there, but only as 'moments'
and no longer as independent elements.
It is, further, in retrospect, the unity which reverses the first
negation which also made that first negation possible. I t is
because a unity indivisibly underlies distinct sides, that each
such side can acquire a certain relative self-sufficiency and independence, can after a fashion assert itself in opposition to the
whole. But it is this unity also which forces the mind (and also

x

FOREWORD

the thing) onward from one of its one-sided aspects to another
aspect necessary to its completion, and which ultimately. builds
all sides into a single integrated or reasonable totality. From
the point of view of the phenomenological student, we have here
a dialectical process or sequence. This is always initiated by
the Understanding, that seemingly marvellous facuIty (see
Phenomenology §32, (PP.29-3o)) that is able, as it were, to segre..
gate aspects in an indivisible whole, and to endow the non-independent with a certain quasi-independence. This segregation
is carried on by a dialectical phase in which other aspects then
either negate) oppose, supplement, or are put into necessary
relation with the first segregated aspect, which then loses itself
with the other aspects in a many-sided but truly indivisible
whole. From the point of view of the notional phases here concerned, they grow out of and into one another, not in the derived temporal sense in which the parts of an organism grow
out of one another, but rather in the primary sense in which,
for example, the whole series of numbers grows out of certain
basic arithmetical principles. The notional integration thus indicated ends, according to Hegel, in Absolute Knowledge or
the Absoluteldea, the test of whose absoluteness consists simply
in the fact that nothing further remains to be taken care of.
Even the contingencies and loosenesses of connection that
obtain in the world are such as the sort of system we are constructing does and must involve. That Hegel does achieve this
final integration is, of course, what many would dispute.
There is, however, yet another sense in which the Phenomenology is concerned only with notions or concepts, i.e. with the
universal shapes of Spirit, and only indirectly with the individual instances of such shapes. This depends on Hegel's view
that conscious Spirit or subjectivity is itself exhaustively analysable in terms of the three conceptual moments of universality,
specificity, and singularity, and that it represents, in fact,
merely an extreme form of these three notional functions, a
severance or an alienation of them from one another which is,
of course, inseparable from their fruitful and necessary comingtogether. For Hegel does not believein the subject as being some
detached, substantival entity standing in varying relations to
other substantival entities which are its objects. The subject is,
as said in the Encyclopaedia, the active or self-active universal,

FOREWORD

xi

the universal in a peculiar form in which it distinguishes itself
from what is specific and individual, from what is perhaps given
sensibly, and yet goes forth from itself and interprets and controls what thus confronts it objectively. In so doing, moreover,
it makes its objects its own, and is thereby enabled to return
to self and to achieve consciousness of self. (See Phenomenology
§I 8 (p. 20), also Encyclopaedia §§2o-g.) The thinking Ego is,
further, in another place (Phenomenology §235 (pp. 178"-9))
closely connected and in fact identified, much as by Kant in
the Transcendental Deduction, with the category or categories
used in the synthetic constitution of objects by the"understanding, and, at the end of the Phenomenology, the conceptualization
of all objects, and their subjection to universals, is not seen as
different from the imposition on them of the form af self (Pheno~
menology §803 (p. 560)). The subject or Ego is thus for Hegel
not what we ordinarily understand by a personal thinker, but
the logical function of universality in a peculiar sort of
detachment from its species and instances. The mind for Hegel,
as for Aristotle, is thus the place of forms, a bustling Agora
where such forms are involved in endless transactions and conversations, and though it is by the intermediation of such forms
that there is a reaching~out to their individual instances, they
none the less enjoy a relative independence there, a detachment
in the thought-ether, that they never enjoy elsewhere. Universals, of course, on Hegel's view, enjoya sunken, implicit existence in natural objects (see Encyclopaedia §24),and they also
enjoy some sort of being beneath the surface of natural objects,
as the essences or forces which ,exp]ain them (Phenomenology §152
(p. I 17)). They are also, in the Logic, given as having a status
as 'pure essentialities' or as 'notional shadows' without sensuous
concretion, in som'e sense prior to the existence of nature and
finite spirit. Hut however much universals, and that,Universal
of all Universals, the Idea, may exist apart from subjects, in
any ordinary sense of the latter, the fact remains that they
achieve their full development and truth in the self~conscious­
ness of Spirit, in which all universal patterns of logical and
natural being are reactivated and resumed.
The life then ofconsClous Spirit, whether in the Phenomenology
of Spirit or the later Philosophy of Spirit, is arguably only a series
of phases in' which one or other of the moments of the Notion

xii

FOREWORD

is detached, as subjective, from the rest, which are thereby
extruded into objectivity, and which are then again reintegrated with the moments remaining in the subject, again
extruded and again reintegrated in an endlessly developing
rhythm. Those who know Hegel well, and are aware of the profound connections of the Phenomenology with the later system
(which is in fact all there in the Jena writings), will know how
mistaken are all those who think of the Phenomenology as merely
a contribution to existential phenomenology, to which the later
system is largely irrelevant. From first to last Hegel conceived
everything in terms of the self-active BegrifJ and Idee, and his
thought is as remote from the personally concerned thought of
the existentialists as from that of the grandiose suprapersonal
Ego of Fichte. These types of thought can, of course, be found
encapsulated in Hegel if one likes to look for them, since he
includes what he transcends and even includes what he will
transcend once hisepigoni have formulated it. (Compare, for
example, his dialectical anticipations of Mill's views on induction and of the logical atomism of Wittgenstein and Russell.)
But what Hegel brings in as a phase in an ongoing dialectic
is not, of course, his last word on a subject.
One more word before we begin our introductory survey of
the actual content of the PhenomenQlogy.Since the Phenomenology
studies a particular path from immediate, sense-experience to
aU-grasping Wissenschqft which is also the path distilled in
Hegel's experience from the previous experiences of the World
Spirit, there will be much in that path that would be illuminated by knowledge of the personal history of Hegel: we ought
to know why he was impressed by certain notional entailments
and affinities and not by others. In part we do have considerable
light on this topic. We understand, for example, how the love
between him and his sister Christina caused him to stress the
role of sisters in ethicaJ life, we understand his interest in the
Antigonefrom his sc~ool boy studies at Stuttgart, and we under~
stand hisinterest in the French Enligbtenment and Revolution
from the provincial posi tion of con tinent~l Germany: both historical phases counted for much less in Britain, There are also
difficult allusions in his treatment of the Unhappy Consciousness which Rosenkranz convincingly illuminated. But there
remains much in the Phenomenology which is enigmatic, and one

FOREWORD

xiii

cannot always see why the route to Absolute Knowledge should
wind through just these peculiar thickets. Hegel was in fact a
writer of literary genius, and one swayed in his choice of words
by a burgeoning unconscious. Once he departed from the dispiriting atmosphere of Berne and Frankfurt, and ceased writing
such relatively dull, much over-studied writing as he produced
there, an afflatus seized him in the J ena lecture-rooms, an
afflatus perhaps uniquein philosophical history, which affected
not only his ideas but his style, and which makes one at times
only sure that he is saying something immeasurably profound
and important, but not exactly what it is. (I am in this position,
despite help, regarding thetwo intelligible worlds in the section
on Force and Understanding.) To comment on Hegel funy
would therefore req uire the same sort of psychological and
metapsychological treatment that has long been practised on
an essentially rapt man like Shakespeare or on such a Gal1ic
genius as Rimbaud or Mallarme. Despite the sensitive work of
Jean Hyppolite, we are far from having anything like a really
full commentary on the Phenomenology. The general remarks
that I shall now make will therefore yield only a very inadequate prefatory illumination.
We shall begin our treatment of the Phenomenology with the
In tl"oductiol1, ignoring .thebea u tifulandfamous Preface, which
was in fact only added when the book was complete, and which
was meant to introduce not only the Phenomenology, but the
whole system. The point of the Introduction is simply to give
a.preliminary conception, justified only when the wbrk would
be complete, as to how a study of the shapes of mind leading
one on from immediate experience to what claimed to be scientific knowledge could succeed in dissipating doubt as to the real
possibility ofthe whole venture. Might not the finally corrected
sbape which emerged from such a process be as remote from
things 'as they in themselves are' as the first, uncorrected, immediate shape? And how could the projected work abolish
Kant's view that an examination of human knowledge only
shows, not that such knowledge can really reach some stand ..
pointwhere 'theAbsolute' or"theThingin Itself' will he accessible
to it, but that this is for ever and in itself impossible, that there
are and must be aspects of things that we can indeed conceive
negatively, or perhaps have beliefs about, but of \-Yhic'h we can

xiv

FOREWORD

never have knowledge? Hegel's criticism of this critical view
ofknowledge is simply that it is self-refuting, that it pronounces,
even if negatively, on the relation of conscious appearances to
absolute reality, while claiming that the latter must for ever
transcend knowledge. To this self-refuting view Hegel opposes
the view that the distinction between what things in themselves
are, and what things only are for consciousness or knowledge,
must itselfbe a distinction drawn within consciousness, that the
former can be only the corrected view of an object, while the
latter is merely a view formerly entertained but now abandoned
as incorrect. The progress of knowledge will then consist in the
constant demotion of what appeared to be the absolute truth
about the object to what now appears to be only the way that
the object appeared to consciousness, a new appearance of absolute truth taking the former's place.
Hegel, however, assumes that this progress must have a final
term, a state where knowledge need no longer transcend or correct itself, where it will discover itselfin its object and its object
in itself, where concept will correspond to object and object to
consciousness (see §80 (p. 69)). Such a conception might seem
to go too far, for surely an endless inadequacy of knowledge to its
object woqld 1,1otdestroy aU meaning and validity in such knowledge, nor would this vanish were there tobe aspects of things of
which, as Kant held, we could only frame negative, regulative
conceptions, but of which we could never have definite knowledge? Hegel will, however, marvellousl y include in his final no tion
ofthefinalstate of knowledge the notion of an endless progress
that can have no final term. For he conceives that, precisely
in seeing the object as an endless problem, we forthwith see it
as not being a problem at alL For what the object in itself is,
is simply to be the other, the stimulant of knowledge and prac~
dee, which in being for ever capable of being temouldeq and
reinterpreted) is also everlastingly pinned down and found out
beingjust what it is. Th,e implication ofal1 this is that the teleological view of objectivity as being intrinsically destined to be
interpreted and con trolled by consciousness will prove, on a sufficiently deep examination, to be so wholly appeasing and
satisfying that no shadow of the hidden or inexplicable will
remain to haunt us. We shall then bein a fit state to investigate
the essentialities of being as set forth in the Logic, and the sub-

FOREWORD

xv

sequent self-externalization of these essentialities in the philosophies of Nature and Spirit. Whether this Hegelian view of the
role of the object as a mere inspirer of spiritual effort is valid
may of course be questioned: there would certainly seem to be
obscurities, inconsequences, and dysteleologies in our world
which demoralize, rather than stimulate, spiritual effort. We
shall not, however, consider these contemporary depressants,
which Hegel, as a German Romantic, could not have en..
visaged.
The Introduction in its fina] paragraphs (§§86-g (pp. 7 ]-5))
makes the further important point that the lessons that consciousness learns in its continued experience of objects are not
for it a continuous course of lessons : it conceives,that it is constantly passing to some new and unrelated object, when it is
really only seeing its previous object in some novel, critical light.
It is not, for example, aware, as previously said, that the consciousness of an order of mutually conscious persons is what was
implicit in the awareness of laws, forces, and other essentialities
hehind the phenomena of nature: it is we, the phenomenological students, who see the deep notional continuity in what is
for it a kaleidoscope of objects. It is important, in what follows,
that we should always distinguish between the actual transitioDS occurring in conscious experience and the logical transitions that the phenomenologist elicits from these latter.
In Section A on Consciousness Hegel explores three relations
of conscious subjectivity to its object: the Sense-certainty which
merely confronts an object in what seems to be its rich individuality without making anything definite of it, the Perception
where it begins to disting1,lish properties or qualities in the immediately given, but is unahle to integrate them in the unity
of the perceived thing, and finally the Understanding, where
the natures of things are seen as fixed patterns of mutual interference and interaction behind their manifest, phenomenal
surface. Sense~certainty is dialectically flawed by itsdaim to
q ualita dve richness and individual immediacy, sinceitis impossible to pin down the qualities which are thus felt to be rich
and various or the individuality which is thus felt to be wholly
unique. For in the flux of experience one quality is constantly
yielding place to another, and it is impossible to seize what is individual by pointing gestures or by demonstrative words such

xvi

FOREWORD

as 'This', 'Here', 'Now', 'I', etc., which are all irremediably
general in meaning. Perception, 1ikewise, is dialectically flawed
by its incapacity to integrate the separate characters it picks out
with the unified individuality of the object to which it seeks
to attribute them. Both lead on to Understanding, where the
universal in terms of which immediacies are to be understood
is both a complex pattern unifying a number of discriminable
characters and a]so involves the distinction of the manifest and
the dispositional, the latter being part and parcel of such
notions as permanent nature, specific essence, force, and law.
But the realm of the essential and dispositional is dialectically
flawed by its inability to explain the comprehensive dovetailing
of essential natures, forces, and laws into one another, so as to
form only one system ofinteracting essentialities. It is by recognizing something akin to the explanatory unity imparted by
conscious mind to all that it considers, that this dialectical flaw
is removed, and that the consciousness of objects is replaced
by self-consciousness or by a consciousness of consciousness. It
isimportant to realize that the sensing, perceiving, understand ..
ing, and self.. conscious mind does not perceive the logical connections which lead from each of these stages to the next. It
is we, the phenomenologists, who perceive them. To consciousness itself there is simply a blurred, sensuous confrontation with
unseizable, qualified particulars, which becomes clarified into
a perception of things which in some manner mysteriously unite
different aspects or characters, and which then becomes
organized in the sense of a number .of regularly recurrent
'natures'making dynamic impacts upon us and upon oQe
another. From this the glance simply switches to the rational
creatures around oneself, who are all interpreting the same
objects, without identifying their interpretative acts with the
interpretations embedded in things. It is the watching phenomenologist who discerns aU these transitions, and who above
all performs the difficult, non-formal transition from 'Things
are in teracting in a manner X' to 'We all are understanding
things as interacting in a manner X'.
From Consciousness, A, we have therefore jumped to B, Selfconsciousness, where our object is now a conscious Ego, an actively functioning, categorically synthetic universal, looking
about for fully specified and individualized contents to interpret

FOREWORD

xvii

intellectually and to master practically (§1 77 (p. 140)). Practical
desire which transforms the object is at this stage more im~
portant than intellectual interpretation.) But the active universality of the subject Ego is at first unwilling to see in the
active Universality of the object Ego a just reflection of itself
I t at first tries to demote the object Ego to one that will indeed
recognize it'as subject Ego, but whom it in its turn will not fully
recognize as an active subject (§18S (p. 143)). This demotion
of object Egos by subject Egos then inevitably leads to what
Hegel calls a Life-and-death struggle: each subject wishes to
be the sole centre of active universality and to risk all in asserting his claims. Such.a policy, however, threatens to deprive
each subject of the recognition he demands, and hence the
struggle develops into one for a sovereign position among actively universal subjects, all others being wholly subordinated
to this one (Lord and Bondsman) . But this one-sided aspiration
is also self-frustrating, since the recognition one receives from
a palerefiex of oneself can be no true recognition, and will in
fact impoverish the receiver, whereas the recognition the serf
accords to·his lord, and the work he does for him, will raise
him to a far higher consciousness of active universality than the
lord can ever enjoy. Ohviously the flawed, imperfect universality where every subject desires sovereignty only for himself
{the second occurrence ofthe variable not beingindeBendently
quantified) necessarily corrects itself in the unfiawed universality where every subject recognizes and promotes active
universality in ev,ery subject, where all men equally recognize
and co",.operate with one another.
This stage must, however, at first be present as an inner ideal
to which the particularity of interpersonal existence will not
as yet conform: the world is not as yet so arranged that aU can
he servants and thus also lords to one another. The self-active
universal therefore withdraws stoically into the emptily abstract
fortress ofreason and virtue, or) recognizing this emptiness, into
a similar impractically sceptical fortress which commits itself to
nothing whatever, whether theoretical or practical. Finally we
have an extreme, pathologicalform of spiritual withdrawal in
which consciousness, unable to disengage itself from irrational
particularity, simply identifies itseIfwith the latter, and is then
led to extrude the rational universality which is its true selfinto

xviii

FOREWORD

a mystical, unattainable Beyond. Consciousness in this last
pathology makes itself the universal serf, whi1e the lord in his
perfection becomes noone and dwells nowhere. Such a strained
separation of moments that necessarily belong together cannot
but breakdown. Consciousness must pass from a wallowing selfabasing mysticism to a reasonahleframe of mind. It must see the
world, in all its natural and social arrangements, as something
to be known, enjoyed, and improved by all, since it embodies
the same universality that is active in each subject. Here again
we must stress that the logical sequence of phases from the Lifeand-death-struggle to Reason is not a 10gical sequence for those
who live through it. They pass from Hobbesian egoism to various forms of abstract intersubjectivity, then to a despair which
locates all shared universality infinitely above and beyond
themselves, and then on to a confidence born from the sheer
absurdity of such despair, all without seeing the secret logical
links which link one such attitude to another.
The next section of the Phenomenology (§§23 1-437), devoted
to various forms of Vernunjt or Reasonableness, gets off, after
a short discussion of the Hegelian meaning of 'idealism' .(§§23140 (pp. I75-H2))-as a philosophy which discovers the same
universality in the world as in subjective thought-··-to a consideration of various forms ofscientific empiricism and experimentation. (This is not the same as the projections ofthe Understanding studied in §§I32-65 (pp. 102-29), since the scientific
understanding is now conscious and confident, even if
obscurely, of its own methodologicalprocedur,es.) We start with
the observational study of nature, in which the universal in the
mind divines its own presence in the worJd, and is guided by
an 'instinct of reason' to see what that presence may in detail
involve. Hegel goes lnto a long discussion of various forms of
observational description and classification, and the passage
from these to the formulation of laws which involve unmanifest
and dispositionaLfactors. The discovery of such laws is wholly
successfu1 in the inorganic realm, but can only be partially sue..
cessful in the organic, realm, where all laws are laws of tendency,
and involve contingencies introduced by that 'universal individual', the Earth, as well as al1 the systematic indefinitenesses
of teleology. The observational urge therefore directs itself inward to the true home of self-determining universality, and in-

FOREWORD

xix

vestigates, first the principles of a logic conceived in purely psychologistic terms, and then the wider psychologism which deals
in contingent mental traits and faculties. This treatment of
conscious inwardness as if it had the contingency and the
singularity of external, natural being, leads, however, inevitably to attempts to physicalize consciousness, to identify it with
a thing, or a set of things, that we find out there in the natural
world. Had Hegel lived in the present age we should now have
had a long treatment of the behaviourisms of Watson and Tolman and Skinner: as it is, we are treated to a repulsively long
discussion of the crude physiognomic speculations of Lavater
and the phrenological fantasies of Gall. All that is important
in Hegel's long attempt to make dialectical sense of these primitive exercises is the final outcome: that if self-consciousness can
be reduced to something like a bone or a bone-structure, then
a hone or a bon~structure must be credited with aU the intentional negativity, and the negation of this negativity, involved in self:.·consciousness. The manreuvres of reductionism
are accordingly vain: if mind can be modelled by matter, mattermust be possessed ofevery intricate modality of mind. Nothing has been achieved by the 'reduction', and, since the phenomena of self.consciousness are richer and more intrinsically intelligible than the limi ted repertoire that we ordinarily ascribe
to matter, it is matter rather than mind that is thereby reduced.
This conclusion is whatBertrand Russell would call 'malicious'.
Hegel, however, is not ashamed of the vengeful ingratitude of
consciousness and spirit: it overreaches its pitiable 'other' , and
reduces it to itself.
Hegel now characteristically moves from a reasonableness
concerned to discover itself in objects to a reasonableness con ..
cerned to impose itself on objects through overt action. After a
few initial moves (§§347-58 (pp. 254-61)), which anticipate
what will really only emerge at the stage of the Spiritual, Hegel
begins by discussing the hedonistic approach to the world, the
reasonableness which makes everything in the world, including
the body and soul of another person, minister to one's own satisfaction. This attitude breaks down in a manner ana10gous to
theseemingfulness of sense-certainty : it condemns the hedonist
to an endless, hollow search for new pleasures, which never provide a lasting content for self-consciousness. The hedonistic life

xx

FOREWORD

therefore dissolves into the romantic life of the heart, the life
which espouses grand projects, which in their extravagance
measure up to the sweeping universality of self-consciousness,
but which inevitably clash with the equally grand life-projects
of others. The game of the heart then yields place to the greater
game ofvirtue, of the keeping of oneself pure in quixotic scruple
and total indifference to 'the way of the world'. This game,
however, also interferes with the parallel quixotism of others,
and with the sensible non-quixotism of the ordered social world,
which is more truly universal than the cult of personal virtue.
The dialectic then swings over from arbitrary subjectivity to
the arbitrary objectivity of Sachlichkeit. A man identifies himself
with a Sache, a thing or a task, which is his own, and which
he pursues without· regard to external success or approval.
Everyone else is similarly supposed to be devoting himself to
his own Sache. Such disinterested fulfilment of tasks rests, however, on self-deception. Its disinterestedness is always held up
for the admiration of others, and is really a form of personal
exhibitionism. When this is exposed, disinterestedness shifts to
a moralistic form, setting up absolute prescriptions of various
simple sorts (Tell the truth, Help others, etc.). These can, however, never achieve the complete exceptionlessness to which
they aspire. Reasonableness then finally assumes the Kantian
form of-identifying the universal with the formally universalizable or self-consistent. This, Hegel shows, is as vacuous as the
universalism of the Stoics or Sceptics, since any way ofHfe can
be rendered formally self·consistent. We therefore move to a
universalism which is substantial as well as subjective, the universalism of the ethical life of an actual communi ty, whose laws
and customs clothe the bare bones of ethical prescriptions with
living flesh, and make the universalizing life genuinely possible.
We pass from the merely Reasonable t Vernunft) to the higher
stage of the Spiritual tGeist) .
Hegel finds the exemplary material for his first, rudimentar-y
form of spirituality in the ethical world of Greek tragedy, with
which he had come into vivid contact in his Gymnasium studies
at Stuttgart. Rudimentary spiritual life is not the life of an un..
divided community with which the individual subject iden ..
tifies himself whole-heartedly: it is essentially bifocal,
and centres as much in the family, with its unwritten prescrip-

FOREWORD

xxi

tions dimly backed by dead ancestors, as in the overt power
of the State, with its openly proclaimed, 'daylight' laws. The
law of the family is a divine law, a law stemming from the
underwor1d of the unconscious, and interpreted by the intuitive
females in the family: the state law is on the contrary human,
and is proclaimed and enforced by mature males. Hegel makes
plain that these two laws must at times clash-the theme of
the Antigone and other tragedies: in the case of such clashes,
the individual incurs guilt whatever he may do. Obviously
Hegel has here seized on a very profound source of disuni ty
in ethical spiritual life : the clash between a self~transcendence
which is deep, but also tinged with contingent immediacy, and
a self-transcendence which can be extended indefinitely,
but in that very extensibility necessarily lacks depth.
The truly moral life to which we must advance will be as deep
in its care for individual problems and circumstances as
it is wide in its concern for anyone and everyone. For the time
being., however, the rent life of the primitive ethical community must yield place to a spiri tual life where all in timacy is
dissolved.
Hegel here chooses for his illustration the atomistic life of Imperial Rome (§§4 77-83 (pp. 342-6)), where every man counts
as no more thana property-owner and the state laws merely
concern the ownership and transmission of property. Such an
atomistic comlDunity, to which all individual needs and characters are indifferent, necessarilyculminatesin a moreorless arbitrarily selected Imperator or World-master, whose relation to
the community is external, and quite void of anything like
family depth and warmth, The removal of intimacy, of warmth
or soul, from the mutual recognition of the community's
members, must} however, necessarily give rise to a sense ofdis·
tance, of estrangement or alienation from the community. The
latter may represent the individual's true self, but he cannot
find himself in it. If Hegel has chosen Imperial Rome as his
first example of such alienation, he now leaps to seventeenthand eighteenth-century continental Europe, with its dazzling
French centre, for one of his most fascinating and brilliant
phenomenological studies. The ju~p here taken shows how
little the Phenomenology is an eidetic reconstitution of history,
and how much it is concerned with spiritual stances that are

xxii

FOREWORD

very widely scattered, for example in Hellenistic Greece, India
in the time of Buddha, contemporary America, etc.
In the immense centralsection of Spirit (§§488-595 (pp. 347422)) in which Hegel discusses alienated spirituality, there are
two central focuses: the focus of Enlightenment (Aujklarung) ,
representing the abstract communal life ofa mutual recognition
and shared use of facilities which never becomes intimate, and
the focus of Faith or Belief (Glaube), which in a dim and con~
fused way strives to overcome the abstraction which leads to
alienation, and to return to the intimate concreteness of tribal
and family life. It seems clear that in this section Hegel is really
characterizing the spiritual life of Germany, that eternal servi~
tor among nations, condemned to admire and imitate the brilli~
ant, brittle universalism of French life. and culture, while always
hankering after the integrity and concreteness of a simpler,
sturdier, more peasant~like vision, the vision which expressed
itself, for example, in the Rhineland masters or in countless religious sculptors and wood~carvers. The German eighteenth century was one of the high~points of such alienation: if it was
the age when Voltaire and Maupertuis plumed themselves at
Frederick's court, it was also the age of the pietists, so strong
aninfluence in the early life ofKant and Hegel, the simple, good
people who scorned all but the precepts and transforming
example of the 'Holy One of the Gospels'. The simple man of
virtue and good sense, whom Hegel depicts as struck dumb by
the ruthless wit of the French salons (§§S23-4 (pp. 373-4)), is
argua bly the eternal German visi tor, struggling to unify the cuI.
tivated negations ofa disintegrating society, which he admires
but only half unders tands, with the simple standards and principles that the 'folks at home' still rely on and live by.
The spiri tuali ty of the Enlightenmen t is firs ts.ketched in a section entitled Enlightenment and its Realm of Actuality (§§488-526 (pp. 350-7 6 )). This spirituality is characterized as being
essentially one of Culture (Bildung), by which nothing immediateor natural is reckoned as of importance. I ts universality
isthatofthe open variable: one must always be ready to progress
further, to develop talents and possibilities, to replace one's
initial constants with others. This open varia]Jility reveals
itself, on the one hand, in the infinitely ramifying structure
ofthe state bureaucracy, ~ulmina~n_the_ M9!1~E~_~!_~~~_, _ ~n

FOREWORD

xxiii

the other hand, in the endless open variability of economic life,
in which enterprises always expand or decline, fortunes go up
and down, and extreme wealth always goes flanked by abject penury. This spirituality is also always one of divided
values: residues of feudal loyalty still attach to the bureaucracy
and the monarch, while new va]ues, whether favourable or
unfavourable, circulate about money-making and moneychangers. In the inner life of those who live in this alienated
regime the divided values appear in two new forms: in sophisticated, Voltairian 'insight' on the one hand, and in the deliberate unsophistication of pious belief (Glaube) on the other.
These are discussed through §§527-8 I (pP' 376---,41 I), and
Hegel is mainly concerned to stress that the whole fight between
these seemingly irreconcilable opponents is really a sham fight,
since the generalized insights of Voltairianism mean nothing
without 'their concrete implementation in such lives as those
of good, God-fearing people, just as the 'simple' faith of the lat~
ter is really, in its indifference to anything merely outward or
literal, as full of critical negativity as the enlightenment of Voltaire. The Voltairian thinks religious piety is intent on icons
or wafers, or historical events which never happened, whereas
religious piety is as critical of vain observances or of external
signs as the Voltairian, and believes only in religious events that
can be re-enacted in the believer's heart. And, if the Voltairian
regards the God of pious worship as a mere projection of its
thought, the pietist agrees with him in worshipping a God felt
not to be alien to his own spirituality, but as being the universality of which he represents only the contraction (§S49
(pp. 390-1)). The various abstractions posited by the enlightened, whether going by the names of 'matter' or 'the supreme
being', are likewise mere prQjections of the enlightened person's
thought, only more empty and the same in their total emptiness.
The alienated spirituality of the Enlightenment is not, however, able to achieve a true synthesis of abstractly universalistic
insight and ·pious unsophistication: its most positive achieve~
ment in this direction is the thin notion of Nutzlichkei.t, Utility
(§S 79 (pp. 4 I 0- I I ) ). Everything in the world has then its sole
justification in its usefulness towards human ends, which, like
anything merely concrete, generate an endless series ofperformances and arrangements, each exciting purely for the sake of

xxiv

FOREWORD

something else. But the two abstractions of individual subjectivity on the one hand, with its intimately felt demands, and
the indifferent, external, bureaucratic~economic machine on
the other, have necessarily to come together, and this is at first
brought about in an abstraction which liquidates both, much
as emptily restless Becoming in the Logic is the joint outcome
of emptily abstract Being and emptily abstract Nothingness.
The pure self-assertion of the individual person, the element
alwa ys passed over by the whole aliena ted society, storms the Bastille and creates a society which will reflect and express his absolute self alone. It does not, however, take Hegel long to exhibit
the purely destructive and ultimately self-destructive profile of
this spiritual stance (§§528-95). Spiritual sansculottism can
have no programme but the downing and doing~away of everything and everyone: it can generate no principle of self-differentiation, it can throw up no genuine or permanent leadership. It is a government by junta, by cahal and intrigue, and
can achieve only the universal suppression and liquidation of
individuality. It would have been interesting if, instead of this
dialectical criticism of the relatively innocuous and transient
synthesis of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, dismembered
almost as soon as formed, we had had Hegel's criticisms ofthe
far more adhesive pitch-like abstractions oftheCommun£slManijeslo, in which the feet of humanity would seem as if for ever
entangled.
The third of Hegel's studies of Spirituality is entitled Spirit
Sure of ItselforMorality (§§S9 6- 67 I (pp. 424-72)). Here we
have a study of dutiful subjectivity, by which Hegel understands neither the personal cult of Virtue, a superseded form
of egoistic Reasonableness, nor the blind obedience to the daylight or underground laws of the substantial ethical community,
but rather a set of practically oriented attitudes representing
the individual's own deep reflection on conduct, balanced by
a deep respect for the parallel reflections of other~. The moral
view of the world sees the fulfilment of duty not only as the
whole task of man, but also as the whole purpose of nature,
and also ofa continuation of life and consciousness beyond the
limits of our present state. Such a view requires supplementation by theological postulates: we must posit a God who will
guarantee the indefinite survival that will make endless moral

FOREWORD

xxv

progress possible, and who will also complete the moral good
of virtue with the natural good of happiness. Such a view is
at once involved in peculiar contradictions, and in the bad faith
and hypocrisy (Verstellung) used to cover up such contradic ..
tions. It must alternate like Sisyphus between seeming on the
point of pushing the stone of its sensuousness on to the high
plateau of perfect virtue, and then realizing that this would destroy, rather than perfect, virtue, and so sinking back once
more to the bottom of the hill. (See, for example, §62 3 (p. 439).)
These self-contradictory postulations, and these hypocritical
self-deceptions, are then all cured in the spiritual stance of pure
Conscientiousness, where the subject makes his goal the simple
doing of his duty as he sees it, without worrying about its relations
to the natural or supernatural order, or without raising the unreal issue of what he should do once he has achieved perfection.
Conscientiousness so defined has its standard of certainty in
itself: it is undisturbed by the conflict ofpr;ma facieduties, since
it is the sole arbiter as to which must override which (§635 (p.
447) ) .1 t is also undis turbed by the conflict between different
men's consciences, since it is not part of the idea of conscience
thatitshould pronounce identically to different men. The cult
of conscience is a religion, a religion at once lonely, yet at a
higher level communaL My conscience in its absolute majesty
legislates for me and for me alone, but its legislation for me is
recognized as valid by all conscientious persons, and so in a
sense becomes a law for all (§§65S-6 (pp. 460-2)).
.
Hegel's analysis is here very profound, and wholly true to
what we actually think and say. It is superior to analyses which
argue that where consciences differ, one or other must be misa
taken, failing to see that they thereby remove the one solvent
virtue of conscientiousness, that it can decide issues which are
in the abstract undecidable. This solvent virtue ofconscientiousness is, however, open to other difficulties: though inerrant in
what it proclaims, it can at times be thought to be enunciating
duties when it is not really pronouncing dearly on anything,
or when its presumed voice is really that of some external authority, or ofsome private interest, or some intellectual confusion.
And, while the communion of conscientious persons must
always respect my conscience, they may at times doubt whether
some pronouncement really springs from my conscience,

xxvi

FOREWORD

whether it is not the expression of some hypocritical personal
interest (§66I (pp. 464-5)). Faced with this new fear of selfdeceit, conscience readily takes refuge in a passive concern with
'problems': it prefers to wring its hands in beautiful impotence,
rather than do something that may be wrong, and so violate
the law of conscience (§658 (p. 462)). This impotent beauty
of soul then confronts the other species of conscientiousness,
which has dared to make difficult decisions, and perhaps goes
on to condemn it, thereby, however, implicitly condemning
itself. For the refusal to take a decision is itself a decision, even
if of higher order. The confrontation may, however, lead on
to a higher spiritual reconciliation, that of mutual understanding and forgiveness among men, who have nevertheless decided
differently. At this stage, Hegel tells us, morality becomes religious: we experience a spirit at once present in, yet transcending, the-difference of conscientious agents, and which is rightly
thought of as suprapersonal and divine (§67I (pp. 471-2)). If
the quarrelof consciences really ended, there would be no place
for God : God exists and is active because He lives beyond any
form of reasoned consensus.
Hegel's phenomenology of Religion (§§672~787 (pp. 473520)) runs through all the forms in which men have conceived,
and must necessarily conceive, a spirituality which transcends
their own, and which as much lies behind nature as behind the
personal and social life of men. He writes beautifully of the
Irani<;ln religion of Light, of theIndian pantheisms which place
the malign and sinister alongside the beautiful and good, of the
Egyptian religion of the Understanding, with its passion for
geometrical forms and for enigmatic sculptural combinations
of human rationality with animality. From all these we pass
on to the "Art-Religion' of Greece, which, if tinged, in Hegel's
account, with eighteenth-century German sensibility and
romanticism, is still described with aptness and beauty.. The
sculptured god represents to Hegd a fine fusion of rational selfconsciousness with sensuous externality, and the same applies
to the hymn and the rite, to the athlete w~ th his glorious, public
body, and to the semi-religious performances of tragedy and
comedy. All forms of religion, which unite the self-consciously
human with what transcends it, must, however, suffer decay
and attrition in a period when man becomes alienated from

FOREWORD

xxvii

his deeper self, a period such as that of Rome under the Caesars,
or again of Europe in the eighteenth century, and so on. It was
at such a point in time that Christianity, the absolute and
revealed religion, first made its appearance, a religious stance
in which human spirituality strives upwards towards and
becomes one with a spirituality which transcends the human,
while the latter likewise is seen as coming down into and transfiguring human spirituality. If this spiritual identification of
two natures was conceived of as first occurring in the historic
person of Jesus, it was also thought of as being capable of being
shared by a whole society of believers, to whom the Divine
Spirit at work in Jesus could be further communicated. Such
a union of the individual and the specific with the transcendently universal is of course for Hegel the sense and 'truth' of
everything. It is not necessary nor pertinent for us here to enter
into a long assessment of Hegel's merits or demerits as a
Christian theologian. Plainly he saw as merely pictorial much
thatorthodox Christians would see as essential to their faith.
But his philosophical reconstitution of Christianity strays ne
further from his original than, for example, the Aristotelianneo-Platonic reconstitution of Aquinas: in Some respects it
keeps closer to it. For the Christianity of German y, as witnessed
by countless, infinitely affecting altar-pieces, has always been
one that could best distil beauty from agony, and which could
see what was most divine in the lifting of the ordinary griefs,
frustrations, and pathetic needs of men into a region that transcends the human. The Christian God is essentially redemptive,
and Hegel's philosophy is essentially a philosophy of redemption, ofa self.;alienation that returns to self in victory. If Hegel
was nothing better, he was at least a great Christian theologian.
The phenomenological drama now draws to its close, Con~
sdousness has confronted the world through the senses, described it perceptually, and construed it quasi-scientifically. It
has learnt, after some initial distortions, to put itself on a level
with others, and has proceeded with their aid to classify and
explain the phenomena of nature and mind. It has also tried
to contribute distinctively to interpersonal life by various personal programmes of a hedonistic, sentimental, improving,
absorbedly practical, and analytically ethical sort. It has
become aware of the community of conscious persons as united,

xxviii

FOREWORD

and also dirempted, by the close bonds of common ancestry
and family love, and also more loosely but widely held together
by governmental and economic ties. I t has experienced the ten~
sions of social positions where men are subjected to external
legal and ,economic pressures, where their need for a more pro~
found comm union has to be displaced to the higher plane of
faith. It has worked through the various stages and syndromes
of a conscientiousness that has learnt to cut Gordian knots in
its practical decisions and to respect others whose decisions have
cut these differently. It has risen to a reHgion for which the
active universality, the Spirit which informs the teleology of
nature and history, is also felt and pictured as a principle
which achieves self-consciousness in a paradigmatic man, and,
through the Spirit there present, in all men, What will now
be achieved is das absolute Wisst'n, the perfect knowledge only
consummated in philosophy, and here spoken of with a brevity
and a modesty which accords with Hegel's simple sense of its
all."irnportance. For absolute knowledge is simply the realization that all forms of objectivity are identical with those essential to the thinking suQject;so that in construing the world conceptludly it is seeing everything in theform of self, the selfheing
simply the ever..active principle of conceptual universality, of
categ()rial synthesis. In itsconceptua] grasp ofobjects it necessarily grasps what ititsdfis, and in,gfasping itself it necessarily
grasps every phase ofobjectivity. These are the claims obscurely
stated in Kant's transcendental deduction, hut there given a
one-sidedly subjective slant which is here for ever done away
,
with. (See §§79R-8oo (pp. 556-7).)
Prior to this final conceptual g.rasp there has heen a long process in time during which the extruded concept, the self
ali~nated from self, has been steadily enriched in its determinations until, when the process was completed, the extruded concept simply came into coincidence with the self which studies
it, and Time, in which the process was completing itself, was
abolished, made wholly irrelevant (§80I (pp. 557-8)). The be~
ginnings of absolute knowledge occurred at a point in time
when the religious vie\\:, of the Midd1e Ages yielded to the first
stirring of modern post-Renaissance thought, when Descartes
made his celebrated connection of thinking with being. It continued through Spinoza's attribution of thought and extension

FOREWORD

xxix

to a single substance, and through Leibniz's further diremption
of this substance into countless points of individual spirituality.
Then follqwed the Enlightenment with its stress on utilitythe unmentioned empiricists are not here seen as helping on
'conceptual grasp'-and thisin its turn gave rise to the Kantian
subordination of all practicaJ ends to the demands of the
rational will-the transcendental deduction here also goes unmentioned-and this to the philosophy of Fichte, where the
pure self necessarily opposes itself to, yet also identifies itself
with, the flux of time, and is further opposed to the frozen differentiation of space. From this the thought of Schelling de . .
veloped, where substantial being and subjective thought were
alike thrown back into the abyss of the Absolute, and neither
enjoyed an unquestioned priority. Out of all these thoughtstances the final form of conceptual grasp emerged, where the
selfor subject sawitse1fas itself the Absolute, externalizingitself
in substantial, obje.ctive nature yet conscious of itself in this
very act of se1f-externalization, and of itself, in fact, as simply
h~ingits own act.of$elf~identificationin and through such externalization. (The packed thought of §§803~4 (pp. 560-"':1 ) defiesreproduction in term!) other than its own, and one is quite unSlJre that one bas got the full gist of it.) At this stage of grasp
the whole distinctioobetween objective truth and subjective
certitude vanishes: the Notion or Concept unites both aspects
in itself. Weare thereforein a position to develop the scientific
~ystem which has been our goal from the first, where notions
develop purely out of notions in virtue of their own inner
oppositions and mediations. Obviously what Hegel is here anticipating (§805 (p. 562)).is the Logic or Metaphysics which
is the first part of his system. He tells us that this system must
then go onto exhibit theself..,externalization ofhispure1y logical
categories in the sensuous shows of nature and in the contingencies which fill space and time (§§806~7 (p. 563)) ~ and that
ilmust then study itselfreturning tnitse1f out of nature's externality, a return which willrestate the content of the phenomenology in the form of a real history of spirit, i.e. in the Philosophy of Spirit which will form the third partof the system (§Bo8
(pp. 563-c4)). What has further happened at this point is that
the phenomenological 'We' that has been examining and ordering the shapes of consciousness has itself become one of their
j

xxx

FOREWORD

number, has revealed itselfas being the final shape of consciousness. As such it now appropriates and remembers the whole
content of the development that it has been studying, and can
go on to study alignm'ents of shapes which are as much shapes
of being as of its own conscious eerti tude.
We might at this point go on to analyse the superb Vorrede
or Preface, which Hegel wrote early in 1807 as an Introduction,
not only to the Phenomenology, but to the whole system. We shall,
however, abstain from doing this, and shall leave the reader
with a task which he should be able to perform with pleasure,
provided he reads the rest of the book before the Preface. What
we have said in this Foreword is only meant to be a sketch,
a preliminary help, and the same applies to the analyses that
have been added to the translated paragraphs of the text. They
are meant to orient the reader in the thickets of the text, not
to provide exhaustive or wholly reliable guidance. They have
been found useful by my students, and may prove useful to
others. Mr. Miller has further translated the text with great
care and faithfulness, but no amount of either will achieve unambiguous perspicuity where the text faH$to provide it.
At the end of these remarks it may be asked whether Hegel's
self-justifying circular series of spiritual characterizations has
done anything like show that the real must coincide with the
intelligible, or that the 'truth' about anything will consist in
its teleological rel~tinn to the emergence of spiritual self-consciousness. He has·certainly shown up the absurdity of believing
in objective arrangements which are wholly out of gear with
our categories and our thought-demands, and which are not
at all accommodated to our theoretical requirements or toour
practical approaches and endeavours. But has he exorcised the
doubt that there may be sides of the world which will remain
obstinately and depressingly unintelligible, and which are without a significant teleological relation to our spiritual goals and
endeavours, and which may in the end bring these all to
nought? These doubts, to which the state of science and the
state of the world lend some substance, are not, however, such
as can he considered in this Foreword, nor is it clear by what
process of reasoning, dialectical or other, they could be adequately exorcised.
Boston University

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD
T HIS translation of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit has been
made fro~ the fifth edition ( F. Meiner, Hamburg, 1952) edited
by J. Hoffmeister. In attempting to convey Hegel's thought to
the English reader who has no German, I have done my best
to steer a course which, avoiding loose paraphrase, departs at
times from a rigid consistency in rendering Hegelian locutions
where this seemed to be more helpful to the reader. I have been
sparing in the use of capitals and, in general, have only used
them for terms which have a peculiarly Hegelian connotation.
The German Verstand I have translated by 'the Understanding'.
Where the capital is omitted, the word has the usual English
meamng.
The translation was undertaken at the suggestion of Professor
Findlay to whom I am greatly indebted for encouragement and
advice. I also wish to thank Professor H. S. Harris of Glendon
College, York University, Toronto, who saw parts of the translation and offered helpful criticism and suggestions. Responsibility for the translation rests, of course, with me. Thanks are
also due to my wife Frances who typed the final draft of my
manuscript.

, Rivendell'
Whiteway,
Glos.
March 1976

A. V.

MILLER

CONTENTS
page
PREFACE; ON SCIENTIFIC COGNITION
The element of the True is the Notion and its true shape is scientific
system (3). The state of spiritual culture at the present time (4). The
principle of Science is not the completion of Science: objections to formalism (7). The Absolute is Subject: the meaning of this (10). The
element of knowledge (14). The elevation of consciousness into that element is the Phenomenology of Spirit (IS). The transformation of
picture-thoughts and familiar ideas into thoughts (18); and these in to
Notions (20). To what extent is the Phenomenology of Spirit negative,
or how is the false contained in it? (:;l2). Historical and mathematical
truth (23). The nature of philosophical truth and its method: objections
to schematizing formalism (27). Requirement for the study of philosophy (35). The negative attitude of ratiocinative thinking, its positive
attitude, and its subject (36). Philosophizing by the light of nature:
sound common sense (41); the inspiration of genius (43). Conclusion:
the relation of the author to his public (44).
INTRODUCTION
A. CONSCIOUSNESS

58

I. SENSE-CERTAINTY: OR THE 'THIS' AND 'MEANING'
I I. PER C E P T ION: 0 R

'r H E

T H I.N G AND DEC E P T ION

III. FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING: APPEA.RANOE AND
THE SUP E R SEN SIB LEW 0 R L D

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSN ESS
IV. THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY

104

104

A. Independence and dependence of self-consciousness: Lord·
shi p and Bondage

I 1I

B. Freedom of self~consciousness: Stoicism, Scepticism, and the
Unhappy Consciousness

119

C. (AA.) REASON
V.

79

THE CERTAINTY AND 'fRUTHOF REASON

A. Observing Reason
a. Observation of Nature. Description in general. Descrip.
tive marks. Laws. Observation of the organic: relation of
the organic to the inorganic. Teleology. Inner and outer.
The inner: laws of the pure moments ofthe inner; Sensibility, Irritability, and Reproduction; the inner and its

139
139
145

CONTENTS

xxxiv

page
outer aspect. The inner and the outer as an organic shape.
The outer itself as inner and outer, or the organic Idea
transposed into the inorganic. The organic from this point
of view: Genus, Species, and Individuality
b. Observation of self~consciousness in its purity and in its
relation to external actuality. Logical and psychological
laws
c. Observation of self-consciousness in its relation to its
immediate actuality. Physiognomy and Phrenology
B. The actualization of rational
own activity

self~consciousness

147

180
185

through its
21 I

17

a. Pleasure and Necessi ty
b. The law of the heart and the frenzy of self-conceit
c. Virtue and the way of the world

228

C. Individuality which takes itself to be real in and for itself

236

a. The spiritual animal kingdom and deceit, or the 'matter
in hand itself
b. Reason as lawgiver
c. Reason as testing laws
I

(BB.) SPIRIT

2

221

237
25 2
256
263

VI. SPIRIT

A. The true Spirit. The ethical order

a. The ethical world. Human and Divine Law: Man and
Woman
b. Ethical action. Human and Divine knowledge. Guilt and
Destiny
c. Legal status
B. Self-alienated Spirit. Culture

1. The world of self-alienated Spirit
a. Culture and its realm of actuality
b. Faith and pure insight
II. The Enlightenment
a. The struggle of the Enlightenment with Superstition
b. The truth of Enlightenment

266
267
279
29 0

294
296
297
32 I

328
329
349

III. Absolute Freedom and Terror

355

C. Spirit that is certain of itself. Morality

364

a. The moral view of the world
b. Dissemblance or duplicity
c. Conscience. The 'beautiful soul', evil and its forgiveness

365
374
383

CONTENTS

xxxv

page
(CC.) RELIGION
VII. RtLI GION

A. Natural Religion

a. God as Light
b. Plant and animal
c. The artificer
B. Religion in the form of Art

a. The abstract work of art
b. The living work of art
c. The spiritual work.of art
C. The revealed religion

424
427

435
439
453

(DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

479

VIII. ABSOLUTE KNOWING

479

ANALYSIS OF THE TEXT by J. N. Findlay

495

INDEX

593

PREFACE: ON SCIENTIFIC
COGNITION
I. It is custo~ary to preface a work With an explanation of
the author~s aim, why he wrote the book, and the relationship
in which he believes it to stand to other earlier or contemporary
treatises on the same subject. In the case of a philosophical
work, however, such an explanation seems not only superfluous
bu t, in view of the nature of the su bject-matter, even inappropriate and misleading. For whatever might appropriately be
said about philosophy in a preface-say a historical statement
of the main drift and the point of view, the general content and
results, a string of random assertions and assurances about
truth-none of this can be accepted as the way in which to
expound philosophical truth. Also, since philosophy moves
essentially in the element of universality, which includes within
itself the particular, it might seem that here more than in any
of the other sciences the subject-matter itself, and even in its
complete nature, were expressed in the aim and the final results,
the executionbeing by contrast really the unessential factor. On
the other hand, in the ordinary view of anatomy, for instance
(say, the knowledge of the parts of the body regarded as inanimate), we are quite sure thatwe do not as yet possess the subject-matter itself, the content of this science, but must in addition exert ourselves to know the particulars. Further, in the case
of such an aggregate of information, which has no right to bear
the name of Science, an opening talk about aim and other such
generalities is usually conducted in the same historical and uncomprehending way in which the content itself (these nerves,
muscles, etc.) is spoken of. In the case of philosophy, on the
other hand, this would give rise to the incongruity that along
with the employment of such a method its inability to grasp
the truth would also be demonstrated.
2. Furthermore, the very attempt to define how a philosophical work is supposed to be connected with other efforts
to deal with the same subject-matter drags in an extraneous
concern, and what is really important for the cognition of the

2

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

truth is obscured. The more conventional opinion gets fixated
on the antithesis of truth and falsity, the more it tends to expect
a given philosophical system to be either accepted or contradicted; and hence it finds only acceptance or rejection. It
does not comprehend the diversity of philosophical systems as
the progressive unfolding of truth, but rather sees in it simple
disagreements. The bud disappears in the bursting-forth of the
blossom, and one might say that the former is refuted by the
latter; similarly, when the fruit appears, the blossom is shown
up in its turn as a false manifestation of the plant, and the fruit
now emerges as the truth of it instead. These forms are not just
distinguished from one another, they also supplant one another
as mutually incompatible. Yet at the same time their fluid
nature makes them moments of an organic unity in which they
not only do not conflict, but in which each is as necessary as
the other; and this mutual necessity alone constitut~s the life
of the whqle. But he who rejects a philosophical systerp. [Le.
the new ppilosopherJ does not usually comprehend what he is
doing in this way; and he whograspsJhe contradiction between
them [i.e. the historian of philosophy] does not, as a general
rule, Jcnow how to free itfroIP- itsone",sidedness, or maintain
it in its freeqom by recognizing the reciprocally necessary
motpents that take shape as a cOl1fiictand seeming incompatibility.
3. Demanding and SJl,pplyir,tg these [superficial] explanatiops passes readily enQugh as a concern with what is essential.
Where could the inner meaning of a philosophical work find
fuller expression than in its airps and results,anq how could
these be more exactly known than by distinguishing them from
everything else the age brings forth in this sphere? Yet when
trtisactivity is taken for more than the mere beginnings of cognition) when it is allowed to pass for actual cognition, then it
shOHld be reckoned as no more than a device for evading the
real issue [die Sache selhstJ, a way of creating an impression of
hard work and serious commitment to the problem, whileactually sparing oneself both. For the real issue is not exhausted
by stating it as an aim, but by carrying it out, nor is the result
the actual whole, but rather the result together with the process
through which it came about. The aim by itselfis a lifeless universal, just as the guiding tendency is a mere drive that as yet

PREFACE

3

lacks an actual existence; and the bare result is the corpse which
has left the guiding tendency behind it. Similarly, the specific
difference of a thing is rather its limit; it is where the thing
stops, or it is what the thing is not. This concern with aim or
results, with differentiating and passing judgement on various
thinkers is therefore an easier task than it might seem. For instead of getting involved in the real issue, this kind of activity
is always away beyond it; instead of tarrying with it, and losing
itselfin it, this kind of knowing is forever grasping at something
new; it remains essentially preoccupied with itself instead of
being preoccupied with the real issue and surrendering to it.
To judge a thing that has substance and solid worth is quite
easy, to comprehend itis much harder, and to blend judgement
and comprehension in a definitive description is the hardest
thing of all.
4. Culture and its laborious emergence from the immediacy
of substantial life must always begin by getting acquainted with
general principles and points of view, so as at first to work up
to a general conception [Gedanke] of the real issue, as well as learning to support and refute the general conception with reasons;
then to apprehend the rich and concrete abundance [of life]
by differential classification; and finally to give accurate instruction and pass serious judgement upon it. From its very beginning, culture must leave room for ,the earnestness of life in
its concrete richness; this leads the way to an experience of the
real issue. And even when the real issue has been penetrated
to its depths by serious speculative effort, this kind of knowing
and judging will still retain its appropriate place in ordinary
conversation.
5. The true shape in which truth exists can only be thescientific system of such truth. To help bring philosophy closer to
the form of Science, to the goal where it can lay aside the title
'love of knowing' and be actual knowing-that is what I have
set myself to do. The inner necessity that knowing ,should be
Science lies in its nature, and only the systematic exposition
of philosophy itself provides it. But the external necessity, so far
as ids grasped in a general way, setting aside accidental matters
of person and motivation, is the same as the inner, or in other
words it lies in the shape in which time sets forth the sequential
existence of its moments. To show that now is the time for philo-

4

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

sophy to be raised to the status of a Science would therefore
be the only true justification of any effort that has this aim,
for to do so would demonstrate the necessity of the aim, would
indeed at the same time be the accomplishing of it.
6. To lay down that the true shape of truth is scientificor, what is the same thing, to maintain that truth has only the
Notion as the element of its existence~seems, I know, to con~
tradict a view which is in our time as prevalent as it is preten~
tious, and to go against what that view implies. Some explana~
don therefore seems called for, even though it mllst for the
present be no more than a bare assertion, like the view that
it contradicts. If, namely, the True exists only in what, or better
as what, is sometimes called intuition, sometimes immediate
knowledge of the Absolute, religion or being-not at the centre
of divine love but the being of the divine love itself-then what
is required in the exposition of philosophy is, from this viewpoint, rather the opposite of the form of the Notion. For the
Absolute is not supposed to be comprehended, it is to be felt
and intuited; not the Notion of the Absolute, but the feeling
and intuition of it, must govern what is said, and must be
expressed by it.
7. Ifwe apprehend a demand of this kind in its broader context, and view it as it appears at the stage which selfaconseious
Spirit has presently reached, it is clear that Spirit has now got
beyond the substantial life it formerly led in the element of
thought, that it is beyond the immediacy of faith, beyond t1)e
satisfaction and security of the certainty that consciousness then
had, of its reconciliation with the essential being, and of that
being's universal presence both within and without. It has not
only gone beyond all this into the other extreme of an insubstan·
tial reflection of itself into itself, but beyond that too. Spirit has
not oply lost its essential life; it is also conscious of this loss,
and of the finitude that is its own content. Turning away from
the empty husks, and confessing that it lies in wickedness, it
reviles itself for so doing, and now demands from philosophy,
not so much knowledge of what it is, as the recovery through
its agency of that lost sense of solid .and substantial being. Philosophy is to meet tbis need, not by opening up the fast-locked
nature .of substance, and raising this to self-consciousness, not
by bringing consciousness out ofits chaos back to an order based

PREFACE

5

on thought, nor to the simplicity of the Notion, but rather by
running together what thought has put asunder, by suppressing
the differentiations of the Notion and restoring the feeling of
essential being: in short, by providing edification rather than
insight. The 'beautiful', the ~holy', the 'eternal', 'religion', and
'love' are the bait required to arouse the desire to bite; not the
Notion, but ecstasy, not the cold march of necessity in the
thing itself, but the ferment of enthusiasm, these are supposed
to be what sustains and continually extends the wealth ofsub~
stance.
B. In keeping with this demand is the strenuous, almost
over~zealous and frenzied effort to tear men away from their
preoccupation with the sensuous, from their ordinary, private
[einzelne] affairs, and to direct their gaze to the stars; as if they
had forgotten all about the divine, and were ready like worms
to content themselves with dirt and water. Formerly they had
a heaven adorned with a vast wealth of thoughts and imagery.
The meaningofall that is, hung on the thread of light by which
it was linked to that heaven. Instead of dwelling in this world's
presence, men looked beyond it, following this thread to an
other~worldly presence, so to speak. The eye of the Spirit had
to be forcibly turned and held fast to the things of this world;
and it has taken a long time before the lucidity which on\y
heavenly things used to have could penetrate the dullness and
confusion in which the sense of worldly things was enveloped,
anclso make attention to the here and now as such"attention
to what has been called 'experience', an interesting and valid
enterprise. Now we seem to need just the opposite: sense is so
fast rooted in earthly things that it requires just as much force
to raise it. The Spirit shows itself as so impoverished that, like
a wanderer in the deserLcraving for a mere mouthful of water,
it seems to crave for its refreshment only the bare feeling of the
divine in general. By the little which now :satisfies Spirit, we
can measure the extent of its loss.
g. This modest complacency in receiving, or thissparingness
in giving, does not, however, befit Science. Whoever seeks mere
edification, and whoever wants to shroud in a misttbe manifold
variety of his earthly existence and of thought, in order to
pursue the indeterminate enjoyment of this indeterminate
divinity, may look where he likes to find all this. He will find

6

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

ample opportunity to dream up something for himself. But
philosophy must beware of the wish to be edifying.
10. Still less must this complacency which abjures Science
claim that such rapturous haziness is superior to Science. This
prophetic talk supposes that it is staying right in the centre and
in the depths, looks disdainfully at determinateness (Horos) ,
and deliberately holds alooffrom Notion and Necessity as products of that reflection which is at home only in the finite. But
just as there is an empty breadth, so too there is an empty depth;
and just as there is an extension of substance that pours forth
as a finite multiplicity without the force to hold the multiplicity
together, so there is an intensity without content, one that holds
itself in as a sheer force without spread, and this is in no way
distinguishable from superficiality. The power of Spirit is only
as great as its expression, its depth only as deep as it dares to
spread out and lose itselfin its exposition. Moreover, when this
non-conceptual, substantial knowledge professes to have sunk
the idiosyncrasy of the self in essential being, and to philosophize in a true and holy manner, it hides the truth from itself:
by spurning measure and definition, instead of being devoted
to God, it merely gives free rein both to the contingency of the
content within it, and to its own caprice. Such minds, when
they give themselves up to the uncontrolled ferment of (the
divine] substance, imagine that, by drawing a veil over selfconsciousness and surrendering understanding they become the
beloved of God to whom He gives wisdom in sleep; and hence
what they in fact receive, and bring to birth in their sleep) is
nothing but dreams.
I I. Besides, it is not difficult to see that ours is a birth-time
and a period of transition to a new era. Spirit has broken with
the world it has hitherto inhabited and imagined, and is of a
mind to submerge it in the past, and in the labour of its own
transformation. Spirit is indeed never at rest but always
engaged in moving forward. But just as the first breath drawn
by a child after its long, quiet nourishment breaks the gradualness of merely quantitative growth-there is a qualitative leap,
and the child is born-so likewise the Spirit in its formation
matures slowly and quietly into its new shape, dissolving bit
by bit the structure ofits previous world, whose tottering state
is only hinted at by isolated symptoms. The frivolity and bore ..

PREFACE

dom which unsettle the established order, the vague foreboding
of something unknown, these are the heralds of approaching
change. The gradual crumbling that left unaltered the face of
the whole is cut short by a sunburst which, in one flash, illuminates the features of the new world.
12. But this new world is no more a complete actuality than
is a new-born child; it is essential to bear this in mind. It comes
on the scene for the first time in its immediacy or its Notion.
Just as little as a building is finished when its foundation has
been laid, so Ii ttle is the achieved Notion of the whole the whole
itself. When we wish to see an oak with its massive trunk and
spreading branches and foliage, we are not content to be shown
an acorn instead. So too, Science, the crown ora world of Spirit,
is not complete in its beginnings. The onset of the new spirit
is the product of a widespread upheaval in various forms of
culture, the prize at the end oLa complicated, tortuous path
and ofjust as variegated and strenuous an effort. l1'i8 the whole
which, having traversed its content in time and space, has
returned into itself, and is the resultant-simple Notion of the
whole. But the actuality of this simple whole consists in those
various shapes and forms which have become its moments, and
which wiUnow d evelop and take shape afresh, this time in their
new element, in their newly acquired meaning:
13. WhiletheinitiaLappearanceofthe new world is, to begin
with, only the whole veiled in its simplicity, or the general
founclationof the whole,the wealth of previous existence is still
presentto consciousnessin memory. Consciousness misses in the
newly emerging shape its former range and specificity of content, and even more the articulation of form whereby distinctions are securely defined, and stand arrayed in their fixed
relations. Withoutsucharticulation, Science lacks universal intelligibility, and gives the appearance of being the esoteric possession of a few individuals: an esoteric possession,since it is
as yet present only in its Notion or in its inwardness; of a few
individuals, since its undiffused manifestation makes its existence something singular. Only what is completely determined
is at once exoteric, comprehensible, and capable of being
learned and appropriated byatl. The intelligible form of
Science is the way open and equally accessible to everyone, and
consciousness as it approaches Science justly demands that it

8

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

be able to attain to rational knowledge by way of the ordinary
understanding; fot the understanding is thought, the pure'!'
as such; and what is intel1igible is what is already familiar and
common to Science and the unscientific cDnsciousness alike, the
latter through its having afforded direct access to the former.
1.4. Science in its early stages, when it has attained neither
to completeness of detail nor perfection .of form, is vulnerable
to criticism. But it would be as unjust for such criticism to strike
at the very heart of Science, as it is untenable tD refuse to honour
the demand for its further development. This polarization
seems t.o be the GDrdian knot with which scientific culture is
at present struggling, and which it still does not properly understand. One side boasts .of its wealth of material and intelligibility, the other side at least scorns this intelligibility, and
flaunts its immediate rationality and divinity. Even if the
former side is reduced to silen<;:e, whether by the force of truth
alone or by the blustering .of the other, and even i~ in respect
of fundam.entals, it feeJs itself outmatched, it is by no means
satisfied regarding the said demands ; for they are justified, but
not fulfilled. Its silence stems .only halffrom the triumph of its
opponef.lt, and halffrom the boredom and indifference which
tend to result from the continual awakening of expectations
through unfulfilled promises .
15. As for content, the other side make it easy en.ough for
themselves at times todisplaya great expanse of it. They appropriate a IDtof already familiar and well..,.orderedmateriaL; by
focusing .on rare and eXDtic instances they give the impression
that they have hold .of everything else whkh scientific know,..
ledge had already embracedin its scope, and that they are also
in command .of such material~s is as yet unDrdered. It thus
appears that everything has been subjected to the absolute
Idea, which therefore seems tn be cognized in everything<and
to have matyred into an expanded science. But a closer inspection shows that this expansion has not come abou t through one
and thesameprinciplehavingsP.onta-neously assumed different
shapes, but rather through the shapeless repetiti.on .of one and
the same formula, only externally applied to diverse materials,
thereby .obtaining merely a boring show of diversity. The Idea,
which is of cour~e true enough on its own acc.o.unt, remains in
effect always in its primitive condition, if its development io-

PREFACE

9

volves nothing more than this sort of repetition of the same for~
mula. When the knowing subject goes around applying this
single inert form to whatever it encounters, and dipping the
material into this placid element from outside, this is no more
the fulfilment of what is needed, i.e. a self-originating, selfdifferentiating wealth ofshapes, than any arbitrary insights into
the content. Rather it is a monochromatic formalism which
only arrives at the differentiation of its material since this has
been already provided and is by now familiar.
16! Yet this formalism maintains that such monotony and
abstract universality are the Absolute, and we are assured that
dissatisfaction with it indicates the inability to master the absolute standpoint and to keep hold of it. Time was when the bare
possibility of imagining something differently was sufficient to
refute an idea, and this bare possibility, this genera] thought,
also had the entire positive value of an aC,tual cognition. Nowadays we see all value ascribed to the universal Idea in this nonactualform, and the undoing of all distinct, determinate entities
(orratherthehurling of them aU into the abyss of vacuity without further development or any justification) is allowed to pass
muster as the speculative mode of treatment. Dealing with
something ftom the perspective of the Absol u te consis ts merely
in declaring that, although one has been speaking ofitjust now
as something definite, yet in the Absolute, the A=A, there is
nothing of the kind, for there allis one. To pit this single insight,
that in the Absoluteeverythingis the same, against thefullb6dy
ofarticulated cognition, which at least seeks and demands such
fulfilment, to palm off its Absolute as the night in which, as
the saying goes, all cows are black-this is cognition naIvely
reduced to vacuity. The formalism which recent philosophy
denounces and despises, only to see it reappear in its midst, will
not vanish from Science, however much its inadequacy may
be recognized and felt, tin the cognizing of absolute actuality
has become entirely dear as to its own nature. Since the presentation of a general idea in outline, before any attempt to
followit out in detail, makes the latter attempt easier to grasp,
it may be useful at this point to give a rough idea of it, at the
same time taking the opportunity to get rid of certain habits
of thought which impede. philosophical cognition.
17. In my view, which can bejustified only by the exposition

10

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

of the system itself, everything turns on grasping and expressing
the True, not only as Substance, but equally as Subject. At the
same time, it is to be observed that substantiality embraces the
universal, or the immediacy Q[ knowledge itself, as well as that
which is being or immediacy for knowledge. If the conception
of God as the one Substance shocked the age in which it was
proclaimed, the reason for this was on the one hand an instinctive awareness that, in this definition, self-consciousness
was only submerged and not preserved. On the other hand,
the opposite view, which clings to thought as thought, to universality as such, is the very same simplicity, is undifferentiated,
unmoved substantiality. And if, thirdly, thought does unite
itselfwith the being of Substance, and apprehends immediacy
or intuition as thinking, the question is still whether this intellectual intuition does not again fall back into inert simplicity,
and does not depict actuality itself in a non-actual manner.
18. Further, the living Substance is being which is in truth
Subject, or} what is the same, is in truth actual only in so far
as it is the movement of positing itself, oris the mediation of
its self-othering with itself. This Substanceis, as Subject, pure,
simple negativity, and isfor this very reason the bifurcation of
the simple; itis the doubling w4ichsetsupopposition, and then
again the negation of this indifferent diversity and of its anti..
thesis [the immediate simplici ty]. Only this self-usto,ring Sameness, or this reflection in otherness within itself~not an original
or immediate unity as such-is the True. It is the process of its
own becoming, the circle that presupposes its end as its goal,
having its end also as its beginning ; and only by being worked
out to its end, is it actual.
19. Thus the life of God and divine cognition may well be
spoken ofas a disporting of Love with itself; but this idea sinks
into mere edification, and even insipidity , if it lacks the seriousness, the suffering> the patience, and the lahoQf of thene.gative.
In itself, that life is indeed one of untroubled equality and unity
with itself, for which otherness and alienation, and the overcoming of alienation, are not serious matters. But this in-itself
is abstract universality, in which the nature of the divine life
to he for itself, and so too the self-movement of the form, are
altogether left out of account. If the form is declared to be the
same as the essence, then it is ipso, facto a mistake to suppose

PREFACE

II

that cognition can be satisfied with the in-itself or the essence,
butcan get along without the form-that the absolute principle
or absolute intuition makes the working-out of the former, or
the development of the latter, superfluous. Just because the
form is as essential to the essence as the essence is to itself, the
divine essence is not to be conceived and expressed merely as
essence, i.e. as immediate substance or pure self-contemplation
of the divine, but likewise as form, and in the whole wealth of
the developed form. Only then is it conceived and expressed
as an actuality.
20. The True is 'the whole. But the whole is nothing other
than the essence consummating itself through its development.
Of the Absolute it must be said that it is essentially a result, that
only in the end is it what it truly is; and that precisely in this
consists its nature, viz. to be actual, subject, the spontaneous
becoming ofitsdf. Though it may seem contradictory that the
Absolute should be conceived essentially as a result, it needs
little pondering to set this show of contradiction in its true Ugh t.
The beginning, the principle, or the Absolute, as at first immediately enunciated, is only the universal. Just as when I say 'all
animals', this ex pression cannot pass for a zoology, so it is
equally plain that the words, 'the Divine" 'the Absolute', 'the
Eternal', etc., do not express what is contained in them; and
only such words, in fact, do express the intuition as something
immediate. Whatever is more than such a word, even the transition to a mere proposition, contains a becoming-other that has
to be taken back, or is a mediation. But it is just this that is
rejected with horror, as if absolute cognition were beingsur*
rendered when more is made of mediation than in simply saying
that it is nothing absolute, and is completely absent in the
Absolute.
2 I. But this abhorrence in fact stems from ignorance of the
nature of media tion , and of absolute cognition itself. For mediation is nothing beyond self-moving selfsameness, or is reflection
into self, the moment of the '1' which is for itself pure negativity
or, when reduced to its pure abstraction, simple becoming. The
'I', or becoming in general, this mediation, on account of its
simple nature, is just immediacy in the process of becoming,
and is the immediate itself. Reason is, therefore, misunderstood
when reflection is excluded from the True, and is not grasped

12

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

as a positive moment of the Absolute. It is reflection that makes
the True a result, but it is equally reflection that overcomes
the antithesis between the process of its becoming and the result,
for this becoming is also simple, and therefore not different from
the form of the True which shows itself as simple in its result;
the process of becoming is rather just this return into simplicity.
Though,the embryo is indeed in itselfa human being, it is not
s010r itself; this it only is as cultivated Reason, which has made
itself into what it is in itself. And that is when it for the first
time is actual. But this result is itself a simple immediacy, for
it is self~conscious freedom at peace with itself, which has not
set the antithesis on one side and left it lying there, but has been
reconciled with it.
22. What has just been said can also be expressed by saying
that Reason is purposive activity. The exaltation of a supposed
Nature over a misconceived thinking, and especially the rejection of external teleology, has brought the form of purpose in
general, into discredit. Still, in the sense in which Aristotle, too,
defines Nature as purposive activity, purpose is what is imme
diate and at rest, the unmoved which is also self-moving, and as
such is Subject. I ts power to move, Uiken abstractly, is being..
fOf~self or pure negativity. The result is the same as the hegin~
ning, only because the beginning is the purpose; in other words,
the actual is the same as its Notion only because the immediate,
as purpose, contains the self or pureactuaHty within itself. The
realized purpose, or the existentactuality, is movement and un~
folded becoming; but it1s just this unrest that is the self; and
the self is like that immediacy and simplicity of the beginning
because it is the result, that which has returned into itself, the
latter being similarly just the self. And the self is the sameness
and simplicity that relates itself to itself.
23. The need to represent the Absolute as Subject has found
expression in the propositions: God is the eternal, the moral
world-order, love, and so on. In such propositions the True is
only posited immediately as Subject, but is not presented as the
movement of reflecting itself into itself. In a proposition of this
kind one begins with the word 'God'. This by itselfis a rneaning~
less sound, a mere name; it is only the predicate that says what
God is, gives Him content and meaning. Only in the end of the
proposition does the empty beginning become actual knowD

PREFACE

13

ledge. This being so, it is not clear why one does not speak
merely of the eternal, of the moral world-order, and so on, or,
as the ancients did, of pure notions like 'being', 'the One" and
so on, in short, of that which gives the meaning without adding
the meanz'ngless sound as wen. But it is just this word that indi~
cates that what is posited is not a being [i.e. something that
merely is], or essence, or a universal in general, but rather something that is reflected into itself, a Subject. But at the same time
this is only anticipated. The Subject is assumed as a fixed point
to which, as their support, the predicates are affixed by a move ..
ment belonging to the knower of this Subject, and which is not
regarded as belonging to the fixed point itself; yet it is only
through this movement that the content could be represented
as Subject. The way in which this movement has been brought
about is such that it cannot belong to the fixed point; yet, after
this point has been presupposed, the nature of the movement
cannot really be other than what it is, it can only be externaL
Hence, the mere anticipation that the Absolute is Subject is
not only not the actuality of this Notion, but it even makes the
actuality impossible; for the anticipation posits the subject as
an inert point, whereas the actuality is self-movement.
24. Amongthe various consequences that follow from what
has just been said, this one in particular can be stressed, that
knowledge is only actual, and can only be expounded, as
Science or as system; and furthermore, that a so-called basic pro ..
position or principle of philosophy, if true, is also false, just
because it is only a principle. It is, therefore, easy to refute it.
The refutation consists in pointing out its defect; and it is defective because it is only the universal or principle, is only the be ..
ginning. If the refutation is thorough, it is derived and developedfrom the principle itself, not accomplished by counterassertions and random thoughts from outside. The refutation
would, therefore, properly consist in the further development
of the principle, and in thus remedying the defectiveness, if it
did not mistakenly pay attention solely to its negative action,
without awareness of its progress and result on their positive side
too-The genuinely positive exposition of the beginning is thus
also, conversely, just as much a negative attitude towards it,
viz. towards its initially one-sided form of being immediate or
purpose. It can therefqre be taken equally well as a refutation

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

of the principle that constitutes the basis of the system, but it
is more correct to regard it as a demonstration that the basis
or principle of the system is, in fact, only its beginning.
25. That the True is actual only as system, or that Substance
is essentially Subject, is expressed in the representation of the
Absolute as Spirit-the most sublime Notion and the one which
belongs to the modern age and its religion. The spiritual alone
is the actual; it is essence, or that which has being in itself; it is
that which relates itself to itself and is de term£nate , it is other-being
and being-for-sel/, and in this determinateness, or in its self-externality, abides within itself; in other words, it is in andfor itself.But this being-in-and-for-itself is at first only for us, or in itself,
it is spiritual Substance. It must also be this for itself, it must be
the knowledge of the spiritual, and the knowledge of itself as
Spirit, i.e. it must be an object to itself, but just as immediately
a sublated object, reflected into itself. It islor itself only for us,
in so far as its spiritual content is generated by itself. But in
so far as it is also for itself for its own self, this self-generation,
the pure Notion, is for it the objective element in which it has
its existence, and it is in this way, in its existence for itself, an
object reflected into itself. The Spirit that, so developed, knows
itself as Spirit, is Science; Science is its actuality and the realm
which it builds for itself in its own element.
26. Pure self-recognitionin absolute otherness, this Aether as
such, is the ground and soil of Science or knowledge in general.
The beginning of philosophy presupposes or requires that consciousness should dwell in this element. But this element itself
achieves its own perfection and transparency only through the
movement of its becoming. It is pure spirituality as the universal
that has the form of simple immediacy. This simple being in
its existential form is the soil [of Science], it is thinking which
has its being in Spirit alone. Because this element, this immediacy of Spirit, is the very substance of Spirit, it is the transfigured essence, reflection which is itself simple, and which is for
itself immediacy as such, being that is reflected into itself.
Science on its part requires that self-consciousness should have
raised itself into this Aether in order to be able to live-and
[actually] to live-with Science and in Science. Conversely, the
individual has the right to demand that Science should at least
provide him with the ladder to this standpoint, should show

PREFACE

him this standpoint within himself. His right is based on his
absolute independence, which he is conscious of possessing in
every phase of his knowledge; for in each one, whether recog~
nized by Science or not, and whatever the content may be, the
individual is the absolute form, i.e. he is the immediate certainty
of himself and, if this expression be preferred, he is therefore
unconditioned being. The standpoint of consciousness which
knows objects in their antithesis to itself, and itself in antithesis
to them, is for Science the antithesis of its own standpoint. The
situation in which consciousness knows itself to be at home is
for Science one marked by the absence of Spirit. Conversely,
the element of Science is for consciousness a remote beyond in
which it no longer 'possesses itself. Each of these two aspects [of
self-conscious Spirit] appears to the other as the inversion of
truth. When natural consciousness entrusts itself straightway
to Science, it makes an attempt, induced by it knows not what,
to walk on its head too,just this once; the compulsion to assume
this unwonted posture and to go about in it is a violence it is
expected to do to itself, all unprepared and seemingly without
necessity. Let Science be in its own self what it may, relatively
to immediate self-consciousness it presents itself in an inverted
posture; or, because this self. . consciousness has the principle of
its actual existence in the certainty of itself, Science appears
to it not to be actual, since self-consciousness exists on its
own account outside of Science. Science must therefore unite
this elementnfself-certainty with itself, or rather show that and
how this element belongs to iLSo long as Science lacks this actual
dimension, it is only the content as the in-itself, the purpose that
is as yet still something inward, not yet Spirit, but only spiritual
Substance. This £n-itself has to express itself outwardly and
becQrnejor itself, and this means simply that it has to posit selfconsciousness as one with itself.
27. It is this coming. . to-be of Science as such or of knowledge,
that is described in this Phenomenology of Spirit. Knowledge in
its first phase, or immediate Spirit, is the non-spiritual, I.e. sense·
consciousness. In order to become genuine knowledge, to beget
the element of Science which is the pure Notion of Science itself,
it must travel a long way and work its passage. This process
of coming-to-be (considering the content and patterns it will
display therein) will not be what is commonly understood by

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

an initiation of the unscientific consciousness into Science; it
will also be quite different from the 'foundation' of Science;
least of all will it be like the rapturous enthusiasm which, like
a shot from a pistol, begins straight away with absolute knowledge, and makes short work of other standpoints by declaring
that it takes no notice of them.
28. The task of leading the individual from his uneducated
standpoint to knowledge had to be seen in its universal sense,
just as it was the universal individual, self-conscious Spirit,
whose formative education had to be studied. As regards the
relation between them, every moment, as it gains concrete form
and a sha pe ofi ts own, dis pIa ys i tse1fin the universal individual.
The single individual is incomplete Spirit, a: concrete shape in
whose whole existence one determinateness predominates, the
others being present only in blurred outline. In a Spirit that
is more advanced than another, the lower concrete existence
has been reduced to an inconspicuous moment; what used to
be the important thing is now but a trace; its pattern is
shrouded to become a mere shadowy outline. The individual
whosesuhstance is the more advanced Spirit runs through this
past just as one who takes up a higher science goes through the
preparatory studies he haslongsince absorbed, in order to bring
their content to mind: he recalls them to the inward eye, but
has no lasting interest in them. The single individual must also
pass through the formative stages of universal Spirit so far as
their content is concerned, blJ-t as shapes which Spirit has
already left behind, as stages on a way that has been made level
with toil. Thus, as far as factual information is concerned) we
find that what in former ages engaged the attention of men of
mature mind, has been reduced to the level of facts, exercises,
and even games for. children; and) in the child's progress
through school, we shall recognize the history of the cultural
development of the world traced, as it Were, in a silhouette.
Thispastexistence is the already acquired property of universal
Spirit which constitutes the Substance of the individual) and
hence lfippears externally to him as his inorganic nature. In this
respect formative education, regarded from the side of the individual) consists in his acquiring what thus lies at hand,
devouring his inorganic nature, and taking possession of it for
himself. But, regarded from the side of universal Spirit as sub-

PREFACE

17

stance, this is nothing but its own acq uisi tion of self-consciousness, the bringing-about of its own becoming and reflection into
itself.
29. Science sets forth this formative process in all its detail
and necessity, exposing the mature configuration of everything
which has already been reduced to a moment and property of
Spirit. The goal is Spirit's insight into what knowing is. Impatience demands the impossible, to wit, the attainment of the
end without the means. But the length of this path has to be
endured, because, for one thing, each moment is necessary; and
further, each moment has to be lingered over, because each is
itself a complete individual shape, and one is only viewed in
absolute perspective when its determinateness is regarded as a
concrete whole, or the whole is regarded as uniquely qualified
by that determination. Since the Substance of the individual,
the World-Spirit itself, has had the patience to pass through
thes.e shapes over the long passage of time, and to take upon
itself the enormous labour of worJd~history, in which it
embodied in each shape as much of its entire content as that
shape was capable of holding, and since it could not have
attained consciousness of itself by any lesser effort, the individual certainly cannot by the nature of the case comprehend
his own substance more easily. Vet,at the same time, he does
have less trouble, since .aH this has already been implicitly
accompJished; the content is already the actuality reduced to
a . possibility, its immediacy overcome, and the embodied shape
reduced to abbreviated, simple determinations of thought. It
is no longer existence in the form of being-in-itself---,neither still
in the original form [oian abstract concep.t], nor submerged
in existence~but is now the recollected in-itself, ready fot: conversion in. to the form of being:for-selJ. How this is done mus t now
be described more precisely.
30. We take up the movement of the whole from the point
where the sublation of existence. as such is no longer necessary.;
what remains to be done, and what requires a higher level of
cultural reorientation, is to represent and to get acquainted
with these forms. The existence that has been taken back into
the Substance has only been immediately transposed into the elemen t of the self through tha tfirs t negation. Hence this acquired
property still has the same character of uncomprehended

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

immediacy, of passive indifference, as existence itself; existence
has thus merely passed over in to figurative representation. At the
same time it is thus something familiar, something which the
existent Spirit is finished and done with, so that it is no longer
active or really interested in it. Although the activity that has
finished with existence is itself only the movement of the particular Spirit, the Spirit that does not com'prehend itself,
[genuine] knowing, on the other hand, is directed against the
representation thus formed, against this [mere] familiarity;
knowing is the activity of the universal self, the concern of
thinking.
31. Quite generally, the familiar, just because it is familiar,
is not cognitively understood. The commonest way in which
we deceive either ourselves or others about understanding is
by assuming something as familiar, and accepting it on that
account; with all its pros and cons, such knowing never gets
anywhere, and it knows not why. Subject and object, God,
Nature, Understanding, sensibility, and so on, are uncritically
taken for granted as familiar,/established as valid, and made
intoJixed points for starting and stopping. While these remain
unmoved, the knowing activity goes back and forth between
them, thus moving only on their surface. Apprehending and
testing likewise consist in seeing whether everybody's impression of the matter coincides with what is· asserted about these
fixed points, whether it seems that way to him or not.
32. The analysis of an idea, as it used to be carried out, was,
in fact, nothing else than ridding it of the form in which it had
become familiar. To break an idea up into its original elements
is to return to its moments, which at least do not have the form
of the, given idea, but rather constitute the immediate property
of the se1f. This analysis, to besure, only arrives at thoughts which
are themse1ves familiar, fixed, and inert determinations. But
what is thus separated and non-actual is an essential moment;
for it is only because the concrete does divide itself, and make
itself into .something non-actual, that it is self-moving" The
activity of dissolution is the power and work of the Understanding, the most astonishing and mightiest of powers, or rather the
absolute power. The circle that remains self-enclosed and, like
substance, holds its moments together, is an immediate relationship, one therefore which has nothing astonishing about it.

PREFACE

19

But that an accident as such, detached from what circumscribes
it, what is bound and is actual only in its context with others,
should attain an existence of its own and a separate freedom~
this is the tremendous power of the negative; it is the energy
of thought, of the pure 'I'. Death, if that is what we want to
call this non-actuality, is of all things the most dreadful, and
to hold fast what is dead requires the greatest strength. Lacking
strength, Beauty hates the Understanding for asking of her what
it cannot do. But the life of Spirit is not the life that shrinks
from death and keeps itself untouched by devastation, but
rather the life that endures it and maintains itself in it. It wins
its truth only when, in utter dismemberment, it finds itself. It
is this power, not as something positive, which closes its eyes
to the negative, as when we say of something that it is nothing
o~ is false, and then, having done with it, turn away and pass
on tO,something else; on the contrary, Spirit is this power only
by looking the negative in the face, and tarrying with it. This
tarrying with the negative is the magical power that converts
itinto being. This PQweris identical with what we earlier called
the Subject, which by giving determinateness an existence in
its own element supersedes abstract immediacy, i.e. the immediacy which barelyis, and thus is authentic substance: that
being or immediacy 'whose mediation is not outside of it but
which is this mediation itself.
33. The fact that the object represented becomes the property of pure self.. consciousness, its elevation to universality in
general, is only one.aspect of formative education, not its fulfilment~The manner of study in ancient times differed from that
ofthe modern age in that the former was the proper and com ..
plete formation of the natural consciousness. Putting itself to
the test at every point of its existence, and philosophizing about
everything it came across, it made itself into a universality that
was active thrQugh and through. In modern times, however,
the individual finds the abstract form ready-made; the effort
to grasp and appropriate it is more the direct driving-forth of
what is within and the truncated generation of the universal
than it is the emergence of the latter from the concrete variety
of existence. Hence the task nowadays consists not so much in
purging the individual of an immediate, sensuous mode of
apprehension, and making him into a substance that is an

20

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

object of thought and that thinks, but rather injust the opposite,
in freeing determinate thoughts from their fixity so as to give
actuality to the universal, and impart to it spiritual life. But
it is far harder to bring fixed thoughts into a fluid state than
to do so with sensuous existence. The rea~on for this was given
above: fixed thoughts have the 'I', the power of the negative,
or pure actuality, for the substance and element of their existence, whereas sensuous determinations have only powerless,
abstract immediacy, or being as such. Thoughts become fluid
when pure thinking, this inner immediacy, recognizes itself as a
moment, or when the pure certainty of self abstracts from
itself-not by leaving itself out, or setting itself aside, but by
giving uP. the fixity of its self-positing, by giving up not only
the fixity of the pure concrete, which the 'I' itself is, in contrast
with its differentiated content, but also the fixity of the differentiated moments which, posited in the element of. pure
thinking, share the unconditioned nature of the 'P. Through
this movement the pure thoughts become Notions, and are only
now what they are in truth,self~movemen ts, drcles;spiritual
essences; which is what theirsuhstance is.
34. This movement of pure essences constitutes the nature
ofsdentifi·c method in .general.Regarded as the connectedness
of their content it is the necessary expansion ofthat content
into an organic whole. Through this movement the path by
which the N odon of knowledge is reached becomes likewise a
necessary and complete process of becoming; so that this preparatory path ceases to be a casual philosophizing that fastens
on to this or that object, relationship, or thought that happens
to pop up in the imperfect consciousness, or tries to base the
truth on the pros and cons, the inferences and consequences,
ofrigidly defined thoughts. Instead, this pathway, through the
movement of the Notion, will encompass the entire sphere of
secular consciousness in its necessary development.
35. Further, an exposition of this kind constitutes the first
part of Science, because the existence of Spirit qua primary is
nothing but the immediate or the beginning-but not yet its
return into itself. The element of immediate existence is therefore
what distinguishes this part of Science from the others. The
statement of this distinction leads us into a discussion of SOlne
fixed ideas which usually crop up in this connection.

PREFACE

21

36. The immediate existence of Spirit, consciousness, contains
the two moments of knowing and the objectivity negative to
knowing. Since it is in this clemen t [of consciousness] that Spirit
develops itself and explicates its moments, these moments con ..
tain that ant.ithesis, and they all appear as shapes of conscious
ness. The Science ofthis pathway is the Science of the experience
which consciousness goes through; the substance and its movement are viewed as the object of consciousness. Consciousness
knows and comprehends only what falls within its experience;
for what is containedin this is nothing but spiritual substance,
and -this, too, as object of the self. But Spirit becomes object
because it is just this movement of becoming an other to itself,
i.e. becoming an object to itself, and of suspending this otherness.
And experience is the name we give to just this movement, in
which the immediate, the unexperienced, i.e. the abstract,
whether it be of sensuous [hut still unsensed] being, or only
thought of as simple, becomes aHenated from itself and then
returns to itself from this alienation, and is ,only then revealed
for the first time in its actuality and truth, just as it then has
become a property of consciousness also.
S7· The disparity which exists in consciousness between the
'I' and the substance which is its object is the distinction
between them, the negative in general. This can be regarded as
thede/eet of both, though it is their soul, or that which moves
them. Thatis why some of the ancients conceived the void as
the principle of motion, for they rightly saw the moving principleas tbe negative, though they did not as yet grasp that the
negative is the self. Now, although tbis negative appears at first
asa disparity between the 'I' and its object, it is just as much
the disparity :ofthe substance with itself. Thus what seems to
happen outside of it, to he an activity directed against it, is
really its own doing, and Substance shows itse1fto be essentially
Subject. When it has shown this completely, Spirit has made
its existence identical with its essence; it has itself for its object
justas,lt is,and the abstract element of immediacy, and of the
separation of knowing and truth, is overcome. Being is then
absolutely mediated; it is a substantial content which is just
as immediately the property of the 'I', it is self·like or the
Notion.
'
With this, the Phenomenology of Spirit is concluded. What
a

22

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

Spirit prepares for itself in it, is the element of [true] knowing.
In this element the moments of Spirit now spread themselves
out in thatform oj simplicity which knows its object as its own
self. They no longer fall apart into the antithesis of being and
knowing, but remain in the simple oneness of knowing; they
are the True in the form of the True, and their difference is
only the difference of content. Their movement, which organizes itselfin this element into a whole, is Logic or speculative philosophy.
38. Now, because the system of the experience of Spirit embraces only the appearance of Spirit, the advance from this system
to the Science of the True in its true shape seems to be merely
negative, and one might wish to be spared the negative as somethIng false, and demand to he led to the truth without more
ado. Why bother with the false?-The view already discussed,
namely, that we should begin with Science straight away, is
to be answered at this point by examining the nature of the
negative in general regarded as what is false. This is a topic
regarding which established ideas notably obstruct the
approach to truth. It will give us occasion to speak of mathematical cognition, which unphilosophical knowledge regards
as the ideal that philosophy muststrive to attain, though it has
so far striven in vain.
39. 'True' and 'false' belong among those determinate
notions which are held to beinert and wholly separate essences,
one here and one there, each standing fixed and isolated from
the other, with which it has nothing in common. Against this
view it must be maintained that truth is not a minted coin that
can be given and pocketed ready-made. Nor is there such a
thing as the false, any more than there is something evil. The
evil and the false, to be sure, are not as bad as the devil, for
in the devil they are even made into a particular suhjective agent;
as the false and the evil, they are mere universals, though each
has its own essence as against the other.
The false (for here it is ouly of this that we speak) would be
the other, the negative of the substance, which as the content
of knowledge is the True. But the substance is itself essentially
the negative, partly as a distinction and determination of the
content, and partly as a simple distinguishing, i.e. as self and
knowledge in general. One can, of course, know something

PREFACE

23

falsely. To know something falsely means that there is a disparity between knowledge and its Substance. But this very disD
parity is the process of distinguishing in general, which is an
essential moment [in knowing]. Out of this distinguishing, of
course, comes their identity, and this resultant identity is the
truth. But it is not truth as if the disparity had been thrown
away, like dross from pure metal, not even like the tool which
remains separate from the finished vessel; disparity, rather, as
the negative, the self, is itself still directly present in the True
as such. Yet we cannot therefore say that the false is a moment
of the True, let alone a component part of it. To say that in
every falsehood there is a grain of truth is to treat the two like
oil and water, which cannot be mixed and are only externally
combined. It is precisely on account of the importance of designating the moment of complete otherness that the terms 'true' and
'false' must no longer be used where such otherness has been
annulled. Just as to talk of the unity of subject and object, of
finite and infinite,. of being and thought, etc. is inept, since
object and subject, etc. signify what they are outside of their
unity, and since in their unity they are not meant to- be what
their expression says they are~ just so the false is no longer qua
false, a moment of truth.
40. Dogmatism as a way of thinking, whether in ordinary
knowing or in the study of philosophy, is nothing else but the
opinion that the True consists in a proposition which isa fixed
result, or which is immediately known. To such questions as,
When was Caesar born?, or How many feet were there in a
stadium?, etc. a clear-cut answer ought to be given, just as it
is definitely true that .the square on the hypotenuse is equal to
the sum of the squares on the other two sides of a right-angled
triangle. But the nature of a so-called truth of that kind is different from the nature of philosophical truths.
41. As regards historical truths-to mention these brieflyit win be readily granted that so far as their purely historical
aspect is considered, they are concerned with a particular existence, with the contingent and arbitrary aspectsofa given content, which have no necessity. But even such plain truths as
thosejust illustrated are not without the movement of seW-consciousness. To cognize one of them, a good deal of comparison
is called for, books must be consulted, in some way or other

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

inquiry has to be made. Even an immediate intuition is held
to have genuine value only when it is cognized as a fact along
with its reasons, although it is probably only the bare result
that we are supposed to be concerned about.
42. As for mathematical tru ths, we should be even less inclined
to regard anyone as a geometer who knew Euclid's theorems
outwardly by rote, without knowing their proofs, without, as we
might say, to point the contrast, knowing them inwardly. Similarly, if someone became aware, through measuring a number
of right-angled triangles, that their sides do, in fact, have the
well-known relation to one another, we should consider his
(mere] awareness of the fact unsatisfactory. Yet, even in mathe..
I1!atical cognition, the essentiality of the proof does not have the
significance and nature of being a moment of the result itself;
when the latter .is reached, the demonstration is over and has
disappeared. I t is, of course, as a result that the theorem is some..
thing seen 10 he true.; but tbis added circumstance has no bearing
onjtscon~ent, but only ooits relation to the knowing Subject.
The movement of mathematical proof does not belong to the
object, butratheris an activity external to the matter in hand.
Thus the na ture of the right-angled triangle does not divide itself
into parts in just the way set forth in the construction necessary
for the proof of the proposition that expresses its ratio. The way
and the means by which theresult is brought forth belong entirely to the cognitive process. In philosophical cognition, too,
the way in whicb the [outer] existence qua existence of a thing
comes a bou t, is distinct fr.om the way in which its essence or inner
nature comes to he. But, to begin with, philosophical cognition
inchJdes poth [existence and essence], whereas mathematical
cognition sets fortb only the genesis of the existence, i.e. the being
of the nature of the thing in cognition as such. What is more,
philosophical cognition also unites these two distinct processes.
Th:einner coming."to-be or genesis of substance is an unbroken
transition ioto outer existence, into being-for-another, and conversely, the genesis ofexistence is how existence is by itself taken
back into essence. The movement is the twofold process and
the genesis of the whole, in such wise that each side simultaneously posits the other, and each therefore has both perspectives within itself; together they thus constitute the whole by

PREFACE

25

dis$olving themselves, and by making themselves into its
moments.
43. In mathematical cognition, insight is an activity external
to the thing; it follows that the true thing is altered by it. The
means employed, construction and proof, no doubt contain true
propositions, but it must none the less be said that the content
is false. In the above example the triangle is dismembered, and
its parts consigned to other figures, whose origin is allowed by
the construction upon the triangle. Only at the end is the
triangle we are actually dealing with reinstated. During the
procedure it was lost to view, appearing only in fragments
belonging to other figures.-Here, then, we see the negativity
of the content coming in as well; this could just as much have
been called a 'falsity' of the content as is the disappearance of
supposedly fixed conceptions in the movement of the Notion.
44. But what is reallydefective in this kind of cognition conm
cerns the cognitive process itself, as well as its materiaL As
regards the former, 'Ye qonot, in theJirst place, see avy necessity
in the construction. $4(::h necessitydoes notarise from the notion
of the theorem; it israJherimposed, and the instruction to draw
precisely these line$ when infinit~ly many others could be
drawn must be bli~91y obeyed without our knowing anything
b~yQnd except that we believe that this will he to the purpose
in(;~rryil)g out the proof. In retrospect, this expeqiency also
becomes eyicie.nt, but itis only an external expediency,hecause
it h.ecomes evident qnlyafter the proof. This proof, il) addition,
follows a path that begins somewhere or other without indicating as yet what relationsu.ch a beginning will have tothe result
that will emerge. In its progress it takes up.these particul~r determinations~nd relations.,;;tnd lets others alone, without its being
immediately dear whfttthe controlling necessity is; an external
purpose governs this ..procedure.
45. The evident character oftb,is defective cognition of which
ma.tl)emi),tics is prgud, and on which it plumes itself before
PQilosophy, rests solely on the poverty of its purpose and the
defectiveness of its stuff, and is therefore of a kind that philosophy must spurn. Its purpose or N.otion is magnitude. It is just
this rela.tiQnship that}s unessential, lacking the Notion. AccordiJ:igly, this process of knowing proceeds on the surface, does not
touch the thing itself, its essence or Notion, and therefore fails

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

to comprehend it [i.e. in terms of its Notion].-The material,
regarding which mathematics provides such a gratifying treasury of truths, is space and the numerical unit. Space is the existence in which the Notion inscribes its differences as in an empty
lifeless element, in which they arejust as inert and lifeless. The
actual is not something spatial, as it is regarded in mathematics;
with non-actual things like the objects of mathematics, neither
concrete sense-intuition nor philosophy has the least concern.
In a non-actual element like this there is only a truth of the
same sort, i.e. rigid, dead propositions. We can stop at anyone
of them; the next one starts afresh on its own account, without
the first having moved itself on to the next, and without any
necessary connection arising through the nature of the thing
itself.-Further, because of this principle and element-and
herein consists the formalism of mathematical evidence-[this
kind of] knowing moves forward along the line of equality. For
what is lifeless, since it does not move of itself, does not get as
far as the distinctions of essence, as far as essential opposition
or inequality, and therefore does not make the transition of one
opposite into its opposite, does not attain to qualitative,
immanent motion or self..movement. For it is only magnitude,
the unessential distinction, ,that mathematics deals with. It
abstracts from the fact that itis the Notion which divides space
into its dimensions and determines the connections between
and within them. It does not, for example, consider the relationship ofline to surface; and, when it compares the diameter of
a circle with its circumference, it runs up against their incommensurability, i.e. a relatiqnship of the Notion, something
infinite that eludes mathematical determination.
46. Nor does the immanent, so-called pure mathematics set
time qua time over against space, as the second material fbr its
consideration. Applied mathematics does indeed deal with
time, as well as with motion and other concrete thin~s; but the
synthetic propositions, i.e. propositions regarding rela.tionships
determined by their Notion, it takes from experience and
applies itsformulae only on these presuppositions. The fact that
the.so-called proofs of propositions, such as those regarding the
equilibrium of the lever, or the relation of space and time in
the motion offaIling, etc., are often given and accepted as proofs
itself only proves how great is the need of proof for cognition,

PREFACE

seeing that, where nothing better is to be had, cognition values
even the hollow semblance of it, and obtains from it some
measure o(satisfaction. A critique of these proofs would be as
noteworthy as it would be instructive,l partly in order to strip
mathematics of these fine feathers, partly in order to point out
its limitations, and thus show the necessity for a different kind
of knowledge.
As for time, which it is to be presumed would constitute, a~
the co un terpart of space, the material of the other part of pure
mathematics, it .is the existent Notion itself. The principle of
magnitude, of difference not determined by the Notion, and the
principle of equality, of abstract lifeless unity, cannot cope with
that sheer unrest of life and its absolute distinction. It is therefore only in a paralysed form, viz. as the numerical unit, that this
negativity becomes the second material of mathematical cognition, which, as an external activity, reduces what is self-moving
to mere material, so as to possess in it an indifferent, external,
lifeless content.
47. Philosophy, on the other hand, has to do, not with unessential determinations, but with a determination in so far as
it is essential ~ its dement and content is not the abstract or nonactual, but the actual, that which posits itselfand is alive within
itself---existence within its own Notion. It is the process which
begets and traverses its own moments, and this whole movementconstitutes what is positive [in it] and its truth. This truth
therefore includes the negative also, what would be called the
false, ifit could be regarded as something from which one might
abstract. The evanescent itself must, ·on the· contrary, be
regarded as essential, not as something fixed, cut off from the
True,and left lying who knows where outside it, anymore than
the True is to be regarded as something on the other side, positive and dead. Appearance is the arising and passing away that
does not itself arise and pass away, but is 'in itself' [i.e. subsists
in trinsically], and constitutes the .actuali ty and the movement
of the life of truth. The· True is thus the BacchanaHan revel
in which no member is not drunk; yet because each member
collapses as soon as he drops out, the revel isjust as much transparent and simple repose. Judged in the court of this movement,
1 Hoffmeister refers to Ene. §267 where Hegel discusses the laws of gravitation in this
sense.

28

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

the single shapes qfSpirit do not persist any more than determi ..
nate thoughts do, but they are as much positive and ne.cessary
moments, as they are negative and evanescent. In the whole of
the movement, seen as a state of repose, what distinguishes itself
therein, and gives itself particular existence, is preserved as
something that recollects itself, whose existence is self-knowledge,
and whose self~knowledge is just as immediately existence.
48. It might seem necessary at the outset to say more about
the method of this movement, Le. of Science. But its Notion is
already to be found in what has been said, and its proper exposi
tion belongs to Logic, or rather it is Logie. For the method is
nothing but the struct,ure set forth in its pure essentiality. We
should realize, however, that the system of ideas concerning
philosophical method is yet another set of current beliefs that
belongs to a bygone culture. If this comment sounds boastful
or revolutionary--.-.and I am far from adopting such a toneit should be noted that current opinion itself has already come
to view the scientific regime bequeathed by mathe.matics as
quite. old-fa sh io ned-with its explanations, divisions, axioms, sets
of theorems, its proofs, principles, deductions> and conclusions
from them. EvenJf its unfitness is not clearly understood, little
or no use is any longer made of it; and though not actually
condemned outright, no one likes it very much. And we should
be sufficiently prejudiced in favour of what is excellent, to suppose that it will be put to usc, and will find acceptance. But
it is not difficult to see that the way of asserting- a proposition,
adducing reasons for itland in the same way refuting its opposite by reasons, is not theform in which truth can appear. Truth
is its own self-movement, whereas the method just described
is the mode of cognition that remains e><;ternal to its material.
Hence itis peculiar to mathematics, and must he left· to that
science, w4kh, as we have noted, has for its principle the relationship of magnitude, a relationship alien to the Notion, and
for its material dead space and the equally- lifeless numerical
unit. This method, too} ina looser form, i.e. more blended with
thearhitraryand the accidental, may retain its place, as in conversation, or in a piece of historical instruction designed rather
to satisfy curiosity than to produce knowledge, which is about
what a preface amounts to. In ordinary life, consciousness has
for its content items of information, experiences, concrete
u

PREFACE

objects of sense, thoughts, basic principles,-anything will do
as a content, as long as it is ready to hand~ or is accepted as
a fixed and stable being or essence. Sometimes consciousness
follows where this leads, sometimes it breaks the chain, and
deals arbitrarily with its content, behaving as if it were deter
mining and manipulating it from outside. It. refers the content
back to some certainty or other, even if only to the sensation
of the moment; and conviction is satisfied when a famiJiar rest
ing-place is reached.
49. But we have already pointed out that, once the necessity
of the Notion has banished the slipshod style of conversational
discussion, and along with it the pedantry and pomposity of
science, they are not to be replaced by the non-method of presentiment and inspiration, or by the arbitrariness of prophetic
utterance, both of which despise not only scientific pomposity,
but scientific procedure of all kinds.
50. Of course, the triadicform must not be regarded as scien ..
tific when it is reduced to a lifeless schema, a mere shadow,
and when scientific organization is degraded into a table of
terms. Kant rediscovered this triadic form by instinct, but in
his work it was still lifeless and uncomprehended; :since then
it has, however, been raised to its absolute significance, and
with it the true form in its true content has been presented,
so that the Notion of' Science has emerged. This formalism, of
which we have already spoken generally and whose style we
wish here to describe in more detail, imagines that it has com ..
prehended and expressed the nature and life of a form when
it has endowed it with some determination of the schema as
a predicate. The'predicate may be subjectivity or objectivity,
Of, say, magnetism, electricity, etc" contraction or expansion,
east or west, and the like. Such predicates can be'multiplied
to infinity, since in this way each determination or form can
again be used as a form or moment in the case of an other,
and each can gratefully perform the same service for an other.
In this sort of circle of reciprocity one never learns what the
thing itself is, nor what the one or the other is. In such a pro..
cedure, sometimes determinations of sense are picked up from
everyday intuition, and they are supposed, of course, to mean
something different from what they say; sometimes what is in
itself meaningful, e.g. pure determinations of thought like suba

a

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

ject, Object, Substance, Cause, Universal, etc.-these are used
just as thoughtlessly and uncritically as we use them in everyday
life, or as we use ideas like strength and weakness, expansion.
and contraction; the metaphysics is in the former case as unscientific as are our senSUDUS representatiDns in the latter.
5 I. Instead of the inner life and self-movement of its existence, this kind of simple determinateness of intuition-which
means here sense-knowledge-is predicated in accordance with
a superficial analogy, and this external, empty application of
the formula is called a 'construction'. This formalism isjust like
any other. What a dullard a man must be who could not be
taught in a quarter of an hour the theory that there are ,asthenic,
sthenic, and indirectly asthenic diseases, and as many modes
of treatment;1 and, since till quite recently such instruction
sufficed, who could not hope t.o be transformed in this short
space of time from an empirical into a theoretical physician?
The formalism of such a 'Philosophy of Nature' teaches, say,
that the Understanding is Electricity, or the Animal is Nitrogen, or that they are the equivalentof the South or North Pole,
etc., or represent it-whether all this is expressed as baldly as
here or even concocted withm.ore terminol.ogy~and cOnfr'Ollted with su(:h a power which brings together things that
appear to lie far apart, and with the violence suffered by the
passive things of sense through slich association, and which imparts to them the Notion's semblance butsavesitselfthe trolJ,ble
.of doing the main thing, viz. expressing the Notion itself or the
meaning .of the sensuous representation-confronted with all
this, the untutored mind may be filled with admiration and
astonishment, and may venerate in it the profound work .of
genius. It may be delighted, too, with the clarity ofslJ,ch characteri~ations, since these replac~ the abstract Notion with somet4ing that can be intuitively apprehended, and so made more
pleasing; and it may cDngratulate itself on feeling a kinship of
sDul with such a splendid performance. The knack .of this kind
.of wisdom is as quickly learned as it is easy to practise; once
familiar, the repetition of it becomes as insufferable as the
repetition ofa conjuring trick already seen thrDugh. The instrument of this monotonous formalism is no more difficult to
handle than a painter's palette ~aving only two colours) say
1

SOkcalled Brownianism: John Brown, Elementa medicinae, 1780.

PREFACE

31

red and green, the one for colouring the surface when a historical scene is wanted, the other for landscapes. It would be hard
to decide which is greater in all this, the casual ease with which
everything in heaven and on earth and under the earth is coated
with this broth of colour, or the conceit regarding the excellence
of this universal recipe: each supports the other. What results
from this method of labelling aU that is in heaven and earth
with the few determinations of the genera] schema, and pigeonholing everything in this way, is nothing less than a 'report
clear as noonday'1 on the universe as an organism, viz. a synoptic table like a skeleton with scraps of paper stuck all over it,
or like the rows of closed and labelled boxes in a grocer's stall.
It is as easy to read off as either of these; and just as all the
flesh and blood has been stripped from this skeleton, and the
no longer living 'essence' [Sache] has been packed away in
the boxes, so in the report the living essence of the matter [Wesen
derSache] has been stripped away or boxed up dead. We have
already remarked that this way of thinking at the same time
culminates in a style of painting that is absolutely monochromatic; for it is ashamed of its schematic distinctions, these products of reflection, and submerges them all in the void of the
Absolute, from which pure identity, formless whiteness, is produced. This monochromatic character of the schema and its
lifeless determinations, this absolute identity, and the transition
from one to the other, are all equally products of the lifeless
Understanding and external cognition.
52. The excellent, however, not only cannot escape the fate
of being thus deprived of life and Spirit, of being flayed and
then seeing its skin wrapped around a lifeless knowledge and
its conceit. Rather we recognize even in thi's fate the power that
the excellent exercises over the hearts, if not over the minds,
of men; also the constructive unfolding into universality and
determinateness of form in which its perfection consists, and
which alone makes it possible for this universality to be used
in a superficial way.
'
53. Science dare only organize itself by the life of the Notion
itself. The determinateness, which is taken from the schema
and externally attached to an existent thing, is, in Science, the
An allusion to Fichte's Sun-clear Report to the Public about the True &sence
Philosophy (180 I ).

1

if the Newest

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

self-moving soul of the realized content. The movement of a
being that immediately is, consists partly in becoming an other
than itself, and thus becoming its own immanent content;
partly in taking back into itself this unf01ding [of its content]
or this existence of it, i.e. in making itself into a moment, and
simplifying itself into something determinate. In the former
movement, negativity is the differentiating and positing of existence; in this return into selt: it is the becoming of the determinate
simplicity. It is in this way that the content shows that its determinateness is not received from something else, nor externally
attached to it, but that it determines itself, and ranges itself as
a moment having its own place in the whole. The Understanding, in its pigeon-holing process, keeps the nec.essity and Notion
of the content to itself-all that constitutes the concreteness,
the actuality, the living movement of the reality which it
arranges. Or rather, it does not keep this to itself) since it does
not recognize it; for, iflt had this insight, it would surely give
some sign of it. It does not even recognize the need for it, else
it would drop its s.chematizing, or at least realize that it can
never hope to learn more in this fashion than one can learn
from a table of contents. A table of contel1ts is all that it offers,
the content itself it does not offer at all.
Even when the specific determinateness--ccSayone like Mag,..
netism, for exall1ple,-is in itself concrete or real, the Understanding degrades it into something lifeless, merely predicating
it of another existent thing, rather than cognizing it as the
immanent life of the thing, or cognizing its native and unique
way of generating and expressing itselfin that thing. The formal
Understanding leaves it to others to add this principal feature.
Instead of entering into the immanent content of the thing, it
is forever surveying the whole and standing above the particular existence of which it is speaking, i.e. it does not see it at
all. Scientific cognition, on the contrary, demands surrender
to the life of the object, Of, what amounts to the same thing,
confronting and expressing its inner necessity. Thus, absorbed
in its object, scientific cognition forgets about that general survey, which is merely the reflection of the cognitive process away
from the content and back into itself. Yet, immersed in the
material, and advancing with its movement, scientific cognition
does come back to itself, but not before its filling or content

PREFACE

33

is taken back into itself, is simplified into a determinateness,
and has reduced itself to one aspect of its own existence and
passed over into its higher truth. Through this process the
si"mple, self-surveying whole itself emerges from the wealth in
which its reflection seemed to be lost.
54. In general, because,. as we put it above, substance is in
itself or implicitly Subject, all content is its own reflection into
itself. The subsistence or substance of anything that exists is
its self-identity; for a failure of self-identity would be its dissolution. Self-identity, however, is pure abstraction; but this is thinking. When I say 'quality', I am saying simple determinateness;
ids by quality that one existence is distinguished from another,
or is an existence; it is for itself, or it subsists through this simple
oneness with itself. But it is thereby essentially a thought. Comprehended in this is the fact that Being is Thought; and this
is the source of that insight which usually eludes the usual superficial [begrijfios] talk about the identity of Thought and
Being.-Now; since the subsistence of an existent thing is a selfidentity or pure abstraction, it is the abstraction of itself from
itself, or it is itself its lack of self... identity and its dissolutionits own inwardness and withdrawal intoitself--its own becoming. Because this is the nature of what is, and in sofar as what
is has this natyre for [our] knowing, this knowing is not an
activity that deals with the content as something alien, is not
a reflection,iutoitselfaway from the content. Science is not that
ideali&m which replaced the dogmatism of assertion with a
dogmatism of assurance, or a dogmatism of self~certainty. On
the contrary, sinc,e [our] knowing sees the contentreturn into
its own inwardness, its activity is totally absorbed in the content, for it is the immanent self of the content; yet it has at the
same time returned in to itself, for it is pure self-iden tity in otherness. Thus it is the cunning which, while seeming to abstain
from activity, looks on and watches how determinateness, with
its concrete life, just where it fandes it is pursuing its own selfpreservation and particular interest, is in fact doing the very
opposite, is an activity that results in its own dissolution, and
makes itself a moment of the whole.
55. Above we indicated the significance of the Understanding
in reference to the self-consciousness of substance; we can now
see clearly from what has been said its significance in reference

34

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

to the determination of substance as being. Existence is
Quality, self.·identical determinateness, or determinate simplicity, determinate thought; this is the Understanding of existence [i.e. the nature of existence from the standpoint of the
Understanding]. Hence, it is J.lous, as Anaxagoras first recognized the essence of things to be. Those who came after him
grasped the nature of existence more definitely as Eidos or Idea,
determinate Univ.ersality, Species or Kind. It might seem >as
if the term Species or Kind is too commonplace, too inadequate,
for Ideas such as the Beautiful, the Holy, and the Eternal that
are currently in fashion. But as a matter of fact Idea expresses
neither more nor less than Species or Kind. But nowadays an
expression which exactly designates a Notion is often spurned
in favour of one which, ifonly because it is offoreign extraction,
shrouds the Notion in a fog, and hence sounds more edifying.
Precisely because existence is defined as Species, it is a simple
thought; NallS, simplicity, is substance. On account of its simplici ty or seW.iden tily it appears fixed and enduring. But this
seU-identity is no less negativity; therefore its fixed existence
passes over into its dissolution. The determinateness seems a~
first to be due entirely to the fact that it is related to an other,
and its move·ment·seems imposed on it by an alien power'; but
having its otherness within itself, and being seW'moving, is just
what isinvolved in the simplicity ofthinking itself; for this simple
thinking is the self~moving and self-differentiating thought, it
is its own inwardness, it is the pure Notion. Thus COmmon
understanding, too, is a becoming, and, as this becoming, it
is reasonableness.
56. It is in this nature of what is to be in its being its own
Notion, that logical necessity in general consists. This alone is the
rational element and the rhythm of the organic whole; it is as
much knowledge of the content, as the content is the Notion and
essence--in other words, it alone is speculative philosophy. The
self-moving concrete shape makes itself into a simple determinateness; in so doing it raises itselfto logical form, and exists
in its essentiality; its concrete existence is just this movement,
and is directly a logical existence. It is for this reason unnecessary to clothe the content in an external [logical] formalism;
the content is in its very nature the transition into such formal-

PREFACE

35

ism, but a fDrmalism which ceases to be external, since the fDrm
is the innate development Df the CDncrete cDntent itself.
57. This nature Df scientific method, which cDnsists partly
iIi nDt being separate frDm the cDntent, and partly in spDntaneously determining the rhythm Df its mDvement, has, as
already remarked, its prDper expDsitiDn in speculative philDsDphy. Of cDurse, what has been said here dDes express the
NDtiDn, but cannDt CDunt fDr mDre than an anticipatDry
assurance. Its truth does nDt lie in this partly narrative expDsitiDn, and is therefDre just as little refuted by asserting the CDntrary, by calling to. mind and recDunting cDnventional ideas,
as if they were established and familiar truths, Dr by dishing
up something new with the assurance that it comes frDm the
shrine Dfinner divine intuitiDn. A reception Df this kind is uSU
ally the first reactiDn Dn the part of knowing to. sDmething unfamiliar; it resists it in order to. save its Dwn freedDm and its
Dwn insight, its Dwn authDrity, frDm the alien authDrity (for
this is the guise in which what is newly encountered first
appears), and to. get rid Df the appearance that so.mething has
been learned and of the sDrt Dfsham:e this is suppDsed to. involve.
Similarly, when the unfamiliar is greeted with applause, the
reaction is of the same kind~ and cDnsists .in what in anDther
sphere wDuld take the fDrm Df ultra-revDlutionary speech and
action.
58. What, therefDre, is impDrtant in the study Df Science, is
that one shDuld take Dn oneself the strenuous effort Df the
NDtiDn.l This requires attentiDn to. the NotiDn as such, to. the
simple determinatiDns, e.g. Df Being-in-itself, Being-fDr-itself,
Self-identity, etc.; for these are pure self-mDvements such as
cDuld be called sDuls iftheir Notion did nDt designate sDmething
higher than SDUL The habit Dfpicture.. thinking, when it is interrupted by the NDtiDn, finds it just as irksDme as dDes formalistic
thinking that argues back and fDrth in thDUghts that have no.
actuality. That habit should be called material thinking, a CDntingent consciDusness that is absDrbed Dnly in material stuff,
and therefore finds it hard wDrk to lift the [thinking] self clear
Df such matter, and to be with itself alDne. At the Dpposite
extreme, argumentation is freedom from all content, and a
sense Dfvanity tDwards it. What is looked fDr here is the effort
w

I

I

i.c. the strenuous effort required to think in tetms of the Notion.

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

to give up this freedom, and, instead of being the arbitrarily
moving principle of the content, to sink this freedom in the content, letting it move spontaneously of its own nature, by the
selfas its own self, and then to contemplate this movement. This
refusal to intrude into the immanent rhythm of the -Notion,
either arbitrarily or with wisdom obtained from elsewhere, constitutes a restraint which is itself an essential moment of the
Notion,
59. There are two aspects of the procedure of argumentation
to which speculative [hegreifende] thinking is opposed and
which call for further notice. First, such reasoning adopts a negative attitude towards the content it apprehends; it knows how
to refute it and destroy it. That something is not the case, is
a merely negative insight, a dead end which does not lead to
a new conten t beyond itself. In order to have a con ten t once
again, something new must be taken over from elsewhere.
Argumentation is reflection into the empty'!', the vanity of
its own knowing.-This vanity, however, expresses not only the
vanity of this content, but also the futility of this insight itself;
for this insightis the negative that fails to Beethe positive within
itself. Because this reflection does notget its very negativity as
its content, it is never at ,the heart of the matter, hut always
heyond it.·For this reason it imagines that by establishing the
void it is always ahead of any insight rich in content. On the
other hand, in speculative [begreifenden] thinking, as we have
already shown} the negative belongs to the content itself, and
is the positive, both as the immanent movement and determination
of the content, and as the whole of this process. Looked at as
a result, what emerges from this process is the determinate negative which is consequently a positive content as well.
60, But in view of the fact that such thinking has a content,
whether of picture-thoughts or abstract thoughts 0'[' a mixture
of both, argumentation has another side which makes comprehension difficult for it. The remarkable nature of this other side
is closely linked with the above~mentioned essence of the Idea,
or rather itexpresses the Idea in the way that it appears as the
movement which is thinking apprehension. For whereas, in its
negative behaviour, which we have just discussed, ratiocinative
thinking is itself the self into which the content returns, in its
positive cognition, on the other hand, the self is a Suhject to

PREFACE

37

which the content is related as Accident and Predicate. This
Subject constitutes the basis to which the content is attached,
and upon which the movement runs back and forth. Specula.
tive [begreifendes] thinking behaves in a different way. Since the
Notion is the objects's own self, which presents itself as the eaming-to-be of the object, it is not a passive Subject inertly supporting
the Accidents; it is, on the contrary, the self-moving Notion
which takes its determinations back into itself. In this movement the passive Subject itself perishes; it enters into the differences and the content, and constitutes the determinateness,
i.e. the differentiated content and its movement, instead of
remaining inertly over against it. The solid ground which argumentation has in the passive Subject is therefore shaken, and
only this movement itself becomes the object. The Subject that
fills its content ceases to g~ heyond it, and ca.nnot have any
further Predicates or accidental properties. Conversely, the dispersion of the content is thereby bound together under the self;
it is not the universal which, free from the Subject, could belong
to several others. Thus the content is, inJact, no longer aPredicate of the Subject, but is the Substance, the essence and the
Notion of what is under discussion. Picture·thinking, whose
nature it is to run through the Accidents or Predicates and
w h,ich, beca us.e they are nothing more than Predicates and
Accidents, rightly goes beyond them, is checked in its progress,
since that which has the form of a Predicate in a proposition
is the Substance itself. It.suffers, as we might pULit, a counterthrust. Starting fr.om the Subje.ct as though this Were a permanent grouncl,.it finds that, since the Predicate is really the
Substance, the Subject has passed over into the Predicate, and,
by this very fact" has beensuhlated; and, since in this way what
seems to be the Predicate has become the whole and the independent mass, thinking cannot roam at will, hut is impeded
by this weight.
Usually, the Subject is first made the basis,' as the objective,
fixedsdf; thence the necessary movement to the multiplicity
of determinations or Predicates proceeds. Here, that Subject
is replaced by the knowing 'I' itself, which links the Predicates
'with the Subject holding them. "But, since that first Subject
enters into the determinations themselves and is their sou), the
second Subject, viz. the knowing 'I', still finds in the Predicate

38

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

what it thought it had finished with and got away from, and
from which it hoped to return into itself; and, instead of being
able to function as the determining agent in the movement of
predication, arguing back and forth whether to attach this or
that Predicate, it is really still occupied with the self of the content, having to remain associated with it, instead of being for
itself.
61. Formally, what has been said can be expressed thus: the
general nature of the judgement or proposition, which involves
the distinction of Subject and Predicate, is destroyed by the speculative proposition, and the proposition of identity which the
former becomes contains the counter-thrust against that sub ..
ject-predicate relationship.-This conflict between the general
form of a proposition and the unity of the Notion which destroys
it is similar to the conflict that occu.rs in rhythm between metre
and accent. Rhythm results from the floating centre and the
unification of the two. So, too, in the philosophical proposition
the identification of Subject and Predicate is not meant to destroythe difference between them, which the form ofthe proposition expresses; their unity, rather, is meant to emerge as
a harmony. The form of the proposition is the appearance of
the determinate sense, or the accent that distinguishes its fulfil ..
ment; but "that the predicate expresses the Substance, and that
the SubJect itselffalls into the universal, this is the unity in which
the accent dies away.
.
62. To illustrate what has been said: in the proposition 'God
is being', the Predicate is 'being' ; it has the significance ofsomething substantial in which the Subject is dissolved. 'Being' is
here meant to be not a Predicate, but rather the essence; it
seems, conseq uendy, that God ceases to be what he is from his
position in the proposition, viz. a fixed Subject. Here thinking,
instead of making progress in the transition from Subject to Predicate, in reali ty feels itselfchecked by the loss of the Bu bject, and,
missing it, is thrown back on to the thought of the Subject. Or,
since the Predicate itself has been expressed as a Subject, as
the being or essence which exhausts the nature of the Subject,
thinking finds the Subject immediately in the Predicate; and
now, having returned into itself in the Predicate, instead of
being in a position where it has freedom for argumen't, it is still
absorbed in the content, or at least is faced with the demand

PREFACE

39

that it should be. Similarly, too, when one says: 'the actual is
the univ~rsal', the actual as subject disappears in its predicate.
The uniyersal is not meant to have merely the significance of
a predicate, as if the proposition asserted only that the actual
is universal; on the contrary, the universal is meant to express
the essence of the actual.-Thinking therefore loses the firm
.objective basis it had in the subject when, in the predicate, it
is thrown back on to the subject, and when, in the predicate,
it does not return into itself, but into the subject of the content.
63. This abnormal inhibition of thought is in large measure
the source of the complaints regarding the unintelligibility of
philosophical wTitings from individuals who otherwise possess
the educational requirements for understanding them. Here we
see the reason behind one particular complaint so" often made
against them: that so much has to be read over and over before
it can be understood-a complaint whose burden is presumed
to be quite outrageous, and, ifjustified, to admit of no defence.
Itis clear from the above what this amounts to. The philosophi~
cal proposition, since it is a proposition, leads One to believe
that the usual subJect-predicate relation obtains, as wen as the
usual attitude towards knowing. But the philosophical content
destroys tfiisattitudeand this opinion. We learn by experience
that we meant something other than we meant to mean; and
this correction afour meaning compels our knowing to go back
to the proposition, and understand it in some other way.
64. One difficulty which should be avoided comes from mixing up the speculative with the ratiocinative methods, so that
what is said of the Subject at one time signifies Its Notion, at
another time merely its Predicate or accidental property. The
one method interferes with the other, and only a philosophical
exposition that rigidly excludes the usual way of relating the
parts of a proposition could achieve the goal of plasticity.
65- As a matter offact, non-speculative thinking also has its
vaHdrights which are disregarded in the speculative way ofstatinga proposition. The sublation of the form of the proposition
must not happen only in an immediate manner, through the mere
content ofthe proposition. On the contrary, this opposite movement must find explicit expression ; it must not just be the inward inhibition mentioned abovt:. This return of the Notion
into itself must be set forth. This movement which constitutes

40

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

what formerly the proof was supposed to accomplish, is the dialectical movement of the proposition itself. This alone is the speculative in act, and only the expression of this move~ent is a
speculative exposjtion. As a proposition, the speculative is only
the internal inhibition and the non-existential return of the
essence into itself. Hence we often find philosophical expositions
referring us to this inner intuition; and in this way they evade
the systematic exposition of the dialectical movement of the
proposition which we have demanded.-The proposition should
express what the True is; but essentially the True is Subject.
As such it is merely the dialectical movement, this course that
generates itself, going forth from, and returning to, itself. In
non-speculative cognition proof constitutes this side of
expressed inwardness. But once the dialectic has been separated
from proof, the notion of philosophical demonstration has heen
lost.
66, Here we should bear in mind that the dialectical movementlikewisehas propositions for its parts or elements; the difficulty just indicated seems, therefore, to recur perpetually, and
to he inherent in the very nature of philosophical exposition.
This is ~ke what happens in ordinary proof, where the reasons
given are themselves in need of further reasons, and sa on ad
infinitum, This pattern ofgiving reasons and stating conditions
belongs to that method of proof which differs from the dialectical movement, and belongs therefore to external cognition. As
regards the dialectical movement itself, its element is the one
Notion; it thus has a content which is, in its own self, Subject
through and throug,h. Thus no content occurs whichfunctions
as an underlying subject, nor receives its meaning as a predicate; the proposition as it stands is merely an empty form.
Apart from the self that is sensuously intuited or,fepresented,
it is above all the name as name that designates the pure Subject, the empty unit without thought~content. For this reason
it may be expedient, e.g., to avoid the name ~God', since this
word is not immediately also a Notion, but rather the proper
name., the fixed point ofrest ofthe underlyingSubject; whereas,
on the other hand, e.g. 'Being' or 'the One', 'Singularity', 'the
Subject', etc. themselves at once suggest concepts. Even if spe~
culative truths are affirmed of this subject, their content lacks
the immanent Notion, because it is present merely in the form

PREFACE

of a passive subject, with the result that such truths readily
assume the form of mere edification. From this side, too, the
habit of expressing the speculative predicate in the form of a
proposition, and not as Notion and essence, creates a difficulty
that can be increased or diminished through the very way in
which philosophy is expounded. In keeping with our insight
into the nature of speculation, the exposition should preserve
the dialectical form, and should admit nothing except in so far
as it is comprehended [in terms of the Notion], and is the
Notion.
67. The study of philosophy is as much hindered by the conceit that will not argue, as it is by the argumentative approach.
This conc~it relies on truths which are taken for granted and
which it sees no need to re-examine; it just lays them down,
and believes it is entitled to assert them, as well as to judge and
pass sentence by appealing to them. In view of this, it is especially necessary that philosophizing should again be made a
serious business. In the case ofall other sciences, arts, skins) and
crafts, everyone is convinced that a complex and laborious programme of learning and practice is necessary for competence.
Yet when..itcomes to<philosophy, there seems to be a currently
prevailing prejudice to the effect that, although not everyone
who has eyes and fingers, and is given leather and last, is at
once in a position to make shoes, everyone nevertheless imme~
diate1y understi:lnds how to philosophize, and how to evaluate
philosophy, since he possesses the criterion for doing so in his
natural reasoo'-"-as if he did not likewise possess the measure
for a shoe in his own foot. I t seems that philosophical competence consists precisely in an absence of information and
study, as though philosophy left off where they began. Philosophy is frequently taken to be a purely fornlal kind of knowledge, void.of content, and the insight is sadly lacking that,
whatever trutv there may be in the content of any discipline'
or science, itean only deserve the name if sueh truth has been
engendered by philosophy. Let the other sciences try to argue
as much as they like without philosophy-without it they can
have in them neither life, Spirit, nor truth.
68. In place of the long process of culture towards genuine
philosophy, amovemen t as rich as it is profound, through w hieh
Spirit achieves knowledge, we are offered as quite equivalent

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

either direct revelations from heaven, or the sound common
sense that has never laboured over, or informed itselfre.garding,
other knowledge or genuine philosophy; and we are assured
that these are quite as good substitutes as some claim chicory
is for coffee. It is not a pleasant experience to see ignorance,
and a crudity without form or taste, which cannot focus its
thought on a single abstract proposition, still less on a connected
chain of them, claiming at one moment to be freedom of
thought and toleration, and at the next to be even genius.
Genius, we all know, was once all the rage in poetry, as it now
is in philosophy; but when its productions made sense at all,
such genius begat only trite prose instead of poetry, or, getting
beyond that, only crazy rhetoric. So, nowadays, philosophizing
by the light of nature, which regards itself as too good for the
Notion, and as being an intuitive and poetic thinking in virtue
of this deficiency, brings to market the arbitrary combinations
of an imagination that has only been disorganized by its
thoughts, an imagery that is neither fish nor flesh, neither
poetry nor philosophy.
69. On the other hand, when philosophizing by the light of
natureflows along the more evenCOUfse ofsound commonsense,
it offers at its very best only a rhetoric of trivial truths. And, if
reproached with the insignificance of these truths, it assures us
in reply that their meaning and fulfilment reside in its heart,
and must surely be present in the hearts of others too, since
it reckons to have said the last word once the innocence ofthe
heart, the purity of conscience, and such like have been
mentioned. These are ultimate truths to which no exception
can be taken, and beyond which nQthing more can be
demanded. It is just the point, however, that the best should
not remain in the recesses of what is inner, but should be
brought out of these depths into the light of day. But it would
be better by far to spare oneself the effort of bringing forth ultimate truths ofthatkind; for they have longsinee been available
in catechisms or in popular sayings, etc.-It is not difficult to
grasp such vague and misleading truths, or even to show that
the mind in believing them is also aware of their very opposite.
When it labours to extricate itself from the bewilderment this
sets up, it falls into fresh contradictions, and may very well burst
out with the assertion that the question is settled, that so and

PREFACE

43

so is the truth, and that the other views are sophistries. For
'sophistry' is a slogan used by ordinary common sense against
educated reason, just as the expression 'visionary dreaming'
sums up, once and for all, what philosophy means to those who
are ignorant ofit.-Since the man of common sense makes his
appeal to feeling, to an oracle within his breast, he is finished
and done with anyone who does not agree; he Dnly has to
explain that he has nothing more to say to anyone who does
not find and feel the same in himself. In other words, he
tramples underfoot the roots of humanity. For it is the nature
of humanity to press onward to agreement with others; human
nature only really exists in an achieved community of minds.
The anti-human, the merely animal, consists in staying within
the sphere of feeling, and being able to communicate only at
that level.
70. Should anyone ask for a royal road to Science, there is
no more easy-going way than to rely on sound common sense;
and for the rest, in order to keep up with the times, and with
advances in philosophy, to read reviews of philosophical works,
perhaps even to read their prefaces and first paragraphs. For
these preliminary pages give the general principles on which
everything turns, and the reviews, as well as providing historical
accounts, also provide the critical appraisal which, being a
judgement, stands high above the work judged. This common
road can be taken in casual dress; but the high sense for the
Eternal, the Holy, the Infinite strides along in the robes of a
high priest, on a ro.ad that is from the first no. road, but has
immediate being as its centre, the genius Df profound original
ideas and lofty flashes of inspiration. But just as profundity of
this kind still does not reveal the source of essential being, so,
too, these sky-rockets of inspiration are not yet the empyrean.
True thoughts and scientific insight are only to be won through
the labour of the Notion. Only the Notion can produce the universality of knowledge which is neither common vagueness nor
the inadequacy of ordinary common sense, but a fully de~
ve1oped, perfected cognition; not the uncommon universality
of a reason whose talents have been ruined by indolence and
the conceit of genius, but a truth ripened to. its preperly
matured form so as to be capable of being the property of all
self-conscious Reason.

44

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

7 I. Since I hold that Science exists solely in the self-move ..
ment of the Notion, and since my view differs from, and is in
fact wholly opposed to, current ideas regarding the nature and
form of truth, both those referred to above and other peripheral
aspects of them, it seems that any attempt to expound the system of Science from this point of view is unlikely to be favourably received. In the meantime, I can bear in mind that if at
times the excellence of Plato's philosophy has been held to He
in his scientifically valueless myths, there have also been times,
even called times of ecstatic dreaming,1 when Aristotle's philosophy was esteemed for its speculative depth, and Plato's Parmenides (surely the greatest artistic achievement of the ancient
dialectic) was regarded as the true disclosure and positive
expl'ession of the divine life, and times when, despite the
obscurity generated by ecstasy, this misunderstood ecstasy was
in fact supposed to be nothing else than the pure Notion.
Furthermore, what really is excellent in the philosophy of our
time takes its value to lie in its scientific quality, and even though
others take a different view, it is in fact only in virtue of its
scientific character that it exerts any influence. Hence, I may
hope, too, that this attempt to vindicate Science for the Notion,
and to expound it in this its proper element, will succeed in
winning acceptance through the inner truth ofthesubjecbmatter. We must hold to the conviction thatit is the nature of truth
to prevail when its time has come, and that it appears only when
this time has come, and therefore never appears prematurely,
nor finds a public not ripe to receive it; also we must accept
thatthe individual needs that this should be so in order to verify
what is as yet a matter for himself alone, and to experience the
conviction, which in the first place belongs only to a particular
individual, as something universally held. But in this con·
nection the public must often be distinguished from those who
pose as its representatives and spokesmen. In many respects the
attitude of the public is quite different from, even contrary to,
that of these spokesmen. Whereas the public is inclined goodnaturedly to blame itself when a philosophical work makes no
appeal to it, these others, certain of their own competence, put
all the blame on the author. The effect of such a work on the
I This was what the English Enlightment called 'enthusiasm', but the word has no relik
gious overtones now.

PREFACE

45

public is more noiseless than the action of these dead men when
they bury their dead. The general level of insight now is altogether more educated, its curiosity more awake, and its judgement more swiftly reached, so that the feet of those who will
carry you out are already at the door. But from this we must
often distinguish the more gradual effect which corrects the
attention extorted by imposing assurances and corrects, too,
contemptuous censure, and gives some writers an audience only
after a time, while others after a time have no audience left.
72. For the rest, at a time when the universality of Spirit
has gathered such strength, and the singular detail, as is fitting,
has become correspondingly less importan t, when, too, that
universal aspect claims and holds.on to the whole range of the
wealth it has developed, the share in the total work of Spirit
which falls to the individual can only be very small. Because
of this, the individual must all the more forget himself, as the
nature ofScience implies and requires. Of course, he must make
of himself and achieve what he can; but less must be demanded
of him, just as he in turn can expect less of himself, and may
demand less for himself

INTRODUCTION
73. It is a natural assumption that in philosophy, before}Ve
start to deal with its proper subject~matter, viz. the actual
cognition of what truly is, one must first of all come to an under~
standing about cognition, which is regarded either as the instrument to get hold of the Absolute, or as the medium through
which one discovers it. A certain uneasiness seems justified,
partly beca~se there are different types of cognition, and one
of them might be more appropriate than another for the
attainment of th\s goal, so that we could make a bad choice
of means ; and partly because cognition is a faculty ofa definite
kind and scope, and thus, without a more precise definition of
its nature and limits, we might grasp clouds of error instead
of the heaven of truth. This feeling of uneasiness is surely bound
to be transformed into the conviction that the whole project
of securing for consciousness through cognition what exists in
itselfis absurd, and that there is a boundary between cognition
and the Absolute that completely separates them. For, if cogni~
tion is the instrument for getting hold of absolute being, it is
obvious that the use of an instrument on a thing certainly does
not let it be what it is for itself, but rather sets out to reshape
and a1ter it. If, on the other hand, cognition is not an instrument
of our activity but a more or less passive medium through which
the light of truth reaches us, then again we do not receive the
truth as it is in itself, but only as it exists through and in this
medium. Either way we employ a means which immediately
brings about the opposite of its own end; or rather, what is
really absurd is that we should make use of a means at all.
It would seem, to be sure, that this evil could be remedied
through an acquaintance with the way in which the instrument
works; for this would enable us to eliminate from the representation of the Absolute which we have gained through it
whatever is due to the instrument, and thus get the truth in
its purity. But this 'improvement' would in fact only bring us
back to where we were before. If we remove from a reshaped
thing what the instrument has done to it, then the thing-here

INTRODUCTION

47

the Absolute-becomes for us exactly what it was before this
[accordingly] superfluous effort. On the other hand, if the
Absolute is supposed merely to be brought nearer to us through
this instrument, without anything in it being altered, like a bird
caught by a lime-twig, it would surely laugh our little ruse to
scorn, if it were not with us, in and for itself, all along, and
of its own volition. For a ruse is just what cognition would be
in such a case, since it would, with its manifold exertions, be
giving itself the air of doing something quite different from
creating a merely immediate and therefore effortless relationship. Or, if by testing cognition, which we conceive of as a
medium, we get to know the law ofits refraction, it is again useless
to subtract this from the end result. For it is not the refraction
of the ray, but the ray itself whereby truth reaches us, that is
cognition; and if this were removed, all that would be indicated
would be a pure direction or a blank space.
74. Meanwhile, if the fear of faIling into error sets up a mistrust of Science, which in the absence of such scruples gets on
with the work itself,and actually cognizes something, it is hard
to see why we should not turn round and mistrust this very
mistrust. Should we not be concerned as to whether thi~ fear
of error is not just the error itself? Indeed, this fear takes something~a great deal in fact-for granted as truth, supporting
its scruples and inferences on what is itselfin need of prior scrutiny to see ifit is true. To be specific, ittakes for granted certain
ideas about cognition as an instrument and as a medium, and
assumes that there is a dijference between ourselves and this cognition.
Above all, it presupposes that the Absolute stands on one side
and cognition on the other, independent and separated from
it, and yet is something real; or in other words, it presupposes
that cognition which, since it is excluded from the Absolute,
is surely outside of the truth as well is nevertheless true, an
assumption whereby what calls itselffear of error reveals itself
rather as fear of the truth.
75. This conclusion stems from the fact that the Absolute
alone is true, or the truth alone is absolute. One may set this
aside on the grounds that there is a type of cognition which,
though it does not cognize the Absolute as Science aims to, is
still true, and that cognition in general, though it be incapable
of grasping the Absolute, is still capable of grasping other kinds
j

48

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

of truth. But we gradually come to see that this kind of talk
which goes back and forth only leads to a hazy distinction
between an absolute truth and some other kind of truth, and
that words like 'absolute', 'cognition', etc. presuppose a meaning which has yet to be ascertained.
76. Instead of troubling ourselves with such useless ideas and
locutions about cognition as 'an instrument for getting hold of
the Absolute, or as 'a medium through which we view the
truth' (relationships which surely, in the end, are what all these
ideas of a cognition cut offfrom the Absolute, and an Absolute
separated from cognition, amount to); instead of putting up
with excuses which create the incapacity of Science by assuming
relationshi ps of this kind in order to be exempt from the hard
work of Science, while at the same time giving the impression
of working seriously and zealously; instead of bothering to
refute all these ideas, we could reject them out of hand as adventitious and arbitrary, and the words associated with them like
'absolute', 'cognition', 'objective' and 'subjective', and count..
less others whose meaning.is assumed to be generally familiar,
could even be regarded as so much deception. For to give the
impression that their meaning is generally well known, or that
their Notion is comprehended, looks more like an attempt to
avoid the main problem, which is precisely to provide this
Notion. We could, with better justification, simply spare ourselves the trouble of paying any attention whatever to suchideas
and locutions; for they are intended to ward off Science itself,
and constitute merely an empty appearance of knowing, which
vanishes immediately as sOon as Science comes on the scene.
But Science, just because it comes on the scene, is itself an
appearance: in coming on the scene it is not yet Science in its
developed and unfolded truth. In this connection it makes no
difference whether we think of Science as the appearance
because it comes on the scene alongside another mode of knowledge, or whether we call that other untrue knowledge its manifestation. In any case Science must liberate itselffrom this semblance, and it can do so only by turning against it. For, when
confronted with a knowledge that is without truth, Science can
neither merely reject it as an ordinary way of looking at things,
while assuring us that its Science is a quite different sort of
cognition for which that ordinary know1edge is of no account

INTRODUCTION

49

whatever; nor can it appeal to the vulgar view for the intimations it gives us of something better to come. By the former
assurance, Science would be declaring its power to lie simply in
its being; but the untrue knowledge likewise appeals to the fact
that it is, and assures us that for it Science is of no account. One
bare assurance is worth just as much as another. Still less can
Science appeal to whatever intimations of something better it
may detect in the cognition that is without truth, to the signs
which point in the direction of Science. For one thing, it would
only be appealing again to what merely is; and for another,
it would only be appealing to itself, and to itself in the mode
in which it exists in the cognition that is without truth. In other
words, it would be appealing to an inferior form of its being,
to the way it appears, rather than to what it is in and for itself.
I t is for this reason that an exposition of how knowledge makes
its appearance will here be undertaken.
77. Now, because it has only phenomenal knowledge for its
object; this exposition seems not to be Science, free and self.·
movingin its own peculiar shape ; yet from this standpoin t1 tcan
be regarded as the path of the natural consciousness which
presses forward to true knowledge; or as the way of the Soul
whichjourneys through the series of its own configurations as
though they were the stations appointed for it by its own
nature/so that it may purify itself for the Hfeof the Spirit, and
achieve finally, through a completed experience of itself, the
awareness of what it really is in itself.
78. Natural consciousness will show itself to be only the
Notion of knowledge, or in other words, not to be real knowledge. But since it directly takes itselfto be real knowledge, this
path has a negative significance for it, and what is in fact the
realization of the N otlon, counts for it rather as the loss of its
own self; for it does lose its truth on this path. The road can
therefore be regarded as the pathway of doubt , or more precisely
as the way of despair. For what happens on it is not what is
ordinarily understood when the word 'doubt' is used; shillyshallying about this or that presumed truth, followed by a
return to that truth again, after the doubt has been appropriately dispelled-so that at the end of the process the matter
is taken to be what it was in the first place, On the contrary,
1

An allusion perhaps to the Stations of the Cross.

so

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

this path is the conscious insight into the untruth ofphenomenal
knowledge, for which the suprem"e reality is what is in truth
only the unrealized Notion. Therefore this thoroughgoing
scepticism is also not the scepticism with which an earnest zeal
for truth and Science fancies it has prepared and eq ui pped itself
in their service: the resolve, in Science, not to give oneself over
to the thoughts of others, upon mere authority, but to examine
everything for oneself and follow only one~.s own conviction, or
better still, to produce everything oneself, and accept only one's
own deed as what is true.
The series of configurations which consciousness goes
through along this road is, in reality, the detailed history of the
education of consciousness itself to the standpoint of Science.
That zealous resolve represents this education simplistically as
something directly over and done with in the making of the
resolution; but the way of the Soul is the actual fulfilment of
the resolution, in qontrast to the untruth of that view. Now,
following one's own conviction is, of course, more than giving
on.eself over to authority; but changing an opinion accepted
on authority into an opinion held out of personal conviction,
does npt.necessarily alter thecpntentof the opinion, orreplace
error with tl}1,Jth. The only difference between being caught up
ina system of opinions and prejudices based on persona] conviction, and being caught up in one based on the authority of
others) lies in the added conceit that is inn~tein the former position. The scepticism that is directed against the whole range
of phenomenal consciousness, on the other hand, renders the
Spiritfor the first time competent to examine what truth is.
For it brings a.bout a state of despair about all the so--called
natur~l idea.s, thoughts, and opinions, regardless of whether
they are called one's own or someone else's, ideas'with which the
consciousness that sets about the examination [of truth] straight
away is still filled and hampered, so that it is, in fact, incapable
of carrying nut what it wants to undertake.
79. The necessary progression and interconnection of the
forms of the unreal consciousness will by itself bring to pass the
completion of the series. To make this more intelligible, it may
be remarked, in a preliminary and general way, that the exposition of the untrue consciousness in its untruth is not a merely
negative procedure. The natura] consciousness itself normally

INTRODUCTION

5'

takes this one-sided view of it; and a knowledge which makes
this one-sidedness its very essence is itself one of the patterns
ofincomplete consciousness which occurs on the road itself, and
will manifest itself in due course. This is just the scepticism
which only ever sees pure nothingness in its result and abstracts
from the fact that this nothingness is specifically the nothingness
of that from which it results. For it is only when it is taken as
the result of that from which it emerges, that it is, in fact, the
true result; in that case it is itself a determinate nothingness, one
which has a content. The scepticism that ends up with the bare
abstraction of nothingness or emptiness cannot get any further
from there, but must wait to see whether something new comes
along and what it is, in order to throw it too into the same empty
abyss. But when, on the other hand, the result is conceived as
it is in truth, namely, as a determinate negation, a new form has
thereby immediately arisen, and in the negation the transition
is made through which the progress through the complete series
offorms comes about of itself.
80. But the goalis as necessarily fixed for knowledge as the
serial progression ;jt1S the point where knowledge no longer
needs to go heyonditself, where knowledge finds itself, where
Notion corresponds to object and object to Notion. Hence the
progress towards this goal is also unhalting, and short of it no
satisfaction is to be found at any of the stations on the way.
Whatever is confined within the limits of a natural life cannot
by its own efforts go beyond its immediate existence; but it is
driven heyond it by something else, and this uprooting entails
its death. Consciousness, however, is explicitly the Notion of
itself. Hence it is something that goes beyond limits, and since
these limits are its own, it is something that goes beyond itself.
With the positing ofa single particular the beyond is also established for consciousness, even if it is only alongside the limited
object as in the case of spatial intuition. Thus consciousness
suffers this violence at its own hands: it spoils its own limited
satisfaction. When consciousness feels this violence, its anxiety
may well make it retreat from the truth, and strive to hold on
to what it is in danger of losing. But it can find no peace. If
it wishes to remain in a state of unthinking inertia, then thought
troubles its thoughtlessness, and its own unrest disturbs its inertia. Or, if it entrenches itself in sentimentality, which assures

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

us that it finds everything to be good in its kind, then this
assurance likewise suffers violence at the hands of Reason, for,
precisely in so far as something 1s merely a kind, Reason finds
it not to be good. Or, again, its fear of the truth may lead con ..
sciousness to hide, from itself and others, behind the pretension
that its burning zeal for truth makes it difficult or even impossible to find any other truth but the unique truth of vanity--c"
that of being at any rate cleverer than any thoughts that one
gets by oneself or from others. This conceit which understands
how to belittle every truth, in order to turn back into itself and
gloat over its own understanding, which knows how to dissolve
every thought and always find the same barren Ego instead of
any content-this is a satisfaction which we must leave to itself,
for it fiees from the universal, and seeks only to be for itself.
8 I. In addition to these preliminary general remarks about
the manner and the necessity of the progression, it may be useful
to say something about the method of carrying out the inquiry. If
this exposition is viewed as a way o fre lating Science to phenomenal
knowledge,andas an investigation andexaminatirm of the reality
ofcognition, itwouldseem that i t'cannottake placewithoQ tsorne
presupposition which can serve as its undedying criterion. For
anexamina tion cansistsin applying an .accepted,stanclard, and
indeterminingwhethersomething is r1gh tor wrong an thepasis
of the resulting agreement or disagreementof the thing examined; thus the standard as such (and Science likewise if it;were
the criterion) is accepted as the essence or as the in-itselj. But
here, where Sciencehasjust begun tocome on the scene, neither
Science nor anything else has yet justifiedi.tself as the essence
orthein,.,itself; and without something of the sort it seems that
no examination can take place.
82. This contradiction and its removal will become more
definite ifwecaU to mind the abstractdeterminations of truth
and knowledge as they occur in consciousness. Consciousness
simultaneously distir;guishes itself from something, and atthe
same time relates itself to it, or, as it is said, this something exists
for consciousness; and the determinate aspect of thisrelaling,
or of the being of something for a consciousness, is knowing.
But we distinguish this being-for-another from being.. in-its:elf;
whatever is related to knowledge or knowing is also distin...,
guished from it, and posited as existing outside-of this relation-

INTRODUCTION

53

ship; this being-in-itseljis called truth. Just what might be involved in these determinations is of no further concern to us
here. Since our object is phenomenal knowledge, its determinations too will at first be taken directly as they present themselves; and they do present themselves very much as we have
already apprehended them.
83. Now, if we inquire into the truth of knowledge, it seems
tha t we are asking what knowledge is in itself. Yet in this inq uiry
knowledge is our object, something that exists jor us; and the
in-itself that would supposedly result from it would rather be
the being ofknowledgejor us. What we asserted to be its essence
would be not so much its truth but rather just our knowledge
of it. The essence or criterion would lie within ourselves, and
that which was to be compared with it and about which a decision would be reached through this comparison would not
necessarily have to recognize the validity of such a standard.
84. But the dissociation, or this semblance ofdissociation and
presupposition, is overcome by the nature of the object weare
investigating. Consciousness provides its own criterion from
within itself, so that the investigation becomes a comparison
ofconsciousness with itself; for the distinction made above falls
within it. In consciousnessbne ihingexistsjoranother, i.e. consciousness regularly contains the determinateness of the
moment of knowledge; at the same time, this other is to consciousness not merely jor it, but is also outside of this relation
ship, or exists in itself: the moment of truth. Thus in what consciousness affirms from withinitse1f as being-in-itselfor the True
we have the standard which consciousness itselfsets up by which
to measure what it knows. If we designate knowledge as the
Notion, hut the essence or the True as what exists, or the object,
then the examination consists in seeing whether the Notion corresponds to th.e object. But if we call the essence or in~itself of
the object the Notion, and on the other hand understand by the
object the Notion itself as object, viz. as it existsjor an otner, then
the examination consists in seeing whether the object corresponds to its Notion. It is evident, of course, that the two procedures-are the same. But the essential point to bear in mind
throughout the whole investigation is that these two moments,
'Notion' and 'obJect', 'being.;for-another' and 'heing-in-itself',
both fall within' that knowledge which we are investigating.
g

54

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

Consequently, we do not need to import criteria, or to make
use of our own bright ideas and thoughts during the course
of the inquiry; it is precisely when we leave these aside that we
succeed in contemplating the matter in hand as it is in and for
itselj.
85. But not only is a contribution by us superfiuous, since
Notion and object, the criterion and what is to be tested, are
present in consciousness itself, but we are also spared the trouble
of comparing the two and really testing them, so that, since what
consciousness examines is its own self, all that is left for us to
do is simply to look on. For consciousness is, on the one hand,
consciousness of the object, and on the other, consciousness of
itself; consciousness of what for it is the True, and consciousness
ot its knowledge of the truth. Since both are for the same consciousness, this cons"Ciousness is itself their comparison; it is for
this same consciousness to know whether its knowledge of the
object corresponds to the object or not. The object, it is true,
seems only to befor consciousness in the way thatconsciousness
knows it; it seems that consciollsnesscannot, as it were~ get
behind the object as it exists fqrconsciousness so as to.examine
what the object is in itself, and hence, too, cannot test its own
knowledge by that standard. But the distinction between the
in-itself and knowledge is already present in the very fact that
consciousness knows an object~t all.Something is for it the initself; and knowledge, or the being of the object for consciousness, is, for it, another moment. Upon this distinction, which
is presen t as a fact, the examination rests. If the comparison
shows that these two moments do not correspond to one
another, it would seem that consciousness must alter its know ..
ledge to make it conform tothe object. But, in fact, in the alteration of the knowledge, the object itself alters for it too) for the
knowledge that was present was essentially a knowledge of the
object: as the knowledge changes, so too does the object, for
it essentially belonged to this knowledge. Hence it comes to pass
for consciousness that what it previously took to be the in-itself
is not an in-itself, or that it was only an in-itselfjor consciousness.
Since consciousness thus finds that its knowledge does not correspond to its object, the object itself does not stand the test; in
other words, the criterion for testing is altered when that for
which it was to have been the criterion fails to pass the test;

INTRODUCTION

55

and the testing is not only a testing of what we know, but also
a testing of the criterion of what knowing is.
86. Inasmuch as the new true object issues from it, this dialectical
movement which consciousness exercises on itself and which
affects both its knowledge and its object, is precisely what is
called experience [Eifahrung]. In this connection there is a
moment in the process just mentioned which must be brought
out more clearly, for through it a new light will be thrown on
the exposition which follows. Consciousness knows something;
this object is the essence or the in-itself; but it is also for consciousness the in-itself. This is where the ambiguity of this truth
enters. We see that consciousness now has two objects: one is
the first in-itself, the second is the being..Jor-conscwusness of this initself. The latter appears at first sight to he merely the reflection
of consciousness into itself, i.e. what consciousness has in mind
is not an object, but only its kno:Nledge of that first object. But,
as was shown previously, the first object, in being known, is
altered for consciousness; it ceases to be the in-itself, and
becomes something that is the in· itself only for consciousness. And
this then is the True : the being-for-consciousness of this in-itself.
Or, in other words, this is the essence, or the object of consciousness. This new object contains the nothingness of the first, it
is what experience has made of it.
87. This exposition of the course of experience contains a
moment in virtue of which it does not seem to agree with what
is ordinarily understood by experience. This is the moment of
transition from the first object and the knowledge of it, to the
other object, which experience is said to be about. Our account
implied that our knowledge of the first object, or the beingfor-consciousness of the first in-itself, itself becomes the second
object. It usually seems to be the case, on the contrary, that
our experience of the untruth of our first notion comes by way
of a second object which we come upon by chance and externally, so that our part in aU this is simply the pure apprehension
ofwhat is in and for itself. From the present viewpoint, however,
the new object shows itself to have come about through a reversal
of consciousness itself. This way of looking atthe matter is something contributed by us, by means of which the succession of
experiences through which consciousness passes is raised into
a scientific progression-but it is not known to the consciousness

PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT

that we are observing. But, as a matter of fact, we have here
the same situation as the one discussed in regard to the relation
between our exposition and scepticism, viz. that in every case
the result of an untrue mode of knowledge must not be allowed
to run away into an empty nothing, but must necessarily be
grasped as the nothing ofthatfrom which it results-a result which
contains what was true in the preceding knowledge. It shows
up here like this: since what first appeared as the object sinks
for consciousness to the level of its way of knowing it, and since
the in-itself becomes a being-jor-consciousness of the in-itself, the
latter is now the new object. Herewith a new pattern of consciousness comes on the scene as well, [OF which the essence
is something different from what it was at the preceding stage.
It is this fact that guides the entire series of the patterns of consciousness in their necessary seq uence. But it is just this necessity itself, or the origination of the new object, that presents
itself to consciousness without its understanding how this
happens, which proceeds for us, as it were, behind the back
of consciousness. Thus in the movement of consciousness there
occurs a moment of being",in-itself or being-jor-us which is not
present to the consciousness comprehended in the experience
itself. The content, however, of what presents itself to US does
existfor it; we comprehend only the formal aspect of that content, or its pure origination. For it, what has thus arisen exists
only as an object;jor us, it appears at the same time as movement and a process oLbecoming.
88. Because of this necessity, the way to Science is itself
already Science, and hence, in virtue of its content, is the Science
of the experience of consciousness.
89. The experience of itself which consciousness goes
through can, in accordance with its Notion, comprehend nothing less t~an the en tire system of consciousness, or the entire
realm of the truth of Spirit. For this reason, the moments of
this truth are exhibited in their own proper determinateness,
viz. as being not abstract moments, but as they are for consciousness, or as consciousness itself stands forth in its relation
to them. Thus the momen ts of the whole are patterns ofconsciousness. In pressing forward to its true existence, consciousness will
arrive at a point at which it gets rid of its semblance of being
burdened with something alien, with what is only for it, and

INTRODUCTION

57

some sort of 'other', at a point where appearance becomes
identical with essence, so that its exposition will coincide at just
this point with the authentic Science of Spirit. And finally,
when consciousness itself grasps this its own essence, it will
signify the nature of absolute knowledge itself.

A. CONSCIOUSNESS
I. SENSE-CERTAINTY: OR THE 'THIS' AND
'MEANING' [MEINEN]

go. The knowledge or knowing which is at the start or is immediately our object cannot be anything else but immediate
know ledge itself, a know ledge of the immediate or of what sim pI y
is. Our approach to the object must also be immediate or receptive;
we must alter nothing in the object as it presents itself. In apprehending it, we must refrain from trying to comprehend it.
9 I. Because of its concrete content, sense-certainty immediately appears as the richest kind qfknowledge, indeed a knowledge of infinite wealth for which no bounds can be found, either
when we reach out into space and time in which it is dispersed,
or when we take a bit of this wealth, and by division enter into
it. Moreover, sense-certainty appears to be the truest knowledge; for it has not as yet omitted anything from the object,
but has 'the object before it in its perfect entirety. But, in the
event, this very certainty proves itself to be the most abstract and
poorest truth. All that it says about what it knows is just that
it is; and its truth contains nothing but the sheer being of the
thing [Sache]. Consciousness, for its part, is in this certainty only
as a pure'!'; or I am in it only as a pure 'This" and the object
similarly only as a pure 'This', I, this particular I, am certain
of this particular thing, not because I, qua consciousness, in
knowing it have developed myselfor thought about it in various
ways; and also not because' the thing of which I am certain, in
virtue of a host of distinct qualities, would be in its own self
a rich complex of connections, or related in various ways to
other things. Neither of these has anything to do with the truth
of sense-certainty: here neither I nor the thing has the significance of a complex process of mediation; the'!, does not have
the significance of a manifold imagining or thinking; nor does
the 'thing' signify something that has a host of qualities. On
the contrary, the thing is, and it is, merely because it is. It is;
this is the essential point for sense-knowledge, and this pure

SENSE.CERTAINTY

59

being, or this simple immediacy, constitutes its truth. Similarly,
certainty as a connection is an immediate pure connection: consciousness is 'J', nothing more, a pure 'This'; the singular consciousness knows a pure 'This', or the single item.
92. But when we look carefully at this pure being which constitutes the essence of this certainty, and which this certainty
pronounces to be its truth, we see that much more is involved.
An actual sense-certainty is not merely this pure immediacy,
but an instance of it. Among the countless differences cropping
up here we find in every case that the crucial one is that, in
sense-certainty, pure being at once splits up into what we hav.e
called the two 'Thises', one 'This' as 'I', and the other 'This'
as object. When we reflect on this difference, we find that
neither one nor the other is only immediately present in sense..
certainty, but each is at the same time mediated: I have this certainty through something else, viz. the thing; and it, similarly,
is in sense-certainty through something else, viz. through the 'I'.
93. It is not just we who make this distinction between
essence and instance, between immediacy and mediation; on
the contrary, we find it within sense",certainty itself, and it is
to be taken up in the form in which it is present there, not as
we have just defined it. One of the terms is posited in sensecertainty in the form of a simple, immediate being, or- as the
essence, the object; the other, however, is posited as what is unessential and mediated, something which in sense-certainty is
not in itself but through [the mediation of] ail other, the 'I',
a knowing which knows the object only because the object is, while
the knowing may either be or not be. But the object is: it is
what is true, or it is the essence. It is, regardless of whether it
is known or not; and it remains, even it it is not known, whereas
there is no knowledge if the object is not there.
94. The q uestionmust therefore be considered whether in
sense-certainty itself the object is in fact the kind of essence that
sense·certainty proclaims it to be; whether this notion of it as
the essence corresponds to the way it is present in sense-certainty. To this end, we have not to reflect on it and ponder
what it might be in truth, hut only to consider the way in which
it is presen t in sense-certain ty.
95. It is, then, sense-certainty itself that must be asked:
'What.is the This?' Ifwe take the 'This' in the twofold shape

60

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

of its being, as 'Now' and as 'Here', the dialectic it has in it
will receive a form as intelligible as the 'This' itself is. To the
question: 'What is Now?', let us answer, e.g. 'Now is Nigh~.'
In order to test the truth of this sense~certainty a simple experi~
ment will suffice. We write down this truth; a truth cannot lose
anything by being written down, any more than it can lose anything through our preserving it. If now, this noon, we look again
at the written truth we shall have to say that it has become
stale.
96. The Now that is Night is preserved, i.e. it is treated as what
it professes to be, as something that is'; but it proves itself to
be, on the contrary, something that is not. The Now does indeed
preserve itself, but as something that is not Night; eq ually, it
preserves itself in face of the Day that it now is, as something
that also is not Day) in other words, as a negative in general.
This self"preservingN ow is, therefore, not immediate bu t mediated; for it is determined as a permanent and self-preserving
Now thro ugk the fact that something else, viz. Day and Night,
isnol. As so determined, it is ,still just as simply Now as before,
and in this'simplicity isinclifferent to what happens in it; just
as little as Night and Day are its being, just as much also is
itDay and Night; it iSDnt in theleast affected by this its otherbeing. A simple thing of this kind which is through negation,
which is neither This nor That, a not- This, and is with equal
indifference This as well as That-sucha thing we call a universal. So it is iri fact the universal that is the true [content]
of sense-certainty.
97. It is as a universal too that we utter what the sensuous
[content] is. What we say is: 'This', i.e. the universal This; or,
'it is', i.e. Being in general, Of course, we do not envisage the universal This or Being in general, but we utter the universal; in
other words, wedo not strictly say what in this sense .. certainty
we mean to say. But language, as we see, is the more truthful;
in it, we ourselves directly refute what we mean to say, and since
the universal is the true [content] of sense-certainty and language expresses this true [content] alone, it isjust not possib1e
for us ever to say, or express in words, a sensuous being that
we mean.
g8. The same will be the case with the other form of the
'This', with 'Here'. 'Here' is,e.g., the tree. If I turn 'round,

SENS E-CER TA INTY

61

this truth has vanished and is converted into its opposite: ~N 0
tree is here, but a house instead'. 'Here' itself does not vanish;
on the con trary, ita bid es cons tan t in the vanishing of the house,
the tree, etc., and is indifferently house or tree. Again, therefore,
the 'This' shows itself to be a mediated simplicity, or a universality.
99. Pure being remains, therefore, as the essence of this sensecertainty, since sense-certainty has demonstrated in its own self
that the truth of its object is the universal. But this pure being
is not ,?tn immediacy, but something to which negation and
mediation are essential j consequently, it is not what we mean
by 'being" but is 'being' defined as an abstraction, or as the
pure universal; and our 'meaning', for which the true [content]
of sensemcertainty is not the universal, is all that is left over in
face of this empty or indifferent Now and Here.
100. When we compare the relation in which knowing and
the object first came on the scene, with the relation in which
they now stand in this result, we find that it is reversed. The
object, which was supposed to ~e the essential element in sensecertainty, is now the unessential element; for the universal
which the object has come to be is no longer what the object
was supposed essentialJy to be for sense-certainty. On the contrary, the certainty is now to be found in the opposite element,
viz. in knowing, which previously was the unessential element.
Its truth is in the object as my object, or in its being mine
[Meinen]., it is, because Iknow it. Sense-certainty, then, though
indeed expelled from the object, is not yet thereby overcome,
but only driven back into the '1', We have now to see what
experience shows us about its reality in the 'I'.
101, The force of its truth thus lies now in the 'P, in the
immediacy of my seeing, hearing, and so on; the vanishing of the
single Now and Here that we mean is prevented by the fact
that I hold them fast. 'Now' is day because I see it; 'Here' is
a tree for the same reason. But in this relationship sense-certainty experiences the same dialectic acting upon itself as in
the previous one. I, this '1', see the tree and assert that 'Here'
is a tree; but another 'I' sees the house and maintains that
'Here' is not a tree but a house instead. Both truths have the
same authentication, viz. the immediacy of seeing, and the certaintyand assurance that both have about their >knowing; but
the one tru th vanishes in the other.

A. CONSCIOUSNESS
102. What does not disappear in all this is the'!, as universal,
whose seeing is neither a seeing of the tree nor of this house,
but is a simple seeing which, though mediated by the negation'
of this house, etc., is all the same simple and indifferent to what·
ever happens in it, to the house, the tree, etc. The 'I' is merely
universal like ':Now', 'Here', or 'This' in general; I do indeed
mean a single'!', but I can no more say what I mean in the case
of'!' than I can in the case of ':Now' and "Here'. When I say
'this Here', 'this Now', or a 'single item', I am saying aU Thises,
Heres, Nows, all single items. Similarly, when I say '1', this
singular '1\ I say in general all 'Is'; everyone is what I say,
everyone is 'I', this singular' I'. When Science is faced with the
demand-as if it were an acid test it could not pass-that it
should deduce, construct, find a priori, or however it is put,
something called 'this thing' or 'this one man', it is reasonable
that the demand should say which 'this thing', or which 'this
particular man' is meant; but it is impossible to say this.
103. Sense-certainty thus comes to know by experience that
its essence is neither in the object norin the 'I' , and thatits immediacy is neither an immediacy of the one nor of the other; for
in both, what I mean is rather something unessential, and the
object and the 'I' are universals in which that ':Now' and 'Here'
and 'I' which I mean do not have a continuing being, or are
not. Thus we reach the stage where we have to posit the whole
of sense·certainty itself as its essence, and no longer only one of
its moments, as happened in the two cases where first the object
confronting the'!', and then the'!', were supposed to be its
reality. Thus it is only sense-certainty as a whole which stands
firm within itself as immediacy and by so doing excludes from
itself all the opposition which has hitherto obtained.
104. This pure immediacy, therefore, no longer has any
concern with the otherness of the 'Here' as a tree which passes
over into a 'Here' that is not a tree, or with the otherness of
the 'Now' as day which changes into a ':Now' that is night,
or with another'!' for 'which something else is object. Its truth
preserves itself as a relation that remains self-identical, and
which makes no distinction of what is essential and what is unessential, between the 'I' and the object, a relation therefore into
which also no distinction whatever can penetrate. I, this'!',
assert then the 'Here' as a tree, and do not turn round so that
j

SENSE.CERTAINTY

the Here would become for me not·a tree; also, I take no notice
of the fact that another'!, sees the Here as not a tree, or that
I myself at another time take the Here as not-tree, the Now
as not-d~y. On the contrary, I am a pure [act of] intuiting;
I, for my part, stick to the fact that the Now is day, or that
the Here is a tree; also I do not compare Here and Now themselves with one another, but stick firmly to one immediate relation: the Now is day.
105. Since, then, this certainty will no longer come forth to
us when we direct its attention to a Now that is night, or to
an '1' to whom it is night, we will approach it and let ourselves
point to the Now that is asserted. We must let ourselves point
to it; for the truth of this immediate relation is the truth of this
'I' which confines itself to one 'Now' or one 'Here'. Were we
to examine this truth afterwards, or stand at a distance fronl it,
it would lose its significance entirely; for that would do away
with the immediacy which is essential to it. We must therefore
enter the same point of time or space, point them out to ourselves, i.e. make ourselves into the same singular 'I' which is
the one who knows with certainty. Let us, then, see how that
immediate is constituted that is pointed out to us.
106. The Now is pointed to, this Now. 'Now'; it has already
ceased to be in the act of pointing to it. The Now that is, is
another Now than the one pointed to, and we see that the Now
is just this; to be no more just when it 4;. The Now, as it is
pointed out to us, is Now that has been, and this is its truth;
it has not the truth of being. Yet this much is true, that it has
been. But what essentially has been [gewesen ist] is, in fact, not
an essence that is [kein Wesen]; it is not, and it was with being
that we were concerned.
107. In this pointing-out, then, we see merely a movement
which takes the following course: (I) I point out the 'Now',
and it is asserted to be the truth. I point it out, however, as
something that has been, or as sonlething that has been super~
seded; I set aside the first truth. (2) I now assert as the second
truth that it has been, that it is superseded. (3) But what has
been, isnot; I set aside the second truth, its having been, its super..
session, and thereby negate the negation of the 'Now', and thus
return to the first assertion, that the 'Now' is. The 'Now', and
pointing out the 'Now', are thus so constituted that neither the

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

one nor the other is something immediate and simple, but a
movement which contains various moments. A This is posited;
but it is rather an other that is posited, or the This is superseded:
and this otherness, or the setting~aside of the first, is its~lf in turn
set aside, and so has returned into the first. However, this first,
thus reflected into itself, is not exactly the same as it was to
begin with, viz. something immediate; on the contrary, it is something that is reflected into itself, or a simple entity which, in its otherness, remains what it is: a Now which is an absolute plurality
of Nows. And this is the true, the genuine Now, the Now as
asim pleda ywhich con tains wi thin i t man y N ows-hours. A Now
of this sort, an hour, similarly is many minutes, and this Now
is likewise many Nows, and so on. The pointing-out of the Now
is thus itself the movement which expresses what the Now is
in truth, viz. a result, or a plurality ofNows all taken together;
and the pointing-out is the experience of learning that Now is
a universal.
loB. The Here pointed out, to which I hold fast, is similarly
a this Here which, in fact, is not this Here, but a Before and
Behind, an Above and Below, a Right and Left. The Above
is itself similarly this manifold otherness of above, below; etc.
The Here, which was supposed to have been pointed out,
vanishes in other Heres, but these likewise vanish. What is
pointed out, held fast, and abides, is a negative This, which is
negative only when the Heres are taken as they should be, but,
in being so taken, they supersede thetnselves; what abides is
a simple complex of many Heres. The Here that is meant would
be the point; but it is not: on the contrary, when it is pointed
out as something that is, the pointing-out shows itself to be not
an immediate knowing [of the point], but a movement from
the Here that is meant through many Heres into the universal
Here which is a simple plurality of Heres, just as the day is a
simple plurality of Nows.
log. I t is clear that the dialectic ofsense-certainty is nothing
else but the simple history orits movement or of its experience,
and sense-certainty itself is nothing else but just this histdry.
That is why the natural consciousness, too, is always reaching
this result, learning from experience what is true in it; but
equally it is always forgetting it and starting the movement all
over again. It is therefore astonishing when, in face of this ex-

SENSE·CER TAINTY

perience, it is asserted as universal experience and put forward,
too, as a philosophical proposition, even as the outcome of
Scepticism, that the reality or being of external things taken
as Thises or sense-objects has absolute truth for consciousness.
To make such an assertion is not to know what one is saying,
to be unaware that one is saying the opposite of what one wants
to say. The truth for consciousness ofa This of sense is supposed
to be universal experience; but the very opposite is universal
experience. Every consciousness itself supersedes such a truth,
as e.g. Here is a tree, Of, Now is noon, and proclaims the opposite: Here is not a tree, but a house; and similarly, it immediately
again supersedes the assertion which set aside the first so far
as it is also just such an assertion of a sensuous This. And what
consciousness will learn from experience in all sense-certainty
is, in truth, only what we have seen viz. the This as a universal,
the very opposite ofwhat that assertion affirmed to be universal
experien ce.
With this appeal to universal experience we may be permitted to an ticipatehow the case stands in the practical sphere.
In this respect we can tell those who assert the truth and certainty of the reality of sense-obj ects tha'l they should go hack
to the most elemen tary school of wisdom, viz. the ancien 1. EIeusinian Mysteries of Ceres and Bacchus, and that they have stillto
learn the secre t meaning of theea ting ofhread and the drinking
of wine. For he who is initiated into these Mysteries not only
comes to doubt the being of sensuous things, but to despair of
it; in part he brings about the nothingness of such things himself
in his dealings with them, and in part he sees them reduce them~
selves to nothingness. Even the animals are not shut out from
this wisdom but,,on the contrary, show themselves to be most
profoundly initiated into it; for they do not just stand idly in
frontofsen~uous things as if these possessed intrinsic being, but,
despairing of their reality, and completely assured of their
nothingness, they fall to without ceremony and eat them up.
And all Nature, like the animals, celebrates these open Mysteries which teach the truth about sensuous things.
I 10. But, just as our previous remarks would suggest, those
who put forward such an assertion also themselves say the direct
opposite of what they mean: a phenomenon which is perhaps
best calculated to induce them to reflect on the nature of sense-

66

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

certainty. They speak of the existence of external objects, which
can be more precisely defined as actual, absolutely singular,
wholly personal, individual things, each of them absolutely unlike
anything else; this existence, they say, has absolute certainty
and truth. They mean 'this' bit of paper on which I am writingor rather have written-'this'; but what they mean is not what
they say. If they actually wanted to say 'this' bit of paper which
they mean, if they wanted to say it, then this is impossible,
because the sensuous This that is meant cannot be reached by language, which belongs to consciousness, i.e. to that which is inherently universal. In the actual attempt to say it, it would
therefore crumble away; those who started to describe it would
not be able to complete the description, but would be compelled
to leave it to others, who would themselves finally have to admit
tospeaking about something which is not. They certainly mean,
then, this bit of paper here which is quite different from the
bit mentioned above; but they say 'actual things', 'external or
sensuous objects', {absolutely singular entities' [Wesen] and so on;
i.e. they say ofthem only what is universal. Consequently, what
is called the unutterable is nothing else than the untrue, the
irrational, what is merely meant [but is not actuallyexpressed].
If nothing more is said ofsome thing than that it is "an actual
thing', an 'external object', its description is only the most
abstract of generalities and in fae,t expresses its sameness with
everything rather than its distinctiveness. When I say: 'a single
thing', I am really saying what it is from a wholly universal
point of view, for everything is a single thing; and likewise 'this
thing' is anything you Hke. If we describe it more exactly as
'this bit of paper', then each and eV~TY bit of paper is 'this bit
of paper', and I have only uttered the universal all the time.
But if I wantto help outlanguage-which has the divine nature
of directly reversing the meaning of what is said, of making it
into something else, and thus not letting what is meant get into
words at all~by pointing out this bhofpaper, experience teaches
me what the truth of sense-certainty in fact is: I point it out
as a 'Here', which is a Here of other Heres, or is in its own
selfa 'simple togetherness of many Heres'; i.e. it is a universal.
I take it up then as it is in truth, and instead of knowing some"
thing immediate I take the truth of it, or perceive it. 1
I

The German for 'to perceive' is wahrnehmen which means literally 'to take truly'.

PERCEPTION

II. PERCEPTION: OR THE THING AND
DECEPTION
I I I. Immediate certainty does not take over the truth, for
its truth is the universal, whereas certainty wants to apprehend
the This. Perception, on the other -hand, takes what is present
to it as a universal. Just as universality is its principle in general,
the immediately self~differentiating moments within percep~
tion are universal: 'I' is a universal and the object is a universal.
That principle has arisen for us, and therefore the way we take
in perception is no longer something that just happens to us
like sense~certainty; on the contrary, it is logically necessitated.
With the emergence of the principle, the two moments which
in their appearing merely occur, also come into being: one being
the movement of pointing-out or the act of perceiving, the other
being the same' movement as a simple event or the object perceived.
In essence the object is the same as the movement: the move~
ment is the unfolding and differentiation of the two moments,
and the obj ect is the apprehended togetherness of the momen t5.
For us, or in itself, the universal as principle is the essence of
perception, and, in contrast to this abstraction, both the
moments distinguished-that which perceives and that which
is perceived~are the unessentiaL But, in fact, because both are
themselves the universal or the essence, both are essential. Yet
since they are related to each other as opposites, only one can
be the essential moment in the relation, and the distinction of
essential and unessential moment must be shared between
them. One of them, the object, defined as the simple [entity],
is the essence regardless of whether it is perceived or not; but
the act of perceiving, as a movement, is the unessential moment,
the unstable facton! which can as well be as not be.
I 12. This object m us t now be defined more precisely, and the
definition must be developed briefly from the result that has
been reached; the more detailed development does not belong
here. Since the principle of the object, the universal, 'is in its
simplicity a mediated universal, the object must express this its
nature in its own self. This it does by showing itself to be the
thing with many properties. The wealth ofsense~know]edge belongs
to perception, not to immediate certainty, for which it was only
the source of instances; for only perception contains negation,
that is, difference or manifold ness, within its own essence.

68

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

1 13. The This is, therefore, established as not This, or as something superseded; and hence not as Nothing, but as a determi~
nate Nothing, the Nothing of a content, viz. of the This. Consequently, the sense-element is still present, but not in the way
it was supposed to be in [the position of] immediate certainty:
not as the singular item that is 'meant', but as a universal, or
as that which will be defined as a prope.rty. Supersession exhibits
its true twofold meaning which we have seen in the negative:
it is at once a negating and a preserving. Our Nothing, as the Nothing of the This, preserves its immediacy and is itself sensuous,
but it is a universal immediacy. Being, however, is a universal
in virtue ofits having mediation or the negative within it; when
it expresses this in its immediacy it is a differentiated, determinate
property. As a result many such properties are established simultaneously, one being the negative of another. Since they are
expressed in the simplicity of the universal, these determinacies-which are properties strictly speaking only through
the addition of a further determination~are related {only] to
themselves; they are indifferent to one another, each is on its
own and free from the others. But the simple, self-identical universalityisitselfin turn distinct and free from these determinate
propertiesithas. It is pure relating of selfto self, or the medium
in ,which all these determinacies are, and in which as a simple
unity they therefore interpenetrate, but without coming into contact-withone another; for it is precisely through participating
in this universality that they exist indifferently on their own
account.
This abstract universal medium, which can be called simply
'thinghood) or 'pure essence', is nothing else than what Here
and Now have proved themselvess to be, viz. a simple togetherness
ofa plurality; but the many are, in their determinateness, simple
un'iversals themselves. This salt is a simple Here, and at the
same time manifold; it is white and also tart, also cubical in
shape, of a specific gravity, etc, All these many properties are
in a single simple 'Here', in which, therefore, they interpenetrate; none has a different Here from the others, but each
is everywhere~ in the same Here in which the others are. And,
at the same time, without being separated by different Heres,
they do not affect· each other in this interpenetration. The
whiteness does not affect the cubical shape, and neither affects

PERCEPTION

69

the tart taste, etc.; on the contrary, since each is, itself a simple
relating of self to selfit leaves the others alone, and is connected
with them only by the indifferent Also. This Also is thus the
pure universal itself, or the medium, the 'thinghood', which
holds them together in this way.
I 14. In the rela tionshi p which has thus emerged it is only
the character of positive universality that is, at first observed
and developed; but a further side presents itself, which must
also be taken into consideration. To wit, if the many determinate properties were strictly indifferent to one another, if they
were simply and solely self-related, they would not be determinate; for they are only determinate in so far as they differentiate
themselves from one another, and relate themselves to others as
to their opposites. Yet; as thus opposed to .one another they
cannot be together in the simple unity of their medium, which
is just as essential to them as negation; the differentiation of
the properties, in so far as it is not an indifferent differentiation
but isexc1usive, each property negating the others, thus falls
outside of this simple medium; and the medium, therefore; is
not merely an Also, an indifferent unity, but a One as well, a
unity which excludes an other. The One is the momentof negation;
it is itself quite simply a relation of self to selfap;d it excludes
an other; and it is that by which 'thinghood' is determined as
a Thing. Negation is inherent in a property as a determinateneM
which is immediately one with the immediacy of being, a;n
immediacy which, through this unity with negation, is u,ni·
versality. As a One, however, the determinatetless is set free
from this unity with its opposite, and exists in and for itself.
I 15. In these moments,· taken together, the Thin.g a~ the
truth of perception is completed, soJar as it is necessary to develop it here. It is (a) an indiffert;nt, passive universality, the
Also of the many properties or rather 'matters'; (b) negation,
equally simply ; or the One, which exc1udes opposite properties;
and (c) the many properties tbemsel ves, the relation of the first
two moments, or negation as it relates to the indifferent ele.
ment, and therein expands into a host of differences; the point
ofsingularindividuality in the medium of subsistence radiating
forth into plurality. In so far as these differences belong to the
indifferent medium they are themselves universal, they are
related only to themselves and do not affect one another. But
a

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

in so far as they belong to the negative unity they are at the
same time exclusive [of other properties] ; but they necessarily
have this relationship of opposition to properties remote from
their Also. The sensuous universality, or the immediate unity of
being and the negative, is thus a property only when the One
and the pure universality are developed from it and differentiated from each other, and when the sensuous universality unites
them; it is this relation of the universality to the pure essential
moments which at last completes the Thing.
I 16. This, then, is how the Thing of perception is constituted; and consciousness is determined as percipient in so far
as this Thing is its object. It has only to take it, to confine itself
to a pure apprehension of it, and what is thus yielded is the
True. If consciousness itself did anything ip taking what is
given, it would by such adding or subtraction alter the truth.
Since the object is the True and universal, the self-identical,
while consciousness is alterable and unessential, it can happen
that consciousness apprehends the object incorrectly and
deceives itself. The percipient is aware of the possibility of deception; for in the universality which is the principle, otherness
itself is immediately present for him, though present as what
is null and superseded. His criterion of truth is therefore seljidentity) and his behaviour consists in apprehending the object
as self·identical. Since at the same time diversity is explicitly
there for him, it is a connection of the diverse moments df his
apprehension to one another; but if a dissimilarity makes itself
felt in the course of this comparison, then this is not an untruth
of the object~for this is the self..identical-but an untruth in
perceiving it.
I 17. Let us see now what consciousness experiences in its
actual perceiving. For us, this experience is already c"ontained
in the development of the object, and of the attitude of consciousness towards it given just now. It is only a matter of deVeloping the contradictions that are present therein. The object
which I apprehend presents itself purely as a One; but I also
perceive in it a property which is universal, and which,thereby
transcends the singularity [of the object]. The first being of the
objective essence as a One was therefore not its true being. But
since the object is whatis true, the untruth falls in me; my apprehension was not correct. On account of the universality of the

PERCEPTION

property, I must rather take the objective essence to be on the
whole a community. I now further perceive the property to be
determinate, opposed to another and excluding it. Thus I did not
in fact apprehend the objective essence correctly when I defined
it as a community with others, or as a continuity; on account
of the determinateness of the property, I must break up the
continuity and posit the objective essence as a One that
excludes.
In the broken up One I find many sl:lch properties which
do not affect one another but are mutually indifferent. Therefore, I did not perceive the object correctly when 1 apprehended
it as exclusive; on the contrary, just as previouly it was only
continuity in general, so now it is a universal common medium
in which many properties are present as sensuous universalities,
each existing on its own account and, as determinate, excluding
the others. But this being so, what I perceive as the simple and
the True is also not a universal medium, but the single property
by itself which, however, as such, is neither a property nor a
determinate being; for now it is neither in a One nor connected
with others. Only when it belongs to a One is it a property,
and only in relation to others is it determinate. As this pure
relating of itself to itself, it remains merely senSUOUJ being in
general, since it nolonger possesses the character of negativity;
and the consciousness which takes its object to be a sensuous
being is only 'my' meaning [ein Meinen], i.e. it has ceased altogether to perceive and has withdrawn into itself. But sensuous
being and my meaning themselves pass over into perception:
I am thrown back to the beginning and drawn once again into
the same cycle which supersedes itself in each moment and as
a whole.
I 18. Consciousness, therefore, necessarily runs through this
cycle again, but this time not in the same way as it did the first
time. For it has experienced in perception that the outcome
and the truth of perception is its dissolution, or is reflection out
of the True and into itself. Thus it becomes quite definite for
consciousness how its perceiving is essentially constituted,
viz. that it is not a simple pure apprehension, but in its apprehension is at the same time reflected out Q/ the True and into itself. This
return of consciousness into itself which is directly mingled with
the pure apprehension [of the objectJ-for this return into itself

72

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

has shown itself to be essential to perception-alters the truth.
Consciousness atonce recognizes this aspect as its own and takes
responsibility for it; by doing so it will obtain the true object
in its purity. This being so, we have now in the case ofperception the same as happened in the case of sense~certainty, the
aspect of consciousness being driven back into itself; but not,
in the first instance, in the sense in which this happened in
sense-certainty, i.e. not as if the truth of perception fell in consciousness. On the contrary, consciousness recognizes that it is
the untruth occurring in perception that falls within it. But by
this very recognition it is able at once to supersede this untruth;
it distinguishes its apprehension of the truth from the untruth
of its perception, corrects this untruth, and since it undertakes
to make this correction itself, the truth, qua truth of perception,
falls of course within consciousness. The behaviour of conscious ..
ness which we have now to consider is thus so constituted that
consciousness no longer merely perceives, but is also conscious
ofits reflection into itself, and separates this from simple appre ..
hension proper.
119. At first, then, I become aware of the Thing as a One,
and have to hold fast to it in this its true character; if, in the
course ot perceiving it, something turns up which contradicts
it, this is to be recognized as a reflection of mine. Now, there
also occur in the perception various properties which seem to
be properties of the Thing; but the Thing fs a One, and we are
conscious that this diversity by which it would cease to be a
One falls in us. So in point of fact, the Thing is white only to
our eyes, also tart to our tongue, also cubical to our touch, and
so on. We get the entire diversity of these aspects', not from the
Thing, but from ourselves; and they fall asunder in this way
for us, because the eye is quite distinct from the tongue, and
so on. Weare thus the universal medium in which such moments
are kept apart and exist each on its own, Through the fact, then,
that we regard the characteristic of being a universal medium
as our reflection, we preserve the self..identity and truth of the
Thing, its being a One.
l20. But, regarded as existing each for itself in the un~versa]
medium, these diverse aspects for which consciousness accepts responsibility are specifically determined. White is white only in
opposition to hlack, and so on, and the Thing is a One precisely

PERCEPTION

73

by being opposed to others. But it is not as a One that it excludes
others from itself, for to be a One is the universal relating of
self to self, and the fact that it is a One rather makes it like
all the others; it is through its determinateness that the thing
excludes others. Things are therefore in and for themselves
determinate; they have properties by which they distinguish
themselves from others. Since the property [Eigenschaft] is the
Thing's own [eigene] property or a determinateness in the Thing
itself, the Thing has a number of properties. For, in the first
place, the Thing is what is true, i.e. it possesses intrinsic being;
and what is in it, is there as the Thing's essence, and not on
account of other things. Secondly, therefore, the determinate
properties do not only exist on account of other things and for
other things, but in the Thing itself; yet they are determinate
properties in it only because they are a plurality of reciprocally
self-differentiating elements. And thirdly, since this is how they
are in the 'thinghood' [Le. the essence of the one thing of which
they are properties], they exist in and for themselves, indifferent
to one another. It is in truth, then, the Thing itself that is white,
and also cubical, also tart, and so on. In other words, the Thing
is the Also, or the universal medium in which the many properties
subsist apart from one another, without touching or cancelling
one another; and when so taken, the Thing is perceived as what
is true.
121. Now, in perceiving in this way, consciousness is at the
same time aware that it is also reflected in to itself, and that,
in perceiving, the opposite moment to the Also turns up. But
this moment is the unity of the Thing with itself, a unity which
excludes difference frDm itself. Accordingly, it is this unity
which consciousness has to take upon itself; for the Thing itself
is the subsistence of the many diverse and independent properties. Thus
we say of the Thing: it is white, also cubical, and also tart, and
so on. But in so far as it is white, it is not cubical, and in so far
as it is cubical and also white, it is not tart, and so on. Positing
these properties as a oneness is the work of consciousness alone
which, therefore, has to prevent them from collapsing into oneness in the Thing. To this end it brings in the 'in so far', in
this way preserving the properties as mutually external, and
the Thing as the Also. Quite rightly, consciousness makes itself
responsible for the oneness, at first in such a way that what was

74

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

called a property is represented as 'free matter'. The Thing is
in this way raised to the level ofa genuine Also, since it becomes
a collection of 'matters' and} instead of being a One, becomes
merely an enclosing surface.
122. Ifwe look back on what consciousness previously took,
and now takes, responsibility for, on what it previously
ascribed, and now ascribes, to the Thing, we see that consciousness alternately makes itself, as well as the Thing, into both a
pure} many-less One, and into an Also that resolves itself into
independent 'matters'. Consciousness thus finds through this
comparison that not only its truthful perceiving [Nehmen des
Wahren], contains the distinct moments oj apprehension and withdrawal into itself, but rather that the truth itself, the Thing,
reveals itself in this twofold way. Our experience, then, is this,
that the Thing exhibits itse1fjor the consciousness apprehending it,
in a specific manner, but is at the same time reflected out of the
way in which it presents itself to consciousness and back into
itself; in other words, it contains in its own self an opposite truth
[to that which it has for the apprehending consciousness].
123. Thus consciousness has got beyond this second type of
attitude in perceiving, too, i.e. the one in which it takes the
Thing as truly self-identical, and itselffor whatis notself-identical but returns back into itself out of identity. The object is now
for consciousness this whole movement which was previously
shared between the object and consciousness. The Thing is a
One, reflected into itself; it isJor £tselj, but it is alsoJof an other;
and, moreover, it is an other on its own account, just because it
is for an other. Accordingly, the Thing is for itself and also for
an other, a being that is doubly differentiated but also a One;
but the oneness contradicts this diversity. Hence consciousness
would again have to assume responsibility for placing [the
diversity] in the One and for keeping it away from the Thing.
It would have to say that in so far as it is for itself, the Thing
is not for an other. But the onen~ss also belongs to the Thing
itself as consciousness has found by experience: the Thing is
essentially reflected into itself. The Also, or the indifferent difference, thus falls as much within the Thing as does the oneness;
but since the two are different they do not fall within the same
Thing, but in different Things. The contradiction which is
present in the objective essence as a whole is distributed

PERCEPTION

75

between two objects. In and for itself the Thing is self-identical,
but this unity with itself is disturbed by other Things. Thus
the unity of the Thing is preserved and at the same time the
otherness is preserved outside of the Thing as well as outside
of consciousness.
124. Now, although it is true that the contradiction in the
objective essence is in this way distributed among different
Things, yet the difference will, for that reason, attach to the
singular separated Thing itself. The different Things are thus
established as existing on their own account; and the conflict
between them is so'far reciprocal that each is different, not from
itself, but only from the other. But each is thereby determined
as being its~lf a different Thing, and it has its essential difference
in its own self; but all the while not as if this difference were
an opposition in the Thing itself. On the contrary, for itself it
is a simple determinateness which constitutes the Thing's essential
character, and differentiates it from others. As a matter offact,
since differentness is present in it, it is of course necessarily
present as an actual difference manfoldly constituted. Eut
because the determinateness constitutes the essence of the
Thing, by which it distingui~hes itself from other Things and
is for itself, this further manifold constitution is the unesse.ntial
aspect. Consequently, the Thing does indeed have the. twofold
'in so far' within its unity, but the aspects are unequal in value.
As a result, this state of opposition does not develop into an
actual opposition in the Thing itself, but in so far as the Thing
through its absolute difference comes into a state of opposition,
it :is opposed to another Thing outside of it. Of course, the
further manifold ness is necessarily present in the Thing too, so
that it cannot be left out; but it is the unessential aspect of the
Thing.
125. This determinateness, which constitutes the essential
character of the Thing and distinguishes it from all others, is
now defined in such a way that the Thing is thereby in opposi
tion to other Things, but is supposed to preserve its independence in this opposition. But it is only a Thing or a One that
exists on its own account, in so far as it does not stand in this
relation to others; for this relation establishes rather its continuity with others, and for it to be connected with others is to
cease to exist on its own account. It isjust through the absolute
M

J

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

character of the Thing and its opposition that it relates itself to
others, and is essentially only this relating, The relation, how~
ever, is the negation of its self-subsistence, and it is really the
essential property of the Thing that is its undoing.
126. The conceptual necessity of the experience through
which consciousness discovers that the Thing is demolished by
the very determinateness that constitutes its essence and its
being-foraself, can be summarized as follows. The Thing is
posited as beingfor itself, or as the absolute negation of all other~
ness, therefore as purely selfarelated negation; but the negation
that is self..rela ted is the suspension of itself; in other words, the
Thing has its essential being in another Thing.
127. In fact, the definition of the object, as it has emerged,
has shown itself to' contain nothing else. The object is defined
as having within it an essential property which constitutes its
simple being-for-self; but along with this simple nature the
object is also to contain diversity which, though necessary, is not
to constitute its essential determinateness. This, however, is a
distinction that is still only nominal; the unessential, which is
nOne the less supposed to be necessary, cancels itself out. It is
what has just been called the negation of itself.
128. With this, the last 'in so far' that separated being-for~
self from being~for-another falls away; on the contrary, the
object is in one and tke samerespecttheopposlteofitselJ: it isfor itself,
sofaras it isforanother, and it is for another, sofar as it isfar itself.
It is for itself, reflected into itself, a One; but this 'for~itself,
this reflection into itself, this being a One, is posited in a unity
with its opposite, with its 'being~for~another', and hence only
as' cancelled; in other words, this being-for~selfisjust as unessen~
tial as the only aspect that was supposed to be unessential, viz.
the relationship to another.
129. Thus the object in its pure determinatenesses, or in the
detenninatenesses which were supposed to constitute its essen~
tial being, is overcome just as surely as it was in its sensuous
being. From a sensuous being it turned into a universal; but
this universal, since it originates in the sensuous, is essentially conditioned by it, and hence is not truly a self-identical universality
at all, but one aj}licted with an opposition; for this reason the universaHty'splits into the extremes of singular individuality and
universality, into the One of the properties, and the Also of the

PERCEPTION

77

'free matters'. These pure determinatenesses seem to express the
essential nature itself, but they are only a 'beingQfor.. self that
is burdened with a 'being~for-another'. Since, however, both
are essentially in a single unity, what we now have is unconditioned
absolute universality, and consciousness here for the first time truly
enters the realm of the Understanding.
130. Thus the singular being of sense does indeed vanish in
the dialectical movement of immediate certainty and becomes
universality, but it is only a sensuous universality. My 'meaning'
has vanished, and perception takes the object as it is in itself,
or as a universal as such. Singular being therefore emerges in the
object as true singleness, as the in~itselfofthe One, or as a reflec ..
tedness~into-self. But this is still a conditioned being .. for-self alongside which appears another being-for.. self, the universality which
is opposed to, and conditioned by singular being. But these two
contradictory extremes are not -merely alongside each other but
in a single unity, or in other words, the defining characteristic
common to both, viz. 'being-for-self, is burdened with opposi~
tion generally, i.e. it is at the same time not a 'being·for-self.
The sophistry of perception seeks to save these moments from
their contradiction, and it seeks to lay hold on the truth, by
distinguishing between the aspe.cts, by sticking to the 'Also' and
to the 'in sofar\ and finally, by distinguishing the 'unessential'
aspect from an 'essence' which is opposed to it. But these
expedients, instead of warding off deception in the process of
apprehension, prove themselves on the contrary to be quite
empty; and the truth which is supposed to be won by this logic
of the perceptual process proves to be in one and the same respect the opposite [of itself] and thus to have as its essence a
universality which is devoid ofdistinctions and determinations.
13 I. These empty abstractions of a Isingleness' and a 'uni~
versality' opposed to it, and of an 'essence' that is linked with
something unessential-a 'non-essential' aspect which is necessary all the same~these are powers whose interplay is the perceptual understanding, often called Isound common sense'.
This 'sound common sense' which takes itself to be a solid, realistic consciousness is, in the perceptual process, only the play
of these abstractions; generally, it is always at its poorest where
it fancies itsdftobe the richest. Bandied about by these vacuous
'essences', thrown into the arms first- of one and then of the

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

other, and striving by its sophistry to hold fast and affirm alternately first one of the 'essences' and then the directly opposite
one, it sets itself against the truth and holds the opinion that
philosophy is concerned only with mental entities. As a matter
offact, philosophy does have to do with them too, recognizing
them as the pure essences, the absolute elements and powers;
but in doing so, recognizes them in their specific determinateness
as well, and is therefore master over them, whereas perceptual
understanding [or 'sound common sense'] takes them for the
truth and is led on by them from one error to another. It does
not itself become conscious that it is simple essentialities of this
kind that hoJd sway over it, but fancies that it has always to
do with wholly substantial material and content; just as sensecertainty is unaware that the empty abstraction of pure being
is its essence. But it is, in fact, these essentialities within which
perceptual understanding runs to and fro through every kind
of material and content; they are the cohesive power and mastery over that content and they alone are what the sensuous
is as essence for consciousness, they are what determines the relations of the sensuous to it, and it is in them that the process
of perception and ofits truth runs its course. This,course, a perpetualalternationof determining what is true, and then setting
aside this determining, constitutes, strictly speaking, the steady
everyday life and activity of perceptual consciousness, a consciousness which fancies itselfto be moving in the realm of truth.
It advances uninterruptedly to the outcome in which all these
essential essentialities or determinations are equally set
aside; bu t in each single momen tit is conscious only of this one
determinateness as the truth, and then in tu~n of the opposite one.
It docs indeed suspect their unessentiality, and to save them
from the danger thrc<:ltening them it resorts to the sophistry of
asserting to be true what it has itselfjust declared to be untrue.
What the nature of these untrue essences is really trying to get
[perceptual] understanding to do is to bring together, and
thereby supersede, the thoughts of those non-entities, the
thoughts of that universality and singular being, of 'Also' and
'One', of the essentiality that is necessarily linked to the unessential moment, and of an unessential moment that yet is necessary. But the Understanding struggles to avoid doing this by
resorting to 'in so far as' and to the various 'aspects', or by mak-

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

79

ing itself responsible for one thought in order to keep the other
one isolated as the true one. But the very nature of these abstractions brings them together of their own accord. It is 'sound common sense' that is the prey of these abstractions, which spin
it round and round in their whirling circle. When common
sense tries to make them true by at one time making itself responsible for their untruth, while at another time it calls their
deceptiveness a semblance of the unreliability of Things, and
separates what is essential from what is necessary to them yet
supposedly unessential, holding the former to be their truth as
against the latter-when it does this, it does not secure them
their truth, but convicts itself of untruth.

III. FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING:
APPEARANCE AND THE SUPERSENSIBLE
WORLD
132. In the dialectic of sense-certainty, Seeing and Hearing
have been lost to consciousness; and, as perception, consciousness has arrived at thoughts, which it brings together for the
first time in the unconditioned universal. This, now, if it were
taken as an inert simple essence, would itselfin turn he nothing
else than the one-sided extreme of being-for-selj, for it would then
be confronted by non-essence; but, if it were related to this,
it would itself be unessential, and consciousness would not have
escaped from the deceptions of the perceptual process. However, this universal has proved to be one which has returned
into itself out of such a conditioned being-far-self. This unconditioned universal, which is now the true object of consciousness, is sti11 just an object for it; consciousness has not yet
grasped the Notion of the unconditioned as Notion. It is essential
to distinguish the two: for consciousness, the object has returned
into itself from its relation to an other and has thus become
Notion in principle.; but consciousness is not yet for itself the
Notion, and consequently does not recognize itself in that reflected object. For us, this object has developed through the
movement of consciousness in such a way that consciousness
is involved in that development, and the reflection is the same
on both sides, Of, there is only one reflection. But since in this

80

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

movement consciousness has for its content merely the objective
essence and not consciousness as such, the result must have an
objective significance for consciousness; consciousness still
shrinks away from what has emerged, and takes it as the essence
in the objective sense.
133. With this, the Understanding has indeed superseded its
own untruth and the untruth of the object. What has emerged
for it as a result is the Notion of the True-but only as the implicit
being of the True, which is not yet Notion, or which lacks the
bring-for-self of consciousness, and which the Understanding,
without knowing itself therein, lets go its own way. This truth
follows out its own essence, so that consciousness plays no part
in its free realization, but merely looks on and simply apprehends it. To begin with, therefore, we must step into its place
and be the Notion which develops and fills out what is contained in the result. It is through awareness of this completely
developed object, which presents itself to consciousness as something that immediately is, that consciousness first becomes
explicitly a consciousness that comprehends [its object].
134. The result was the unconditioned universal, initially,
in the negative and abstract sense that consciousness negated
its one-sidedN otions and abstracted them: in other words, it
gave them up. But the result has, implicitly, a positive signifi..
cance: in it, the unity of 'being-far-self' and 'being-for-another'
is posited; in other words, the absolute antithesis is posited as
a self."identical essence. At first sight, this seems to concern only
the form of the moments in reciprocal relation; but 'being-forself' and 'being-for-another' are the content itself as well, since
the antithesis in its truth can have no other nature than the
one yielded in the result, viz. that the content taken in perception to be true, belongs in fact only to the form, in the unity
of which it is dissolved. This content is likewise universal; there
can be no other content which by its particular constitution
would fail to fall within this unconditioned universality. A content of this kind would be some particular way or other of being
fm' itself and of being in relation to an other. But, in general,
to be for itself and to be in relation to an other constitutes the
nature and essence of the content, whose truth consists in its
being unconditionally universal; and the result is simply and
solely universaL

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

81

135. But because this unconditioned universal is an object
for consciousness, there emerges in it the distinction ofform and
content; and in the shape of content the moments look like
they did when they first presented themselves: on one side, a
universal medium of many subsistent 'matters', and on the
other side, a One reflected into itself, in which their independence is extinguished. The former is the dissolution of the
Thing's independence, i.e. the passivity that is a being-foranother; the latter is being-for-self. We have to see how these
moments exhibit themselves in the unconditioned universality
which is their essence. It is dear at the outset that, since they
exist only in this universality, they are no longer separated from
one another at all but are in themselves essentially self-superseding aspects, and what is posited is only their transition into one
another.
136, One moment, then, appears as the essence that has
stepped to one side as a universal medium, or as the subsistence
of independent 'matters'. But the independence of these 'matters'is nothing else than this medium; in other words, the [unconditioned] universal is simply and solely the plurality of the
diverse universals of this kind. That within itself the universal
is in undivided unity with this plurality means, however, that
these 'matters' are each where the other is; they mutually interpenetrate, but without coming into contact with one another
because, conversely, the manydiverse 'matters' are equally independent. This also means thatthey are absolutely porous,
or are sublated. This sublation in its turn, this reduction of the
diversity to a pure being-fo1-selj, is nothing other than the
medium itself, and this is the independence of the different 'matters'. In oher words, the 'matters' posited. as independent
directly pass over into their unity, and their unity directly unfolds its diversity, and this once again reduces itself to unity.
But this movement is what is called Force. One of its moments,
the dispersal of the independent 'matters' in their [immediate]
being, is the expression of Force ; but Force, taken asthatin which
they have disappeared, is Force proper, Force which has been
driven back into itself from its expression. First, however, the
Force which is driven back into itself must express itself; and,
secondly, his still Force remaining within itselfin the expression,
just as much as it is expression in this self-containedness.

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

When we thus preserve the two moments in their immediate
unity, the Understanding, to which the Notion of Force
belongs, is strictly speaking the Notion which sustains the different moments qua different; for, in themselves, they are not supposed to be different. Consequently, the difference exists only
in thought. That is to say, what has been posited in the foregoing is in the first instance only the Notion of Force, not its
reality. In point of fact, however, Force is the unconditioned
universal which is equally in its own self what it isfor an other;
or which contains the difference in its own self--for difference
is nothing else than being-for-another. In order, then, that Force
may in truth be, it must be completely set free from thought,
it must be posited as the substance of these differences, i.e. first
the substance, as this whole Force, remaining essentially in and
for itself, and then its differences as possessing substantial being, or
as moments existing on their own account. Force as such, or
as driven back into itself, thus exists on its own account as an
exclusive One, for which the unfolding of the (different] 'matters'
is another subsisting essence; and thus two distinct independent
aspects are set up, But Force is also the whole, i.e. it remains
what it is according to its Notion; that is to say, these differences
remain pure forms., superficial vanishing moments. Atthe same
time there would be no difference at all between Force proper
which has been driven back intoitse1f,and Force unfolded into
independent 'matters', if they had no enduring being, or, there
would be no Force if it did not exist in these opposite ways.
But that it does exist in these opposite ways simply means
that the two moments are at the same time themselves independent. It is therefore this movement of the two moments
in which they perpetually give themselves independence
and then supersede themselves again which we are now to
consider.
In general, it is clear that this movement is nothing else than
the movement of perceiving, in which the two sides, the percipient and what is perceived, are indistinguishably one in the
apprehension of the True, and yet each side is at the same time
equally reflected into itself, or has a being of its own, Here, these
two sides are moments afForce; theyarejust as much in a unity,
as this unity, which _appears as the middle term over against
the independent extremes, is a perpetual diremption of itself

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

83

into just these extremes which exist only through this process.
Thus the movement which previously displayed itselfas the self·
destruction of contradictory Notions here has objective form and
is the movement of Force, the outcome of which is the unconditioned universal as something not objective, or as the inner
being of Things.
137. Force, as thus determined, since it is conceived as Force
or as reflected into itself, is one side of its Notion, but posited as
as u bs tan tial ex treme and, moreover, with the express character
of a One. The subsistence of the unfolded 'matters' outside of
Force is thus precluded and is something other than Force:
Since it is necessary that Force itself be this subsistence, or that
it express itself, its expression presents itself in this wise, that the
said ~other' approaches it and solicits it. But, as a matter offact,
since its expression is necessary, what is posited as another essence
is in Force itself We must retract the assertion that Force is
posited as a One, and that its essence is to express itself as an
'other' which approaches it externally, Force is rather itself this
universal medium in which the moments subsist as 'matters';
or, in other words, Force has expressed itself, and what was supposed to be something else soliciting it is really Force itself. It
exists, therefore, now as the medium of the unfolded 'matters'.
But equally essentially it has the form of the supersession of the
subsisting 'matters', or is essentially a One. Consequently, this
oneness, since Force is posited as the medium of the 'matters',
is now something other th;in Force, which has this its essence outside of it. But, since Force must of necessity be this oneness
which it is not as yet posited as being, this 'other' approaches it,
soliciting it to reflect itself into itself: in other words, Force
supersedes its expression. But in fact Force is itselfthis reflectedness ..into-self, or this supersession of the expression. The oneness, in the form in which it appeared, viz. as an 'other',
vanishes;· Force is this 'other' itself, is Force that is driven back
into itself.
138. What appears as an 'other' and solicits Force, both to
expression and toa return in to i tsdf, directly proves to be itself
Force; for the 'other' shows itself to he as much a universal
medium as a One, and in such a way that each of these forms
at the same time appears only as a vanishing moment. Consequently, Force, in that there is an 'other' for it, and it is for

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

an 'other', has not yet altogether emerged from its Notion.
There are at the same time two Forces present; the Notion of
both is no doubt the same, but it has gone forth from its unity
into a duality. Instead of the antithesis remaining entirely and
essentially only a moment, it seems, by its self-diremption into
two wholly independent forces, to have withdrawn from the controlling uni ty. W e have now to see more closel y the implications
of this independence.
In the first place, the second Force appears as the one that
solicits and, moreover, in accordance with its content, as the
universal medium in relation to the Force characterized as the
one solicited. But since the second Force is essentially an
alternation of these two moments and is itself Force, it is likewise
the universal medium only through its being solicited to be such; and
similarly, too, it is a negative unity, i.e. it solicits the retraction
of Force [into itselfJ, only through its heing solicited to do so. Oonsequently, this distinction, too, which obtained between the two
Forces, one ofwhich was supposed tohe the soliciting, the other
the solicited, Force is transformed into the same reciprocal
interchange of 'the determinatenesses.
139. 'The interplay of the two Forces thus consists in their
being determined as mutually opposed, in their being for one
another in this determination, and in the absolute, immediate
alternation ofthe determinations-consists,Le. in a transition
through which alone these determinations are in which the
Forces seem to make an independent appearance, The soliciting
Force, e.g., is posited as a universal medium, and the one soli..
cited, on the other hand, as Force driven back into itself; but
the former is a universal medium only through the other being
Force that is driven back into itself; or, it is really the latter that
is the soliciting Force for the other and is what makes it a
medium. The first Force has its determinateness only through
the other, and solicits only in so far as the other solicits it to
be a soliciting Force; and, just as directly, it loses the determinateness given to it, for this passes over---cor rather has
already passed over~to the other. The external, soliciting
Force appears as a universal medium, but only through its having heen solicited by the other Force to do so; but this means
that the latter gives it that character and is really itself essentially
a universal medium; itgives the soliciting Force this character

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

just because this other determination is essential to it, i.e.
because this is really its own self.
140, To complete our insight into the Notion of this move
ment it may further be noticed that the differences themselves
are exhibited in a twofold difference: once as a difference of
content, one extreme being the Force reflected into itself, but the
other the medium of the 'matters'; and again as a difference
ofjorm, since one solicits and the other is solicited, the former
being active and the other passive. According to the difference
of content they are distinguished [merely] in principle, or jor
us; but according to the difference ofform they are independent
and in their relation keep themselves separate and opposed to
one another. The fact that the extremes, from the standpoint
of both these sides, are thus nothing in themselves, that these sides
in whi~h their different essences were supposed to consist are
only vanishing moments, are an immediate transition of each
into its opposite, this truth becomes apparent to consciousness
in its perception of the movement of Force. But jor u~, as
remarked above~ something more was apparent, viz. that the
differences, qua differences oj e<mtent andjorm, vanished in them ..
selves; and on the side ofform, the essence of the active, soliciting
or independent side, was the same as that which, on the side of
content, p.resented itself as Force driven hack into itself; the
side which was passive, which was solicited or for an other, was,
from the side of form,- the same as that which, from the side
of content, presented itselfas the universal medium of the many
'matters'.
141. From this we see that the Notion of Force becomes qctual
through its duplication into two Forces, and how it comes to
he so. These two Forces exist as independent essences; but their
existence is a movement of each towards the other, such that
their being is rather a pure positedness or a being that is posited
by an other, i.e. their being has really the significance of a sheer
vanishing. They do not exist as extremes which retain for them ..
selves something fixed and substantial, transmitting to one
another in their middle term and in their contact a merely
external property; on the contrary, what they are, they are,
only in this middle term and in this contact. In this, there is
immediately present both the repression within itself of Force,
or its being..Jor-self, as well as its expression: Force that solicits
a

86

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

and Force that is solicited. Consequently, these moments are
not divided into two independent extremes offering each other
only an opposite extreme: their essence rather consists simply
and solely in this, that each is solely through the other, and
what each thus is it immediately no longer is, since it is the
other. They have thus, in fact, no substances of their own which
might support and maintain them. The Notion of Force rather
preserves itself as the ~ssence in its very actuality; Force, as actual,
exists simply and solely in its expression, which at the same time
is nothing else than a supersession of itself. This actual Force,
when thought of as free from its expression and as being f9r
itself, is Force driven back into itself; but in fact this deter~
minateness, as we have found, is itself only a moment of Force's
expression. Thus the truth of Force remains only the thought of
it; the moments ofits actuality, their substances and their: move~
ment, collapse unresistingly into an undifferentiated unity, a
unity which is not Force driven back into itse1f (for this is itself
only such a moment), but is its Notion qua Notion. Thus the realization of Force is at the same time the loss of reality; in that
realization it has really become something quite different, viz.
this universality, which the Understanding knows at the outset,
or immediately, to be its essence and which also proves itself
to be such in the supposed reality of Force, in the actual substances.
142. In so far as we regard thefirst universal as the Understanding's Notion in which Force is not yetf()r itself, the second
is now Force's essence as it exhibits itself in and for itself. Or,
conversely, if we regard the first universal as the Immediate,
which was supposed to be an actual object for consciousness, then
this second is determined as the negative of Force that is objective
to sense; it is Force in the form of its t'rue essence in which it
exists only as an obJect for the Understanding. The first universal
would be Force driven back into itself, or Force as Substance;
the second, however, is the inner being of things qua inner, which
is the same as the Notion of Force qua Notion.
143. This true essence of Things has now the character of
not being immediately for consciousness; on the contrary, con~
sciousness has a mediated relation to the inner being and, as
the Understanding, looks through this mediating play of Forces into
the true hackground of Things. The middle term which unites the

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

two extremes, the Understanding and the inner world, is the
developed being of Force which, for the Understanding itself,
is henceforth only a vanishing. This 'being' is therefore called
appearance; for we call being that is directly and in its own self
a non-being a surface show. But it is not merely a surface show;
it is appearance, a totality of show. This totality, as totality or
as a universal, is what constitutes the inner [of Things], the play
of Forces as a reflection of the inner into itself. In it, the Things
of perception are expressly present for consciousness as they are
in themselves, viz. as moments which immediately and without
rest or stay turn into their opposite, the One immediately into
the universal, the essential immediately into the unessential,
and vice versa. This play of Forces is consequently the developed negative; but its truth is the positive, viz. the universal,
the object that, in itself, possesses being. The being of this object
for consciousness is mediated by the movement of appearance,
in which the being of perception and the sensuously objective in
general has a merely negative significance. Consciousness,
therefore, reflects itself out of this movement back into itself as
the True; but, qua consciousness, converts this truth again into
an objective inner, arid distinguishes this reflection of Things
from its own reflection into itself: just as the movement of
mediation is likewise still objective for it. This inner is, therefore, for consciousness an extreme over against it; but it is for
consciousness the True, since in the inner, as the in-itself, it possesses at the same time the certainty of itself, or the moment
of its being-for~self. But it is not yet conscious of this ground
or basis, for the being-for-selfwhich the inner was supposed to
possess in its own self would be nothing else but the negative
movement. This, however, is for consciousness still the objective
vanishing appearance, not yet its own being-for-self. Consequently, the inner is for it certainly Notion, but it does not
as yet know the nature of the Notion.
144. Within this inner truth, as the absolute universal which has
been' purged of the antithesis between the universal and theindividual and has become the object of the Understanding, there
now opens up above the sensuous world, which is the world of
appearance, a supersensible world which henceforth is the true
world, above the vanishing present world there opens up a
permanent beyond; an in-itself which is the first, and therefore

88

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

imperfect, appearance of Reason, or only the pure element in
which the truth has its essence.
145. Our object is thus from now on the syllogism which has
for its extremes the inner being of Things and the Understanding, and for its middle term, appearance; but the movement
of this syllogism yields the further determination of what the
Understanding'descries in this inner world through the middle
term, and tlJ.e experience from which Understanding learns
about the close-linked unity of these terms.
146. The inner world is, for consciousness, still a pure beyond,
because consciousness does not as yet find itselfin it. It is empty,
for it ,is merely the nothingness of appearance, and positively
the simple or unitary universal. This 'mode of the inner being
[of Things] finds ready acceptance by those who say that the
inner being of T~ings is unknowable; but another reason for
this would have t6 be given. Certainly, we have no knowledge
of this inner world as it is here in its immediacy; bu t not because
Reason is too short",signted or is limited, or however else onc
likes to call it----..on this point, we know nothing as yet because
we have pot yet gone deep enough~but because of the .simple
nature of the matter in hand, that is to say, because in the void
nothing is known, or, expressed from theotherside,just because
this inner world is determined as the beyond of consciousness.
The result is, of course the same ira blind man is placed amid
the wealth of the supersensible world (if it has such wealth,
whether it be its own peculiar content, of whether consciousness
itself be this content), and if one with sight is placed in pure
darkness, or if you like, in pure light, just supposing the supersensible world to be this. The man with sight sees as little in
that pure light as in pure darkness, and just as much as the
blind man, in the abundant wealth which lies before him. If
no further significance attached to the inner world and to our
close link with it tl?rough the world ofappearance, then nothing
would he left to us but to stop at the world of appearance, i.e.
to perceive something as true which we know is not true. Or,
in order that there may yet be something in the void~which,
though it first cam.e about as devoid of objective Things must,
however, as empty in itself, be taken as also void of all spiritual
relationships and distinctions of conscious'ness qua consciousness-in order, then, that in this complete void, which is even

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

89

called the holy oj holies, there may yet be something, we must
fill it up with reveries, appearances, produced by consciousness
itself. It would ha,ve to be content with being treated so badly
for it would not deserve anything better, since .even reveries are
better than its own emptiness.
147. The inner world, or supersensible beyond, has, however, come into being: it comesjrom the world pf appearance which
has mediated it; in other words, appearance is its essence and,
in fact, its filling. The supersensible is the sensuous and the perceived posited as it is in truth; but the truth of the sensuous and
the perceived is to be appearance. The supersensible is therefore
appearance qua appearance. We completely misunderstand this if
we think that the supersensible world is therefore the sensuous
world, or the world as it exists for immediate sense .. certainty
and perception; for the world of appearance is, on the contrary,
not the world of sense-knowledge and perception as a world
that positively is, but this world posited as superseded, or as
in truth an inner world. It is often said that the supersensible
world is not appearance.; but what is here understood by a ppearance is not appearance, but rather the sensuous world as itself
the really actuaL
148. The.Understanding, which is our object, finds itself in
just this position, that the inner world has come into being for
it, to begin with, only as the universal, still unfilled, in-itself.
The play of Forces has merely this negative significance of being
in itself nothing, and its only positive significance that of being
themedirJtingagency, but outside of the Understanding. The connection of the Understanding with the inner world through the
mediation is, however, its own movement through which the
inner world will fill itself out for the Understanding. What is
immediate for the Understanding is the play of Forces ; but what
is the True for it, is the simple inner world. The movement of
Force is therefore the True, likewise only as something altogether simple. We have seen, however, that this play of Forces
is so constituted that the Force which is solicited by another
Force is equally the soliciting Force for that other, which only
thereby becomes itself a soliciting Foree. What is present in this
interplay is likewise merely the immediate alternation, or the
absolute interchange, of the determinateness which constitutes the
sole content of what appears.: to be either a universal medium,

go

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

or a negative unity. It ceases immediately on its appearance
in determinate form to be what it was on appearing; by appearing in determinate form, it solicits the other side to express itself,
i.e. the latter is now immediately what the first was supposed
to be. Each of these two sides, the relation of soliciting and the
relation of the opposed determinate content, is on its own account
an absolute reversal and interchange [of the determinateness].
But these two relations themselves are again one and the same;
and the difference ofform, of being the solicited and the soliciting Force, is the same as the difference of content, of being the
solicited Force as such, viz. the passive medium on the one
hand, ~nd the soliciting Force, the active, negative unity or the
One, on the other. In this way there vanishes completely all
distinction of separate, mutually contrasted Forces which were
supposed to be present in this movement, for they rested solely
on those distinctions; and the distinction between the Forces,
along with both those distinctions, likewise collapses into only
one. Thus there is neither Force, nor the act of soliciting or
being solicited, nor the determinateness of being a stable
medium and a unity reflected into itself, there is neither something existing singly by itself, nor are there diverse antitheses;
on the contrary, what there is in this absolute flux is only difference as a universal difference, aras a difference into which the
many antitheses have been resolved. This difference, as a universal difference, is consequently the simple element in the play of
Force itself and what is true in it. It is the law of Force.
149- The absolute flux of appearance becomes a simple difference through its relation to the simplicity of the inner world
or of the Understanding. The inner being is, to begin with, only
implicitly the universal; but this implicit, simple universal is
essentially no less absolutely universal difference, for it is the out~
come of the flux itself, or the flux is its essence; but it is a flux
thatis posited in the inner world as it isin truth, and consequently
it is received in that inner world as equally an absolute universal difference that is absolutely at rest and remains selfsame. In
other words, negation is an essential moment of the universal,
and negation, or mediation in the universal, is therefore a universal difference. This difference is expressed in the law, which
is the stable image of unstable appearance. Consequently, the
supersensible world is an inert realm of laws which, though beyond

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

91

the perceived world-for this exhihits law only through incessant change-is equally present in it and is its direct tranquil
image.
150. This realm of laws is indeed the truth for the Understanding, and that truth has its content in the law. At the same
time, however, this realm is only the initial truth for the Understanding and does not fill out the world of appearance. In this
the law is present, hut is not the entire presence of appearance;
with every change of circumstance the law has a different actuality. Thus appearance retainsfor itselfan aspect which is not
in the inner world; i.e. appearance is not yet truly posited as
appearance, as a superseded heing-for-self. This defect in the law
must equally he made manifest in the law itself. What seems
to he defective in it is that while it does contain difference, the
difference is universal, indeterminate. However, in so far as it
is not law in general, but a law, it does contain determinateness";
consequently, there are indefinitely many laws. But this plurality
is itself rather a defect; for it contradicts the principle of the
Understanding for which, as consciousness of the simple inner
world, the True is the implicitly universal unity. It must therefore let the many laws collapse into one law, just as, e.g., the
law hy which a stone faUs, and the law hy which the heavenly
bodies move, have been grasped asonelaw. But when the laws
thus coincide, they lose their specific character. The law
becomes more and more superficial, and as a result what is
found is, in fact, not the unity of these specific laws, but a law
which leaves out their specific character; just as the one law
which combines in its elf the laws offaIling terrestrial bodies and
of the motions of the heavenly bodies, in fact expresses neither
law. The unification of all laws in universal attract-ion expresses
no other content than just the mere Notion of law itself, which
is posited in that law in the form of being. Universal attraction
merely asserts that everything has a constant difference in rel(1tion to
other things. The Understanding imagines that in this unification it has found a universal law which expresses universal
reality as such; but in fact it h~s only found the Notion of law
itself, although in such a way that what it is saying is that all
reality is in its own self, conformable to law. The expression, universal attraction, is of great importance in so far as it is directed
against the thoughtless way in which everything is pictured as

92

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

contingent, and for which determinateness has the form of sensuous independence.
151. Thus, in contrast to specific laws, we 'have universal
attraction, or the pure Notion of law. In so far as this pure
Notion is looked on as the essence, or the true inner being, the
determinateness of the specific law itself still belongs to appear~
ance, or rather to sensuous being. But the pure Notion of law
transcends not merely the law which, being itself a specific law,
stands contrasted with other specific laws, but also transcends
law as such. The determinateness of which we spoke is itself
really only a vanishing moment which can no longer occur here
as something essential, for here it is only the law that is the True j
but the Notion oflaw is turned against law itself. That is to say,
in the law the difference itself is grasped immediately and taken
up into the universal, thereby, however, giving the moments
whose relation is expressed by the law a subsistence in the form
of indifferent and [merely] implicit essentialities. But these
parts of the difference present in the law are at the same time
themselves determinate sides; the pure Notion of Jaw as universal attraction must, to get its tfuemeaning, be grasped in
such a way that in it, as what is absolutely simple or unitary,
the differences present in law as such themselves return again
into theinnerworld as a simple unity. This uni ty is the inner necessity
of the law.
152. Thelawis therebypresentin atwofo]d manner: once, as
law in which the differences are expressed as independent moments; andalsoin the form of a simple withdrawal in to itself which
again can be called Force, but in the sense not of a Force that is
drivenbackintoitself, butForceassuch, or theNotion ofForce , an
abstraction which absorbs the differences themselves of what
attracts and what is attracted. In this sense, simple electricity,
e.g., is Force; but the expression of difference falls within the
law; this difference is positive and negative electricity. In the
case of the motion of falling, Force is the simple factor, gravity,
whose law is that the magnitudes of the differen t momen ts of
the motion, the time elapsed and the space traversed, are relat~d
to one another as root and square. Electricity itself is not difference per se, oris not in its essence the dual essence of positive
and negative electricity; hence, it is usually said that it has the
law of this mode of being, and, too, that it has the property of

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

93

expressing itselfin this way. It is true that this property is the
essential and sole property of this Force, or that it belongs to
it necessarily. But necessity here is an empty word; Force must,
just because it must, duplicate itself in this way. Of course, given
positive electricity, negative too is given in principle; for the posi ..
tive is, only as related to a negative, or, the positive is in its
own self the difference from itself; and similarly with the nega
tive. But that electricity as such should divide itself in this way
is not in itselfa necessity. Electricity, as simple Force, is indifferent
to its law-to be positive and negative; and if we call the former
its Notion but the latter its being, then its Notion is indifferent
to its being. It merely has this property, which just means that
this property is not in itself necessary to it. This indifference is
given another form when it is said that to be positive and nega ..
tive belongs to the definition of electricity, and that this is simply
its Notion and essence. In that case, its being would simply mean
its actual existence. But that definition does not contain the
necessity of its existence; it exists, either because we find it, i. e. its
existence is not necessary at all, or else it exists through, or by
means of, other Forces, i.e. its necessity is an external necessity.
But, in basing this necessity on the determinaten,ess of being
through another, we relapse again into the plurality of specific laws
which we have just left behind in order to consider law as law.
It is only with law as law that we are to compare its Notion
as Notion, or its necessity. But in all these forms, necessity has
shown itself to be only an empty word.
I53. There is still another form than that just indicated in
which the indifferenceoflaw and Force, or of Notion and being,
is to be found. In the law of motion, e.g., it is necessary that
motion be split up into time and space, or again, into distance
and velocity. Thus, since motion is only the relation of these
factors, it-theuniversal-is certainly divided in its own self. But
now these parts, time and space, or distance and velocity, do
not in themselves express this origin in a One; they are indifferent to one another, space is thought of as able to be with ..
out time, time without space, and distance at least without
velocity~ust as their magnitudes are indifferent to one
another, since they are not related to one another as positive and
negative, and thus are not related to one another through their
own essential nature. The necessity of the division is thus certainly
a

94

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

present here, but not the necessity of the parts as such for one
another. But it is just for this reason that that first necessity,
too, is itself only a sham, false necessity. For motion is not itself
thought of as sorpething simple, or as a pure essence, but as
already divided; time and sp£lce are in themselves its independent
parts or essences, Of, distance and velocity are modes of being
or ways of thinking, either of which can well be without the
other; and motion is, therefore, only their superficial relation,
not their essence. If it is thought of as a simple essence or as
Force, motion is no doubt gravity, but this does not contain these
differences at all.
154. The difference, then, in both cases is not a difference
in its own self: either the universal, Force, is indifferent to the
division which is the law, or the differences, the parts, Df the
law are indifferent to one another. The Understanding, however, has the Notion of this implicz't differencejust because the law
is, on the one hand, the inner, implicit being, but is, at the same
time, inwardly differentiated. That this difference is thus an
innerdifferencefoUows from the fact that the law is a simple Force
or is the Notion of the difference, and is therefore a difference
belonging (0 the Notion. But this inner difference still falls, to
begin with, only within the Understanding, and is not yet
posited in the thing itself. !tis, therefore, only its ow~ necessity
that is asserted by the Understanding; the difference, then, is
posited by the Understanding in such a way that, at the same
time, it is expressly stated that the difference is not a difference
belonging to the thing itself. This necessity, which is merely verbal,
is thus a recital of the moments constituting the cycle of the
necessity, The moments are indeed distinguished, but) at the
sametime, their difference is expressly said to be nota difference
of the thing itself, and consequently is itself immediately cancelled again. This process is called 'explanation'. A law is enunciated; from this, its implicitly universal element or ground is
distinguished as Force; but it is said that this difference is no
difference, rather that the ground is constituted exactly the
same as the law. The single occurrence of lightning, e.g., is
apprehended as a universal, and this universal is enunciated
as the law of electricity; the 'explanation' then condenses the
law into Force as the essence of the law. This Force, then, is so
constituted that when it is expressed, opposite eJectricities appear,

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

95

which disappear again into one another; that is, Force is constituted exactly the same as law; there is said to be no difference
whatever between them. The differences are the }!>ure, universal
expression oflaw, and pure Force; but both have the same content, the same constitution. Thus the difference qua difference
of content, of the thing, is also again withdrawn.
155. In this tautological movement, the Understanding, as
we haveseen, sticks to the inert unity ofits object, and the movement falls only within the Understanding itself~ not within the
object. It is an explanation that not only explains nothing, but
is so plain that, while it pretends to say something different from
what has already been said, really says nothing at all but only
repeats the same thing. In the Thing itself this movement gives
rise to nothing new; it comes into consideration [only] as a
movement of the Understanding. In it, however, we detect the
very thing that was missing in the law, viz. the absolute flux
itself; for this movement, when we look at it more closely, is
directly the opposite of itself. Thatis to say, it posits a difference
which is not only nota difference for us, but one which the move~
ment itself cancels as a difference. This is the same flux which
presented itself as the play of Forces. This contained the distinction of soliciting and solicited Force, or Force expressing
itselfand Force repressed into itself; but these were distinctions
which in reality were no distinctions, and therefore were also
immediate! y cancelled again. What is presen t here is not merely
bare unity in which no difference would be posited, but rather a
movement in which a distinction is certainly made but, because it is
no distinction, is again cancelled. In the process, then, of explaining, the to and fro of change which before was outside of
the inner world and present only in the appearance, has penetrated into the supersel1sible world itself. Our consciousness,
however, has passed over from the inner heing as object to the
other side, into the Understanding, and it experiences change
there.
156. Thus this change is not yet a change of the thing" itself,
but rather presents itself as pure change by the very Hict that
the content of the moments of change remains the same. But.since
the Notion, qua Notion of the Understanding, is the same as the
inner being of things, this change becomes for the Understanding
the law of the inner world. The Understanding thus learns that

96

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

it is a law of appearance itself, that differences arise which are
no differences, or that what is selfsame repels itself from itself;
and similarly, that the differences are only such as are in reality
no differences and which cancel themselves; in other words,
what is not selfsame is self-at~ractive. And thus we have a second
law whose content is the opposite of what was previously called
law, viz. difference which remains constantly selfsame; for this
new law expresses rather that like becomes unlike and unlz"ke
becomes like. The Notion demands of the thoughtless thinker
that he bring both laws together and become aware of their
antithesis. The second is certainly also a law, an inner selfidentical being, but a selfsameness rather of the unlike, a permanence of impermanence. In the play of Forces this law
showed itself to be precisely this absolute transition and pure
change; the selfsame, viz, Force, splits into an antithesis which
at first appears to be an independent difference, but which in
fact proves to be none; for it is the selfsame which repels its elf from
itself, and therefore w hatis repelled is essentially self-attractive,
for itis the same; the difference created, since it is no difference,
therefore cancels itself again. Consequently, the difference
exhibits itself as difference of the thing itself or as abso} ute difference, and this difference of the thing is thus nothing else but
the selfsame that has repelled itself from itself, andthe·refore
merely posits an antithesis which is none.
157. Through this principle, the first supersensible worJd,
the tranquil kingdom of laws, the immediate copy of the per~
ceived world, is changed into its opposite. The law was, in
general, like its differences, that which remains selfsame; now,
however, it is posited that each of the two worlds is really the
opposi te of itself. The selfsame really repels i tselffrom itself, and
what is not selfsame really posits itselfas selfsame. In point of
fact, it is only when thus determined that the difference is inner
difference, or the difference in its own self, thelike being unlike
itself, and the unlike, like itself. This second supersensible world is
in this way the inverted world and, moreover, since one aspect
is already present in the first supersensible world, the inversion
of the first. With this, the inner world is completed as appearance. For the first supersensible world was only the immediate
raising of the perceived world into the universal element; it had
its necessary counterpart in this perceived world which stiH

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

97

retained for itself the principle of change and alteration. The first
kingdom of laws lacked that principle, but obtains it as an inverted world.
158. According, then, to the law of this inverted world, what
is like in the first world is unlike to itself, and what is unlike in
the first world is equally unlike to itself, or it becomes like itself.
Expressed in determinate moments, this means that what in
the law of the first world is sweet, in this inverted in-itself is
sour, what in the former is black is, in the other, white. What
in the law of the first is the north pole of the magnet is, in its
other, supersensible in-itself [viz. in the earth], the"south pole;
but what is there south pole is~ere north pole. Similarly, what
in the first law is the oxygen pole of electricity becomes in its
other, supersensible essence, hydrogen pole; and conversely,
what is there the hydrogen pole becomes here the oxygen pole.
In another sphere, revenge on an enemy is, according to the
immediate law, the supreme satisfaction of the injured individuality. This law, however, which bids me confront ,him as himself a person who does not treat me as such, and in fact bids
me destroy him as an individuality~this law is turned round by
the principle of the other world into its opposite: the reinstatementofmyselfas a person through the destruction of the ""lien
individuality is turned into self;,.destruction. If, now, this inversion, which finds expression in the punishment o( crime, is
m""de into a law, it, too, again is only the law ofone world which'
is confronted by an inverted supersensible world where what is
despised in the form·er is honoured, and what in the former is
honoured, meets with contempt. The punishment which under
the law ofthejirst world disgraces and destroys a man, is transformed in its inverted world into the pardon which preserves his
essential being and brings him to honour.
159. Looked at superficially, this inverted world is the opposite of the first in the sense that it has the latter outside of it
and repels that world from itself as an inverted actual world: that
the one is appearance, but the other the in-itself; that the one
is the world as it is for an other, whereas the other is the world
as it is for itself. So that to use the previous examples, what
tastes sweet is really, or inwardly in the thing, sour; or what is
north pole in the actual magnet in the world of appearance,
would be south pole in the inner or essential being; what presents

98

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

itself as oxygen pole in the phenomenon of electricity would
be hydrogen pole in unmanifested electricity. Or, an action
which in the world of appearance is a crime would, in the inner
world, he capable of being really good <a bad action may be
well-intentioned) ; punishment is punishment only in the world
of appearance; in itself, or in another world, it may be a benefit
for the criminal. But such antitheses of inner and outer, of
appearance and the supersensible, as of two different kinds of
actuality, we no longer find here. The repelled differences are
not shared afresh between two substances such as would support
them and lend them a separate subsistence: this would result
in the Understanding withdrawing from the inner world and
relapsing into its previous position. The one side, or substance,
would be the world of perception again in which one of the
two laws would be operative, and confronting it would be an
inner world,just such a sense-world as the first, but in the imagination; it c.ould not be exhibited as a sense~world, could not be
seen, heard, or tasted, and yet it would be thought of as such
a sense-wo:rld. But,in fact, ifthe one posited world is a perceived
world, anditsin-itse/f, as its inversion, iseq ually thought of as
sensuous, then sourness which would be the in-itself ofthe sweet
thing is actually a thing just as much as theJatter, viz. a sour
thing; black, which would be the in-itself of white, is an actual
black; the north pole which is the in--itself of the south pole is
the north pole actually present in the same magnet; the oxygen pole
which is the in-itself of the hydrogen pole is actually present in
the same voltaic pile. The actual crime} however, has its inversion
and its in-itself as possibility, in theinten#on as such) but not in
a good intention; for the truth ofintention is only the act itself.
But the crime, as regards its content, has its reflection-into-self,
or its inversion, in the actual punishment; this is the reconciliation of the law with the actuality opposed to it in the crime.
Finally, the actual punishment has its inverted actuality present
in it in such a way that the punishment is an actualization of
the law, whereby the activity exercised by the law as punishment sus.pends itselj,and, from being active, the law becomes
again quiescent and is vindicated, and the conflict of individ uality with it, and of it with individuality, is extinguished.
160. From theidea, then, of inversion, which constitutes the
essential n;;ture of one aspect of the supersensible world, we

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

99

must eliminate the sensuous idea of fixing the differences in a
different sustaining element; and this absolute Notion of the difference must be represented and understood purely as inner difference, a repulsion of the selfsame, as selfsame, from itself~ and
likeness of the unlike as unlike. We have to think pure change,
or think antithesis within the antithesis itself, or contradiction. For in
the difference which is an inner difference, the opposite is not
merely one of two-if it were, it would simply be, without being
an opposite-but it is the opposite of an opposite, or the other
is itselfimmediately present in it. Certainly, I put the 'opposite'
here, and the 'other' of which it is the opposite, there; the 'opposite', then, is on one side, is in and for itself without the '0 thee .
But just because I have the 'opposite' herein and for itself, it is the
opposite of itself, or. it has, in fact, the 'other' immediately
present ioit. Thus the supersensible world, which is.the inverted
world, has at the same 'time overarched the other world and
has it within it; it isfor itselfthe inverted world, i.e. the inversion
of itself; it is itself and its opposite in one unity. Only thus is
it difference as inner difference, or difference in its own self, or
difference as an infinity.
161. We see that through infinity, law completes itself into
an immanent necessity, and all the moments of [the world of]
appearanc~are taken up into the inner world. That the simple
character of law is infinity means, according to what we have
found, (a) thatlt is self-identical, but is also in itself diJIerent; or it
is the selfsame w hieh repels itself from itselfor sunders itself into
two. What was called s£mple Force duplicates itself and through
its infinity is law. (b) What is thus dirempted, which constitutes
the parts thought ofas in the law, exhibits itselfas a stable existence; and if the parts are. considered without the Notion of the
inner difference, then space and time, or distance and velocity,
which appear as moments of gravity, arejust as indifferent and
without a necessary relation to one another as to gravity itself,
or) as this simple gravity is indifferent to them, or, again, as
simple electricity is indifferent to positive and negative electricity. But (c) through the Notion of inner difference, these
unlike and indifferent moments, space and time, etc. are a difference which is no difference, or only a difference of what is selfsame, and its essence is unity. As positive and negative they
stimulate each other into activity, and their being is rather to

100

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

posit themselves as not-being and to suspend themselves in the
unity. The two distinguished moments both subsist; they are
implicit and are opposites in themselves, i.e. each is the opposite
of itself; each has its 'other' within it and they are only one
unity.
162. This simple infinity, or the absolute Notion, may be
called the simple essence of life, the soul of the world, the universal blood, whose omnipresence is neither disturbed nor inter..
rupted by any difference, but rather is itself every difference,
as also their supersession; it pulsates within itself but does not
move, inwardly vibrates, yet is at rest. It is self-identical, for the
differences are tautological; they are differences that are none.
This self-identical essence is therefore related only to itself; 'to
itself implies relationship to an 'other', and the reiation-tQ",selj
is rather a self-sundering; or, in other words, that very self-iden ticalness is an inner difference, These sundered moments are thus
in andJor themselves each an opposite-oj an other; thus in each
moment the 'other' is at the sa,me time expressed; or each is
not the opposite of an 'other' but only a pure opposite; and so
each is therefore in its own self the opp.osite of itself. In other
words; it is nolan opposite at all, but is purely for itself, a pure,
self-identica,lessence that has no difference in it. Accordingly,
wedonotneed to ask the question, still less tothink thatJretting
over such a question is philosophy, or even that it k a question
philosophy cannot answer, the question, viz. 'How, from this
pureessencc, how does difference or otherness issue jorth from
it?' Fox the division into two moments has already taken place,
difference isexcl uded from the self-iden tical and set apart from
it. What was supposed to berhe self-identical is thus already one
of these two moments instead of beip.g the absolute essence.
That the self"identical divides itself into two means, therefore,
just aswellthat it supersedes itsdfas already divided, supersedes
itselfas an otherness. The unity, of which it is usual to say that
difference cannot issue from it, is in fact itself one of the two
moments ;it is the abstraction ofthc.simplicity or unitary nature
over against the difference. But in saying that the unity is an
abstraction, that is, is only one of the opposed moments, it is
already implied that it is the dividing of itself; for if the unity
is a negative, is opposed to something, then it is eo ipso posited as
that which has an antithesis within it. The different moments

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

tor

of self-sundering and ofhecoming self-identical are therefore likewise
only this movement of self-supersession; for since the self-identical, which is supposed first to sunder itself or become its opposite, is an abstraction or is already itself a sundered moment, its
selfmsundering is therefore a supersession of what it is, and therefore the supersession of its dividedness. Its becoming self-identical
is equally a self-sundering; what becomes identical with itself
thereby opposes itself to its self-sundering; i.e. it thereby puts
itself on one side, or rather it becomes a sundered moment.
163. Infinity, or this absolute unrest of pure selfwmovement,
in which whatever is determined in one way or another, e.g.
as being, is rather the opposite of this determinateness, this no
doubt has been from the start the soul of all that has gone
before; but it is in the inner world that it has first freely and
dearly shown itself. Appearance, or the play of Forces, already
displays it, hut itisas 'explanation' that it first freely stands forth;
and in being finally an object for consciousness, as that which
it is, consciousness is thus self-consciousness. The Understanding's
'explanation'is primarily only the description ofwhatse1f;;.consciousness is. It supersedes the differences present in the law,
differences which ha ve alreadybecome pure differences hut are
still indifferent, and posits them in a single unity, in Force. But
this unifying ofthern is equally and immediately a sundering,
for it supersedes the differences and posits the oneness of Force
only by creating a new difference, that of Law and Force,
which, however, at the same time is no difference; and, moreover, from the fact that this difference is no difference, it goes
on to supersede this difference again, since it lets Force be similady constituted to Law. But this movement, or necessity, is
thus still a necessity and a movement of the Understanding,
Of, the movement as such is not the Understanding's object; on
the contrary, in this movement the Understanding has as
objects positive and negative electricity, distance, force of
attraction, and a thousand other things which constitute the
content of the moments of the movement. The reasOn why
'explaining' affords so much self-satisfaction is just because in
it consciousness is, so to speak, communing directly with itself,
enjoying only itself; although it seems to be busy with some·
thing else, it is in fact occupied only with itself.
164- In the contrary law, as the inversion of the first law,

102

A. CONSCIOUSNESS

or in the inner difference, it is true that infinity itself becomes
the object of the Understanding; but once again the Understanding falls short of infinity as such, since it again apportions
to two worlds, or to two substantial elements, that which is a
difference in itself-the self-repulsion of the selfsame and the
self-attraction of the unlike. To the Understanding, the movement, as it is found in experience, is here a [mere] happening,
and the selfsame and the unlike are predicates, whose essence is
an inert sub&trate. What is, for the Understanding, an object
in a sensuous covering, is for us in its essential form as a pure
Notion. This apprehension of the difference as it is in truth, or
the apprehension of infinity as such, is for us, or in itself [i.e. is
merely implicit]. The exposition of its Notion belongs to
Science; but consciousness, in the way that it immediately has
thi!) Notion, again comes on the scene as a form belonging to
consciousness itself, or as a new shape of consciousness, which
does not recognize in what has gone before its own essence, but
looks on it as something quite different. Since this Notion of
infinity is an object for consciousness, thelatter is consciousness
of a differen ce tha t is noless immediately cancelled; consciousness
is for its own self, it is a distinguishing of that which contains
difference, or sel:hconsciousness. I distinguish myself from
myself,andin doing so I am directly aware that what is distinguished frommyselfis not different [from me]. 1, the selfsame
being, rep.el myselffrom myself; but what is posited as distinct
from me, or as unlike me, is immediately, in being so distinguished, not a distinction for me. It is true that consciousness
of an 'other', of an object in general, is itself necessarily selfconsciousness, a reflectedness-into-self, consciousness of itself in
its otherness. The necessary advance from the previous shapes of
consciousness for which their truth was a Thing, an 'other' than
themselves, expresses just this, that not only is consciousness of
a thing possible only for a self-consciousness, but that self-consciousness alone is the truth of those shapes. But it is only for
us that this truth exists, not yet for consciousness. But self-consciousness has at first become [simply] for itself, not yet as a unity
with consciousness in general.
165- We see thatin the inner world ofappearance, the Understanding in truth comes to know nothing else but appearance,
but not in the shape of a play of Forces, but rather that play

np

FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING

103

of Forces in its absolutely universal moments and in their movement; in fact, the Understanding experiences only itself. Raised
above perception, consciousness exhibits itself closed in a unity
with the supersensible world through the mediating term of
appearance, through which it gazes into this background [lying
behind appearance]. The two extremes [of this syllogism], the
one, of the pure inner world, the other, that of the inner being
gazing into tpis pure inner world, have now coincided, andjust
as they, qua extremes, have vanished, so too the middle term,
as something other than these extremes, has also vanished. This
curtain [of appearance] hanging before the inner world is therefore drawn away, and we have the inner being [the '1'] gazing
into the inner world-the vision of the undifferentiated selfsame
being, which repels itself from itself, posits itself as an inner
being containing different moments, but for which equally
these moments are immediately not different-self.,consciousness.
It is manifest that behind the so-called curtain which is supposed to conceal the inner world, there is nothing to be seen
unless we go behind it ourselves, as much in order that we may
see, as that there may besomething behind there which can be
seen. Butat the same time it is evidentthat we cannot without
more ado go straightway behind appearance. For this knowledge ofwhat is the>truth ofappearance as ordinarily conceived,
and ofits.inner being, is itself only a result ofa complex movement whereby the 'modes of consciousness 'meaning', perceiving, and the Understanding, vanish; and it will be equally evident that the cognition of what consciousness knows in knowing itself,
requires a still more complex movement, the exposition of
which is contained in what follows.

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
IV. THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY
166. In the previous modes of certain ty what is true for consciousness is something other than itself. But the Notion of this
truth vanishes in the experience of it. What the object immedia tely was in itself-mere being in sense-certain ty, the concrete
thing of perception, and for the Understanding, a Forceproves to be in truth, not this at all; instead, this in-itself turns
out to be a mode in which the object is only for an other. The
Notion of the object is superseded in the actual object, or the
first, immediate presentation of the object is superseded in experience: certainty gives·place to truth. But now there has
arisen what did not emerge in these previous relationships, viz.
a certainty which is iqcn tical with its truth; for the certainty
is to itselfits own object, anrlconsciousness is to itself the truth.
In this there is indeedanotherness; thatis tosay, consciousness
makes a distinction; butane which atthesarne time is for consciousness nota distinction. Ifwe give the name of Notion to the
movement of knowing, and the name of object to knowing as
a passive unity, or as the '1', then we see that not only for us,
but for knowing itself, the objectcorrespoQrls to the Notion-,
Or alternatively, if we call Notion what the object is in itself,
but call the object what z't is qua object or for an other, then it
is clear that being-in-itselfand being:for-an-otker are one and the
same. For the in-itselfis consciousness; but eq ually it is thatfor
which an other (the in-itself) is; and it is for consciousness that
the in-itself of the object, and the being of the object for an
other, are one and the same; the 'I' is the content of the connection and the connecting itself. Opposed to an other, the '1'
is its own self, and at the same time it overarches this other
which~ for the 'I', is equally only the 'I' itself.
167. With self-consciousness, then, we have therefore
entered the native realm of truth. We have now to see how the
shape of self-cons do us ness first makes its appearance. Ifwe consider this new shape of knowing, the knowing of itself, in rela-

THE TR UTH OF SELF-eER TAINTY

5

10

tion to that which preceded, viz. the knowing of an other, then
we see that though this other has indeed vanished, its moments
have at the same time no less been preserved, and the loss consists in this, that here they are present as they are in themselves.
The rmere] being of what is merely 'meant', the singleness and
the universality opposed to it of perception, as also the empty inner
being of the Understanding, these are no longer essences, but
are moments of self-consciousness, i.e. abstractions or dis"tinctions which at the same time have no reality fo.r consciousness itself, and are purely vanishing essences. Thus it seems that
only the principal moment itself has been lost, viz. the simple
self-subsistent existence for consciousness. But in point of fact selfconsciousness is the reflection out of the being of the world of
sense and perception, and is essentially the return from otherness.
As self-consciousness, it is movement; but since what it distinguishes from itselfis only #seljasitseJf, the difference, as an otherness, is immediately su:perseded for it; the difference is not, and it
[self-consciousness] is only the motionless tautology of: 'I am
r; blH since for it the difference does not have the form of being,
it is not self-consciousness. Hence otherness is for it in the form
of a being, or a,s a distinct moment; but there is also forconsdousness the unity of itself with this difference as a seconddZ'stinct
moml}nt. With that firstmoment, self."consciousness is in the form
of consciousness, and the whole expanse of the sensuous world
is pr~served for it, but at the same time only as connected with
the second moment, the unity of self-consciousness with itself;
and hence the senSUOllS world is for it an enduring existence
Which, however, is only (lppearance, or a difference which, in
itself, is no difference. This :antithesis of its appearance and its
tnl~b ht:l,s, however, for its essence only the truth, viz. the unity
ofself-cousciousness with itself; this unity must become essential
to self-consciousness; i.e. self-consciousness is Des'ire in general.
Consciousness, as self-consciousness, henceforth has a double
object: one is the immediate object, that of sense-certainty and
perception, which howeverfor setfconsciousness has the character
ofa negative; and the second, viz. itself, which is the true essence,
and is present in the first instance only as opposed to the first
object. In this sphere, seIf.. consciousness exhibits itself as the
movement in which this antithesis is removed, and the identity
of itself with hself becomes explicit for it.

106

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

168. Butforus, orin itseif"the object which for self-consciousness is the negative element has, on its side, returned into itself,
just as on the other side consciousness has done. Through this
reflection into itself the object has become Life. What self-consciousness distinguishes from itself as having being, also has in
it, in so far as it is posited as being, not merely the character
of sense-certainty and perception, but it is being that is reflected
into itself, and the object of immediate desire is a living thing.
For the in-itself, or the universal result of the relation of the
Understanding to the inwardness of things, is the distinguishing
of what is not to be distinguished, or the unity of what is distinguished. But this unity is, as we have seen,just as much its repulsion from itself; and this Notion sunders itself into the antithesis
of self-consciousness and life: the former is the unity for which
the infinite unity of the differences is; the latter, however, is
only this unity itself, so that it is not at the same timefor itself.
To the extent, then, that consciousness is independent, so too is
its object, hut only implicitly. Self-consciousness which is simply
for itself and directly characterizes its object as a negative element,or is primarily desire, will therefore, on the contrary, learn
through experience that the object is independent.
169. The determination of Life as it has issued from the
Notion, or the general result with which we enter this sphere,
issuflicient to characterize it without having further to develop
its nature. Its sphere is completely determined in the following
moments. Essence is infinity as the supersession of all distinctions,
the pure movement of axial rotation, its self-repose being an
absolutely restless infinity; independence itself, in which the differences of the movement are resolved, the simple essence of
Time which, in this eq uality with itself, has the stable shape
of Space. The differences, however, are just as much present
as differences in this simple universal medium; for this universal
flux has its negative nature on]y in being the supersession of
them; but it cannot supersede the different moments if they
do not have an enduring existence [Bestehen). Itis this very flux,
as a self~identical independence which is itself an enduring existence, in which, therefore, they are present as distinct members
and parts existing on their own account. Being no longer has
the significance of abstract being, nor has their pure essentiality
the significance of abstract universality; on the contrary, their

THE TRUTH OF SELF-CER TAINTY

107

being is precisely that simple fluid substance of pure movement
within itself. The difference, however, qua "difference, of these
members with respect to one another consists ir,t general in no
other determinateness than that of the moments of infinity or of
the pure movement itself.
170. The independent members are jor themselves; but this
being-jor-se{f is really no less immediately their reflection into
the unity than this unity is the splitting-up into independent
shapes. The unity is divided within itself because it is an absolutely negative or infinite unity; and because it is what subsists,
the difference, too, has independence only in it. This independence of the shape appears as something determinate,jor an other,
for the shape is divided within its'elf; and the supersession of
this dividedness accordingly takes place through an other. But
this supersession is just as much within the shape itself, for it
isjust that flux that is the substance of the independent shapes.
This substance, however, is infinite, and hence the shape in its
very subsistence is adividedness within itself, or the supersession
of its being-for-self.
171. If we di~tiqguish more exactly the moments contained
here, we see that we have, as the first moment, the subsistence
of the independent shapes, or the suppression of what diremption is in itself, viz. that the shapes have no being in themselves,
no enduring existence. Thesecond moment, however is the subjection of that exis tence to the infinity of the difference. In the
first moment there ,is the existent shape; as beingjor itself, or
being in its determinateness infinite substance, it comes forward
in antithesis to the universal substance, disowns this fluent continuity with it and asserts that it is not dissolved in this universal
element, but on the contrary preserves itself by separating itself
from this its inorganic nature, and by consuming it. Life in the
universal fluid medium, a passive separating-out of the shapes
becomes, just by so doing, a movement of those shapes or
becomes Life as a process. The simple universal fluid medium
is the in-itself, and the difference of the shapes is the other. But
this fluid medium itself becomes the other through this difference; for now it isfor the difference which exists in and for itself,
and consequently is the ceaseless movement by which this pass ..
ive medium is consumed: Life as a hving thing.
This inversion, however, is for that reason again an inverted-

108

B.

SELF~CONSOIOUSNESS

ness in its own self. What is'consumed is the essence: the individua
ality which maintains itself at the expense of the universal, and
which gives itself the feeling of its unity with itself, just by so
doing supersedes its antithesis to the other by means of which
it exists for itself. Its self-given unity with itselfisjust thatfluidity
of the differences or their general dissolution. But, conversely, the
supersession of individual existence is equally the production
of it. For since the essence of the individual shape-universal
Life-and what exists for itselfis in itselfsimple substance, when
this substance places the other within itself it supersedes this its
simplicity or its essence, i.e. it divides it, and this dividedness
of the differenceless fluid medium isjust what establishes indivia
duality. Thus the simple substance of Life is the splitting-up
ofitselfinto shapes and at the same time the dissolution of these
existent differences; and the dissolution of the splitting-up is
just as much a splitting-up and a forming of members. With
this, the two sides of the whole movement which before were
distinguished j viz. the passive separatednessofthe shapes in the
general medium of independence, and the process of Life, collapse into one another. The latter is just as much an imparting
of shape asa supersession of it; and the other, the imparting
ofshape , isjustas much asupersessionas an articulation ofshape.
The fluid element is itself only the abstraction of essence, or it is
actualonly as shape; and its articulation of itself is again a split
ting .. up of what is articulated into form or a dissolution of it.
It is the whole round of this activity th'atconstitutes Life: not
what was expressed at the outset, the immediate continuity and
compactness of i ts essence, nor the enduring form, the discrete
moment existing for itself; nor the pure process of these; nor
yet the simple taking-together of these moments. Life consists
rather in being the self.. developing whole which dissolves its development and in this movement simply preserves itself.
172. Since we started from the first immediate unity and
returned through the moments of formation and of process to
the unity of both these moments, and thus hack again to the
original simple substance) this reflected unity is different from
the first. Contrasted with that immediate unity, or that unity
expressed as a [mere] being, this second is the universal unity
which contains all these moments as superseded within itself.
It is the simple genus which, in the movement of Life itself,
a

THE TRUTH OF SELF.CERTAINTY

does not existfor itself qua this simple determination; on the con
trary, in this result, Life points' to something other than itself,
viz. to consciousness, for which Life exists as this unity, or as
genus.
173. This other Life, however, for which the genus as such
exists, and which is genus on its own account, viz. self~conscious~
ness, exists in the first instance for self-consciousness only as this
simple essence, and has itself as pure 'I' for object. In the course
of its experience which we are now to consider, this abstract
object will enrich itself for the 'I' and undergo the unfolding
which we have seen in the sphere of Life.
174. The simple 'I' is this genus or the simple universal, for
which the differences are not differences only by its being the
negative essence of the shaped independent moments; and self..
consciousness is thus certain of itself only by superseding this
other that presents itself to selfmconsciousness as an independent
life; self-consciousness is Desire. Certain of the nothingness ,of
this.other, it explicitly affirms thatthis nothingness isjor it the
truth of the other; it destroys the independent object and
thereby gives itself the certainty of itself as a true certainty, a
certainty which has become explicit for self-consciousness itself
a

in an objective manner,
175. Inthissatisfaction, however, exp,erience makes it aware
that the object has its own independence. Desi,reand the SeIfR
certainty obtained in its gratification, are conditioned by the
object, for se1f certainty comes from superseding this other : in
order that tbis supersession can take place, ~here must be this
other. Thus self-consciousness, by its negative relation to the
a bj eet, is unable to su persedei t; i tis really because oftha t relation that it produces the object again, and the desire as well.
I t is in fact something other than self-consciousness that is the
essence of Desire; and through this experience self-conscious~
ness has itself realized th.is truth. But at the same time it is no
less absolutely for itself, and it is so only by superseding the
object; and it must experience its sa tis fac tiOD , foritis the truth.
On account of the independence ofthe object, therefore, it can
achieve satisfaction only when the object itself effects the negation within itself; and it must carry out this negation of itself
in itself, for itis in it$elfthe negative, and must bejor the other
what it is. Since the object is in its own self negation, and in
a

110

B.

SELF~CONSCIOUSNESS

being so is at the same time independent, it is consciousness.
In the sphere of Life, which is the object of Desire, negation is
present either in an other, viz in Desire, or as a determinateness
opposed to another indifferent form, or as the inorganic universal nature of Life. But this universal independent nature in
which negation is present as absolute negation, is the genus as
such, or the genus as self-consciousness. Self-consciousness achieves
its satisfaction only in another self-consciousness.
176. The notion of self-consciousness is only completed in
these three moments: (a) the pure undifferentiated'!' is its first
immediate object. (b) But this immediacy is itself an absolute
mediation, it is only as a supersession of the independent object,
in other words, it is Desire. The satisfaction of Desire is, it is
true, the reflection of self-consciousness into itself, Qr the certainty that has become truth. (c) But the truth of this certainty
is really a double reflection, the duplication of self-consciousness. Consciousness has for its object one which, of its own self,
posits its otherness or difference as a nothingness, and in so
doing is independent. The differentiated, merely living, shape
does indeed also supersede its independence in the process of
Life, but it ceases with its distinctive difference to be what it
is. The object ofself-consciousness, however, is equaUyindependent in this negativity of itself; and thus it isfor itself a genus,
a universal fl uid elemen t in the peculiarity of its own separate
being; it is a living self-consciousness.
177. A self-consciousness exists for a self-consciousness. Only so
is it in fact self-coJ:!sciousness ; for only in this wa ydoes the unity
of itself in its otherness become explicit for it. The 'I' which)·
is the object of its Notion is in fact not 'object'; the object of
Desire, however, is only independent, for it is the universal in~
destructible substance, the fluid self.identical essence. A selfconsciousness, in being an object, isjust as much 'T' as 'object'.
With this, we already have before us the Notion of Spirit. What
still lies ahead for consciousness is the experience of what Spirit
is-this absolute substance which is the unity of the different
independent self-consciousnesses which} in their opposition,
enjoy perfect freedom and independence: 'r that is 'We' and
'We' that is 'I'. It is in self-consciousness, in the Notion of Spirit,
that consciousness first finds its turning-point, where it leaves
behind it the colourful show of the sensuous here-and-now and

LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE

111

the nightlike void of the supersensible beyond, and steps out
into the spiritual daylight of the present.
A, INDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE OF SELFCONSCIOUSNESS: LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE

178. Self-consciousness exists in and for itself when, and by
the fact that, it so exists for another; that is, it exists only in
being acknow ledged. The Notion of this its Jni ty in its d uplication embraces many and varied meanings. Its moments, then,
must on the one hand be held strictly apart, and on the other
hand must in this differentiation at the same time also be taken
and known as not distinct, or in their opposite significance. The
twofold significance of the distinct moments has in the nature
of self-consciousness to be infinite, or directly the opposite of
the determinateness in which it is posited. The detailed exposition of the Notion of this spiritual unity in its duplication will
present us with the process of Recognition.
179. Self.,.consciousness is faced by another self-consciousness; it has come out of itself. This has a twofold significance:
first, it has lost itself~ for it finds itself as an other being; secondly,
in doing so it has superseded the other, for it does not see
the other as an essential being, but in the other sees its own
self.
IBo. It must supersede this otherness of itself. This is the
supersession of the first ambiguity, and is therefore itself a
second ambiguity. First, it must proceed to supersede the other
independent being in order thereby to become certain of itself
as the essentiaJ being; secondly, in so doing it proceeds to supersede its own self, for this other is itself.
181. This ambiguous supersession of i ts ambiguous otherness
is eq ually an ambiguous return int(J itself. For first,through the
supersession, it receives back its ownself, because, by superseding its otherness, it again becomes equal to itself; hut secondly,
the other self-consciousne8s equally gives it back again to itself,
for it saw itself in the other, but supersedes this being of itself
in the other and thus lets the other again go free.
182. Now~ this movement of self-consciousness in relation to
another self-consciousness has in this way been represented as
the action of one self-consciousness, but this action of the one

112

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

has itself the double significance of being both its own action
and the action of the other as well. For the other is equally inde
pendent and self-contained, and there is nothing in it of which
it is not itself the origin. The first does not have the object before
it merely as it ex:ists primarily for desire, but as something that
has an independent existence of its own, which, therefore, it
cannot utilize for its own purposes, if that object does not of
its own accord do what the first does to it. Thus the movement
is simply the double movement of the two self-consciousnesses.
Each sees the other do the same as it does; each does itself what
it derrlands of the other, and therefore also does what it does
only in so far a.s the other does the same. Action by one-side
only would be useless because what is to happen can only be
brought about by both.
18g. Thus the action has a double significance not only
because it is directed against itself as well as against the other,
but also because it is indivisibly the action of one as well as
of the other.
1,84. In this movement we see repeated the process which
presented,itse1fas the play of Forces, but repeated now in conscl.ousness, What in that process was for us,is true here of the
extremes themselves. The middle term is self-consciousness
which splits into the extremes ; and each extreme is this
exchanging of its own determinateness and an absolute transi~
rinn into the opposite. Although, as consciousness, it does indeed come QutQ[itself, yet, though out of itself, it is at the same
, time kept back within itself, isfor itself, and the self outside it,
is for it. It is aware that -it at once is, and is not, another consciousness, and equally that this other is]or itself only when it
supersedes itself as being for itself, and is for itself only in the
being-for..selfQfthe other. Each isfqr the other the middle term,
through whieheach mediates itself with itself and unites with
itself; and each is for itself, and for the other, an immediate
being on its own account, which at the same time is such only
through this mediation. They recognize themselves as mutually
ret'Ognizing one another.
J 85. We have now to see how the process of this pure Notion
ofrecognition, of the duplicating ofself~consciousness in its oneness, appear$ to self~consciousness. At first, it will exhibit
the side of the inequality of the two, or the splitting-up of the
M

LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE

113

middle term into the extremes which, as extremes, are opposed
to on~. -another, one being oply recognized, the other only
recogmzzng.
186. Self-consciousness is, to begin with, simple being-forself, self-equal through the exclusion from itself of everything
else. For it, its essence and absolute object is'!'; and in this
immediacy, or in this [mere] heing, of its being-for-self, it is
an individual. What is 'other' for it is an unessential, negatively
characterized object. But the 'other' is also a self-consciousness;
one individual is confronted by another individual. Appearing
thus immediately on the scene, they are for one another like
ordinary objects, independent shapes, individuals submerged in
the being [or immediacy] of Life-for the object in its immediacy is here determined as Life. They are,jor each other, shapes
of consciousness which have not yet accomplished the move",
ment of absolute abstraction, of rooting-out all immediate
being, and of being merely the purely negative being of selfidentical consciousness; in other words, they have not as yet
exposed themselves to each other in the form of pure beingfor-self, or as sdf-consciousnesses. Each is indeed certain of its
own self, but not of the other, and therefore its own self-cera
taintystill has no truth. For it would have truth only if its own
being-for""self had confronted it as an independent object, or,
what is the same thing, if the object had presented itself as this
pure self-certainty. But according to the Notion of recogpition
this is possible on]y when each is for the other what the other
is for it, on,ly when each in its own self through its own action,
and again through the action of the other, achieves this pure
abstraction of being-for-self.
187. The presentation of itself, however, as the pure abstraction of self-consciousness consists in showing itself as the pure
negation of its objective mode, or in showing that it is not
attached to any specific existenc.e, not to the individuality common to existence as such, that it is not attached to life. This
presentation is ,a twofold action; action on the part of the other,
and action on its own part. In so far as itls the action of the
other, each seeks the death of the other. But in doing so, the
second kind of action, action on its own part; is also involved;
for the former involves the staking of its own life. Thus the relation of the two self-conscious individuals is such that they prove

B.

SELF~CONSCIOUSNESS

themselves and each other through a life-and-death struggle.
They must engage in this struggle, for they must raise their certainty of being for themselves to truth, both in the case of the
other and in their own case. And it is only through staking one's
life that freedom is won; only thus is it proved that for selfconsciousness, its essential being is not [just] being, not the immediate form in which it appears, not its submergence ill the
expanse of life, but rather that there is nothing present in it
which could not be regarded as a vanishing ,moment, that it
is only pure being-jor-self. The individual who has not risked
his life may well be recognized as a person, but he has not
attained to the truth of this recognition as an independent selfconsciousness. Similarly,just as each stakes his own life, so each
mustseek the other's death, for it values the other no rpore than
itself; its essential being is present to it in the form of an 'other',
it is outside of itself and must rid itself of its self-externality.
The other is an immediate consciousness entangled in a variety
of relations hips, and it must regard its otherness as a pure beingfor",self or as an absolute negation.
188. This trial by death, however, does away with the truth
which was supposed to issue from it, and so, too, with the ~er­
tainty of self generally. For just as life is the natural setting of
consciousness, independence without absolute negativity, so
death is the natural negation ofconsciousness, negation without
independence, which thus remains without the required significance of recognition. Death certainly shows that each staked
his life and held it of no account, both in himself and in the
other; but that isnnt for those who survived this struggle. They
put an end to their consciousness in its alien setting of natural
existence, that is to say, they put an end to themse1ves, and
are done away with as extremes wanting to be for themselves, or
to have an existence of their own. But with this there vanishes
from their interplay the essential moment of splitting into
extremes with opposite characteristics; and the middle term
collapses into a lifeless unity which is split into -lifeless, merely
immediate, unopposed extremes; and the two do not reciprocally give and receive one another back from each other consciously, but leave each otherfree only indifferently, like things.
Their act is an abstract negation, not the negation coming from
consciousness, which supersedes in such a way as to preserve

LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE

"5

and maintain what is superseded, and consequently survives
its own supersession.
18g. In this experience, self-consciousness learns that life is
as"essential to it as pure self-consciousness. In immediate selfconsciousness the simple ~I' is absolute mediation, and has as
its essential moment lasting independence. The dissolution of
that simple unity is the result of the first experience; through
this there is posited a pure self-consciousness, and a consciousness which is not purely for itselfbut for another, i.e. is a merely
immediate consciousness, or consciousness in the form of
thinghood. Both moments are essential. Since to begin with they
are unequal and opposed, and their reflection into a unity has
not yet been achieved, they exist as two opposed shapes of consciousness; one is the independent consciousness whose essential
nature is to be for itself, the other is the dependent consciousness
whose essential nature is simply to live or to be for another.
The former is lord, the other is bondsman.
I go. The lord is the consciousness that exists for itself, but
no longer merely the Notion of such a consciousness. Rather,
it is a consciousness existing for itself which is mediated with
itself through another consciousness, i.e. through a consciousness whose nature it is to be bound up with an existence that
is independent, or thinghood in general. The lor~ puts himself
into relation with both of these moments, to a thing as such,
the object of desire, and to the consciousness for which
thinghood is the essential characteristic. And"since he is (a) qua
the Notion of self-consciousness an immediate relation of beingfor-self, put (b) is now at the same time mediation, or a beingfor-self which is for itself only through another, he is related
(a) immediately to both, and (b) mediately to each through
the other. The lord relates himself mediately to the bondsman
through a being [a thing] that is independent, for it is just this
which holds the bondsman in bondage; it is his chain from
which he could not break free in the struggle, thus proving himself to be dependent, to possess his independence in thinghood.
But the lord is the power over this thing, for he proved in the
struggle that it is something merely negative; since he is the
power over this thing and this again is the power over the other
[the bondsman], it follows that he holds the other in subjection.
Eq ually, the lord relates himself mediately to the thing through

116

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

the bondsman; the bondsman, qua self-consciousness in general,
also relates himself negatively to the thing, and takes away its
independence; but at the same time the thing is independent
visma-vis the bondsman, whose negating of it, therefore, cannot
go the length of being altogether done with it to the point of
annihilation; in other words, he only works on it. For the lord,
on the other hand, the immediate relation becomes through this
mediation the sheer negation of the thing, or the enjoyment
of it. What desire failed to achieve, he succeeds in doing, viz.
to have done with the thing altogether, and to achieve satisfac·'
tion in the enjoyment of it. Desire failed to do this because of
the thing's independence; but the lord, who has interposed the
bondsman between it and nimself, takes to himself only the dependent aspect of the thing and has the pure enjoyment of it.
The aspect of its independence he leaves to the bondsman, who
works on it.
191. In both of these moments the lord achieves his recognition through anotherconsciousness; for in them, that other consciousnessis expressly something unessential, both by its work..
lngon the thing, and by its dependence on a specific existence.
In neither case can it be lord over the being of the thing .and
achieve absolute negation of it. Here, therefore, is present this
moment of recognition, viz. that the other consciousness sets
aside its own being-for-self, and in so doing itself does what the
first does to it. Similarly, the other momenttoo is present, that
this action of the second is the first's own action; for what the
bondsman does is reallythe action ofthe lord. Thejatter's essential nature is to exist only for himself; he is the sheer negative
power for whom the thing is nothing. Thus he is the pure, essential action in this relationship, while the action of the bondsman
is impure and unessential. But for recognition proper the
moment is lacking, that what thelord does to the other he also
does to himself, and what the bondsman does to himself he
should also do to the other. The outcome is a recognition that
is one ..sided and unequal.
192. In this recognition the unessential consciousness is for
the lord the object, which constitutes the truth of his certainty
of himself. But it is clear that this object does not correspond
to its Notion, but rather that the object in which the lord has
achieved his lordship has in reality turned out to be something

LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE

"7

quite different from an independent consciousness. What now
really confronts him is not an independent consciousness, but
a dependeot one. He is, therefore, not certain of being-for.. self
as the truth of himself. On the contrary, his truth is in reality
the unessential consciousness and its unessential action.
193. The truth of the independent consciousness is accordingly the servile consciousness of the bondsman. This, it is true,
appears at first outside of itself and not as the truth of self-consciousness. But just as lordship showed that its essential nature
is the reverse of what it wants to be, so too servitude in its coosummation will really turn into the opposite of what it immediately is; as a consciousness forced back into itself, it will withdraw into itself and be transformed into a truly independent
consciousness.
194. We have seen what servitude is only in relation to lord ..
ship. But it is a self-consciousness, and we have now to consider
what as such it is in and for itself. To begin with, servitude has
the lord for its essential reality; hence the truth for it is the inde ..
pendent consciousness that is for itself. However, servitude is
not yet aware that this truth is implicit in it. But it does in fact
contain within itself this truth of pure negativity and beingfor-self, for it has experienced this its own essential nature. For
this consciousness has been fearful, not ofthis or that particular
thing or just at odd moments, but its whole being has been
'seized with dread; for it has experienced the fear of death, the
absolute Lord. In that experience it has been quite unmanned, has trembled in every fibre ofitsbeing, and everything
solid and stable has been shaken to its foundations. But this pure
universal movement, the absolute melting-away of everything
stable, is the simple, essential nature ofself-consciousness, absolute negativity, pure being-for-selj, which consequently is implicit
in this consciousness. This moment of pure being-for-self is also
explicit for the bondsman, for in the lord it exists for him as his
object. Furthermore, his consciousness is not this dissolution of
everything stable merely in principle; in his service he actually
brings this about. Through his service he rids himself of his
attachment to naturaJ existence in every single detail; and gets
rid of it by working on it.
195. However, the feeling of absolute power both in general,
and in the particular form of service, is only implicitly this dissolution, and although the fear of the lord is indeed the begin-

[18

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

ning of wisdom, consciousness is not therein aware that it is a
being~for.self. Through work, however, the bondsman becomes
conscious of what he truly is. In the moment which corresponds
to desire in the lord's consciousness, it did seem that the aspect
of unessential relation to the thing fell to the Jot of the bondsman, since in that relation the thing retained its independence.
Desire has reserved to itself the pure negating of the object and
thereby its unalloyed feeling of self. But that is the reason why
this satisfaction is itself only a fleeting one, for it lacks the side
of objectivity and permanence. Work, on the other hand, is
desire held in check, fleetingness staved off; in other words,
work forms and shapes the thing. The negative relation to the
object becomes its form and something permanent, because it is
precisely for the worker that the object has independence. This
negative middle term or the formative activity is at the same time
the individuality or pure being-for-self of consciousness which
now, in the work outside of it, acquires an element of permanence. It is in this way, therefore, that consciousness, qua
worker, comes to see in the independent being [of the object]
its own independence.
19B. But the formative activity has not only this positive significance that in it the pure being-for. .self of the servile COn·
sdousness acquires an existence; it also has, in contrast with
its first moment, the negative significance offear. For, in fashioning the thing, the bondsman's own negativity, his beingfor·self, becomes an object for him only through his setting at
nought the existing shape confronting him. But this objective
negative moment is none other than the alien being before which
it has trembled. Now, however, he destroys this alien negative
moment, posits himself as a negative in the permanent order
of things, and thereby hecomesfor himself, someone existing on
his own account. In the lord, the being-for-self is an 'other' for
the bondsman, or is only for him [Le. is not his own]; in fear,
the being-for-selfis present in the bondsman himself; infashion
iog the thing, he becomes aware that being-for·self helongs to
him, that he himself exists essentially and actually in his own
right. The shape does not become something other than himself
through being made external to him; forit is precisely this shape
that is his pure being-for-self, which in this externality is seen
by him to be the truth. Through this rediscovery of himself by
M

FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

"9

himself, the bondsman realizes that it is precisely in his work
wherein he seemed to have only an alienated existence that he
acquires a mind of his own. For this reflection, the two moments
of fear and service as such, as also that of formative activity,
are necessary, both being at the same time in a universal mode.
Without the discipline of service and obedience, fear remains
at the formal stage, and does not extend to the known real world
of existence. Without the formative activity, fear remains inward and mute, and consciousness does not become explicitly
for itself If consciousness fashions the thing without that initial
absolute fear, it is only an empty self-centred attitude; for its
form or negativity is not negativity per sc, and therefore its
formative activity cannot give it a consciousness of itself as
essential being. Ifit has not exper~enced absolute fear but only
some lesser dread, the negative being has remained for it something external, its substance has not been infected by it through
and through. Since the entire contents of its natural consciousness have not been jeopardized, determinate being still in principle attaches to it; having a 'mipd of one's own' is self-win, a
freedom which is still enmeshed in servitude. Just as little as
the pure form can hecome essential being for it, just as little
is that form, regarded as extended to the particular, a universal
formative activity, an absoluteN'otion; rather itis a skill which
is master over some things, but not over the universal power
and the whole of objective being.

FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS:
B. ST01CISM, SCEPTICISM, AND THE UNHAPPY
CON SCI 0 USN E SS

197. For the independent self-consciousness, it is only the
pure abstraction of the '1' that is its essential nature, and, when
it does develop its own differences, this differentiation does not
become a nature that is objective and intrinsic to it. Thus this
self-consciousness does not become an 'I' that in its simplicity
is genuinely self-differentiating, or that in this absolute differentiation remains identical with itself. On the other hand,
the consciousness that is forced back into itself becomes, in its

120

B. SELF·CONSCIOUSNESS

formative activity, its own object in the form of the thing it has
fashioned, and at the same time sees in the lord a consciousness
that exists as a being-for-self But for the subservient consciousness as such, these two moments-itself as an independent
object, and this object as a mode of consciousness, and hence
its own essential nature-fall apart. Since, however, the form
and the heing-for-self are for us, or in themselves, the same, and
since in the Notion of independent consciousness the intrinsic
being is consciousness, the moment of intrinsic being or
thinghood which received its form in being fashioned is no other
substance than consciousness. We are in the presence of selfconsciousness in a new shape, a consciousness which, as the infinitude of consciousness or as its own pure movement, is aware
of itself as essential being, a being which thinks or is a free selfconsciousness. For tf) think does not mean to be an abstract 'I',
bu tan' I' which has at the same time the significance of intrinsic
being, of having itselffor object, or ofrelating itself to objective
being in such a way that its significance is the being-for-self of
the consciousness for which it is [an object]. For in thinking, the
object does not present itse1fin picture-thoughts but in Notions,
i.e. in a distinct being-in..,itselfor intrinsic being, consciousness
being immediately aware that this is not anything distinct from
itself What is pictured or figuratively conceived, what immediately is, has, as such, the form ofbeing something other than
consciousness; but a Notion is also something that immediately
is, and this distinction, in so far as it is present in consciousness
itself, is its determinate content; but since this content is at the
same time a content grasped in thought, consciousness remains
immediately aware of its unity with this determinate and distinct
being, not, asin the case of a picture-thought, where consciousness still has specially to bear in mind that this is its picturethought; on the contrary, the Notion is for me straightway my
Notion. In thinking, I am free, because I am not in an other,
but remain simply and solely in communion with myself, and
the object, which is for me the essential being, is in undivided
unity my being-for-myself; and my activity in conceptual
thinking is a movement within myself. It is essential, however,
in thus characterizing this shape of self-consciousness to bear
firmly in mind that it is thinking consciousness in general, that
its object is an immediate unity of being-in-itself and being-for.. itself.

FREEDOM OF

SELF~CONSC]OUSNESS

121

The selfsame consciousness that repels itselffrom itself becomes
aware of itself as the element of being.in~itselj; but at first it
knows itself to be this element only as a universal mode of being
in general, not as it exists objectively in the development and
process of its manifold being.
19B. This freedom of self.. consciousness when it appeared as
a conscious manifestation in the history of Spirit has, as we know,
been called Stoicism. Its principle is that consciousness is a
being that thinks, and that consciousness holds something to be
essentially important, or true and good only in so far as it thinks
it to be such.
Igg. The manifold self~differentiating expanse of life, with
all its detail and complexity, is the object on which desire and
work operate. This manifold activity has now contracted into
the simple positing of differences in the pure movement of
thinking. Essential importance no longer attaches to the dif.
ference as a specific thing, or as consciousness ora specific natural
existence, as a feeJing, or as desire and its object, whether this
is posited by myself or by an alien consciousness. What alone
has importance is the difference posited by thought, or the dif;.
ference which from the very first is not distinct from myself.
This consciousness accordingly has a negative attitude towards
the lord and bondsman relationship. As lord, it does not have
its tru th in the bondsman, nor as bondsman is its tru th in the
lord's will and in his service; on the contrary, whether on the
throne or in chains,in the utter dependence of its individual
existence, its aim is to be free, and to maintain that lifeless indifference which steadfastly withdraws from the bustle of existence, alike from being active as passive, into the simple essentiality of thought. Self-will is the freedom which entrenches itself
in some particularity and is still in bondage, while Stoicism is
the freedom which always comes directly out of bondage and
returns into the pure universality of thought. As a universal
form of the World~Spiritl Stoicism could only appear on the
scene in a time of universal fear and bondage) but also a time
of universal culture which had raised itself to the level of
thought.
200. Now, itistrue that for this self-consciousness the esSence
is neither an other than itself, nor the pure abstraction of the
'I', but an'!' which has the otherness within itself, though in

122

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

the form of thought, so that in its otherness it has directly
returned into itself. Yet at the same time this its essence is only
an abstract essence. The freedom of self-consciousness is indifferent to natural existence and has therefore let this equally go
free: the reflection is a twofold one. Freedom in thought has only
pure thought as its truth, a truth lacking the fullness oflife. Hence
freedom in thought, too, is only the Notion offreedom, not the
living reality of freedom itself. For the essence of that freedom
is at first only thinking in general, the form as such [of thoughtJ ,
which has turned away from the independence of things and
returned into itself. But since individuality in its activity should
show itself to be alive, or in its thinking should grasp the living
world as a system of thought, there would have to be present
in thought itself a content for that individuality, in the one case
a content of what is good, and in the other of what is true, in
order that what is an object for consciousness should contain
no other ingredient whatever except the Notion which is the
essence. ButheretheNotion as an abstraction cuts itself off from
the multiplicity of things, and thus has noconten tin its own
selfbutone thatis.given to it. Consciousness does indeed destroy
the con tent as an alien immediat;y [Sein] when it thinks it; but
the Notion is a determinate Notion, and this determinateness of
the Notion is the alien elementwhich it has within it. Stoicism,
therefore, was perplexed when it was asked for what was called
a 'criterion oftruth as such', Le. strictly speaking, for a content
ofthougbt itself. To the question, Whatis good and true, it again
gave for answer the contentless though t: The True and the Good
shall consist in reasonableness. But this self..,identity of thought
is again only the pure form in which nothing is determined.
The True and the Good, wisdom and virtue, the general terms
beyond which Stoicism cannot get, are therefore in a general
way no doubt uplifting, but since they cannot in fact produce
any expansion of the content, they soon become tedious.
20 I. This thinking consciousness as determined in the form
of abstract freedom is thus only the incomplete negation of
otherness. Withdrawn from existence only into itself, it has not
there achieved its consummation as absolute negation of that
existence. The content, it is true, only counts as thought, but
also as thought that is determinate and at the same time
determinateness as such.

FREEDOM OF SELF· CONSCIOUSNESS

12 3

202. Scepticism is the realization of tha t.of which Stoicism was
only the Notion, and is the actual experience of what the free~
dom of thought is. This is in itself the negative and must exhibit
itself as such. With the reflection of self-consciousness into the
simple thought of itself, the independent existence or permanent determinateness that stood over against that reflection
has, as a matter of fact,- fallen outside of the infinitude of
thought. In Scepticism, now, the wholly unessential and nonindependent character of this 'other' becomes explicitJor con~
sciousness; the [abstract] thought becomes the concrete thinking
which annihilates the being of the world in all its manifold
determinateness, and the negativity of free self-consciousness
comes to know itself in the many and varied forms of life as
a real negativity.
It is dear that just as Stoicism corresponds to the Notion of
the independent consciousness which appeared as the lord and
bondsman relationship, so Scepticism corresponds to its realization as a negative attitude towards otherness, to desire and work.
But although desire and work were unable to effect the negation
for self-consciousness) this polemical bearing, towards the manifold independence of things will, on the other hand, be successful, because it turns against them as a free self-consciousness
that is already complete in its own self; more specifically,
because it is thinking, or is in its own self infinite, and in this
infinitude the independent things in their differences from one
another are for it only vanishing magnitudes. The differences,
which in the pure thinking of self-co.nsciousness are only the
abstraction of differences, here become the entirety of the differences, and the whole of differentiated being becomes a difference of self-consciousness.
203. Thus the foregoing has defined the nature of the activity
of scepticism as sllch,and the way in which it operates. It
exhibits the dialectical movement which Sense-certainty, Perception, and the Understanding each is; as also the unessential
character of what, in the relationship of lord and bondsman,
and for abstract thinking itself, is held to be a determinate element. That relationship at the same time embraces a specific
mode in which ethical laws, too) are present as sovereigh commands: The determinations in abstract thinking, however, are
scientific Notions in which [formal] con tentless thinking

124

B.

SELF~CONSCIOUSNESS

spreads itself, attaching the Notion in fact in a merely external
way to the being constituting its content, and which for it is
independent, and holding as valid only determinate Notions, even
though these are only pure abstractions.
204. Dialectic as a negative movement, just as it immediately is, at first appears to consciousness as something which
has it at its mercy, and which does not have its source in con..
sciousness itself. As Scepticism, on the other hanc;i, it is a
moment of self-consciousness, to which it does not happen that
its truth and reality vanish without its knowing how, but which,
in the certainty of its freedom, makes this 'other' which claims
to be real, vanish. What Scepticism causes to vanish is not only
objective reality as such, but its own relationship to it, in which
the 'other' is held to be objective and is established as such,
and hence, too, its perceiving, along with firmly securing what
it is in danger of losing., viz. sophistry, and the truth it has itself
determined and established. Through this self-conscious negation itprocures for its own self the certainty of its freedom,
generates the experience of that freedom, and thereby raises
it to truth. What vanishes is the determinate element, or the
moment of difference, which, whatev~ritsmode of being and
whatever its source, sets itselfupas something fixed and immutable. It contains no permanenteiement, and must vanish before
thought, because the 'different' is just this, not to be in possession of itself, but to have its essential being only in an other.
Thinking, however, is the.insight in to this nature of the Idif..
fetent', it is the negativ.e essence, as simple.
205. Thesceptical self-consciousness thus experiences in the
flux of all tha t would stand secure before it its own freedom
as given and preserved by itself. It is aware of this stoical indifferenceofa thinking which thinks itself, the unchanging and
genuine certainty ofits elf. This se1f~certainty does notissue from
something alien, whose complex development was deposited
within it, a result which would leave behind it the process of
its coming to be, On the contrary, consdousnessitselfis the abso ..
lute dialectical unrest, this medley of sensuous and intellectual
representations whose differences coincide, and whose identity
is equally again dissolved, for it is itselfdeterminateness as contrasted with the non-identical. But it is just in this proc~ss that
this consciousness, instead of being self-identical, is in fact noth-

FREEDOM OF SELF.CONSCIOUSNESS

12 5

ing but a purely casual, confused medley, the dizziness ofa perpetually self-engendered disorder. It is itself aware of this; for
itself maintains and creates this restless confusion. Hence it also
admits to it, it owns to being a whol1y contingent, single, and
separat~ consciousness-a consciousness which is empirical,
which takes its guidance from what has no reality for it, which
obeys what is for it not an essential being, which does those things
and brings to realization what it knows has no truth for it. But
equally, while it takes itselfin this way to be a single and separate, contingent and, in fact, animal life, and a lost self-consciousness, it also, on the contrary, converts itself again into a
consciousness that is universal and self-identical; for it is the
negativity of all singularity and aU difference. From this selfidentity, or within its own self, it falls back again into the former
contingency and confusion, for this same spontaneous negativity has to do solely with what is single and separate, and
occupies itself with what is contingent. This consciousness is
therefore the unconscious, thoughtless rambling which passes
back and forth from the one extreme of self.-identical self-consciousness to the other extreme of the contingent consciousness
thatis hoth bewildered and bewildering. It does not itself bring
these two thoughts of itself together. At one time it recognizes
that its freedom lies in rising above all the confusion and contingency of existence, and at another time equally admits to a
relapse into occupying itselfwith what is unessential. It-lets the
unessential content in its thinking vanish; but just in doing, so
it is the consciousness of something unessentiaL It pronounces
an absolute vanishing, but the pronouncement is, and this consciousness is the vanishing that is pronounced. It affirms the
nullity of seeing, hearing, etc" yet it is itself seeing, hearing,
etc. It affirms the nullity of ethical principles, and lets its conduct be governed by these very principles. Its deeds and its
words always belie one another and equally it has jtself the
doubly contradictory consciousness of unchangeableness and
sameness, and of utter contingency and non~identity with itself.
But it keeps the poles of this its self.. contradiction apart, and
adopts the same attitude to it as it does in its purely negative
activity in general. Point out likeness or identity to it, and it
will point out unlikeness or non-identity; and when it is now
confronted with what it has just asserted, it turns round and

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

points out likeness or identity. Its talk is in fact like the squabbling of self~willed children, one of whom says A if the other
says B, and in turn says B if the other says A, and who by contradicting themselves buy for themselves the pleasure of continually contradicting one another.
206. In Scepticism, consciousness truly experiences itself as
internally contradictory. From this experience emerges a new
form of consciousness which brings together the two thoughts
which Scepticism holds apart. Scepticism's lack of thought
about itself must vanish, because it is in fact one consciousness
which contains within itself these two modes. This new form
is, therefore, one which knows that it is the dual consciousness
ofitself, as self-liberating, unchangeable, and self..identical, and
as se1f~bewildering and self-perverting, and it is the awareness
of this self~contradictory nature of itself.
In Stoicism, self... consciousness is the simple freedom of itself.
In Scepticism, this freedom becomes a reali ty, nega tes the other
side of determinate existence, but really duplicates itself, and
now knows itself to be ad uality. Consequently, the duplication
which formerly was divided between two individuals, the lord
and the bondsman, is noW lodged in one. The duplication of
self.consciousness withini tself, which is essential in the Notion
of Spirit, is thus here before llS, but not yet in its unity: the
Unhappy Consc£ousness is the consciousness of self as a dual ..
natured, merely contradictory being.
207. This unhappy, inwardly disrupted consciousness, since its
essentially contradictory'nature is for it a single consciollsness,
must for ever have present in the one consciousness the other
a]so; and thus it is driven out of each in turn in the verymomen t
when it imagines it has successfully attained to a peaceful unity
with the other. Its true return into itself, or its reconciliation
with itself will, however, display the Notion of Spirit that has
hecome a living Spirit, and has achieved an actual existence,
be'cause it already possesses as a single undivided consciousness
a dual nature. The Unhappy Consciousness itself is the gazing
of one self-consciousness into another, and itself is both, and
the unity of both is also its essential nature. But it is not as yet
explicitly aware that this is its essential nature, or that it is the
unity of both.
208. Since it is, to begin with, only the immediate unity of the

FREEDOM OF

SELF~CONSCIOUSNESS

12

7

two and so takes them to be, not the same, but opposites, one
of them, viz. the simple Unchangeable, it takes to be the essential
Being; but the other, the protean Changeable, it takes to be
the unessential. The two are, for the Unhappy Consciousness,
alien to one another; and because it is itself the consciousness
oftbis contradiction, it identifies itself with the changeable consciousness, and takes itself to be the unessential Being. But as
consciousness of unchangeableness, or of simple essential Being,
it must at the same time set about freeing itselffrom the unessen ..
tial, i.e. from itself. For though it indeed takes itself to be merely
the Changeable, and the Unchangeable is, for it, an alien Being,
yet it is itself a simple, hence unchangeable, consciousness, and
hence is aware that this consciousness is its own essence,
although in such a way that again it does not itself take
the essence to be its own. The attitude it assigns to both
cannot therefore be one of mutual indifference, i.e. it cannot
itself be indifferent towards the Unchangeable; rather, it
is itself directly hoth of them, and the relation of the two
is for it a relation of essential being to the unessential, so that
this latter has toh.e set aside; but since for it both are
equally essential and contradictory, it is merely the contradictory movement in which one opposite does not come to rest
in its opposite, but in it only produces itself afresh as an
opposite.
209. Here, then, we have a struggle against an enemy, to
vanquish whom is really to suffer defeat, where victory in one
consciousness is really lost in its opposite. Consciousness of life,
of its existence and activity, is only an agonizing over this existence and activity, for therein it is conscious that its essence is
only its opposite, is conscious only of its own nothingness. Raising itself out of this consciousness it goes over into the Unchangeable; but this elevation is itself this same consciousness.
It is, therefore, directly consciousness of the opposite, viz. of
itselfas a particular individual. The Unchangeable that enters
into consciousness is through this very fact at the same time
affected by individuality, and is only present with the latter;
individuality, instead of.having been extinguished in the consciousness of the Unchangeable, only continues to arise" therefrom.
2 10. In this movement, however, consciousness experiences

B. SELF.CONSCIOUSNESS

just this emergence of individ uali ty in the Unchangeable, and
of the Unchangeable in individuality. Consciousness becomes
aware of individuality in general in the Unchangeable, and at
the same time of its own individuality in the latter. For the truth
of this movement is just the oneness of this dual consciousness.
This unity, however, in the first instance, becomes for it one
in which the difference of both is still the dominant feature. Thus
there exist for consciousness three different ways in which individuality is linked with the Unchangeable. Firstly, it again
appears to itself as opposed to the Unchangeable, and is thrown
back to the beginning of the strugg1e which is throughout the
element in which the whole relationshipsubsists. Secondly, consciousness learns that individuality belongs to the Unchangeable itself, so that it assumes the form ofindividuaIity into which
the entire mode of existence passes. Thirdly, it finds its own
self as this particular individual in the Unchangeable. The first
Unchangeable it knows on1y as the alien Being who passes
judgement on the particular individual; since, secondly, the
Unchangeable is aCorm ofindivid uality like itself, consciousness
becomes, thirdly, Spirit, and experiences the joy offinding itself
therein, and becomes aware oftherecondliation ofitsinclivicluaBty with the universal.
21 I. What is set forth here as the mode and relationship of
the Unchangeable has appeared as the experience through which
the divided self-consciousness passes in its wretchedness. Now,
this experience, it is true, is not its own one-sided movement, for
it is itself the unchangeable consciousness, and this, consequently, is at the same time a particular individual consciousness too; and the movement is just as much a movement of the
unchangeable consciousness, which makes its appearance in
that movement as much as the other. For the movement runs
through these moments: first, the Unchangeable is opposed to
individuality in general; then, being itself an individual, it is
opposed to another individual; and finally, it is one with it.
But this reflection, so far as it is made by us, is here premature,
for what has come before for us so far is only unchangeableness
as unchangeableness ofconsciousness) which for that reason is not
genuine unchangeableness, but one still burdened with an antithesis, not the Unchangeable in and for itself; we do not know,
therefore, how the latter will behave. Here, we know only that

FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

129

fot consciousness, which is our object here, the determinations
indicated above appear in the Unchangeable.
2 I 2. For this reason, therefore, the unchangeable consciousness also retains in its very form the basic character of dividedness and being-for-self in contrast to the individual consciousness. Consequently, for the latter, the fact that the Unchangeable receives the form of individuality is only a contingent
happening; j us tas it also merely finds itself opposed to it, so that
the relation seems to result from its own nature. That, finally,
it doesfinditselfin the Unchangeable, appears to it to be brought
about partly, no doubt, by itself, or to take place because it
is itself an individual; but this unity, both as regards its origin
and the fact that it is, appears partly due to the Unchangeable;
and the antithesis persists within this unity itself. In fact,
through the Unchangeable~s assuming a definite form, the
moment of the beyond not only persists, but really is more
firm I yes tablished ; for jf the, beyond seems to have been brought
closer to the individual consciousness through the form of an
actyality thatisindividual, it henceforth on the other hand confronts him as an opaque sensuous unit with aU the obstinacy
ofwhatisactual. The hope of becoming one with it must remain
a hope, i.e. without fulfilment and present fruition, for between
the hope and its fulfihnent there stands precisely the absolute
contingency or inflexible indifference which lies in the very
as~:umption of definite form, which was the ground oEhope. By
the nature of this immediatelyprBsent unit, through the actual
existence in which it has clothed itself, it necessarilyfollowsthat
in the world of time it,has vanished, and that in space it had
a remote existence and remains utterly remote.
2 13. If at firstthe mere Notion of the divided consciousness
was characterized by the effort to set aside its particular individuality and to become the unchangeable consciousness, its
efforts from now on are directed rather to setting aside its relation with the pure/armless Unchangeable, and to coming into
relation only with the Unchangeable in its embodied or incarnate form. For the oneness of the particular individual with
the U nchangeahle is henceforth the essenccand the object for
this consciousness, just as in the mere Notion of it the formless
abstract Unchangeable was the essential object; and the relation of this absolute dividedness of the Notion is now what it

Igo

B. SELF. CONSCIOUSNESS

has to turn away from. The initially external relation to the
incarnate Unchangeable as an alien reality has to be transformed into a relation in which it becomes absolutely one with
it.
214. The movement in which the unessential consciousness
strives to attain this oneness is itself threefold in accordance with
the threefold relation this consciousness will have with its incarnate beyond: first, as pure consciousness; second, as a particular individual who approaches the actual world in the forms
of desire and work; and third~ as consciousness that is aware
of its own being-for ..self. We have now to see how these three
modes of its being are present and determined in that general
rela tionshi p.
2 15. At first, then, this conscim.isness being taken as pure consciousness, the incarnate Unchangeable when it is an object for
pure consciousnesScseems to be present in its own proper nature.
But this, its own proper nature, has not yet come into existence,
as we have already remarked. In order that it should appear
in consciousness in its own ptopernature, this would certainly
have to corne about from its side, rather than from the side of
consciousness. Thus its presencehereis,atfirs"t, only one-sidedly
due to consciousness, andjustfor that reason is not perfect and
genuine, but remains burdened with imperfection or an antiilie~s.
'
216. But although the Unhappy Consciousness does not
have the.enjQyment of this presence, it has at the same time
advanced beyond pure thinking in so far as this is the abstract
thinking of Stoicism which turns its back on individuality altogether, and beyond the merely unsettled thinking of Scepticism~which is in fact only individuality in the form of an unconscious contradiction and ceaseless movement. It has
advanced beyond both of thes(!; it brings and holds together
pure thinking and particularindividuality, but has not yet risen
to that thinkingwhere consciousness as a particular individuality is reconciled with pure thought itself It occupies rather
this intermediate position where abstract thinking is in contact
with the individuality of consciousness qua individuality. The
Unhappy Consciousness is this contact; it is the unity of pure
thinking and individuality; alsoitknowsitse1fto be this thinking
individuality or pure thinking, and knows the Unchangeable

FREEDOM OF SELF.CONSCIOUSNESS

131

itself essentially as an individuality. But what it does not know
is that this its object, the Unchangeable, which it knows essentially in the form of individuality, is its own self, is itself the indivl~
duality of consciousness.
2 17. In this first mode, therefore, where we consider it as
pure consciousness, it does not relate itself as a thinking consciousness to its object, but, though it is indeed in itself, or implicitly,
a pure thinking individuality, and its object is just this pure
thinking (although the relation oj one to the other is not itself pure
thinking), it is only a movement towards thinking, and so is devotion. I ts thinking as such is no more than the chaotic jingling
of bells, or a mist of warm incense, a musical thinking that does
not get as far as the Notion, which would be the sole, immanent
objective mode of thought. This infinite, pureinner feeling does
indeed come into possession of its object; but this does not make
its appearance in conceptual form, not as something [specuJatively] comprehende{l, and appears therefore as something
alien. What we have here, then, is the inward movement of
the pure heart which feels itself, but itself as agonizingly selfdivided, the movement of an infinite yearning which is Gert~in
thatits essence is such a pure heart, a pure thinking which thinks
ofitself as aparticular individuality, certain of being known and
recognized by this object, precisely because the latter thinks of
itself as an individuality. At the same time, however, this
essence is the unattainable beyond which, in being laid holci 0(,
fiees, or rather has already flown, It has already flown; for it
is in part the Unchangeable which thinks ofitself as an individuality, and consciousness therefore direct]y attains in it its own
self~its own self, but as the antithesis of the Unchangeable;instead of laying hold of the essence, it only feels it and has fallen
back into itself. Since, in attaining itself, consciousness is unable
to get aWilY from itself as this antithesis to the Unchangeable) it
has, instead oflaying hold of the essence, only laid hold of what is
unessential. Just as, on the one hand, when striving to find itself
in the essence it takes hold only of its own separate existence,
so on the other hand it cannot lay hold of the 'other' as an individual or as an actual Being. Where that 'other' is sought, it cannot
be found, for it is supposed to be just a beyond, something that
can not be found. When sought as a particular individual, it
is not a universal individuality in the form of thought, not a

B.

SELF~CONSCIOUSNESS

Notion, but an individual in the form of an object, or an actual
individual; an object ofimmediate sense~certainty, and for that
very reason only something that has already vanished. Con~
sciousness, therefore, can only find as a present reality the grave
of its life. But because this grave is itself an actual existence and
it is contrary to the nature of what actually exists to afford a
lasting possession, the presence of that grave, too, is merely the
struggle of an enterprise doomed to failure. But having learned
from experience that the grave of its actual unchangeable Being
has no actuality, that the vanished individuality, because it has
vanished, is not the true individuality, consciousness will abandon its quest for the unchangeable individuality as an actual
existence, or will stop trying to hold on to what has vanished.
Onlythen is it capable of Hnding individuality in its genuine
or universal form.
218. But, in the first instance, the return of the feeling heart into
itself is to be taken to mean that it has an actual existence as
an individual. It is the pure heart'whichjor usorin itself'has found
itselfand is inwardly satiated, for although for itself in its feeling
th~ essential Being is separated from it, yet this feeling is, in
itself, a feeHngofselj; ithas felt the object of its pure feeling
and this object is itself. 'Thus it cornes forward hereasself.;;feeling, oras an actual consciousness existing on its own account.
In this return into self there comes to view its second relation ..
ship, that of desire and work in' which consciousness finds confirmation of that inner certainty of itself which we know it has
attained, by overcoming and enjoying the existence alien to it,
viz. existence in the form of independent things. But the Unhappy Consciousness merely finds itself desiring and working; it
is not aware that to find itself active in this way implies that
it is in fact certain of itself, and that its feeling of the alien exis tence is this self-feeling. Since it is not explicitly aware of this
certain ty, its iriner life really remains a still incomplete self-certainty; that confirmation which it would receive through work
and enjoymentis therefore eq ually incomplete; in other words,
it must itself set at nought this confirmation so that it may indeed find in it confirmation, but only confirmation of what it
is jor'itself, viz. of its dividedness.
219. The world of actuality to which desire and work are
directed is no longer for this consciousness something intrinsically

FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

133

null, something merely to be set aside and consumed, but something like that consciousness itself, an actuality broken in two,
which is only from one aspect intrinsically null, but from
another aspect is also a sanctified world j it is the form of the
Unchangeable, for this has retained individuality, and because,
as the Unchangeable, it is a Universal, its individuality has in
general the significance of all actuality.
220. If consciousness were aware of being an independent
consciousness, and the world of actuality were for it an absolute
nullity, then in work and enjoyment it would attain toa feeling
ofits independence, since the world of actuality would be nullified by itself. But since this actuality is for consciousness the
form of the Unchangeable, it is unable of itself to nullify it. On
the contrary, since it does succeed in setting it at nought and
enjoying it, this comes about through the Unchangeable's itself
having surrendered its embodied form, and having relinquished it
for the enjoyment of consciousness. Consciousness, on its part,
likewise makes its appearance as an actuality, but also as divided
within itself"and in its work and enjoyment this divided ness
displays itse1fasbreaking up into a rela#on to the world of actuality or a being which is jor itself, and into a being, that is in
itself. That relation to actuality is the changing of it or working
on it, the being",for~self which belongs to the individual consciousness as such. But, in this relation, it is also in itselfor has intrinsic
being; this aspecthelongs to the Unchangeable beyond and
consists of faculties and powers, a gift from an aliensQurce,
which the Unchangeable makes over to consciousness to make
use of.
22 I. Accordingly, consciousness in its activity is, in the first
instance, a relationship of two extremes. On one side it stands
as actively present, whiLe confronting it is a passive actuality:
the two sides are in relation with one another, but both have
41so withdrawn into the Unchangeable and stand fast in themselves.ltis, therefore, only a superficial element from each side
thatisinvolved inthe moving interplay of their mutualopposi..
don. The [passive] extreme of actuality is setaside by the active
extreme; but the actuality, on its side, can only be set aside
because its own unchangeable essence sets it aside, repels itself
from itself, and hands over what is repelled to the active
extreme. The active force appears as the power in which actu-

B.

SELF~GONSCIOUSNESS

ality is dissolved; for this very reason, however, the consciousness to which the intrinsic or essential Being is an 'other', regards
this power which it displays in its activity to be the beyond of
itself. Instead, therefore, of returning from its activity back into
itself, and having obtained confirmation of its self-certainty,
consciousness really reflects this activity back into the other
extreme, which is thus exhibited as a pure universal, as the absolute power from which the activity started in all directions, and
which is the essence both of the self-dividing extremes as they
at first appeared, and of their interchanging relationship itself.
222. The fact that the unchangeable consciousness renounces
and surrenders its embodied form, while, on the other hand, the
particular individual consciousness gives thanks [for the gift], i.e.
denies itself the satisfaction of being conscious of its independence,
and assigns the essence of its action not to itself but to the
beyond, through these two moments of reciprocal self-surrender
of both parts, consciousness does, of course, gain a sense of its
unity with the Unchangeable. But this unity is at the same time
affected with division, is again broken within itself, and from
it there emerges once more the antithesis of the universal and
the individual. For though consciousness :renounces the show of
satisfying its feeling of self, it obtains the actual satisfaction of
it; for it has heen desire, work, and enjoyment; as consciousness
it has willed, acted, and enjoyed. Similarly, even its giving of thanks,
in which it acknowledges the other extreme as the essential
Being and counts itself nothing, is its own act which counterbalances the action of the other extreme, and meets the self·
sacrificing beneficence with a like action. If the other extreme
delivers o,!er to consciousness only the surface of its being, yet
consciousness also gives thanks; and in surrendering its own
action, i.e. its essential being, it really does more than the other
which only sheds a superficiaLelementofitself. Thus the entire
movement is reflected not only in the actual desiring, working,
and enjoyment, but even in the very giving of thanks where
the reverse seems to take place, in the extreme of individuality.
Consciousness feels itself therein as this particular individual,
and does not letitselfbe deceived by its own seeming renunciation, for the truth of the matter is that it has not renounced itself.
What has been brought about is only the double reflection into
the two extremes; and the result is the renewed division into

FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

135

the opposed consciousness of the Unchangeable, and the consciousness of willing, performing, and enjoying, and selfrenunciation itself which confronts it; in other words, the consciousness of independent individuality in generaL
223. With this appears the third relationship of the process
of this consciousness, which proceeds from the second as a consciousness that has truly proved itself to be independent, by its
will and its deed. In the first relationship it was merely the
notion of an actual consciousness, or the inner feeling or heart
which is not yet actual in action and enjoyment; the second
is this actualization as an external action and enjoyment.
Returned from this external activity, however, consciousness
has experienced itself as actual and effective, or knows that it is
in truth in and for itself. But here, now, is where the enemy
is met with in his most characteristic form. In the struggle of
the heart and emotions the individual consciousness is only a
musicalahstrayt moment. In work and enjoymentwhich make
this unsubstantial existence a reality, it can directly fbrget itselj~
and the consciousness of its own particular role in this realization
is canceUedoutby the act of thankful acknowledgement. But
this cancelling-out is in truth a return of consciousness into
itself, and, moreover, into itself as the actuality which it knows
to be true.
224. This third relationship in which this true actuality is
one oftheterms is the relation of that actuality, as a nothingness,
to the universal Being. The process of this relation we have yet
to consider.
225. To begin.with,as regards the contradictory relation in
which consciousness takes its own reality to be immediately a
nothingness, its actual doing thus becomes a doing of nothing,
its enjoyment a feeling onts wretchedness. Work and enjoyment
thus lose all universal content and significance, for if they had any,
they would have an absolute being of their· own. Both withdraw
into their mere particularity, which consciousness is set upon
reducing to nothingness, Consciousness is aware ofits elf as this
actual individual in the animal functions. These are no longer
performed naturally and without embarrassment, as matters
trifling in themselves which cannot possess any importance or
essential significance for Spirit; instead, since it is in them that
the enemy reveals himse1fin his characteristic shape, they are

B. SELF·CONSCIOUSNESS

rather the object of seriou's endeavour, and become precisely
matters of the utmost importance. This enemy, however)
renews himself in his defeat, and consciousness, in fixing its
attention on him, farfrom freeing itselffrom him, really remains
for ever in contact with him, and for ever sees itself as defiled;
and, since at the same time this object of its efforts, instead of
being something essential, is of the meanest character, instead
ofbeing a universal, is the merest particular, we have here only
a personality confined to its own self and its own petty actions,
a personality brooding over itself, as wretched as it is impo~
verished.
226. But to both of these moments, the feeling of its wretch~
edness and the poverty of its actions, is linked the conscious ..
ness of its unity with the Unchangeable. For the attempted
direct destruction of what itactual1yis is mediated by the thought
of the Unchangeable, and takes place in this relation to it. The
medi.ated relation constitutes the essence of the negative movement in whichconsdousness turns against its particular individUality,butwhich,quarelation,is in itseifpositive, and wilLhring
consciousne§siitself to an awareness of its unity with the Unchangeable.
~2'7. This mediated r.elation is thus a syllogism in which the
individuality, initially fixed in its antithesis to the in,..itself, is
unit~d with this other extreme only thrGugha third term.
Through'tbismid dleterm the one extreme, the Unchangeable,
is brought into relation with the unessential consciousness,
which equally is brought into relation with the Unchangeable
only through this middle term; thus this middle term is one
which presents the two extremes to one another, and ministers
to each·initsdealings with th'eother. This middle termisitself
a conscious Being [the mediator] )foritisan action whichmediates consciousness as such; the content of this action is the
extinction of its particular individuality which consciousness is
undertaking.
228. In the mediator, then, this consciousness frees itselffrom
action and enjoyment so far as they are regarded as its own.
Asa.separate, independent extreme, it rejects the essence of its
will, and casts upon the mediator or minister [priest] its own
freedom ofdedsion, and herewith the responsibility for its own
action. This mediator, having a direct relationship with the un ..

FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

'37

changeable Being, ministers by giving advice on what is right.
The action, since it follows upon the decision of someone else,
ceases, as regards the doing or the willing of it, to he its own.
But there is still left to the unessential consciousness the objective
aspect, viz. the fruit of its labour, and its enjoyment. These,
therefore, it rejects as well, and just as it renounces its will, so
it renounces the actuality it received in work and enjoyment.
It renounces them, partly as identified with the truth it has
attained regarding its own seW·conscious independence-in~
asmuch as what it does is foreign to it, a thinking and speaking
of what is meaningless to it; partly, as identified with external
possessions-when it gives away part .of what it has acquired
through work; and partiy, also, as identified with the
enjoyment it has had-when, in its fastings and mortifications,
it once more completely denies itself that enjoyment.
229. Through these moments of surrender, first of its right
to decide for itself, then ofits property and enjoyment, anp finally through the positive moment.ofpractisingwhatit does not
understand, it truly and completely deprives itself of the consciousness of inner and outerfreedom, of the actualityin which
cQllsciousnes8 exists/or itself. It bas the certainty of having truly
divested itself ofits (1', and of having turned its immediate selfconsciousness into a Thing, into.an objective existence. Only
through this actual sacrifice could it demonstrate this selfrenunciation. For only therein does the deception vanish which
lie$ in the inner acknowledgement of gratitude througb heart,
sentiment, and tongue, an acknowledgement which indeed dis'"
cl~ms all power pertaining to its own independent existence,
ascribing it all to a gift fromahove, but which in this very disclaimer, holds on to its own particular existence, does so outwardly in the possessions it does not surrender, inwardly in the
consciousness of the decision it has itself made, and in the consciousness of its content which it has itself determined, which
it has notexcbangerl for one coming from outside, which last
wQuldfill it up with what is meaningless for it.
~30' But in the sacrifice actually earned out, consciousness,
having nullified the actiQn as its own doing, has also in principlL'
obtained relieffrom its misery. That this reliefhas been ob~ained
in principle is, however, the action of the other extreme of the
syllogism, which is the essence possessed of intrinsic being. But

Ig8

B. SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

that sacrifice made by the unessential extreme was at the same
time not a one-sided action, but contained within itself the
action of the other. For the surrender of one's own will is only
from one aspect negative; in principle, however, or in itself,
it is at the same time positive, viz. the positing of will as the
will of an 'other', and specifically of will, not as a particular,
but as a universal will. This positive meaning of the negatively
posited particular will is taken by this consciousness to be the
will of the other extreme, the will which, precisely because it
is an 'other' for consciousness, becomes actual for it, not through
the Unhappy Consciousness itself, but through a Third, the
mediator as counsellor. Hence, for consciousness, its will does
indeed become universal and essential will, but consciousness
itselfdoes not take itself to be this essential will. The surrender
of its own will, as a particular will, is not taken by it to be in
principle the positive aspect of universal will. Similarly, its giving up of possessions and enjoyment has only the same negative
meaning, and the universal which thereby comes to be for it,
is not regarded as its own doing. This unity of objectivity and
being-for-self, which lies in the Notion of action, and which
therefore becomes for consciousness essence and ohject-this
unity is not the principle of its action, and so too it does not
become an objectjor consciousness, directly and through itself
Rather, it lets the mediating minister express this certainty, a
cC1:tainty which is itself still incomplete, that its misery is only
in principte the reverse, i.e. thatits action brings it only in principle
self-satisfaction or blessed enjoyment; that its pitiable action
too is only in principle the reverse, viz. an absolute action; that
in principle, action is only really action when it is the action
of a particular indi vid ual. Butjor itself, action and its own actual
doing remain pitiable, its enjoyment remains pain, and the
overcoming of these in a positive sense remains a beyond. Hut
in this object, in which it finds that its own action and being,
as being that of this particular consciousness, are be~ng and
actioll in themselve.l', there has arisen for consciousness the idea
of Reason, of the certainty that, in its particular individuality,
it has being absolutely in itself, 01' is an reaUty.

C. (AA.) REASON
V. THE CERTAINTY AND TR UTH OF REASON
23 I. In grasping the thought that the single i~dividual consciousness is in itself Absolute Essence, consciousness has
returned into itself. For the Unhappy Consciousness the in-itself
is the beyond ofitself. But its movement has resulted in positing
the completely developed single individual, or the single individual that is an actual consciousness, as the negative of itself, viz.
as the objective extreme; in other words, it has successfully
struggled to divest itself of its being-for-self and has turned it
into [mere] being. In this movement it has also become aware
of its unity with this universal, a unity which, for us, no longer
falls outside of it since the superseded single individual is tbe
universal, and which, since consciousness maintains itselfin this
its negativity, is present in consciousness as such as its essence.
Its truth is that which appears in the syllogism whose extremes
appear.ed as held absolutely asunder, as the middle term which
proc:laims to the unchangeable consciousness that the single individual has renounced itself, and, to the individual, that the
Unchangeable is for it no longer an extreme, but is reconciled
with it. This middle term is the unity directly aware of both
and connecting them, and is the consciousness of their unity,
which it proclaims to consciousness and thereby to itself, the
consciousness of the certainty of being all truth.
232. Now that self. . conSciousness is Re;il,son, its hitherto negative relation to otherness turns round into a positive relation.
Up till now it has been concerned only with its independence
and freedom, concerned to save and maintain itself for itself
at the expense of the world, or of its own actuality, both.ofwhich
appeared to it as the negative of its essence. But as Reason,
assured of itself, it is at peace with them, and can endure them;
for it is certain that it is itself reality, or that everything actual
is none other than itself; its thinking is itself directly actuaJity,
and thus its relationship to the latter is that ofidealism. A'pprehending itself in this way, it is as if the world had for it only

c.

(AA.) REASON

now come into being; previously it did not understand the
world; it desired it and worked on it, withdrew from it into
itself and abolished it as an existence on its own account, and
its own self qua consciousness-both as consciousness of the
world as essence and as consciousness of its nothingness. In thus
apprehending itself, after losing the grave of its truth, after the
abolition ofits actuality is itself abolished, and after the singleness of consciousness is for it in itself Absolute Essence, it discovers the world as its new real world, which in its permanence
holds an interest for it which previously lay only in its transiency j for the existence of the world becomes for self-consciousness its own truth and presence; it is certain of experiencing only
itself therein.
233. Reason is the certainty of consciousness that it is all
reality; thus does idealism express its Notion. Just as consciousness, that comes on the scene as Reason, possesses that certainty
directly in itself, so too does idealism give direct expression to
that certainty! 'I am r, in the sense that the '1' which is an
object for me is the sole object, is all reality and all that is
present. Here, the 'I' that is object for me, is not merely an
emp.ty object in general, as it is for self-consciousness as such)
noris i t,as infreeseW.coDsciousness) merely an objectthatwith ..
drawsitselffrom other objects which retain their worth alongside
it; on the contrary, it is for self-consciousness an object such
that any other object whatever is a non-heing. But self.. consciousness is all reality, not merely for itself but also in itself, only
thro\.1gh becoming this reality, or rather through demonstrating
itself to be such. It demonstrates itself to be this along thl! path
in which first, in the dialectic movement ofcmeaning', perceiving and understanding, otherness as an intrinsic being vanishes.
Then, in the movement through the independence of consciousness in lordship and bondage, through the conception of freedom, through the liberation that comes from Scepticism and
the struggle for absolute liberation by the consciousness divided
againsthself, otherness, in so far as it is only for conscz'ousness,
vanishes for consciousness itself. There appeared two aspects, one
after the other: one in which the essence or the True had for
consciousness the determinateness of being, the other in which
it had the determinateness of being only for consciousness. But
the two reduced themselves to a single truth, viz. that what is,

eER TAINTY AND TR UTH OF REASON

141

or the in~itse1f, only is in so far as it is for consciousness, and
what is Jor consciousness is also in itself or has intrinsic being.
The consciousness which is this truth has this path behind it
and has fqrgotten it, and comes on the scene immediately as
Reason; in other words, this Reason which comes immediately
on the scene appears only as the certainty of that truth. Thus
it merely asserts that it is all reality, but does not itself comprehend this; for it is along that forgotten path that this
immediately expressed assertion is comprehended. And
equally, anyone who has not trodden this path finds this assertion incomprehensible when he hears it in this pure formalthough he does as a matter of fact make the assertion himself in a concrete shape [i.e. the assertion is implicit in his
behaviour] .
234. The idealism that does not demonstrate that path but
starts off with this assertion is therefore, too, a pure assertion
which does not comprehend its own self, nor can it make itself
comprehensible to others. It proclaims an immediate certainty
which is confronted by other immediate certainties, which
have, however, been lost on that same path. With equal right,
therefore, the assertions of these other certainties, too, take their
place alongside the assertion of that certainty. Reason appeals
to the self;.consciousness of each and every consciousness: '1 am
J, my object and my essence is 1'; and no one will deny Reason
this truth. Butin basing itself on this appeal, Reason sanctions
the truth of the other certainty, viz. that there is for nre an
'other',; that an other than'!' is object and essence for me, or,
in that I am object and essence to myself, I am only so bydraw~
ing back from the 'other' altogether, and taking my place as
an actuality alongside it. Not until Reason comes on the scene
as a reflection from this opposite certainty does its affirmation
aboutitselfpresent itself not merely as a certainty and an assertion, but as truth; and not merely alongside other truths but
as the sole truth. Its immediate appearance on the scene is the
abstraction of its actual presence, the essence and the in~itself of
which is the absolute Notion, i.e. the movement which has brought
it into heing. Consciousness will determine its relationship to
otherness or its object in various ways, according to the precise
stage it has reached in the development of the Wor1d~Spirit into
self~consciousness. How it immediately finds and determines itself

c.

(AA.) REASON

and its object at any time, or the way in which it is for itself,
depends on what it has already become, or what it already is
in itself.
235. Reason is the certainty of being all reality. This in-itself
or this reality is, however, a universal pure and simple, the pure
abstraction of reality. It is the first positivity in which self-consciousness is in z"ts own self explicitly for itself, and 'P is therefore
only the pure essentiality of the existent, or is the simple category.
The category, which formerly had the meaning of being the
essentiality of the existent-and it was undetermined whether of
the existent as such, or of the existent contrasted with consciousness--is now the essentiality or simple unity of the existent only
as a reality that thinks; in other words, the category means
this, that self-consciousness and being are the same essence, the
same, not through comparison, but in and for themselves. It
is only the one-sided, spurious idealism that lets this unity again
come on the scene as consciousness, on one side, confronted by
an in-itself, on the other. But now this category or simple unity
of self-consciousness and being possesses difference in itself; for
its essence is just this, to be immediately one and selfsame in
otherness, or in absolute difference. The difference therefore is,
butisperfectly transparent, and a difference that is.at the same
tim.e none. It appears as a plurality of categories. Since idealism
proclaims the simple unity of self-con scipus ness to be aU reality,_
and immediately ma~es it the essence withol).t having grasped it
as the absolutely negative essence-only this has negation,
determinateness, or difference within it-this second assertion
is even more incomprehensible than the first, viz. that in the
category there are differences or species of categories. The assertion as such, as also the assertion as to any specific number of
species of categories, is a new assertion which, however, itself
implies that we no longer have to accept it as an assertion. For
since the difference originates in the pure' I', in the pure U nderstanding,itself, it is thereby made explicit that the immediacy,
the making of assertions and [mere] finding of differences, is
here given, and we begin to comprehend. But to pick up the
plurali ty of ca tegories again in some way or other as a welcome
find, taking them, e.g., from the variousjudgements, and complacently accepting them so, is in fact to he regarded as an
outrage on Science. Where else should the Understanding be

CER TAINTY AND TR UTH OF REASON

143

able to demonstrate a necessity, if it is unable to do so in its
own self, which is pure necessity?
236. Now, because, in this way, the pure essentiality of
things, like their difference, belongs to Reason, we can, strictly
speaking, no longer talk of things at all, i.e. of something which
would be for consciousness merely the negative of itself. For to
say that the many categories are species of the pure category
means that this latter is still their genus or essence, and is not
opposed to them. But ambiguity already attaches to them, since
in their plurality they possess otherness in contrast to the pure
category. In fact, they contradict .the pure category by such
plurality, and ..the pure unity must supersede them in itself,
thereby constituting itselfa negative unity of the differences. But,
as negative unity, it excludes from itself both the differences as
such, as well as that first immediate pure unity as suc~, and is
a singular individual; a new category which is consciousness as
exclusive, i.e. consciousness for which there is an 'other'. The
singular individual is the transition of the category from its
Notion to an external reality, the pureschema which is both consciousness, and, since it is a singular individual and an exclusive
unit, the pointing to an 'other'. But this 'other' of the category is
merely the other first-mentioned categories, viz. pure essentiality
and pure difference; and in this category i.e. just in the positedness of the 'other', or in this 'other' itself, consciousness is
equally itself. Each of these different moments points or refers
to another; butat the same time they do not attain to otherness.
The pure category points to the species, which pass over into
the negative category or singular individual; this latter, however, points back to them. It is itself pure consciousness which
is aware in each of them of being always this clear unity with
itself, buta unity which equally is referred to an 'other', which
in being, has vanished, and in vanishing also comes into being
again.
237. Here we see pure consciousness posited in a twofold
manner: once as the restless movement to and fro through all
its moments, aware in them ofan otherness which is superseded
in the act of grasping it; and again, rather as the tranquil unity
certain of its [own] truth. For this unity that movement is the
'other', while for this movement that tranquil unity is the
'other'; and consciousness and object alternate within these
j

144

C. (AA.) REASON

reciprocal determinations. Thus on the one hand consciousness
finds itself moving about searching here and there, its object
being the pure in-itselfand essence; on the other hand, it knows
itself to be the simple category, and the object is the movement
of the different moments. Oonsciousness, however, as essence
is this whole process itself, of passing out of itself as simple cate..
go'ry into a singular individua1, into the object, and of contemplating this process in the object, nuHifying the object as
distinct [from it], appropriating it as its own, and prodaiming
itself as this certainty of being all reaJity, of being both itse1f
and its object.
238. Its first declaration is only this abstract empty phrase
that everything is its own. For the certainty of being aU reality
is at first [only] the pure category. This Reason which first
recognizes itself in the object finds expression in the empty
idealism which grasps Reason only as it first comes on the
scene; and fancies that by pointing out this pure 'mine' of consciousness in all being, and by declaring aU things to be sensa..
dons or ideas, it has demonstrated thisjmine' of consciousness
to be complete reality. I tis bound, therefore, to beat the same
time absolute empiricism, for in order to give filling to the
empty 'mine', Le. to get.hold of difference with all its developed
formations, its Reason requires an extraneous impulse, in which
first is to befoundthe multiplicity of sensations and ideas. This
idealism therefore becomes the same kind of self-contradictory
afIlbiguity as S.cepticism, except that, while this expresses itself
negatively, the·former does so positively; but it fails equally
with Scepticism to bring together its contradictory thoughts of
pure consciousness being all reality, whi1e the extraneous
impulse or sensations and ideas.are equally reality. Instead of
bringing them together, it shifts from one to the other, and is
caught up in the spurious, i.e. the sensuous, infinite. Since
Reason is all reality in the sense of the abstract 'mine', and the
'other' is for it something indifferent and extraneous, what is
her.e made explicit is that kind of knowing of an 'other' by
Rt~ason, which wernet with in the form of 'meaning', 'perceiv..
ing' and the 'Understanding', which apprehends what is
'meant' and what is 'perceived'. Such a knowing is at the same
time pronounced by the very principle of this idealism not to
be a true knowing, for only in the unity of apperception lies

OBSERVING REASON

'45

the truth of knowing. The pure Reason of this idealism, in order
to reach this 'other' which is easential to it, and thus is the initself, but which it does not have within it, is therefore thrown
back by its own self on to that knowing which is not a knowing
of what is true; in this way, it condemns itself of its own know ..
ledge and volition to being an untrue kind of knowing, and can
not get away from 'meaning' and 'perceiving', which for it have
no truth. It is involved in a direct contradiction; it asserts
essence to be a duality ofopposed factors, the unity ofapperteption
and equally a Thing; whether the Thing is called an extraneous
impulse, or an empirical or sensuous entity, or the Thing-initself, it still remains in principle the same, i.e. extraneous to
that unity.
239. This idealism is involved in this contradiction because
it asserts the abstract Notion of Reason to be the True; con..
sequently, reality directly comes to be for it a reality that is
just as much not that of Reason, while Reason is at the same"
time supposed to be all reality. This Reason remains a restless
searching and in its very searching declares that the satisfaction
of finding is a sheer impossibility. Actual Reason, however, is
not so inconsistent as that; on the contrary, being at first only
the certainty that it is all reality, it is aware in this Notion that
q.ua certainty, qua t l', it is not yet in truth reality, and it is
impelled to raise its certainty to tru th and to give filling to the
empty ~mine'.
g

A. OBSERVING REASON

240. It is true that we now see this consciousness, for which
Being [Sdn] means what is its own [Seinen], revert to the standpoint of , meaning' and 'perceiving'; but not in the sense that
it is certain of what is merely an 'other? Previously, its perception and experience of various aspects of the Thing were something that only happened to consciousness; but here, conscious ..
ness makes its own observations and experiments. 'Meaning' and
'perceiving', which previously were supersededjor us, are now
superseded by and for consciousness itself. Reason sets to work
to know the truth, to find in the form of a Notion that which,
for 'm'caning' and 'perceiving', is a Thing; i.e. it seeks to possess
in thinghood the consciousness only ofitself. Reason now has,

C. (AA.) REASON

therefore, a universal interest in the world, because it is certain
of its presence in the world, or. that the world present to it is
rational. It seeks its 'other', knowing that therein it possesses
nothing else but itself: it seeks only its own infinitude.
241. While at first it is only dimly aware of its presence in
the actual world, or only knows quite simply that this world
is its own, it strides forward in this belief to a general appropriation of its own assured possessions, and plants the symbol of
its sovereignty on every height and in every depth. But this
superficial' [it is] mine', is not its ultimate interest; the joy of
this general appropriation finqs still in its possessions the alien
'other' which abstract Reason does not contain within itself.
Reason is dimly aware of itself as a profounder essence than
the pure '1' is, and must demand that difference, that being,
in its manifold variety, become its very own, that it behold itself
as the actual world and find itself present as an [outer] shape
and Thing. But even if Reason digs into the very entrails of
things and opens every vein in 'them so that it may gu~h forth
to meet itself, it will not attain this joy; it must h~ve cOfP.pleted
itself inwardly before it can experience th~> consummation of
itself.
242. Consciousness observes; i.e. Reason wants to find and to
have itself as existent object, as an object that is actually and
sensuously present. The consciousness that observes in this way
means, and indeed says, that it wants to learn, not about itst?lf
but, on the contrary, about the essence of things qua things.
That this consciousness means and says this, is implied in the
fact that it is Reason; but Reason as such is not as yet object
for this consciousness. If it knew that Reason is equally the
essence of things and of consciousness itself, and that it is only
in consciousness that Reason can be present in its own proper
shape, it would go dow;n into the depths of its own being, and
seek Reason there rather than in things. Ifit did find it then~,
it would be directed to the actual world outside again, in order
to behold therein Reason's sensuous expression, but at the same
time to take it essentially as Notion. Reason, as it immediately
comes before us as the certainty of consciousness that it is all
reality, takes its reality in the sense of the immediacy qf being,
and similarly, the unity of the'!, with this objective being in
the sense of an immediate unity, in which it has not yet divided

OBSERVING REASON

147

and reunited the moments of being and the'!', or which has
not yet discerned them. Reason, therefore, in its observational
activity, approaches things in the belief that it truly apprehends
them as sensuous things opposite to the'!'; but whatit actually
does, contradicts this belief, for it apprehends them intellectually,
it transforms their sensuous being into Notions, i.e. into just that
kind of being which is at the same time'!', hence transforms
thought into the form of being, or being into the form of
thought; it maintains, in fact, that it is only as Notions that
things have truth. Consciousness, in this observational activity,
comes to know what things are; but we come to know what consciousness itselfis. The outcome of its movement will be that what
consciousness is in itself will become explicit for it.
243. This action of Reason in its observational role we have
to consider in the moments of its movement: how it looks upon
Nature and Spirit, and, lastly, upon the relationship of both
in the form ofsenfiuous being, and how it seeks itselfas actuality
in the form of immediate being.

a. Q hservation of Nature
244. When the unthinking consciousness declares observation and experience to be the source of truth, what it says may
well sound as ifonly tasting, smelling, feeling, hearing, and seeing were involved. It forgets, in the zeal with which it recommends tasting, smelling, etc., to say that iLhas noless essentially
determined the object of this sensuous apprehension, and this
determination is at least as valid for the object as is the sensuous
apprehension. It will also readily admit that its concern is not
wholly and solely with perception, and will not let, e.g., the
perception that this penknife lies alongside this snuff-box, pass
for an observation. What is perceived should at least have the
significance of a universal, not of a sensuous particular.
245. This universal is thus, to begin with, only what remains
identical with itself; its movement is only the uniform recurrence
of the same action. Consciousness, which thus far finds in the
object only universality, or theabstract'itismine', must take upon
itself the movement proper to the object and, since it is not yet
the understanding of the object, must at least be the remem ..
brance of it, which expresses in a universal way what in actua1ity is present only as a single item. This superficial raising

C. (AA,) REASON

out of singularity, and the equally superficial form of unim
versality into which the sensuous object is merely taken up,
without becoming in its own self a universal, this activity of
describing things, is not as yet a movement in the object itself;
the movement is really only in the describing of the object. The
object, as described, has lost its interest; when one has been
described, then another must be started on, and continually
looked for, in order that the activity ofdescribing shall not come
to an end. Ifit is no longer easy to find new whole things, then
we must go back to those already found, divide and analyse
them further, and bring to light fresh aspects of thinghood in
them. This restless, insatiable instinct can never run out of
material; to discover a new genus of major importance, or even
a new planet which, although an individual, possesse's the
nature of a universal, can be the lot of only a lucky few. But
the line of demarcation of what is distinctive of, say, elephant,
oak, gold, ofwhatisgenus and what species, passes through many
stages into the endless particularization of the chaos of animals
and plants, of rocks, or the metals, earths, etc" that only force
and skill can bring to view. In this realm where the universal
is undetermined, where particularization approximates again
to singleness, and again, here and there, descends to it entirely,
there is opened up an inexhaustible supply of material for
observation and description. But here, at the boundary-lineaf
the universal where an immense field is opened 4P forJhatin~
stinct, it can have found not an immeasurable wealth, hut instead merely the bounds of Nature and of its own activity. It
can no longer know whether what appears to possess intrinsic
being is not really something contingent. What bears in itself
the impress of a confused or immature feeble structure, barely
developing out of rudimentary indeterminateness, cannot
claim even to he described.
246. While this searching and describing seems to be con~
cernedonlywiththings, we see thatin fact it does not run away
into sense-perception. On the contrary, what enables things to
be intelligently apprehended is more important to it than the
rest of the complex of sensuous properties which, of course, the
thing itself cannot dispense with, but which consciousness can
do without. Through this distinction into what is essential and
what is unessential, the Notion rises above the dispersion of the

OBSER VING REASON

149

sensuous, and cognition thus makes it clear that it is just as
essentially concerned with its own self as with things. This
duplication of what is essential gives rise to hesitation on the
part of cognition as to whether what is essential and necessary
for cognition is so also in respect of things. On the one hand,
the differentiae enable cognition to distinguish one thing from
another; but, on the other hand, it is not the unessential aspect
of things that has to be known, but that characteristic whereby
the things themselves break loose from the general continuity of
being as such, separate themselves from others, and are explici tly
for themselves. Differentiae are suppost;d, not merely to have an
essential connection with cognition, but also to accord with the
essential characteristics of things, and our artificial system is
supposed to accord with Nature's own system and to express
only this. This follows necessarily from the Notion of Reason;
and the instinct of Reason~for, in this observational activity,
Reason operates only instinctively-has also in its systems
achieved this unity, viz. its objects are themselves so constituted
that they contain in themselves an essentiality or a being;!orself, and are not merely the accident of a particular moment
or a particular place. The dis tinguishing marks orani mals, e.g.,
are taken from theircla ws and teeth; for inpoint of fact it is
not only cognition that thereby distinguishes one animal from
another, but each animal itself separates itself from others
thereby; by means of these weapons it maintains itself in its
independence and in its detachment from the generality. The
plant,on the other hand, does not attain to a heing;!or-self but
merely touches the boundary-line ofindividuality. It is at this
boundary, therefore, where there is a show of division into sexes~
that plants have been studied and distinguished from one
another. What, however, stands on a still lower level cannot
itself any longer distinguish itself from another, but in being
contrasted with it gets lost. Being thatis at rest, and being that
is in a relation, come into conflict with each other; a Thing
in the latter case is something different from what it is in the
former state, whereas the single individual maintains itself in
its relation to something else. What, however, is unable to do
this and~ qua chemical object, becomes something else than it is
empirically, confuses cognition~ and gives rise to the same conflicting views as to whether it ought to keep to one side or the

C. (AA.) REASON

other, since the thing itself does not remain identical with itself,
and in it the two sides fall apart.
247. In those systems, therefore, which are characterized by
a fixed, general selfsameness, this means that both the cognitive
side and the things themselves remain selfsame. But this expansion of the self-identical determinatenesses, each of which de . .
scribes the course of its progress unhindered and with scope for
free play, leads of necessity equally to its opposite, to the confusion of these determinatenesses; for the differentia, the general
characteristic, is the unity of opposites, of what is determinate
and what is in itself universal; it must therefore split up into
this antithesis. If, now, on the one side, the determinateness
gains the ascendancy over the universal in which it has its
essence, on the other side again, this universal equally maintains its control over that determinateness, pushes it to its boundary and there mixes up its distinctions and essentialities.
Observation, which kept them properly apart and believed that
in them it had something firm and settled, sees principles over...
lapping one another, transitions and confusions developing;
what it at first took to he absolutely separate, it sees combined
with something else, and what it reckoned to be in combination,
it sees apart and separate. So it is that observation which clings
to passive, unbroken selfsameness of being, inevitably sees itself
tormentedjustin its most generaldeterminations~e,g. ofwhat
are the differentiae of an animal or a plant-by instances which
rob it of every determination, invalidate the universality to
which it had risen, and reduce it to an observation and description which is devoid of thought.
248. Observation which confines itself in this way to what
is simple, or restrains the scattered sensuous elements by the
universal, thus finds in its object the confusion of its principle,
because what is determinate must, through its own nature, lose
itself in its opposite. Reason must therefore move on from
the inert determinateness which had a show of permanence,
to observing it its it isin truth, viz. as relating itself to its OppOI"
site. What are called differentiae are passive determina tenesses
which, when expressed and apprehended as simple, do not
represent their nature, which is to be vanishing moments of a
movement which returns back into itself. Since Reason now
reaches the stage of looking for the determinateness as some-

OBSERVING REASON

thing which essentially is not for itself, but which passes over
into its opposite, it seeks for the law and the Notion of the deter ..
minateness. True, it seeks for them equally as an actuality in
the form of immediate being, but this will, in fact, vanish for it,
and the aspects of the law become pure moments or abstrac ..
tions, so that the law comes to light in the nature of the Notion,
which has destroyed within itself the indifferent subsistence of
sensuous reality.
249. To the observing consciolisness, the truth of the law is
found in experience, in the same way that sensuous being is [an
object] for consciousness; is not in and for itself. But if the law
does not have its truth in the Notion, it is a contingency, not
a necessity, not, in fact, a law. But the fact that it is essentially
in the form of Notion, not only does not conflict with its being
accessible to observation, but rather for that very reason gives
ita necessary existence, and makes it [an object] for observation.
The universal, in the sense of the universality of Reason, is also universal in the sense im plied in the above Notion, viz. that it is
for consciousness,thatit displays itself as something present and
actual. In other words, the Notion displays itself in the form
of thinghood and sensuous being; but it does not on that
accol,lnt lose its nature, nor relapse into an inert subsistence or
an indifferent succession. What is universally valid is also universally effective; what ought to be, in fact also is, and what
only ought to he without [actually] being, has no truth. The
instinct of Reason, for its part, rightly holds firmly to this standpoint, and refuses to be led astray by figments of thought which
only ought to be and, as 'oughts', are credited with truth,
although they are nowhere met with in experience; orby hypotheses as little as by all the other invisible entities of a perennial
'ought'. For Reason is just this certainty of possessing reality;
and what is not present for consciousness as something existing
in its own right [Selbstwesen], i.e. what does not appear, is for
consciousness nothing at all.
250. That the truth of a law is essentially reality no doubt
again becomes for that consciousness which remains at the level
of observation an antithesis to the Notion and to what is inD
trinsically ~niversal; in other words, itdoes not regard an object
such as its law, as having the nature ofReason , but fancies that
it is something alien. But it contradicts its own beliefin the fact

C. (AA.) REASON

that itdoesnot itself take its universality to mean that every single
sensuous thing must have provided evidence of the law, in order
to enable the truth of the law to be asserted. The assertion that
stones fall when raised above the ground and dropped certainly
does not require us to make this experiment with every stone;
it does perhaps mean that the experiment must have been made
with atleast a great number, and from this we can then by analogy draw an inference about the rest with the greatest probability or with perfect right. But analogy not only does not give
a perfect right, but on account of its nature contradicts itself
so often that the inference to be drawn- from analogy itself is
rather that analogy does not permit an inference to be made.
Probab.ility, which is what the result would amount to, loses, in
face of truth, every distinction of lesser and greater probability;
let it be as great asit may, it is nothing as against truth; But
the instinct of Reason does in fact take such laws for truth,and
it is when it does not discern necessity in them that it comes
to make this distinction, and reduces the truth of the matter
its.elfto thelevel·ofprobabHity, in order to indicate theimperfectwayin which truth presents itselftp the consciousness which
has not yet attained to insight into the pure Notion; for uni..
versality is present only as a simple immediate universality., But,
at the same time, on account of this universality, the law has
truth for consciousness. That a stone falls, is truefor consciousness because in its heaviness the stone has in and for itself
that essential relation to the earth which is expressed in
falling. Consciousness thus has in experience the being of the
law, but it has, too, the law in the form of a Notion ; and it is
only because of the two aspects together that the law is true
for consciousness. The law is valid as a law because it is manifested in the world of appearance, and is also in its own self a
Notion.
251. BecalJ.se the law is at the same time in itself a Notion,
the instinct of Reason in this consciousness proceeds to refine
the law and its moments into a Notion; it does this of necessity,
but without knowing that this is what it aims to do. It puts
the law to the test of experiment. The law as it first appears
exhibitsitselfin an impure form, enveloped in single; sensuous
forms of being, and the Notion constituting its nature is
immersed in empirical material. In its experiments the instinct

OBSERVING REASON

153

of Reason sets out to find what happens in such and such cir~
cumstances. The result is that the law seems only to be all the
more immersed in sensuous being. The inner significance of this
investigation is to find the pure conditions of the law; and this
means nothing else (even if the consciousness expressing its
meaning in this way were to think it meant something different)
than to raise the law ibto the form of Notion, and to free its
moments completely from being tied to a specific being. For
example, negative electricity, which at first comes to be known,
say, as resin~electricity, and positive electricity as glass-electricity, these, as a result of experiments, lose altogether such
a significance and become purely positive and 'negative electricity, neither of which is any longer attached to a particular
kind orthing; and we can no longer say that there are bodies
which are positively electrical and others which are negatively
electrical. In the same way, the relationship of acid and base
and their reaction constitute a law in which these opposite sides
appear as bodies. But these separated detached things have no
actuality; the power,which forces them apart cannot prevent
them from at once entering again into a process, for they are
only this relation. They cannot, like a tooth or a claw, remain
apart on their own and as such be pointed out. This essential
nature of theirs, to passover immediately into a neutral product, makes their being into a being which is implicitly superseded or universal; and acid and base have truth only as universals. Therefore, just as glass and resin canjust as well be positively as negatively electrical, in the same way acid ahd base
are not tied as properties to this or that actuality; each thing
is only relatively acid or base: what seems to bean absolute base
or acid gets in the so-called synsomaties 1 the opposite signifi~
cance in r:elation to something else.~The result of the experiments is in this way to cancel the moments or activated sides
as properties 9f specific things, and to free the predicates from
their subjects. These predicates are found only as universals,
as in truth they are; because of this seW-subsistence they get
the name of 'matters', which are neither bodies nor properties;
I A term coined by a chemist, Wintcrl, at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
These syosomatics .are combinationsformcddirectly without any intermediary which
would produce and itself undergo change; they are still, in consequence, not strictly
chemical processes.

C. (AA.) REASON

and certainly no one would call oxygen, positive and negative
electricity, heat, etc., bodies.
252. Matter, on the contrary, is not an existent thing, but is
being in the form of a universal, or in the form of a Notion.
Reason which is still instinctive makes this correct distinction,
without being aware that just by testing the law on all sensuous
being, it gets rid of the merely sensuous being of the law, and
when it interprets the moments of the law as 'matters', their
essential na ture has become for Reason a universal, and as such
is expressed as a non·sensuous thing of sense, as an incorporeal
and yet objective being.
253. We have now to see what turn its result takes for it,
and what new shape its observational activity assumes in consequence. We find, as the truth of this experimenting consciousness, pure law, which is freed from sensuous being; we see it as
a Notion which, while present in sensuous being, operates there
independently and unrestrained, and, while immersed in it, is
free of it, and a simple Notion. This which is in truth theresult
and essence [of its activity] ,is now present to this consciousness
itself, but ~s an ;object.; further,~npe for it the object is nota
result, and is not connected with the preceding· activity, it
presents itself to consciousness as a particular kind ofobject, and
the relation of consciousness to it appears as another kind of
observation.
254. Such an object, in which the process is present in the
simplicity ofthe Notion, is the organism. Itis this absolute fluidity
in which the determinateness, through which it would be only
for an other, is dissolved. The inorganic thing has determinateness for its essential nature, and for that reason constitutes the
moments ofthe Notion in their completeness only together with
another thing, and therefore is lost when it enters into the pro~
cess; in the organic being) on the contrary, every determinateness through which it is open to ~n other is controlled by the
organic simple unity.. None of them shows itself as essential, as
free to enter intorelation with an other, and consequently what
is organic maintains itself in its relation.
255. The aspects oflaw which the instinct of Reason here proceeds to observe are, as foUowsfrom the above characterization,
in the first instance, organic Nature and inorganic Nature in their
relation to one another. The latter is, for organic Nature, no

OBSERVING REASON

'55

more than the freedom-a freedom opposed to the simple Notion
of organic N ature---of the loosely connected determinatenesses in
which the individual forms of Nature are dissolved and which,
at the same time, breaking away from their continuity, exist
on their own account. Air, water, earth, zones, and climate are
universal elements of this sort, which constitute the indeterminate simple essence of [natural] individualities, and in which
these are at the same time reflected into themselves. Neither
the individuality, nor the universal element, is absolutely in and
for itself; on the contrary, though they appear to observation
as free and independent, they behave at the same time as essenti~
ally connected, but in such a way that their independence and
mutual indifference are the predominant feature, and only in
part become abstractions. Here, then, we have law as the connection of a [universal] element with the formative process of
the organism which, on the one hand, has the elementary being
over against it, and, on the other hand, exhibits it within its
organic reflection. But laws of this kind: animals belonging to
the air have the nature of birds, those belonging to water have
the nature offish, animals in northern latitudes have thick,
hairy pelts, an.d so on-such laws are seen at a glance to display
a poverty which does not do justice to the manifold variety of
organic Nature. Besides the fact that organic Naturein its free ..
domcan divest its forms of these characteristics, and of necessi ty
everywhere presents exceptions to such laws, or rules as we
might call them, the characteri~ationofthe creatures to which
they do applyissosuperficial that even the necessity ofthe laws
cannot be other than superficial, and amounts to no more than
the greatirifluence of environment; and this does not tell us what
does and what does not strictly belong to this influence. Such
relations of organisms to the elements [they live in] cannot
therefore in fact be called laws. For, firstly, the content of such
a relation, as we saw, does not exhaust the range of the organisms con.cerned, and secondly, the sides of the relation itself are
mutually indifferent, and express no necessity. In the Notion
of acid lies the Notion of base, just as the Notion ofpositive e1ectricityimplies that of negative; but often as we may find a thick,
hairy pelt associated with northern latitudes, or the structure
of a fish associated with water, or that of birds with air, the
Notion of north does not imply the Notion of a thick, hairy pelt,

C. (AA.) REASON

the Notion of sea does not imply the Notion of the structure
offish, or the Notion of air that of the structure of birds. Because
of the freedom of the two sides in relation to each other, tnere
are also land animals which have the essential characteristics
of a bird, of a fish, and so on. The necessity, just because it
cannot be grasped as an inner necessity of the creature, ceases
to have a sensuous existence, and can no longer be observed
in the world of reality, but has withdrawn from it. Finding thus
no place in the actual creature, it is what is called a teleological
relation, a relation which is external to the related terms, ,and
therefore really the antithesis of a law. It is a conception cbmpletely freed from the necessi ty of Nature, a conception which
leaves that necessity behind and operates spontaneously above
it.
~56. If the relation, referred to above, of the organism to the
natural elements does not express its essence, the notionofEnd,
on the other hand, does contain it. It-is true that, forthe Qbservingconsciousness, this Notionis not the organism's ownessen(Je,
but something falling outside ofit, and is then only the ahovementionedexternalteleologicalrelatiQn. Yet the organism, as it
has been characterized above, is, in.fact, the real Ep.q itself;
for since itpreservesi.tself in the .relation to another, it is just
thatkind of natural existence in which. Nature re·flects itselfinto
the Notion, and the two moments of caus~ and ~trect, of active
and passive moments, which were the result of a necessary
separating..out, are brought together into a unity, so that here
something does not appear merely as a re.Jult of necessity. But,
because it has returned into its.elf, the last, or the result, is just
as much thefirst which initiated the movement, and·is to ~tself
the realized End. The organism does not produce sOlJlething
but only preserves itself; or, what is produced, is as much
already present as produced.
257. We. must examine more closely this determina,tion of
End, both as it is in itself, and as it is for the instinct of Ref!.son,
in order to see how the latter finds itself therein, but does not
recognize itself in what it finds. The notion of End, then, to
which Reason in its role of observer rises, is a Notion of which
it is aware; butlt is also no less present as something actual, and
is not an external relation of the latter, butits essence. This actu ..
ality, which itself an End, is related purposively to an other:

is

OBSERVING REASON

157

which means that its relation is a contingent one with respect
to what both immediately are; immediately, both are indepen
dent and mutually indifferent. But the essence of their relation
is something different from what they thus appear to be, and
their action has a different meaning from the one sensemperception at first finds in it. The necessity in what takes place is
hidden, and shows itself only in the End, but in such a way
that this very End shows that the necessity has also been there
from the beginning. The End, however, shows this priority of
itself in the fact that nothing else issues from the alteration
resulting from the action than what was already there. Or, if
we start from what is first, then this in its End, or in the outcome
of its action, returns only to itself; and through this very fact
it demonstrates itself to be something that has its own self for
its End, and thus, as a prius, has already returned to itself or
is in andfor itself. Therefore, what it arrives at through the process ofits action lsitself; and in arriving only at itself, it obtains
its feeling of self. W eha vehere, it is true, the distinction between
what it is and what it seeks, but this is merely the show of a
distinction, and consequently it is in its own self a Notion.
258. But this isjust how self-consciousness is constituted ; it likewise distinguishes itself from itself without producing any distinction. Hence it finds in the observation of organic Nature
nothipg else than a being of this kind; it finds itself as a thing,
as a life, but makes a distinction between what it is itself and
what it has found, a distinction, however, which is none. Just
as the instinct of the animal seeks and consumes food, but
thereby brings forth nothing other than itself, so too the instinct
of Reason in its quest finds only Reason itself. The animal
finishes up with the feeling of self. The instinct of Reason, on
the other hand, is at the same time self-consciousness; but
because it is only instinct it is put on one side over against con ...
sciollsness, in which it has its antithesis. Its satisfaction is, therefore, shattered by this antithesis; it does indeed find itself, viz.
the End, and likewise this End as a Thing. But firstly, the End
is for that instinct Dutsid(i of the thing presenting itself as End.
Secondly, this End, qua End, is also ohJective, and therefore does
not fall within the observing consciousness itself, but in another
intelligence.
259. Examined more closely, this determination of End lies

C. (AA.) REASON

just as much in the Notion of the thing, that of being in its own
self an End. That is to say, it preserves itself; i.e. it is at one
and the same time its nature to conceal the necessity, and to
exhibit it in the form of a contingent relation. For its freedom
or its being-for-self is just this, to treat the necessity [of the relation] as of no importance. Thus it presents itself as something
whose Notion falls outside of its being. Similarly, Reason has
of necessity to look on its own Notion as falling outside of it,
hence as a Thing, as something towards which it is indifferent
and which is therefore reciprocally indifferent towards Reason
and its Notion. As instinct, Reason also remains at the level
of [mere] being and a state of indifference, and the Thing expressing the Notion remains for it something other than this Notion,
and the Notion other than the Thing. Thus, for Reason, the
organic thing is in its own self an End only in the sense that
the necessity which presents itself as hidden in the action of the
thing-for this behaves as an indifferent being-for-self-falls
outside of the organism itself. Since, however, the organism as
an End in its own self cannot behave in any other way than
as an organism, the fact that it is an End in itselfisalsomanifest
and present in sensuous fashion, and it is as such that it is
observed. The organism shows itself to be a heing thatpreserves
itself, that returns and has returned into itself. But this observing
consciousness does not recognize in this being the Notion of
End, or that the Notion of End exists just here and in the form
of a Thing, and not elsewhere in some other intelligence. It
makes a distinction between the Notion of End and being-forself and self..preservation, a distinction which is none. That it
is in fact no distinction is something of which this consciousness
is not aware; on the contrary, the making of the distinction
appears to it as a contingent act having no essential connection
with what is brought about by that act; and the unity which
links the two together, viz. the said act and the End, falls
asunder for this consciousness.
260. On this view, what belongs to the organism itself is the
action lying in the nliddle between its first and last stage, so
far as this action bears within it the character of singleness. So
far, however, as the action has the character of universality and
the agent of the action is equated with the outcome of that
action, purposive action as such would not belong to the organ-

OBSERVING REASON

'59

ism. That single action which is only a means comes through
its singleness under the category of an altogether single or contingent necessity. What an organism does to preserve itself as
an individual or as a genus is, therefore, as regards this immediate content, quite uncontrolled by any law, for the universal
and the Notion fall outside of it. Accordingly, its activity would
be an empty activity devoid of any content of its own; it would
not be even the activity of a machine, for this has a purpose,
and its activity therefore a specific content. Deserted in this way
by the universal, it would be the activity merely of something
immediate qua immediate, i.e. an activity like that of an acid or
base which is not at the same time reflected into itself; an
activity which could not separateitselffrom its immediate existence, nor give up this existence (which gets lost in the relation
to its opposite), and still preserve itself. But the thing whose
activity is under consideration here is posited as a thing that
preserves itselfin its relation to its opposite. The activity as such
is nothing but the. pure essenceless form onts being-far-self, and
its substance, which is not merely a determinate being but the
universal, or its End, does not fall outside of it. It is an activity
which spontaneously returns into itself, and is not turned back
into itself by anything alien to it.
26 I, However, this unity of universality and the activity does
not exist for this observing consciousness, because that unity is
essentially the inner movement of the organism and can only
be grasped as Notion; but observation seeks the moments in
the form of bring, of enduring being; and because the nature
of what is organically a whole is such that the moments· are
not contained in it nor can beJound in itin that form, consciousness converts the antithesis into one that conforms to its point
of view.
262. In this way, the organism appears to the observing consciousness as a relation oftwojixed moments in the form ofimmediate being--of an antithesis whose two sides, on the one hand,
appear to be given to it in observation, and on the other hand,
as regards their content, express the antithesis of the organic
Notion of End and actuality; but because the Notion as such
is effaced therein, the antithesis is expressed in an obscure and
superficial way, in which thought has sunk to the level of
picture-thinking. Thus we see the Notion taken to mean

160

C. (AA.) REASON

roughly the inner, and actuality the outer; and their relation produces the law that the outer is the expression of the -inner.
263. When we consider more closely this inner with its opposite and their relation, we find that, 'in the first place, the sides
of the law no longer have the same import as in the case of
previous laws, in which they appeared as self-subsistent things,
each as a particular body; nor, in the second place, do we find
that the universal is supposed to have its existehce elsewhere,
outside ojthe two sides. On the contrary, the organic being in its
absolute undividedness is made the foundation, as the content
of inner and outer, and is the same for both. Consequently, the
antithesis is still only a purely formal one, whose real sides have
the same in-itself for their essence; but, at the same time, since
inner and outer are opposite realities, and each is a distinct
being for observation, they each seem to observation to have
a peculiar content of their own. However, this peculiar content,
since it is the same substance or organic unity, can in fact on]y
bea different form of that substance, of that unity;-and this
is implied by the observing consciousness when i tsays that
the outer is merely the expression ofthe inner. We have seen in
the Notion of End the same determinations of the relation, viz.
the indifferent independence of the different sides and their
unity in that independence, a unity in which they vanish.
264. We have now to see what shape the being ofiuner ;;tud
outer each has. The inner as such must nave an outer being
and a shape,just as much as the outer as such; for it is an object,
or is itself posited in the form of being, and as present for
observation.
265. The organic substance as inner is the simple, unitary soul,
the pure Notion of End or the universal, which in its partition
equally remains a universal fluidity, and therefore appears in
its being as the action or movement of the vanishing actuality;
whereas the outer, opposed to that existent inner, subsists in the
quiescent being oftheorganism. The law, as the relation of that
inner to this outer, thus expresses its content, once by setting
forth universal moments or simple essentialities, and again by settingforth the actualized essentiality or shape. Those first simple,
organic properties, to call them such, are Sensibility~ Irritability,
and Reproduction. These properties, at least the first two, seem
indeed to refer not to the organism in general, but only to the

OBSERVING REASON

animai organism. As a matter of fact the vegetable organism
expresses only the simple Notion of the organism, which does
not develop its moments. Consequently, in regard to those
moments, so far as observation has to take account of them,
we must confine ourselves to the organism which exhibits them
in their d~veloped existence.
266. Now, as regards these moments themselves, they are
directly derived from the notion of 'end-in-itselC, of a being
whose end is its own self. For Sensibility expresses in general
the simple Notion of organic reflection-into-self, or the universal fluidity of this Notion. Irritability, though, expresses
organic elasticity, the capacity of the organism to react at the
same time that it is reflected into itself, the actualization which
is opposed to the initial quiescent being-with in-self, an actualization in which that abstract being-for-self is a beingJ"or-another.
Reproduction, however, is the action of this whole introreflected
organism, its activity as in itself an End, or as genus, in which
the individual repels itself from itself, and in the procreative
act reproduces either its organic members or the whole individual. Reproduction, taken in the sense of selfopreservation in
general, e:x:presses the formal Notion of the organism, or Sensibility; but it is, strictly speaking, the real organic Notion or
the whole, which returns into itself, either qua individual by proclueing single parts of its elf, or, qua genus, by bringing forth individuals.
267. The other significanc~ of these organic elements, viz.
as outer, is their particular shape, according to which they are
present as [outwardly] actual, but at the same time, universal
parts, or organic systems: Sensibility, let us say, as a nervous
system, Irritability as a muscular system, Reproduction as a
visceral system, for the preservation of the individual and the
species.
~68. The laws peculiar to organisms accordingly concern a
relationship of the organic moments in their twofold significance, once as being a part of the organic structure, and again
as being a universal fluid determinateness which pervades all
those systems. Thus, in formulating such a law, a specific sensibility, e.g., would find its expression, qua moment of the .whole
organism, in a specifically formed nervous system, or it would
also be linked up with a specific reproduction of the organic parts

c.

(AA.) REASON

of the individual or with the propagation of the whole, and so
on. Both aspects of such a law can he observed. The outer, in ac~
cordance with its Notion is being-for~another; sensibility, e.g., has
its immediately actualized mode in the system of sensibility ; and,
as a universal property, it is in its outer expressions an objective
existence as well. The aspect which is called the inner has its
own outer aspect, which is distinct from what in general is called
the outer.
269. Both aspects of an organic law would thus no doubt be
observable, but not the law connecting them; and observation
is unable to perceive these laws, not because, qua observation, it
is too short-sighted and ought not to proceed empirically but
ought to start from the Idea-for such laws, if they were something real, must in fact actually exist and therefore be observable; but rather because the conception of laws of this kind
proves to have no truth.
270. We found that a law existed when the relation was such
that the universal organic property in an organic system had made
itself into a Thing, and in this Thing had a structurtid copy
ofitsdf, so that both were the same being, pres~nt in the -one
case as a universal moment, and in the other, as a Thing. But,
in addition, the ,aspect of the inner is, on i tsowri account, also
a relationship of several aspects; and we are therefore presented, tc;> begin with, with the conception ofa law as an inter~
relationship of the universal organic activities or properties.
Whether such a law is possible must be decided from the nature
of such a property. This, however, as a universal fluid is, on
the one hand, not something restricted like a Thihg, keeping
itself to the restricted form which is supposed to constitute its
shape: sensibility extends beyond the nervous system and permeates all the other systems of the organism. On the other hand,
such a property is a universal moment, which is essentially not
divorced or separated from reaction or irritability, and repFo~
duction. For, as reflection~into-self, it eo ipso contains reaction.
Merereflectedness-into-selfis passivity or a dead being, not sensibility; just as action-which is the same as reaction-when
not reflected into itself, is not irr~tability. It is precisely the unity
of reflection in action or reaction, and action or reaction in reflection, that constitutes the organism, a unity which is synonymous with organic reproduction. It follows from this that, ill

OBSERVING REASON

every mode of the organism's actuality, there must be present
the same quantity of sensibility-since to begin with we are COllsidering the relation of sensibility and irritability to one
another-as of irritability, and that an organic phenomenon
can be apprehended and determined or, if you like, explained,
just as much in terms of the one as of the other. What one person
takes, say, for high sensibility, another may equally well take
for high irritability, and irritability of the same degree. If they
are calledfactors, and this word is not to be meaningless, they
are thereby declared to be moments of the Notion; thus the real
object whose essence is constituted by this Notion, contains
them both equally within it, and if the object is characterized according to the one moment as very sensitive, it must
also be stated, according to the other moment, to be just as
irritable.
27 I. If they are distinguished, as they necessarily are, this
is in accordance w:ith the Notion, and their opposition is qualitati.ve. But when, apart from this true difference, they are also
posited as they immediately are, and for. ordinary thought, as
they might be as aspects of the law, then they appear as quantitatively distinct. Their peculiar qualitative antithesis thus
becomes one of magnitude, and there arise laws of this kind, for
example, that sensibility and irritability stand in an inverse
ratio of their magnitude, so that as the one increases the other
decreases; or better, taking directly the magnitude itself as the
content> as its smallness decreases. Should, however, a specific
content be given to this law, say, that the size of a hole increases,
the more whatit is filled with decreases, then thisinverserelation
can equally be changed into a direct relation and expressed in
this way, that the size of the hole increases in direct ratio to the
amount taken away-a tautological proposition, whether
expressed as a direct Or an inverse ratio. As so expressed, the
proposition means simply this, that a quantity increases as this
quantity increases. Just as the hole and what fills it and is taken
away are qualitatively opposed, but what is real in them, and
its specific quantity, is one and the same in both, and similarly,
increase of magnitude and decrease of smallness are the same,
and their meaningless antithesis amounts to a tautology: so are
the organic moments alike indivisible in their real content, and
in their magnitude, which is the magnitude of that being; the

C. (AA.) REASON

one decreases only with the other and increases only with it;
or rather, it is a matter of indifference whether an organic
phenomenon is considered as irritability or as sensibility; this
is so in general and equally when its magnitude is under discussion. Similarly, it is a matter of indifference whether we speak
of the increase ofa hole as an increase of the hole qua emptiness)
or as an increase of the filling removed from it. Or again, a
number, e.g. three, remains the same quantity whetheritis taken
positively or negatively, and if I increase the three to four, then
both the positive and the negative have become four; just as
the south pole ofa magnet is exactly as strong as its north pole,
or a positive electricity, or an acid, is exactly as strong as its
negative, or the base on which it acts. An organic existence is
just such a magnitude as the said 'three" or a magnet, etc. It
is that which is increased or diminished, and when it is increased
both orits factors are increased, just as both poles of the magnet
or both kinds of electricity increase if the potential ofa magnet
or of onc ofthc electric currents is raised. That both can vary
just as little in intension and extension, that the one cannot decreasc'lnextenslon 'but increase in intension, while the other,
conversely; is supposed to ,decrease its intension but increase
i ts extension-~-4his stems from the same nbtionofanemptyantithesis; the realirttension is absolutely as great as the extension,
and vice versa.
272. It is evident that what really happens in formulating
this kind oflaw is that at the outset irritability and sensibility
constitute the organic antithesis; but this content gets lost sight
of and the antitheSis deteriorates into a formal one of quantitative increase and decrease, or of varying intension and extension~an antithesis which no longer has anything to do with
the nature of sensibility and irritability, and no longer expresses
it. Hence this empty play of formulating laws is not confined
to organic moments but can be practised everywhere and with
everything, and rests in general on a lack of acquaintance with
the logical nature of these antitheses.
273. Lastly, if instead of sensibility and irritability, reproduction is brought into relation with one or the other of them,
there is no longer evcn the occasion for making laws of this kind;
for reproduction does not stand in an antithetical relation to
those moments as they do to one another; and since this law-

OBSERVING REASON

making is based on such an antithesis, here even the show of
its being practised is absent.
274. The law-making just considered contains the differences of the organism in their significance as moments of its
Notion, and strictly speaking should be an a priori formulation
of the law. But it essentially involves this thought, that those
differences have the significance of being already given, and the
consciousness that merely observes has, moreover, to confine
itself only to their outer existence. The actual organism necessarily contains such an antithesis as is expressed by its Notion,
and such as can be determined as irritability and sensibility,
as these in turn appear distinct from reproduction. The externality in which the moments of the Notion of organism are here
considered is the inner's own immediate externality, not the outer
which is the outer of the whole organism and its shape; the inner
in its relation to this is to be considered later on.
275. If, however, the antithesis of the moments is understood
in the way it is present in outer existence, then sensibility, irdtability, reproduction, sink to the level of corpmOn properties,
which are universalities equ~lly indiffer~nt towards one
another as are specific gravity, colour, hardness, etc. In this
sense it may well be observed that the organismismoresen$itive
or more irritable, or has a greater reproductive capacity than
another, just as werpay observe that the sensibility of one is
different in kind from that ofanother, that one reacts differently
to a given stimulus than another, e.g. a horse reacts differently
to oats than to hay, and a dog againdifEerently to both, differences as readily observable as that one body is harder than
another, and so on. But these sensuous properties, hardness,
colour ~ etc., as also the phenomena of response to the stimulus
of oats, ofini table response to loads, or Qf the number and kind
of young produced, when they are related to one another and
compared among themselves, essentially conflict with any conformity to a law. For what characterizes their Sl1tl$UOUS being is
just this, that they exist in complete mutua'! indifference, and
manifest the freedom of Nature released from the control of the
Notion rather than the unity of a relation, irrationally playing
up and down on the scale of contingent magnitude between
the moments of the Notion, rather than exhibiting these
moments themselves.

,66

C. (AA.) REASON

276. It is the other aspect, where the simple moments of the
Notion of organism are compared with the moments of the outer
structure, that would first furnish the genuine law expressing the
true outer as a copy of the inner. Now, because those simple
moments are pervasive fluid properties, they do not have in the
organic thing such a separate, real expression as what is called
an individual system of the shape. Or, again, if the abstract
Idea of the organism is truly expressed in those three moments,
merely because they are not static and are only moments of
the Notion and of movement, the organism, on the other hand,
as a structured shape, is not exhaustively dealt with in the three
specific systems into which it is analysed by anatomy. In so far
as such systems are supposed to be found actually existing, and
to be authenticated by being so found, it must also be borne
in mind that anatomy presents us not only with three such systems but with a good many more. Furthermore, apart from this,
the system of sensibilityas a whole must mean something quite
different from what is called the nervous system, the irritable
system something different from the muscular system, the reproductive system something different from the intestinal
mechanism of reproduction. In the systems ofshape as such, the
organism is apprehended from the abstract aspect of a dead
existence; its moments so taken pertain to anatomy and the
corpse, not to cognition and the living organism. In such parts,
the moments have really ceased to be, for they cease to be processes. Since the being of the organism is essentially a universality
or a reflection-into-sel-£: theheingofits totality, like its moments,
cannot consist in an anatomical system; on the contrary, the
actual expression of the whole, and the externalization of its
moments, are really found only as a movement which runs its
course through the various parts of the structure, a movement
in which what is forcibly detached and fixed as an individual
system essentially displays itself as a fluid moment. Consequently, that actual existence as it is found by anatomy must
not be reckoned as its real being, but only that existence taken
as a process, in which alone even the anatomical parts have
a meamng.
277. We see, then, that the moments of the organic inner,
taken by themselves, are incapable of furnishing the aspects of
a law of being, since in such a law they are asserted of an outer

OBSERVING REASON

existence, are distinguished from one another, and neither
aspect could be equally named in place of the other; further,
that, placed on one side, they do not find in the other side their
realization in a fixed system; for this latter would as little possess
any organic truth [i.e. the truth of organic being] as it would
be the expression of those moments of the [organic] inner. The
essential nature of organic being, since it is in itself the universal,
rather consists in general in its moments being equally universal
in actual existence, i.e. in their being pervasive processes, but
not in giving an image of the universal in an isolated thing.
278. In this way the idea of a law in the case of organic being
is altogether lost. The law wants to grasp and express the antithesis as inert aspects, anp in them the determinateness which
is their relation to one another. The inner, to which the manifested universality belongs, and the outer, to which belong the
parts of the inert shape, were supposed to constitute the corresponding aspects of the law, butas thus held apart,they lose
their organic significance; and what lies at the base ofthe idea
of law is precisely this, that eacq orits two aspects should have
an independent, indifferent su bsistence orits own, th.e relation
of the aspects being shared betweenthem as a twofold determinateness corresponding to that.relation. TheJactisthat each
aspec,t ofthe organism is in its own selfjust this: to bea simple
universality in which aU determinations are dissolved, and to
be the movement of this process.
279. An insight into the difference between this way of
formulating a law and previous ~orms wiUmake its nature perfectly clear. If, namely, we look back to the movement of perceiving and to that of the Understanding., in which the latter
reflects itself into itself, and thereby determines its object,' we
see that the Understanding does not, in that movement, have
before itselfin its object therelqtion of these abstractdetermina..
rions of universal and individual, essential and external: it is
itself the transition, which does not become objective toit. Here,
on the contrary, the organic unity, which is just the relation
of those opposites, this relation being a pure transition, is itself
the ohject. This transition in its simplicity is immediately universality; and since this universality explicates the different
moments whose relation is to--express the law, its moments are
universal objects of this consciousness, and the 14w runs, 'the

,68

C. (AA.) REASON

outer is the expression of the inner'. Here, the Understanding
has grasped the thought of the law itself, whereas previously it
only looked for laws generally, and their moments were only
vaguely present to it as a specific content, but not as the
thoughts of the laws. As regards content, the laws obtained here
ought not to be such as are merely a passive taking-up into the
form of universality of simply inert differences, but laws which
directly possess in these differences the unrest of the Notion,
and consequently at the same time possess the necessity of the
relation between the aspects. But just because the object, the
organic unity, directly unites the infinite supersession, or absolute negation, of being with inert being, and because the
moments are essentially a pure transition, there are no such inert
aspects as are required for the law.
280. In order to obtain such aspects, the Understanding
must keep to the other moment ofthe organic relationship, viz.
to thcr£jlectednessof organic existence into itself. But this being
is so completely refl ected into itself that there is no determinateness related to something else leftoverfor it. Immediate sensuous
being is immediatelyone·withthedeterminateness as such, and
therefore expresses a qualitative difference in that being, e.g.
blue asagainstred,acidasagainst alka1i;and soon. But organic
being that has returned into itselfis completely indifferent towards an other, its existence is a simple universality, and it
denies to observation any lasting sensuous differencE$ or, what
is the same thing, displays its essential determinateness only as
thejlux of inert determinatenesses. Consequently, the way in
which difference, qua inert,expresses itself is just this, that it
is an indifftrent difference, Le. difference as magnitude. In this,
however, the Notion is extinguished and necessity has vanished.
But then the content and filling of this indifferent being, the
fluKcf sensuous determinations gathered up into an organic d etermination, expresses also this, that the content really does not
have that determinateness, viz. that of the immediate property,
and the qualitative element falls solely in [the determination
of] magnitude, as we saw above.
281. Although, then, the objective aspect which is apprehended as an organic determinateness itself contains the Notion
and is thereby distinguished from the object as it presents itself
to the Understanding which, in apprehending the content of

OBSERVING REASON

16 9

its laws, behaves purely as perception, yet apprehension in the
first case relapses completely into the principle and the manner
of the Understanding that merely perceives. For by so doing,
what is apprehended receives the character of a fixed determinateness, the form of an immediate property or of an inert
phenomenon; furthermore, it is subsumed under the category
of quantity and the nature of the Notion is suppressed. The
exchange of an object that is merely perceived for one reflected
into itself, of a merely sensuous determinateness for an organic
one, thus loses once more its value and does so by the fact that
the Understanding has not yet put behind it the formulating
of laws.
282. To illustrate this exchange by some examples, we may
find perhaps that something which perception takes to be an
'animal with strong muscles' is defined as an 'animal organism
of high irritability', or what perception takes to be a 'condition
of great we4 kness' is defined as a 'condition of high sensibility',
or, if we prefer it, as an 'abnormal affection' and, moreover,
a 'raising of it to a higher potency' -expressions which translate
sensuous facts into Latin, and a bad Latin at that, instead of
into the Notion. That an animal has strong muscles may also
be expressed by the Understanding by saying that the animal
'possessesagreat muscularforce' -grea t weaknessmeaningsimilarIy a 'slight force'. Determination in terms of irritabiHty has
this advantage over determination in terms of force, that the
latter expresses indeterminate, but the former determinate, reflection-into-self; for the force peculiar to musc1e is precisely
irritability; and irritability is a preferable determination to
'strong muscles', since, as in 'force', reflection-into ..se1f is
already directly implied in it. Similarly, weakness or sHght
force., organic passivity, is given determinate expression in terms
of sensibility. But when this sensibility is so taken by itself and
fixed and, in addition, is bound up, with quantitative determina~
tions and, qua greater or less sensibility, is opposed to a greater
or less irritability, each is wholly in the element of sense and
is reduced to the ordinary form of a property; what connects
them is not the Notion but, on the contrary, a quantitative antithesis, which becomes a difference lacking any thought-con ..
tent. Though the indefiniteness of the expressions 'force',
'strength', and 'weakness' was thereby eliminated, there now

17 0

C. (AA.) REASON

arises the equally futile, vague floundering-about between the
antitheses ofhigher and lower sensibility and irritability as they
increase and decrease relatively to one another. The determinations of greater or lesser sensibility or irritability are no less the
unthinking appff~hension and expression of a sensuous phenomenon than are the wholly sensuous determinations of strength
and weakness which are devoid of any thought-content. Those
thoughtless expressions have not been replaced by the Notion ;
instead, 'strength' and 'weakness' have been g~ven a determination which, taken solely by itself, is based on the Notion, which
it has for its content, but loses completely this origin and character. On account of the form of simplicity. and immediacy in
which this contentis made into the aspect ofa law, and because
quantity constitutes the element of difference in such determinations, the essence of the content, which originally is the
Notion and is posited as such, retains the mode ofsense-percepdon, and remains as far removed from being cognized as when
determined in terms of strength and weakness or by immediate
sense"properties.
283. Now, there still remains to be considered, solely on its
own account, what the outer aspect of organic being is, and how
in it the antithesis of its inner and outer is determined; Just as
at first the inner of the whole in relation to its own outer was
considered.
284. The outer, considered by itself, is the structured shape in
general, the system of life articulating itself in the element of
being, and at the same time essentially the being for an other
of the organism----{)bjective being in its being-Jor-s£lj. This other
appears, in the first instance, as its outer inorganic nature. If
these two are considered in relation to a law, the inorganic
nature cannot, as we saw above, constitute the aspect of a law
over against the organism, because the latter is at the same time
absolutely for itself, and has a universal and free relation to inorganic nature.
285. To define more precisely, however, the relationship of
these two aspects in the organic shape, this shape is, in one
aspect, turned against its inorganic nature, while in the other
it isfor itself and reflected into itself. The actual organism is the
middle term which unites the heing-jor~self of life, with the outer
in general, or with being-in-itself. The extreme of being~for-self

OBSERVING REASON

'7'

is, however, the inner as an infinite One which takes back into
itself, out of their subsistence and connection with outer Nature,
the moments of shape itself; it is that which, without a content
of its own, gives itself a content in its shape and appears in shape
as its process. In this extreme where it is a simple negativity or
a pure singular, the organism possesses its absolute freedom in
virtue of which it is indifferent towards, and secured against,
being-for-other, and the determinateness of the moments of
shape. This freedom is at the same time freedom of the moments
themselves, it is their possibility ofappearing as an outer existence,
and of being apprehended as such; andjust as, in this freedom,
they are free and indifferent towards this outer existence, so,
too, are they in relation to one another; for the simplicity of this
freedom is being, or is their simple substance. This Notion, or
pure freedom, is one and the same life, no matter how many
and varied its shapes or its being-for-other; it is a matter of indifference to this stream oflife what kind ofmil1s its drives. Now,
in the first place it is to be noted that this Notion is not to be
understood here as it was formerly, when we were considering
the properly inner in its form of process, or the deve]opment of
its moments, but in its form of a simple inner, which constitutes
the purely universal aspect in contrast to the actual living being,
or as the element in which the existent members of the [organic]
shape have their subsistence. For it is this shape that we are considering here, and in it the essence of life is present as the simplicity of subsistence. In the next place,·the being-for-other, or
the determinateness of the actual structured shape; is taken up
into this simple universality which is its essence, a determinateness which is equally simple, universa], and noo-sensuous, and
can only be that which is expressed in number. This determinateness is the middle term of the shape which links indeterminate
life with the actual life, simpleJike the former and determinate
like the latter. That which in the former, the inner, would be
expressed numerz'cally, the outer would have to express in accordance with its mode as a multiform actuality, viz. as its manner
of life, colour, etc., in general, as the entire host of differences
which are developed in the world of appearance.
286. If the two aspects of the organic whole-the one being
the inner, while the other is the outer, in such a way that each
again has in its own self an inner and an outer-are compared

C. (AA.) REASON

with reference to the inner which each aspect has, then the inner
of the first aspect was the Notion as the unrest of abstraction;
the second, however, has for its inner a quiescent universality
which also involves a quiescent determinateness, number. If,
therefore, the first inner, because the Notion develops its
moments in it, made a deceptive promise of laws on account
of the show of necessity in the relationship, the second directly
disclaims doing so, since number shows itself to be the determi~
nation of one aspect of its laws. For number is just that com~
pletely quiescent, lifeless, and indifferent determinateness in
which all movement and relation is extinguished, and which
has broken the bridge to the living element of instincts, manner
of life, and other aspects of sensuous existence.
287. But to consider the shape of the organism as such, and
the inner, qua inner, merely of the shape, is in fact no longer
to consider organic being. For the two aspects which were supposed to be related are posited as merely indifferent towards
each other, with the result that the reflection ..into-self which
constitutes the essence of the organism is done away with: What
really happens here is that the attempted comparison of inner
and outer is transferred to inorganic Nature. Here the infinite
Notion is only the essence which is concealed within, or falls without in self-consciousness, and no longer, as in the organism, is
objectively present. This relation of inner and outer has thus
still to be considered in its own proper sphere.
288. In the first place, that inner aspect ofshape as the simple
singu1arity of an inorganic thing is specific gravity. As a simple
being, it can be observed just as well as the determinateness
of number, of which alone it is capable, or, strictly speaking,
it can be found by comparing observations; and it seems in this
way to give one aspect of the law. Shape, colour, hardness,
toughness, and a countless host of other properties would
together constitute the outer aspect, and would have to give
expression to the determinateness of the inner, viz. number, so
that the one would have its counterpart in the other.
289. Now, because negativity is understood here not as a
movement of the process, but as a unity brought to rest, or as
a simple being~or-selj, it appears rather as that by which the thing
resists the process and inwardly preserves itself, as indifferent
towards it. But, in virtue of the fact that this simple being-for-

OBSERVING REASON

173

selfis a tranq uil indifference towards an other, specific gravity
appears as one property alongside others; and with that, all necessary relation of it to this pluraHty, in other words, all conformity
to law, ceases. Specific gravity, as this simple inner, does not
have [the moment of] difference within itself, in other words,
the difference it has is only unessential; for it is just its pure simplicity that effaces all essential distinction. This unessential difference, magnitude, must therefore have its counterpart or other
in the other aspect, viz. the plurality of properties, since it is
only through this tha titis difference at all. If this plurality itself
is concentrated into the simplicity of the antithesis, and determined, say, as cohesion, so that this cohesion is a heing-for-self
in otherness Gust as specific gravity is a pure being-for-self) , then
this cohesion is in the first place pure determinateness posited
in the Notion in contrast to that other determinateness; and
the way of formulating the law would be that which we considered above, in connection with the relation of sensibility to
irri ta bili ty. I n the next place, cohesion, qua N olion of being-forself in otherness, is further only the abstraction of the aspect
standing over against specific gravity, and as such has no existence. For being-for-selfin otherness is the process in which the
inorganic would have to express its being-for~self as a self-preservation, which would secure it from emerging from the process
as momen t of a prociuc 1. Bu t jus t this is con trary to its na ture,
which has no purpose or universality in it. Its process, rather,
is merely the specific activity in,which its being-for-self, I.e. its
specific gravity, is suspended. But this specific activity itself in
which its cohesion would exist in its true Notion, and the specific
quantity of its specific gravity, are Notions completely indifferent towards each other. If the way in which they react
to each other is left out of account, and attention is confined
to the idea of quantity , we could perhaps think of the determination Eke this, that a greater specific weight, as a more intensive being-within-self, would resist involvement in the process more than would a smaller specific weight. But, conversely,
the freedom of being-for-self only proves itself in the ease with
which it enters into relation with everything, and preserves itself
in this multiplicity. The said intensity without extension ofrelations is an empty abstraction, for extension constitutes the outer
existence of intension. But the self-preservation of the inorganic

174

C. (AA.) REASON

in its relation falls, as we have noted, outside of its nature, since
the inorganic does not contain within itself the principle of
movement, or, in other words, because its being is not absolute
negativity and Notion.
290. This other aspect of the inorganic, on the other hand,
when considered not as process but as a q uiescen t being, is ordinary cohesion, a simple sensuous property standing over against
the liberated moment of otherness which is separated into a
number of mutually indifferent properties and which, like ·spe·
cific gravity, is one of these properties. The multiplicity of properties together, then, constitutes the other aspect of cohesion.
In this, however, as in the other properties, number is the sole
determinateness, and this not only does not express a relation
between these properties and a transition from one to another,
but is essentially just the absence of any necessary relation and
it represents rather the abolition of all conformity to law; for
it is the expression of a determinateness that is unessential. This
being so, then a series of bodies in which the difference is
expressed as a numerical difference of their specific gravities
by no means runs parallel toa series in which the difference
is that of the other properties, even if, to facilitate the comparisop-, only one or SOme of them are taken. For, as a matter of
fact, only the en tire bundle of properties could constitu te the
otherseries in such a parallel. To bring thisintoorder andbind
it into a whole, observation has at its disposal, on the one hand,
the quantitative determinatenesses of these various properties;
on the other hand, however, their differences are manifest as
qualitative. Now in this heap of properties, what would have
to be cha,racterized as positive or negative and as mutually
cancelling each other-in general, the internal arrangement
and exposition of the formula, which would be a very complicated matter-this would be for the Notion to determine; but
the Notion is excluded by the very manner in which the properties are immediately there and taken up. In this [mere] being
[of the properties], none dis pia ys the character of a negati.ve
over against the other; on the contrary, one is just as well as
the other is, nor does it indicate in any other way its place in
the arrangement of the whole. In the case of a series which progresses with parallel differences-whether the relation is meant
to be one of simultaneous increase on both sides, or of increase

OBSERVING REASON

'75

only on one and decrease on the other-what is of interest is
only thefinal simple expression of this combined whole, which
was supposed to constitute one aspect of the law over against
'specific gravity; but this one aspect, as a given result, is precisely
nothing else than what has already been mentioned, viz. a
single property, say, like ordinary cohesion, alongside which
the indifferent others, specific gravity among them, are found,
and each of the others can with equal right, i.e. with equal incorrectness, be taken as representative of the .entire other side;
the one, like the other, would merely represent [reprasentieren],
in German, vorstellen, the essential nature, but would not itself
be that essential nature. So that the attempt to find series of
bodies which would run simply parallel to each other and
would express the essential nature of the bodies according to
a law of these two series must be regarded as a conception that
is ignorant of its task and of the means whereby it should be
carried out.
291. Previously, the connection of inner and outer in the
organic shape, which is supposed to be present to observation,
was straightway transferred to the sphere of the inorganic. The
determination which produced this transfer can now be more
precise'ly indicated, and resulting therefrom we have still
anotherform and connection of this relationship. Namely, what
in the case ofthe inorganic seems to offer the possibility of such
a .comparison of inner and outer, in the case of the organism
is altogetherabsent. The inorganic inner is a simple inner which
presents itself to perception as a property that merely is ; its
determinateness is therefore essentially magnitude, and, as a
property that merely is, it appears indifferent towards the outer,
or the various other sensuous properties. But the being-for-self
of the living organism does not stand on one side in this way
over against its outer; on the contrary, it has in its own self
the principle of otherness. If we define being-for..,self as simple,
self-preserving relation-to-self, then its otherness is simple negativity;
and organic unity is the unity of a self·identical relating-to.self
and pure negativity. This unity is, qua unity, the inwardnes!'
of the organism; this is thereby in itself universal, or it is genus.
But the freedom of the genus, in relation to its actual existence,
is different from the freedom of specific gravity in relation to
shape. That of the latter is a freedom that merely is, in other

q6

C. (AA.) REASON

words, specific gravity as a particular property stands on one
side. But because it is a freedom that merely is, it is also only
a determinateness which essentz'ally belongs to this shape, or
whereby this shape, qua essential being, is something determi~
nate. The freedom of the genus, however, is a universal freedom
and is indifferent towards this shape or towards its actuality.
The determinateness which attaches to the heing-for~seLJ of the inorganic as such falls therefore in the case of organic being under
its being~for~self,just as, in the case of the inorganic, it falls only
uncler the heing of the latter. Hence, although determinateness
in the inorganic is at the same time present only as a property,
yet it acquires the dignity of essential being because, as a simple
negative, it stands over against outer existence which is a beingfor-another; and this sirp.pIe negative is, in its ultimate single
determinateness, a number. The organic being, however, is a
singular individual, which is itself pure negativity, and therefore destroys within itself the fixed determinateness which
attaches to indiJIerent being. In so far, therefore, as it has within
it the moment of indifferent being,andso, too, of number, this
latter can be taken as merely a by-product, but not as the
essence of its vitality.
292. But now, though pure negativity, the principle of the
process, does not fall outside of the organism, which therefore
does not have it in its essence as a determinateness, the single
individual being itself intrinsically universal, yet in the organ~
ism the moments of this pure individual are not developed and
actual as moments which.are themselves abstract or universal. On
the contrary, this their expression appears outside of that universality, which falls back in to the inwardness of the organism;
and between the actual existence or shape, i.e. the self-developing individual, and the organic universal or the genus, there
comes the determinate universal, the species. The concrete existence attained by the negativity of the universal or the genus
is only the developed movement of a process which runs its
course in the parts of the [inert] existence of the shape. If the genus,
as a quiescent unitary being, had within it the differentiated
parts, and if, too, its simple negativity as such were at the same
time a movement which ran through parts which were equally
simple and immediately universal in themselves, parts which
here were actual as such moments, then the organic genus

OBSERVING REASON

'77

wou1d be consciousness. But, as it is, the simple determinateness,
qua determinateness of the species, is present in the genus in
a non-spiritual manner; actuality starts from the genus, or,
what enters into actual existence is not the genus as such, i.e.
in general, not the thought of it. The genus as an actual organism is merely represented by a surrogate, by number. This latter, number, seems to mark the transition from the genus into
the individual structured shape, and to provide observation
with the two necessary aspects of the latter, one as a simple
determinateness, and the other as a shape whose manifold
nature is fully developed. This number, however, really indicates the indifference and freedom of the universal and the individual in relation to one another; the genus puts the individual at the mercy of the non-essential quantitative difference,
but the individual itself, qua living individual, 'equally shows
itself to befree. True universality, as we have defined it, is here
only an inner essence; as determinateness of the species it is a formal
universality, and, over against this, the true universality takes
its stand on the side of the single individual, which is thereby
a living individual, and in virtue of its inner being takes no
account of its ·determinate·ness as species. But this individual is not
at the same time a universal individual, i.e. one in which the
universality would have an outer actual existence as well; the
universal individual falls outside of the living organism. This
universal individual, however, as immediately the individ ual of
natural structured shapes, is not consciousness itself; its existence as a single organic living indz'vidual must not fall outside of
it if it is to be consciousness.
293. Consequently, we have a syllogism in which one
extreme is theuniversallije as a universal or as genus, the other
extreme, however, being the same universal as a single individual,
or as a universal individual; but the middle term is composed
of both: the first seems to fit itselfinto it as a determinate universality or as species, the other, however, as individuality proper
or as a single individual. And since this syllogism pertains
wholly to the aspect of the structured shape, it equally embraces
within its scope what is distinguished as inorganic Nature.
294. Now, since the universal life, qua the simple essence ofthe
genus, develops from its side the differences of the Notion, and
must exhibit them as a series of simple determinat~nesses, this

C. (AA.) REASON

series is a system ofdifferences posited as [mutually] indifferent,
or is a numerical series. Whereas previously the organism in the
form of a single individual was set over against this essenceless
difference, which neither expresses nor contains its living
nature; and whereas just the same -must be said in respect of
the inorganic, taking it as an existence in which the whole of
its properties are developed: it is now the universal individual
we have to consider, and not merely as free from any systematization of the genus, but also as the power controlling the genus.
The genus, which divides itself into species on the basis of the
general determinateness of number, or which may adopt as its
principle of division particular features of its existence, ·e.g.
shape, colour, etc" while peacefully engaged in this activity,
suffers violence from the universal individual, the Earth, which
as the universal negativity preserves the differences as they exist
within itself-their nature, on account of the substance to which
they belong, being different from the nature of those of the
genus-and in face of the systematization of the genus. This
action of the genus comes to he a quite restricted affair which
itis permitted to carryon only inside those powerful elements,
and which is interrupted, incomplete and curtailed on aU sides
by their unchecked violence.
295. It follows from this that in existence in its structured
shape, observation can encounter Reason only as life in general,
which, however, in its differentiating process does not a.ctually
possess any rational ordering and arrangement of parts, and
is not an immanently grounded system of shapes. If, in the syllogism of organic structured shapes, the middle term, which
cqntains the species and its actuality as a single individuality,
hadinits own se1fthe extremes ofinner universality and ofumversaLindividuality, then this middle term would have in the
movement of its actuality the e:xpres~ion and the nature of universality) and would be a self-systematizing development. It is
thus that consciousness, as the middle term between universal
Spirit and its ,individuality or sense-consciousness, has for
middle term the system of structured shapes assumed by consciousness as a self-systematizing whole of the life of Spiritthe. system that we are considering here, and which has its objective existence as world-history. But organic Nature 4as no history; it falls from its universal, from life, directly into the single..

OBSERVING REASON

'79

ness of existence, and the moments of simple determinateness,
and the single organic life united in this actuality, produce the
process of Becoming merely as a contingent movement, in
which each is active in its own part and the whole is preserved;
'but this activity is restricted, so far as itselfis concerned, merely
to its centre, because the whole is not present in it, and is not
present in it because here it is not qua wholefor itself.
296. Apart, then, from the fact that Reason, in observing
organic Nature, attains only to a contemplation of itself as universallife as such, it comes to see its development and realization merely in the form of systems distinguished quite generally,
whose essential character lies not in the organic as such, but
in the universal indi vidual [the Earth] ; and it sees that d evelopment and realization among these differences belonging to the
Earth in the form of arrangements which the genus attempts
to achieve.
297. Since, then, the universality qf organic life falls, in its actuality, directly into the extreme of singleness without a genuine
mediation of its own, the thing before the observing Reason
is only something 'meant'; and if Reason can take an idle interestin observing this 'meant' thing, it is restricted to the description and narration of the 'meanings' and fanciful conceits it
finds in Nature. This unspiritual freedom of 'meaning' will, it
is true, offer on all sides the beginnings of laws, traces of
n~:cessi ty, allusions to order and system, ingenious and plausible
connections. But, as regards law and necessity, when observa..
tion connects the organic with the merely given differences of
theinorganic, the elements, zones, and climates, it does not get
beyond theideaofa 'great influence'. So, too, on the other side,
where individuality has the significance, not of the Earth, but
ofthe oneness immanent in life, and where this, in immediate unity
with the universal, does indeed constitute the genus, the simple
unityofwhich, however, isjustfor that reason determined only
as number, and therefore sets free the qualitative manifestation;
here observation cannotdo more than to make clever remark~~
indicate interesting connections, and make a friendly approach
to the Notion. But clever remarks are not a knowledge of
necessity, interesting connections go no further than being 'of
interest', while the interest is still nothing more than a subjective opinion about Reason; and thefriendliness with which the

IBo

C. (AA.) REASON

individual alludes to a Notion is a childlike friendliness which
is childish if it wants to be, or is supposed to be, valid in and
for itself.

of self-consciousness in its purity and z'n its relation to
external actuality. Logical and psychological laws

b. Observation

2g8. Observation of Nature finds the Notion realized in inorganic Nature, laws whose moments are things which, at the
same time, have the character of abstractions; but this Notion
is not a simplicity that is reflected into itself. The life of organic
Nature, on the other hand, is only this introreflected simplicity;
the antithesis within it of universal and individual does not
sunder itself in the essence of this life itself. The essence is not
the genus which, in its undifferentiated element, would be self..
sundered and self-moved, and at the same time would be, for
itself, undifferentiated in its antithesis. Observation finds this
free Notion, whose universality contains just as absolutely
within it developed individu ali tYI only in the Notion which
itself exists at N olion, i.e. in self-consciousness.
299. When observation now turns in upon itself and directs
its attention to the Notion existing as free Notion, .it finds, to
b~gin with, the Laws of'Fhought. This individuality which
Thought isin its ownselfis the abstract movement of the negative, a movement wholly retracted into simplicity; and ~he
Laws are outside of reality. To say that they have no reality,
means, in general, nothing else than that they lack truth. They
are indeed) not supposed to be the entire truth, but still formal
truth. But what is purely formal without any reality is a mere
figmentof thought, or pure abstraction without that internal
division which would be nothing else but the content.==On the
other hand, however, since they are Laws of pure thought, and
pure thought is intrinsically universal, and ther~fore a knowledge which immediately contains being, and therein all reality,
these Laws are absolute Notions, and are inseparably the essential principles both ofform and of things. Since immanent self..
moving universality is the sundered simple Notion, the latter thus
has in itself a content, and one which is all content, only not a
sensuous being. It is a content which is neither in contradiction
with the form nor is separated atal1 from it; rather, it is essenti-

OBSER VING REASON

ally the form itself, for the latter is nothing else but the universal
dividing itself into its pure moments.
300. But the way in which this form or content presents z'tself
to observation qua observation gives it the character of something
found, something that is given, i.e. a content that merely is. It
becomes a quiescent being of relations, a multitude of detached
necessities which, as in and for themselves a fixed content, are
s~pposed to have truth in their determinateness, and thus are, in
fact, withdrawn from the form. This absolute truth of fixed
determinatenesses, or of a number of different Laws, contradicts, however, the unity of self-consciousness, or of thought
and form in general. What is asserted to be a fixed Law that
is in itself constant can only be a moment of the unity which
is reflected into itself, can only appear as a vanishing magnitude. But, torn out of this context of movement in the course
of considering them, and represented separately, it is not content that they lack, for they possess a definite content, but rather
form which is their essence. In point of fact, these Laws are
not the truth ofthought, not because they are supposed to be
merely formal,and to possess no content, but rather for the
opposite reason, viz. that they are supposed in their determinateness, or just as a content from which form has been re~
lnoved, to rankas something absolute. In their truth, as vanishing moments in the unity of thought, they would have to be
taken as a knowing, or as a movement of thought, but not a.s
Laws of being. But observing is not knowing itself, and is ignorant
of it; it converts its own nature into the form of being, i.e. it
grasps its negativity only as laws of knowing. It is sufficient here
to have pointed out the invalidity of the so-called Laws of
Thought from the general nature of the case. The more precise
development belongs to speculative philosophy in which they
show themselves to be what they are in truth, viz. single vanishing moments whose truth is only the whole movement of
thought, knowing itself.
301. This negative unity of thought isfor itself, or rather it
is being-for-its-own-selj, the principle of individuality, and in its
actuality is active consciousness. Consequently) the observing consciousness will, by the nature of the 'case, be led towards this
as the actuality of those laws. Since this connection is not
explicit for the observing consciousness, it supposes that

C. (AA.) REASON

thought, in its Laws, remains over on one side, and that, on
the other side, it obtains another being in what is now an object
for it, viz. the active consciousness, which is for itself in such
a way that it supersedes otherness and, in this intuition of itself
as the negative, has its actuality.
302. A new field thus opens up for observation in the behaviour ofconsciousness in its actuality. Psychology con tains the collection oflaws in accordance with v.'hich Spirit relates itselfin various ways to the various modes of its actuality as an otherness
already given. On the one hand, Spirit receives these modes into
itself, conforming to the habits, customs, and way of thinking
already to hand, as being that in which it is an actuality or
an object to itself; and, on the other hand, Spirit knows itself
as spontaneously active in face of them, and in singling out from
them something for itself, it follows its own inclinations and
desires, making the object conform to it: in the first case it
behaves negatively towards itself as an individuality; in the
second case, negatively towards itself as a universal being.
According to the first aspect, independence gives to what is
already there merely theJorm of self-conscious individuality as
such and, as regards the content, remains within the general
actuality already given; according to the second aspect~ it gives
the actuality at least a peculiar modification which does not
contradict its essential content, or one even whereby the indivi.
dual, qua particular actuality with a peculiar content, sets itself
in opposition to the general actuality, an opposition which
becomes wrongdoing or crime when it sets aside that actuality
in a merely individual manner, or when it does thisin a general
way and thus for all, putting another world, another right, law,
and customs in place of those already existing.
303. Observational psychology, which in the first instance
records its perceptions of the general modes coming to its notice
in the active consciousness, comes across all sorts of faculties,
inclinations, and passions; and since, while recounting the
details of this collection it cannot help recaJ1ing the unity of
self-consciousness, it must at least go so far as to be astonished
that such a contingent medley of heterogeneous beings can be
together in the mind like things in a hag, more especially since
they show themselves to be not dead, inert things but restless
movements.
304. Observation, in recounting these various faculties, is

OBSER V ING REASON

keeping to the universal aspect; the unity of these manifold
capacities is the opposite aspect to this universality, the actual
individuality. However, to take up again in this way the distinctive actual individualities, and to recount that one man has
more inclination for this, another for that, that one has more
intelligence than another, all this is much less interesting even
than enumerating the species of insects, mosses, etc.; for these
give observation the right to take them thus singly and un':
comprehendingly, because they belong essentially to the element of contingent particularization. On the other hand, to
take conscious individuality unintelligently, as a manifestation
that is single and separate, involves a contradiction, since its
essential nature is the universal of Spirit. But, since observation
in apprehending it, endows it with the form of universality, it
finds its law, and seems now to have a rational aim and to be
engaged in a necessary activity.

305. The momGl}ts constituting the content of the law are,
on the one hand, dl~ individuality itself, on the other hanel,
its universal inorgapic nature, viz. the given circumstances,
situation, habits, customs, religion, and so on; from the§(~ the
specific individuality is to be comprehended. They embrace
specific as well as universal element~, and are at the same time
something given, something which provides material for
observation and which, on the other hand, expresses itself in
the form of individuality.
306. Now, the law of this relation of the two sides would have
to state the kind of effect and influence exerted on the individuality by these speCific circumstances. But this individuality consists precisely both in being the universal, and hence directly and
unresistingly coalescing with the given universal, the customs,
habits, etc., and becoming conformed to them; and in setting
itselfin opposition to them and in fact transforming them; and
again, in behaving towards them in its individuality with COIOplete indifference, neither letting them exert an influence on it,
nor being active against them. Therefore, what is to have an
influence on the individuality, and what kind of influence it is
to have-which really mean the same thing----depend solely on
the individuality itself; to say that by such and suchan influence
this individuality has become this specific individuality means
nothi ng else than that it has been this all along. Circumstances,

C. (AA.) REASON

situation, customs, etc., which on the one hand are shown as
already there, and on the other hand as present in this specific individuality, express only the indeterminate nature of the individuality, which is not the point under consideration. If these circumstances, way of thinking, customs, in general the state of
the world, had not been, then of course the individual would
not have become what he is; for all those elements present in
this 'state of the world' are this universal substance. The fact,
however, that the state of the world has particularized itself in
this particular individual-and it is such an individual that is
to be comprehended-implies that it must also have particularized itselfonitsown account and have operated on an indivi.
dual in this specific character which it has given itself; Qnly in
this way would it have made itself into this specific individual
that he is. If the constitution which the external world has spontaneously given itself is that which is manifest in the individuality, the latter would be comprehended from the former. We
should have a double gallery of pictures, one of which would
be the reflection of the other: the one, the gallery of external
circumstances which completely determine and circumscribe
the individual, the other, the same gallery translated into the
form ~n which those circumstances are present in the conscious
individual: the former the spherical surface, the latter the
centre"which represents that surface within it.
307. But the spherical surface, the world of the individual,
has at once an ambiguous meaning: it is the actual state of the
world as it is in and for itself, and it is the world of the individual; it is the latter either in so far as the individual has merely
coalesced with that world, has let it,just as itis, enter into him,
behaving toward-s it as a merely formal consciousness; or, on
the other hand, it is the world of the individual, in the sense
that the actual world as given has been transformed by the individual. Since, on account of this freedom, the actual world is
capable ofhaving this twofold meaning, the world of the individual is to be comprehended only from the individual himself;
and the ~·n.ftuence on theinclividual of the actual world, conceived
as existing in and for itself, receives through the individual the
absolutely opposite ~ignificance, viz. that the individual either
allows free pIa y to the stream of the actual world flowing in upon
it, or else breaks it off and transforms it. The result of this, how-

OBSERVING REASON

ever, is that 'psychological necessity' becomes an empty phrase,
so empty that there exists the absolute possibility ~hat what is
supposed to have had this influence could just as well not have
had it.
30B . Thus there is no question of a being which would be in
andfor itselfand was supposed to constitute one aspect, and the
universal aspect at that, ofa law. Individuality is what its world
is, the world that is its own. Individuality is itself the cycle of
its action in which it has exhibited itself as an actual world,
and as simply and solely the unity of the world as given and
the world it has made; a unity whose sides do not fall apart,
as in the conception of psychological law, into a world that in
itself is already given, and an individuality existing on its own
account. Or, ifthose sides are thus considered each by itself, there
exists no necessity and no law of their connection with one
another.
c. Observation qfthe r;~lation of self-consciousness to its immediate actuality. Physiognomy and Phrenology
309. Psychological observation discovers no law for the relation of self-consciousness to actuality, or to the world over
against it; and, through the mutual indifference of both, it is
forced to fall back on the peculiar determinalenessofreal individuality which exists in and for itself, or contains the antithesis of
beingfor itselfand being in itself effaced within its own absolute
mediation. Individuality has now become the object for
observation, or the object to which observation now turns.
310. The individual exists in and for himself: he isfor himself
or is a free activity; but he has also an illtrinsic being or has
an original determinate being of his own-a determinateness
which is in principle the same as what psychology thought to
find outside of him. In his own self, therefore, there emerges
the antithesis, this duality ofbeing the movement of consciousness, and the fixed being of an appearing actuality, an actuality
which in the individual is immediately his own. This being, the
body of the specific individuality, is the 1atter's original aspect,
that aspect in the making of which it has not itself played a
part. But since the individual is at the same time only what
he has done, his body is also the expression of himself which

186

C. (AA.) REASON

he has himself produced; it is at the same time a sign, which has
not remained an immediate fact, but something through which
the individual only makes known what he really is, when he
sets his original nature to work.
3 I I. Ifwe consider the morrtents here before us in relation to
the previous view, we have here a general human shape, or at
least the general character of a climate, a continent, a people,
just as previously we had the same general customs and culture.
In addition, there are the particular circumstances and situation within the general sphere of actuality; here this particular
actuality is present as a particular formation of the shape of
the individual. On the other side, just as previously the free
activity of the individual was made explicit, as also the fact
ofhis own actuality in the face of the actuality already given, here
the shape stands for the expression of his own actualization
established by the individual himself, the lineaments and
forms of his spontaneously active being. But the actuality,
both general and particular, which observation previously
found given outside of the individual, is here the actuality of
the individual, his inherited body; and it is precisely in this that
the 'expression' originating from his activity appears. From the
psychological point of view, actuality in and for itself and the
specificindividualitywere supposed to be broughti,ntorelation
to one another; here, however, the whole specific individuality
is the object of obs.ervation; and each side of the antithesis is
itself the whole. To the outer whole, therefore, belongs not only
the original being, the inherited body, but equally the formation
of the body resulting from the activity of the inner being; the
body is the unity of the unshaped and of the shaped being, and
is the individual's actuality permeated by his being-for-self.
This whole, which contains within it the specific original fixed
parts and the lineaments arising solely from the activity, is, and
this heing is the expression of the inner being, of the individual
posited as consciousness and movement. This inner being is, too,
no longer a formal, spontaneous activity, devoid of content or
indeterminate, an activity whose content and determinateness,
as before was the case, lay in external circumstances; on the
contrary, it is an intrinsically determined original character,
whose form is merely the activity. We have then to consider
here how to determine the relation between these two sides and

OBSERVING REASON

what is to be understood by this 'expression' of the inner in the
outer.
3 I 2. This outer, in the first place, acts only as an organ in
making the inner visible or, in general, a being-for-another;
for the inner, in so far as it is in the organ, is the activity itself.
The speaking mouth,> the working hand, and, if you like, the
legs too are the organs of performance and actualization which
have within them the action qua action, or the inner as such.
But the externality which the inner obtains through them is
the action as a reality separated from the individual. Speech
and work are outer expressions in which the individual no
longer keeps and possesses himself wi thin himself, but lets the
inner get completely outside of him, leaving it to the mercy of
something other than himself. For that reason we can say with
equal truth that these expressions express the inner too much,
as that they do so too little; too much, because the inner itself
breaks out in them and there remains no antithesis between
them and it; they give not merely an expression of the inner,
but directly the inner itself; too little, because in speech and
action the inner turns itself into something else, thus putting
itself at the mercy of the element of change, which twists the
spoken word ~nd the accomplished act into meaning something
else than they are in and for themselves, as actions of this par...
ticular individual. Not only do the results of the actions,
through this externality of the influences of others, Jose the
character of being something constant in face of other individualities, but since, intheir relationship. to the inner which they
contain, they behave asa separated, indifferent externality, they
can, qua inner, th.rough the individual himself, be something other
than they appear to be: either the individual intentionally
makes them appear to be other than what they are in truth;
or else he is too clumsy to give himself the outer aspect he really
wanted, and to establish it so firmly that his work cannot he
misconstrued byothers. The action, then, as a completed work,
has the double and opposite meaning of being either the inner
individuality and not its expression, or, qua external, a reality free
from the inner, a reality which is something quite different from
the inner. On account of this ambiguity, we must look around
for the inner as it still is within the individual himself, but in
a visible or external shape. In the organ, ho'..vever, it is present

188

O. (AA.) REASON

only as the immediate activity itself, which attains its externalization in the deed, which either does, or again does not,
represent the inner. The organ, regarded in the light of this
antithesis, does not therefore provide the expression which is
sought.
3 13· Ifnow the outer shape could express the inner individuality only in so far as that shape is neither an organ nor an
action, hence only in so far as it is a passive whole, it would
behave as an existent Thing, which passively received the inner·
as an alien element into its passive existence, and thereby
became a sign of it-an external contingent expression whose
actual aspect lacked any meaning of its own-a language whose
sounds and sound-combinations are not the real thing itself, but
are linked with it by sheer caprice and are contingent in relation
toit.
314. Such an arbitrary combination of factors that are
external for one another yields no law. Physiognomy, however, is sllpposedto differ from other questionable arts and perniciousstudies because it considers specific individuality in the
necessary antithesis of an inner and an outer, of character as a
conscious disposition, and this again as an existent shape, and
the way it relates these factors' to each other is the way they
are related by their Notion ; hence these factors must constitute
the content of a law. In. astrology, palmistry, and similar
sciences, on the other hand,what seems to be related is only
an outer to an outer, something or other to an element aUen
to it. This particular GonsteHation at birth, and, when this
external element is brought closer to the body, these particular
lines on the hand, are external fa·ctors indicating a longer or
shorter life, and the fate in general of the particular individual.
Being externali ties, they are indifferent towards each other, and
lack the necessi tyfor one another tha tough t to He in the relation
of an outer to an inner.
315. Admittedly the hand does not seem to be such a very
external factor for fate; it seems rather to be related to it as
something inner. For fate itself is also only the manifestation
of what the particular individuality is in itself as an ipner otiginal specific character. Now, to find out what this particular individualityis in itself, the palmist, like the physiognomist, takes
a shorter cut than, e.g., Solon, who though t he could only know

OBSERVING REASON

18g

this from and after the course of the whole life; he examined
the manifestation, but the former examines the [unexplicated]
in-itself. That the hand, however, must represent the in ..itself
of the individuality in respect of its fate is easy to see from the
fact that, next to the organ of speech, it is the hand most of
aU by which a man manifests and actualizes himself. It is the
living artificer of his fortune. We may say of the hand that
it is what a man does, for in it, as the active organ of his self..
fulfilment, he is present as the animating soul; and since he
is primarily his own fate, his hand will thus express this in ..
itself.
3 I 6. From this nature of the organ of activi ty, to be a [passive]
being as well as the action within it, or from the fact that the
in .. itself-ness is itself present in it, and has a being for others, we
obtain another view of it than the preceding. Namely, if the
organs" in general showed themselves to be incapable of being
taken as expressions of the inner, because in them the action qua
action is present, but."the action qua [completed] deed is merely
external, and inner and outer in this way fall apart and are
or can be alien to each other, then the organ must now, in
accordance with its nature, be taken again as also a middle term
of both. This very fact that the action is present in it constitutes
an externality of it, and, moreover, one that is other than the
deed; for the organ remains with and in the individual. Now,
this middle term and unity ofinner and outer is in the first place
itself external too. But then this externality is at the same time
taken up into the inner; as simple externality it stands over
against the dispersed externality, which either is merely a single
deed or condition contingent for the individuality as a whole,
or else, as a total externality, is fate split up into a multiplicity
of deeds and conditions. Thus the simple lines of the hand, the
timbre and compass ofthe voice as the individual characteristic
of speech-this too again as expressed in writing, where the
hand gives it a more durable existence than the voice does,
especially in the particular style of handwriting-all this is an
expression ofthe inner, so that, as a simple externality, the expres
sion again stands over against the manifold externality of action
and fate, stands in relation to them as an inner. Thus, irat first
the specific nature and innate peculiarity of the individual,
together with what these have become as a result of cuhivation
m

c.

(AA.) REASON

and education, are taken as the inner, as the essence of his action
and his fate, then this essence has its appearance and externality
to begin with in his mouth, hand, voice, handwriting, and the
other organs and their permanent characteristics. Thereafter,
and not till then, does it give itselfJurther outward expression
in its actual existence in the world.
3 I 7. Now, because this middle term gives, itself the form of
an outer expression, which is at the same time taken back into
the inner, its existence is not restricted to the immediate organ
of the action; the midd1e term is rather the movement and form
of countenance and figure in general, which take no part in
the action. These lineaments and their movements are, according to this notion, the action which is held back and which
remains in the individual, and as regards the individual's relation to the action really performed, they constitute his own control and observation of the action, expression in the sense of a
reflection on the actual expression. The individual is therefore not
dumb as regards his external action, because he is thereby at
once reflected into himself, and gives expression to this reflectedness.,into-self. This theoretical action, or the individual's
speech with himself ahout the external action, is also perceptible to others, for this speech is itself an expression.
318. In this inner, therefore, which in its expression remains
an inner, there is observed the individual as reflected out of
his actual being; and we have to see what is the significance
of this necessity which is posited in this unity. This reflectedness
is in the first place different from the deed itself and therefore
can be something other than the deed, and can be taken for
something other. We see from a man's face whether he is in
earnest about what he is saying or doing. Conversely, however,
what is here supposed to be the expression of the inner is at
the same time an expression in the form of immediate being, and
hence is itself degraded to the level of [mere] being, which is
absolutely contingent for the self-conscious heing. It is therefore
indeed an expression, but at the same time only in the sense
of a sign, so that the particular way in which the content is
expressed is a matter of comp1ete indifference so far as the content itselfis concerned. In this appearance, the inner is no doubt
a visible invisible~ but it is not tied to this appearance: it can
be manifested just as well in another way, just as another inner

OBSER VING REASON

'9'

can be manifested in the same appearance. Lichtenberg 1 therefore rightly says: ~Suppose the physiognomist ever did take the
measure ofa man, it would only require a courageous resolve
on the part of the man to make himself incomprehensible again
for a thousand years,'
Just as, in the previous relationship, the given circumstances
were a [passive] being from which the individuality took what
it could and wanted, either submitting to or transforming that
being, for which reason it did not contain the necessity and
essential nature of the individuality; so here, the manifest immediate being of the individuality is one which either expresses
the fact of its being reflected out of its actual existence and its
being within itself, or which is f<?r the individuality merely a
sign indifferent to what is signified, therefore truly signifying
nothing; for the individuality, it is as much its countenance as
its mask which it can lay aside. The individuality permeates
its shape, moves and speaks init; but this existence in its entirety
equally turns into a being that is indifferent to the will and the
deed. Individuality..effaces from it the significance it formerly
h.;;l..d, viz. of being that in which the individuality is reflected
into itself or has its true essence; instead it places its essence
rather in the will and the deed.
3I9. Individuality gives up that rejlectedness-into-selfwhich is
expressed in lines and li'neaments,and places its essence in the work
it hq.s done. Herein it contradicts the relationship esta.blished QY
the instinct Qf Reason, which is engaged in observing the self..
conscious individuality, ascertaining what its inner and outer are
supposed to be. This pointofview leads us to the thought which
really lies at the base of the 'science'-if one wishes to call it
such---of physiognomy. The antithesis which this observation
encounters has the form of the antithesis of the practical and
the theoretical, both falling within the practical aspect itselfthe antithesis ofindividuality making itse1f actual in its 'doing'
('doing' in its most general sense), and individuality as being
at the same time reflected out of this 'doing' into itself and making this its object. Observation accepts this antithesis in the
same inverted relationship which characterizes it in the sphere
of appearance. It regards as the unessential outer the deed itse1f
and the performance~ whether it be t.hat of speech or a more
I

Dber Physiognomik, 2nd edn., Gottingen, '778, p. 35·

192

C. (AA.) REASON

durable reality; but it is the being-within-self of the individuality which is for it the essential inner. Of the two aspects possessed
by the practical consciousness, intention and deed (what is
'meant' or intended by the deed and the deed itself), observation selects the former as the true inner; the in tention is supposed to have its more or less unessential expression in the deed,
but it has its true expression in the shape of the individuality.
The latter expression is the immediate sensuous presence of the
individual spirit; the inwardness which is supposed to be the
true inner is the particularity of the intention and the singleness
of the being-for-self; both together are the spirit as only 'meane
or intended. What observation has for its objectsis thus an existence which is only 'meant', and it looks for laws between such
existences.
320. The forming ofopinions prima facie about the presumed
[outward] presence of Spirit is natural or everyday physiognomy, the over-hasty judgement formed at first sight about the
inner nature and character of its outershape. The object of this
opinion is of such a kind that i~s essence involves its being in
truth something else than merely sensuous immediate being.
True, it ~s also just this reflectedness into itself, out bfsense,
in sensuous form, and this which is visibly present as visibility
of the invisible, is the object of observation. But just this sensuous immediate presence is the reality of S.pirit only for mere
opinion; and observation, in keeping with this aspect, busies
itselfwith this presumed existence ofSpirit, with physiognomy,
handwriting, sound ofvoice, etc. It connects such existence with
just such a presumed inner. It is not the murderer, the thief, who
is to be recognized, but the capacity to be one. The fixed abstract
quality thereby gets lostin the concrete, infinitely determinate,
characterbftheparticularindividual, which now demands more
skilfully contrived delineations than those qualifications are.
Such ingenious delineations certainlysaymore than the qualification, 'murderer', 'thief', or 'good-natured', 'unspoiled', and
soon; but they are far from being adequate for their purpose,
which is to express the presumed being or the particular individuality; as inadequate as the delineations of the bodily shape
which go [noJl further than a 'flat forehead', a 'long nose', etc.
For the individual shape, like the individual self-consciousness,
I

The sense seems to require a 'no" here.

OBSERVING REASON

193

is, qua a being that is 'meant', inexpressible. The 'science of
knowing men', 1 which deals with the supposed human being,
like the 'science' of physiognomy which deals with his presumed
reality, and aims at raising the unconscious judging of everyday
physiognomy to the level of knowledge, is therefore something
which lacks both foundation and finality; it can never succeed
in saying what it means because it merely 'means' and its content is something merely 'meant'.
32 I. The laws which this 'science' sets out to find are relations between these two supposed aspects, and hence can themselves be nothing more than empty subjective opinions. Also,
since the object of this supposed way of knowing, which takes
it upon itself to deal with the reality of Spirit, isjust the reflection of Spirit out ofits sensuous existence back into itself, and
a particular [physical] existence is for Spirit something indifferent and contingent, this kind of knowing must be directly
aware that the laws it has discovered tell us nothing, that,
strictly speaking, it is idle chatter, or merely the voicing of one's
own opinion (an expr:ession w,hich contains the truth about itself,
viz. that it is One's own opinion that is putforwarcl, hence not
the matter itselfbutmerdy an opinion of oneJsown). As regards
their content, however, these observations are on a par with
these; 'It always rains when we have our annual fair,' says the
dealer; 'and every time, too,' says the housewife, 'when I am
dryillgm y washing'.
322. Lichtenberg, who characterizes physiognomicobservation in this way, also says this; 'Ifanyone said, "You certainly
act like an honest man, but I see from your face that you are
forcing yourself to do so and are a rogue at heart"; without
a doubt, every honest fellow to the end of time, when thus
addressed, will retort with a box on the ear.' This retort is to
the point, because it refutes the primary assumption of such a
'science' of mere subjective opinion, viz. that the reality of a
man is his face, etc. The true heing of a man is rather his deed;
in this the individual is actual, and it is the deed that does away
with both aspects of what is [merely] 'meant' to be: in the one
aspect where whatis 'meant' has the form ofa corporeal passive
I This refers to the claims put forward by Lavat~r, whose work was entitled Physiognomiselle Fragmenie ZUT Biforderung deT Menschenkenntniss und Menschenliehe, Leipzig, 1775-8
(Haillie'snote).

194

C. (AA.) REASON

being, the individuaHty, in the deed, exhibits itself rather as
the negative essence, which only is in so far as it supersedes [mere]
being. Then, too, the deed equally does away with the inexpressibility ofwhat is 'm-eant', in respect of the self-conscious indivi ..
duality. In such mere opinion the individuality is infinitely determined and determinable. In the accomplished deed this
spurious infinity is destroyed. The deed is something simply determined, universal, to be grasped in an abstraction; it is
murder, theft, or a good action, a brave deed, and so on, and
what it is can be said of it. It is this, and its being is not merely
a sign, but the fact itself. It is this, and the individual human
being is what the deed is. In the simplicity of this heing, the individual is for others a universal being who really is, and who ceases
to be something only 'meane. It is true that, in the deed, he
is not explicitly present as Spirit; but when it is a question of
his being qua heing, and, on the one hand, the twofold being
of bodily shape and deed are contrasted, each purporting to
be what he actually is, then it is the deed alone that must be
affirmed as his genuine being-no t his face or outward appearance,
which is supposed to express what he 'means' by his deeds, or
what anyone might suppose he merely could do. Similarly, on
the other hand, when his performance and his inner possihility,
ca pacity orin tention are contrasted, it istheformeralone which
is to be regarded as his true actuality, even ifhe deceives himself
on the point, and, turning away from his action into himself,
fancies that in this inner selfhe is something else than what he
is in thedeed. Individuality, when it commits itself to the objective element in putting itself into a deed, does of course risk
being altered and perverted. But what settles the character of
the deed is just this: whether the deed is an actual being that
endures, or whether it is merely a fancied performance, that
in itself is nothing at all, and passes away. The analysis of this
being into intentions and subtleties of that sort, whereby the
actual man, i.e. his deed, is to be explained away again in terms
of a being that is only 'meant', just as the individual himself
even may cre~te for himself special intentions concerning his
actuality, aUthis must be left to the laziness of mere conjecture.
Should this idle thinking want to set its sterile wisdom to work,
with the aim of denying the doer the character of Reason} and
so ill-using him as to declare that not his deed, but his face and

OBSERVING REASON

'95

lineaments are his real being, then it may expect to get the retort
spoken of above, a retort which demonstrates that the face or
outward appearance is not the individual's in-itselfbut, on the
contrary, can be an object for handling.
323. Ifwe look now at the range of relationships as a whole,
in which the self.. conscious individuality can be observed to
stand towards its outer aspect, there will be one left which has
still to be made an object for observation. In psychology it is
the external reality of things which is supposed to have its selfconscious counterpart in Spirit and to make Spirit intelligible.
In physiognomy, on the other hand, Spirit is supposed to be
k~own in its own outer aspect, as in a being which is the utterance
of Spirit-the visible invisibility of its essence. There remains
the further determination of the aspect of reality, viz. that the
individuality expresses its essence in its immediate, firmlyestablished, and purely existent actuality. This last relation is thus
distinguished from the physiognomic by the fact that this is the
speaking presence of the individual who, in expressing himself
in action, at the same time exhibits himself as inwardly reflecting
and contemplating himself, an expression which is itself a movement, features in repose which are themselves essentially a
mediated being. In the determination yet to be considered,
however, the outer aspect is lastly a wholly immobile reality
which is not in its oWl1 self a speaking sign but, separated from
self-conscious movement, presents itself 00 its own account and
i~ a mere Thing.
'
324. In the first place, in regard to the relation of the inner
to this its outer, it seems clear that that relation must he grasped
as a causal connection, since the relation of one being-in-itself to
another being~in~itself, qua a necessary relation, is a causal connection.
325- Now, for spiritual individuality to have an effect on the
body it must) qua cause) be itself corporeal. The corporeal element, however, in which it acts as cause is the organ, but the
organ not of action against external reality, but of the internal
action of the self~conscious being operating outwards only
against its own body. It is not at once clear which organs these
can be. Ifwe were thinking only of organs in general, the organ
for work as such would be quite obvious, similarly the organ
of sex, and so on. Organs of that sort, however, are to be

19 6

C. (AA.) REASON

considered as instruments or parts which Spirit, as one extreme,
possesses as a middle term against the other extreme, which is the
external object. Here, however, is to be understood an organ in
which the self-conscious individual, as an extreme, preserves
himselfJor himself against his own [corporeal] actuality which
is opposed to him, the individual at the same time not being
turned to the outer world but reflected in his action, and in
which is an organ in which the aspect of being is not a beingJor-another. It is true that in the physiognomic relation the organ
is also considered as an existence reflected into itse1fand reviewing the action; but this being is an objective being, and the
result of the physiognomic observation is this, that self-consciousness confronts this its actuality as something to which it
is indifferent. This indifference vanishes in the fact that this very
reflectedness-into-self is productive of an effect; thereby that
objective existence receives a necessary relation to it. But to act
on that existence the reflectedness .. into-self must itself have a
being,' though not, strictly speaking, an objective being,and
as such an organ it must he pointed out.
326. Now, in ordinary life, anger, e.g., as such an internal
action, is located in the liver. Plato1even assigns the liver something still higher, something which is even regarded by some
as the highest function of all, viz. prophesying, or the gift of
speaking of holy and eternal things in a non-rational manner.
But the movement which the individual has in his liver, heart,
and so on, cannot be regarded' as wholly reflected into itself;
ratherit is present in such a manner that it has already taken
ona corporeal aspect in him and has an animal existence turning outwards to external reality.
327. The nervous system, on the other hand, is the immediate
repose of the organism in its movement. The nerves themselves,
it is true, are again the organs of that consciousness which is
already immersed in its outward~directed activity; brain and
spinal cord, however, may be considered as the immedi-ate presenceofself. consciousness, apresence which abides within itself,
is not objective and also does not look outwards. In so far as
the moment of being which this organ has is a being-1or-another,
i.e. is an outer existence, it is a dead thing and no longer the
presence of self-consciousness. This being-within-itself, however,
1

Timaeus, 71) 72.

OBSERVING REASON

197

is by its very nature a fluid system, in which the circles cast
into it immediately dissolve, and in which no lasting distinction
is expressed. Meanwhile, as Spirit itselfis not abstractly simple,
but a system of movements in which it differentiates itself into
moments, but in this very differentiation remains free; and as
Spirit articulates its body into a variety offunctions, and allots
one particular part for only one function: so too, the fluid being
ofits bei ng~within-Jelf can be thought of as articulated into parts.
And it seems that it must be thought of in this way, because
the being of Spirit which, in the brain, is reflected into itself,
is itself again only a middle term between Spirit's pure essence
and its corporeal articulation, a middle term which therefore
must partake of the nature of both; the corporeal aspect must
therefore also be present in the middle term in the form of imme~
diate being.
328. The spiritually organic being has at the same time the
necessary aspect of an inert, enduring existence; the former, qua
the extreme ofbeing~for-self, must step back, and have this lat~
teras the other extreme over againstit, which is then the object
on which the spiritually organic being acts as cause. If now the
brain and spinal cord together constitute that corporeal beingfo.r-selj of Spirit, the skull and vertebra] column form the other
extreme to it, an extreme which is separated off, viz. the solid,
inert Thing. When, however, anyone thinks of the proper location of Spirit's outer existence, it is not the back that comes
to mind but only the head. Therefore, in examining a way ·of
knowing like the one we are now dealing with, we can be
satisfied with this reason-Dot a very bad reason in this casein order to confine this existence to the skull. Should it occur
to anyone to think of the back as the location of Spirit in so
far as by it, too, knowing and doing are no doubt sometimes
partly driven in and partly driven out, this would be no proof
at all that the spinal cord must be taken as included in the indweJling seat of Spirit, because this proves too much. For one
may equally recall that there are other popular external ways,
too, for getting at the activity of Spirit in order to stimulate
or inhibit it. The vertebral Go]umn is, then, rightly ruled <?ut,
if you like; that the skull alone does not contain the organs of
Spirit is as well 'explained' as many another doctrine of 'philosophy of Nature'. For this was previously excluded from the

[9 8

C. (AA.) REASON

Notion of this relation, and for this reason the skull was taken
for the aspect of outer existence; or, if we are not to be allowed
to recall the Notion of the relation, then certainly experience
teaches that, as it is with the eye qua organ that we see, so it
is not with the skull that we murder, steal, write poetry, etc.
That is the reason why we must also refrain from using the
expression' organ' for that significance of the skull which has still
to be mentioned. For although it is commonly said that reasonable men pay attention not to the word but to the thing itself,
yet this does not give us permission to describe a thing in terms
inappropriate to it. For this is at once incompetence and deceit,
to fancy and to pretend that one merely has not the right word,
and to hide from oneself that really one has failed to get hold
of the thing itself, i.e. the Notion. If one had the Notion, then
one would also have the right word. What has been determined
here in the first instance is only that just as the brain is the living
head, the skull is the caput mortuum.
3~9. It is in this dead being, then, that the mental processes
andspeeific functions of the brain would have to display their
outer reality, a reality, however, which is still in the individual
himself. For the relation of those processes and functions to the
skull, which as a dead being does not have Spirit dwelling
within it, there presents itself, in the first instance, the external
mechanical relation established above, so that the organs
proper~and these are in the brain----,here press the skull out
around, there widen or flatten it, Of in whatever other way one
cares to represent this action on it. Being itself a part of the
organism, it must indeed he credited, as in the case of every
bone, with a living spontaneous formative activity so that, from
this point of view, it is rather the skull that on its part presses
on the brain, and fixes its outer boundary; and it is better able
to do this, being the harder. But in that case the same relation
would still obtain in the determination of their reciprocal
activity; for whether the skull is the determining factor or the
factor determined, this would produce no alteration at all in
the causal connection, except that the skull would then he made
the immediate organ of self-consciousness because in it, qua
cause, would be found the aspect of heing-for-selJ. But in point
offact, since being-For-self, as an organic spontaneity, is equally
present in both, any causal connection between them is rtiled

OBSERVING REASON

199

out. This development of the two, however, would be inwardly
connected, and would be an organic pre-established harmony,
which would leave the two interrelated aspects free in respect
of each other, each with its own shape to which the shape of
the other need not correspond; and still more so as regards the
relation between the shape and the quality, just as the shape
of the grape and the taste of the wine are mutually independent.
But since the determination of being-for-self falls on the side of
the brain, but that of existence on the side of the skull, there is
also to be established a causal connection between them within
the organic uniiy-a necessary relation between them as
external for one another, i.e. a relation itself external through
which, therefore, the shape of each would be determined by the
other.
330. However, as regards the determination in which the
organ of self-consciousness would act causally on the opposite
aspect, all sorts of things can be said. For what is in question
is the constitution of a cause which is considered in regard to
its indifferent outer existence, its shape and size, a cause whose
inner being and being-for-selfare to bepreciselyofakind which
does not conern the immediate or outer existence. The Qrganic
spontaneous formation of the skull is in the first place ip.different
to any mechaniCalinfluence exerted on it, and thcrelationship
of these two relations, since the former is a relating of itself to
itself, is Just this very indefiniteness and unboundedness.
Furthermore, even if the brain received into itself the distinctions of Spirit as existential distinctions and were a plurality
of internal organs each occupying a different space, it would
be left undetermined whether a spiritual feature would, according as it was originally,stronger or weaker, be bound to possess
in the first case~a more expanded brain-organ, or in the latter
case a ~ore ~ontracted brain-organ, or even the other way
about. Bu'th is contradictory to Nature for the brain to be such
a plurality of internal organs, for Nature gives the moments
of the Notion an existence of their own, and therefore puts the
fluid simplicity of organic life dearly on one side, and its articu ..
lation and division with its distinctions clearly on the other, so
~hat in the way they are to be grasped here, they display themselves as particular anatomical things. Similarly with the question whether the development of the brain would enlarge or

200

C. (AA.) REASON

diminish the organ, whether it would make it coarser and
thicker or finer. From the fact that it remains undetermined
how the cause is constituted, it is equally left undetermined how
the effect is produced in the skul1, whether it is an enlarging
or a narrowing and falling-in of the latter. When this influence
is defined, as it were, more imposingly as a 'stimulation', it is
still undetermined whether this takes place by swelling, like the
effect of a cantharides plaster, or by shrivelling, like the effect
of vinegar. All views of this kind can be supported by plausible
grounds, for the organic relation which just as much plays a
part accommodates one view as readily as another, and is
indifferent to all this cleverness.
33 I. However, it is not the function of observation to seek
to determine this relation, for in any case it is not the brain,
qua a physical part, which stands on the one side, but the brain
qua the being of the self-conscious individuality. This latter as a
lasting character and spontaneous conscious activity existsfor
itself and within itself. Over against this heing-for-and-within ..
itself stand its actuality and its existence-for~another. The
being-for-and-within-itselfis the essence and the subject which
has a being in the brain; this beingis subsumed under the subject,
and gets its VallJe onlythroygh itsindweUingsignificance. But
the other aspect of self-conscious individ u.ality, the aspect
of itsouterexi~tence, is being {ju,a inciepel)dent and subject, or
qua a 'thing', viz. a bone: the a4tu4#ty and existt:nce oj man is his
skull-bone. This i~ -how the relationship and the two sides of this
re}lJ,tion 4re understood by the consciousness observing them.
33~. Observation has now todeal with thernore determinate
relatiqn of these aspects. The skull~hone does have in general
thesigni6cance of being the immediate actuality ofSpirit. But
the many-sided ness of Spirit gives its existence a corresponding
variety of meanings. What we have to obtain is the specific
meaning of the particular areas into which this existence is
divid.ed; and we have tosee how the§eareas contain an indication of that specific meaning.
333. The skull .. bone is not an_ organ of activity, nor even a
'speaking' movement. We neither commit the(t, murder, etc.
with the skull-bone, nor does it in the least betray such deeds
by a change of countenance, so that the skull-hone would
become a speaking gesture. Nor has this immediate being the

OBSER VING REASON

201

value even of a sign. Look and gesture, tone of voice, even a
pillar or post erected on a desert island, directly proclaim that
they mean something else than w ha t they simply are a t firs t sight.
They at once profess to be signs, since they have in them a peculiarity which points to something else, by the fact that it does
not properly belong to them. A variety of ideas may well occur
to us in connection with a skull, like those of Hamlet over
Yorick's skull; but the skull-bone just by itself is such an indifferent, natural thing that nothing else is to be directly seen
in it, or fancied about it, than simply the bone itself. It does
indeed remind us of the brain and its specific nature, and of
skulls of a different formation, but not of a conscious movement,
since there is impressed on it neither a look nor a gesture, nor
anything that proclaims itself to have co·me from a conscious
action; for it is an actuality whose role it is to exhibit another
sort of aspect of the individuality, one that would no longer
be a self-reflected, but a purely immediate being.
334. Further, while the skull-bone does not itself feel, it
seems that perhaps a more specific significance could still be
fOl-\ndJor it in the fact th~t"specificfeelings) through their proximity to the skull, might enable us to ascertain what it is that
the skull means.to convey; and when a conscious modeofSpirit
has its feeling in a specific area of the skull, the shape of this
part of the skulLmight perhapsindicate what thatmode is, and
what is its $pecial nature. Just as, e.g., some people complain
of feeling a painful tension somewhere in the head when they
are thinking hard, or even when thinking at alL so too could
stealing, committing murder, writing poetry, and so on, each
be accompanied byits own feeling, which besides would necessarily"belocalized in its own special pJace. This area of the brain
which would in this way be more moved and activated would
probably also develop the adjacent area of the skull .. bone; or
again this particular area would, from sympathy or consensus,
not be inert, but would enlarge or diminish itself or modify its
shape in some way or other. What, however, makes this hypo ..
thesis improbahle is this, that feeling as such is something indeterminate, and feeling in the head as tJ1e centre might be a
general sympathetic feeling accompanying all forms of suffering, so that mixed up with the thiefs, murderer's, poet's, headitching or headache are other feelings which could as little be

202

C. (AA.) REASON

distinguished from one another and also from those we can call
merely bodily feelings, as an illness can be diagnosed from the
symptom of headache, if we restrict its significance merely to
the bodily aspect.
335. In fact, from whatever side we look at the matter, there
is no necessary reciprocal relation at all between them, nor any
direct indication of such a relation. If, all the same, the relation
is still to exist, what remains and is necessary to form it is an
irrational, free, pre-established harmony of the corresponding
determination of the two aspects; for one of the two aspects is
to be a non-spiritual reality, a mere thing.-On the one side,
then, we have a multitude of inert areas of the skull, on the
other, a multitude of mental properties, whose number and
character will deperid on the state of psychology. The more
paltry the conception of Spirit, the easier becomes the task from
this side; for partly, the mental properties become fewer, and
partly, they become more detached, rigid, and ossified, and
therefore more akin to characteristics of the bone, and more
comparable with them. But, although the task is made much
easier by the pal try conception of Spirit, yet there still remains
a very great deal to be done on both sides: there remains for
observation the entire conti ngencyof their relation. If the children of Israel, who were likened in numher to the sands of the
sea . .shore, should each take unto himself the grain of sand
which stood for him, the indifference and arbitrariness of such
a procedure would be no more glaring than that which assigns
to every faculty of soul, to every passion, and-what must
equally be considered here-to each nuance of character which
the more refined psychology and 'knowledge of human n.ature'
likes to talk about, its particular area of skull and shape of skullbone. The skull of a murderer has-not this organ or even
sign-but this bump. But this murderer has as well a multitude
of other properties, just as he has other bumps, and along with
the bumps also hollows; one has a choice of bumps and hollows.
And again, his murderous disposition can be related to any
bump or hollow, and this in turn to any mental property; for
the murderer is neither merely this abstraction of a murderer,
nor does he have only one bump and one hollow. The observations indulged in on this point must)just for that reason, sound
as sensible as those of the dealer and of the housewife about

OBSERVING REASON

20 3

rain at the annual fair and on wash-day. Dealer and housewife
might as well make the observation that it always rains when
a particular neighbour goes by, or when they eat roast pork.
Just as rain is indifferent to circumstances like these, so too,
from the standpoint of observation, a particular determinateness
of Spirit is indifferent to a particular formation of the skull. For
of the two objects of this observation, one is a dry, sapless beingfor-itself, an ossified property of Spirit, the other is an equally
sapless being-in-itself; such an ossified thing as both are is completely indifferent to everything else. It isjust as much a matter
of indifference to the high bump whether a murderer is in its
vicinity, as it is to the murderer whether flatness is clo~e by him.
336. It is of course undeniable that there remains the possibility that a bump at some place or other is connected with a
particular property, passion, etc. One can imagine the murderer
with a high bump here at this place on the skull, and the thief
with one there. From this aspect phrenology is capabie of still
greater expansion; for in the first instance it seems to confine
itself to connecting a bump with a property in the same individual, that is, the individual possesses both. But natural or everyday phrenology-for there must be such a 'science' as well as
a natural physiognomy-already goes beyond this restriction.
It not only declares that a cheating fellow has a bump as big
as your fist behind his ear, but also asserts that, not the unfaithful wife herself, but the other co£tiugal party, has a bump on
the forehead. Similarly, one can imagine the man who is living
under the same roof as the murderer, or even his neighbour,
Of, going further afield, imagine his fellow-citizens, et~. with
high bumps on some part or other of the skull, just as well as
one can imagine the flyi ng cow, that first was caressed by the
crab, that was riding on the donkey~ etc. etc. But if possibility
is taken, not in the sense of the possibility of imagining, but in
the sense of inner possibility, or the possibility of the Notion, then
the object is a reality of the kind which is a pure 'thing', and
is, and should be, without a significance of this sort, and can
therefore have it only in imagination or picture-thinking,
337. The observer, ignoring the mutual indifference of the
two aspects, may nevertheless set to work to determine their
relations, partly encouraged by the general rational principle
that the outer is the expression of the inner, and partly supported

204

C. (AA.) REASON

by the analogy of the skulls ofanimals-which indeed may well
have a simpler character than human beings, but of which at
the same time it will be all the harder to say what ·character
they do have, since it cannot be easy for anyone really to enter
in imagination into the nature of an animal. Should, however,
the observer do so, he will find, in assuring us of the certainty
of the laws he claims to have discovered, an excellent aid in a
distinction which must necessarily occur to us here too. The
being of Spirit cannot in any case be taken as something fixed
and immovable. Man is free; it is admitted that the original
being consists merely of dispositions, about which a man is free
to do much as he wishes, or which require favourable circumstances for their development; i.e. an original being of Spirit is
equally well to be spoken of as a being that does not exist qua
being. Were observations therefore to conflict with what someone happens to maintain is a law, should it happen to be fine
weather at the annual fair or on wash-clay-then dealer and
housewife might say that really it ought to rain, and that the tendency to rain is certainly present. So too when observing the skull,
it might he said that this individual really ought to be what,
according to the law, his skull procla1ms him to be, and that
he has an original disposition, but one that has not been developed: this quality is not present, hut it ought to be present. The
'law' and the 'ought' are based on ohservationofactual rainfall,
and on the actual significance in the case of this particular
characteristic feature of the skull; but if the reality is not present,
the empty possibility serves eq uall y weJ.]. This possi bili ty, i. e, nonactuality, of the stated law, ~nd hence the observations conflicting with the law, inevitably result from the fact that the freedom
of the individual, and the developing circumstance~, are indifferent to being as such [or to what merely is], indifferent to
being, both as an original inner and as an outer osseous form,
and this also from the fact that the individual can be something
else than he is by inner disposition, and still more than what
he is as a bone.
338. We get then the possibility that this bump or this hollow
on the skull may denote something actual, as well as merely
a disposition, one, moreover, that is so ill-defined as to denote
something that is not actual; we see what happens, as always,
to a bad subterfuge, viz. that it is itselfready to be used against

OBSERVING REASON

20 5

what it is supposed to support. We see mere subjective imaging
ing brought by the very nature of the fact to say-but unthinkingly-the opposite of what it affirms; to say that by this particular bone something or other is indicated, but equally too, is not
indicated.
339. What such imagining vaguely has in mind in the case
of this subterfuge is the true thought which, in fact, abolishes
that imagining, viz. that being as such is not the truth of Spirit
at all. Just as the disposition is itself an original being, which has
no part in the activity of Spirit, just such a being is the bone
on its side. What merely is, without any spiritual activity is,
for consciousness, a Thing, and, far from being the essence of
consciousness, is rather its opposite; and consciousness is only
actual to itself through the negation and abolition of such a
being. From this point of view it must be regarded as a complete
denial of Reason to pass off a bone as the actual existence of consciousness; and it is passed off as such when it is regarded as
the outer being of Spirit, for the outer isjust that reality which
merely is. I tis nonse sa yingthat the inner is only being inferred
from the outer, and is something different, nor that the outer is
notthe inner itself, but only its expression. For in the relation
ofthe two to one another the determination of the reality that
thinks itself, and is in the form of thought, does fall on the side
ofthe inner ; but on the side of the outer, falls the determination
of the reality which merely is. When, therefore, a man is told
',You (your inner being) are this kind of person because your
skull-bone is constituted in such and such a way,' this means
nothing else than, 'I regard a bone as your reality\ To reply to
such a judgement with a box on the ear, as in the case of a
similar judgement in physiognomy mentioned above, at first
takes away from the soft parts their importance and position,
and proves only that these are no true in.. itself, are notthe reality
of Spirit; the retort here would, strictly speaking, have to go
the length of beating iathe skull of anyone making such a judgement, in order to demonstrate in a manner just as palpable as
his wisdom, that for a man, a bone is nothing in itself, much
less his true reali ty.
340. The crude instinct of self-conscious Reason will reject
out of hand such a 'science' of phrenology-this other observational instinct of self-conscious Reason which, having

,206

C. (AA.) REASON

attained to a glimpse of the cognitive process, has grasped it
unintelligently in a way that takes the outer to be the expression
of the inner. But the worse the conception, the less sometimes
does it occur to one wherein its badness specifically lies, and
the harder it is to analyse it. For a conception is said to be worse,
the purer and emptier the abstraction which is takcn to be its
essence. But the antithesis we are here concerned with has for
its sides the individuality that is conscious of itself, and the
abstraction of externality that has become wholly a Thingthat inner being of Spirit grasped as a fixed non-spiritual being,
opposed tojust such a being. But Reason, in its role of observer,
having reached thus far, seems also to have reached its peak,
at which point it must abandon itself and do a right-about turn;
for only what is wholly bad is implicitly charged with the immediate necessity of changing round into its opposite. Just so, it
may be said of the Jewish people that it is precisely because
they stand before the portal of salvation that they are, and have
been, the most reprobate and rejected: what that people should
be in and for itself, this essen tial nature of its own self, is not
explicitly present to it; on the co ntra ry, it places it heyond itself.
By this alienation it creates for itself the possibility of a higher
existence, if only i t could take backagain into itself its alienated
object, than ifit had remained undisturbed within the immediacy of being-because Spirit is aU the greater, the.greater the
opposition from which it has returned into itself; but it creates
this opposition for itself by setting aside its immediate unity,
and by alienating its being-for ..self. However, if such a consciousness does not reflect on itself, the intermt;diate position,
or middle term, which it occupies is an unhappy void, since
what should fill and fulfiJ it has been turned into a fixed
extreme. Thus it is that this final stage of Reason in its observational role is its worst; and that is why its reversal becomes
a necessity.
341. For a .survey of the series of relations considered so far
which constitute the content and object of observation shows
that in their first form, i.e. in the observation of the relations
of inorganic Nature, sensuous being is alread y lost to view; the
moments of the relations present themselves as pure abstractions and as simple Notions which should be firmly tied to the
existence of things, an existence, however, which gets lost, so

OBSER VING REASON

20

7

that the moment demonstrates itself to be a pure movement
and a universaL This free process which is complete within itself
retains the significance of something objective, but now appears
as a unitary being; in the process of the inorganic, this unitary
being is the non-existent inner; but the process existing as a unitary being is the organism. The unitary being, qua a being-forself or negative being, stands in antithesis to the universal,
draws away from it, and remains free for itself, so that the
Notion, being realized only in the element of absolute singleness
and isolation, doe;s not find in organic existence its true expression, viz. to be present as a universal, but remains an outer or,
what is the same thing, an inner of organic Nature. The organic
process is orily implicitly free, but is not explicitly free for itself;
the being-for-self of its freedom appears in purpose and exists as
another being, as a wisdom thatis conscious ofitselfand is outside
of the process. Reason in the role of observer thus turns to this
wisdom, turns to Spirit, to the Notion existing as a universality,
or to purpose existing as purpose; and henceforth the object
before it is its own essence.
342. It turns its attention at first to its purity [i.e. its abstract
form]; but since Reason qua observer apprehends the object,
which moves among its own distinct moments, as an inert being,
its Laws of Thought become connections of one constant
moment to another constant moment. But the content of these
la ws being only moments, these run together in to the single uni t
of self-consciousness. This new object, similarly taken as an inert
being, is the single, contingent self-consciousness. Observation
stands, therefore, within what it imagines to be Spirit, and
within the contingent relation of conscious reality to a reality
that is not conscious. Spirit alone is in its own self the necessity
of this relation. Observation therefore looks more closely atthis
object, and compares its reality which wills and acts with its
reality which ponders and is reflected into itself, a reality which
is itself objective. This outer aspect, although a language of the
individual which he possesses within himself, is at the same
time, qua sign, something indifferent to the content it is supposed to denote, just as that which posits for itself the sign is
indifferent to it.
343. For this reason, observation finally goes back again
from this inconstant language to the fixed being, and declares,

208

C. (AA.) REASON

in accordance with its Notion, that externality is the outer and
immediate reality of Spirit, not as an organ, and not as a language or a sign, but as a dead Thing. What was ruled out by
the very first observation ofinorganic Nature, viz. the idea that
the Notion ought to be present in the form of a Thing, is reinstated by this last form of observation in such a way that it turns
the reality of Spirit itselfinto a Thing or, expressing it the other
way round, gives to lifeless being the significance of Spirit.
Observation has here reached the point where it openly declares what our Notion of it was, viz. that the certainty of Reason
seeks its own selfas an objective reality. Of course, the intention
here is not to state that Spirit, which is represented by a skull,
is a Thing; there is not meant to be any materialism, as it is
called, in this idea; rather Spirit must be something more and
other than these bones. But to say that Spirit [merely] is, means
nothing else than that it is a Thing. When being as such, or
thinghood, is predicated of Spirit, the true expression of this
is that Spirit is, therefore, the same kind of being that a bone
is. It must therefore be regarded as extremely important that
the true expression has been found for the hare statement about
Spirit~that it is. When in other respects it is said of Spirit that
it is, that it has being, is a Thing, a single, separate reality, this
is not intended to mean that it is something we can see or take
in our hands or touch, and so on, but that is what is said; and
what really is said is expressed by saying that the being of Spirit
is a bone.
344. Now this result has a twofold significance, One is its
true meaning, in so far as it is a completion of the outcome of
the preceding movement of self-consciousness. The Unhappy
Self-consciousness renounc.ed its independence, and struggled to
make its being-for-self into a Thing. It thereby reverted from self·
consciousness to consciousness, i.e. to theconscio.usness for which
the object is something which merely is, a Thing; but here, what
isa Thiog is self-consciousness; the Thing is, therefore, the unity
of the 'I' and being-the category. The object being determined
th.'cls for consciousness, the latter possesses Reason. Consciousness, as well as self-consciousness, is in itself Reason; but only
that consciousness for which the object is determined as the
category can be said to have Reason. From this, however, we
must still distinguish the knowledge of what Reason is. The

OBSERVING REASON

category, which is the immediate unity of being and selj,l must
pass through both forms, and it is precisely for consciousness
qua observer that the category presents itselfin the form of being.
This consciousness, in its result, enunciates as a proposition that
of which it is the unconscious certainty-the proposition that
is implicit in the Notion of Reason. This proposition is the infinite
judgement that the self is a Thing, a judgement that suspends
itself. Through this result, then, the category is further deter . .
mined as being this self-superseding antithesis. The pure cate~
gory, which is present for consciousness in the form of being or
immediacy, is the object as still unmediated, as merely given, and
consciousness is equally unmediated in its relation to it. The
moment of that infinite judgemen t is the transition of immediacy
into mediation, or negativity. The given object is consequently
determined as a negative object; consciousness, however, is de~
termined as Jeif.. consciousness over against it; in other words,
the category which, in the course of observation, has run
through the form of being is now posited in the form of being~
for..,self; consciousness no longer aims to find itself immediately,
but to, produce itself by its own activity. It is itself the End at
which its action aims, whereas in its role of observer it was'concernedonly with things.
345. The other significance of the result is the one already
considered, viz. the significance of an observational activity
that dispenses with the Notion. This knows no other way of
understanding and expressing itself than na'ively asserting the
reality of self~consciousness to lie in the bone just as it exists as
a sensuous thing, and which at the same time does not lose its
objectivity for consciousness. I t has no clear consciousness, however, of what is implied in its assertion, and does not grasp the
specific character of the subject and predicate, and their relation in its proposition, still less in the sense of the ipfinite, self~
suspendingjudgementand of the NQtion. Rather, out ofapro~
founder self~consciousness of Spirit, which here appears as a
natural J:1onesty, it conceals from itself the disgracefulness of the
irrational, crude thought which takes a bone for the reality of
sdf.consciousness; andit whitewashes that thought by unthink~
ingly mixing up with it all sorts of relationships of cause and
effect, of 'sign', 'organ', etc. which arc meaningless here, and
I

Einheit des Seins und des Seinen.

210

C. (AA.) REASON

it hides the crudity of the proposition by distinctions derived
from them.
.
346. Brain fibres and the like, when regarded as the being
of Spirit, are no more than a merely hypothetical reality exist:
ing only in one's head, not the true reality which has an outer
existence, and which can be felt and seen; when they exist out
there, when they are seen, they are dead objects, and then no
longer pass for the being of Spirit. But objectivity proper must
be an immediate, sensuous objectivity, so that in this dead objec~
tivity-for the ,bone is a dead thing, so far as what is dead is
present in the living being itself-Spirit is explicitly present as
actual. The Not jon underlying this idea is that Reason takes
itself to be all thinghood, even purely ohjective thinghood itself; but
it is this only in the Notion, or, only the Notion is the truth of
this idea; and the purer the Notion itself is, the sillier an idea
it becomes when its content is in the form, not of the Notion,
but of picture-thinking, i.e. if the self-suspending judgement is
not taken with the consciousness of this its infinitude, but as
a fixed proposition the subject and predicate of which are valid
each on its own account, the self fixed as self, the thing fixed
as thing, and yet each is supposed tobe the other. Reason, essen~
tially the Notion, is directly sundered into itselfand its opposite,
anantithesis which for that very reason is equally immediately
resolved. But when Reason is presented as its own self and its
QPposite, and is held fast in the entirely separate moment of
this asunderness, itis apprehended irrationally; and the purer
the moments of this asunderness, the cruder is the appearance
of this content which is either only for consciousness, or only
ingenuously expressed by it. The depth which Spirit brings forth
from within-but only as far as its picture .. thinking conscious~
ness where it lets it remain~and the ignorance of this conscious~
ness about what it really is saying, are the same conjunction of
the high and the low which, in the living being, Nature naively
expresses when it combines the organ of its highest fulfilment,
the organ of generation, with the organ of urination. The in~
finite judgement, qua infinite, would be the fulfilme~t of life
that comprehends itself; the consciousness of the infinite judge~
ment that remains at the level of picture-thinking behaves as
urination. l
I cr. Philosophy of Nature, p. 404 (Miller's translation): 'In many animals the organs

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

211

B. THE ACTUALIZATION OF RATIONAL SELFCONSCIOUSNESS THROUGH ITS OWN ACTIVITY

347. Self-consciousness found the Thing to be like itself, and
itself to be like a Thing; i.e. it is aware that it is in itself the
objectively real world. It is no longer the immediate certainty
of being all reality, but a certainty for which the immediate
in general has the form of something superseded, so that the
objectivity of the immediate still has only the value of something
superficial, its inner being and essence being self-consciousness
itself. The object, to which it is positively related, is therefore
a self-consciousness. It is in the form of thing hood, i.e. it is independent; but it is certain that this independent object is for it
not something alien, and thus it knows that it is in principle recognized by the object. It is Spirit which, in the duplication of its
self.. consciousness and in the independence of both, has the certainty of its unity with itself. This certainty has now to be raised
to the level of tru th; wha t holds good for it in principle, and in
its inner certainty, has to enter into its consciousness and
become explicit for it.
348. What the general stages of this actualization will be is
readily apparent in a general way frOlU a comparison with the
path hitherto followed. Just as Reason, in the role of observer,
repeated, in the element of the category, the movement of consciousness, viz. sense-certainty, perception, and the Understanding, so will Reason again run through the double movement
of self-consciousness, and pass over from independence into its
freedom. To begin with, this active Reason is aware of itself
merely as an individual and as such must demand and produce
its reality inan 'other'. Then, however, its consciousness having
raised itself into universality, it becomes universal Reason, and
is conscious of its elf as Reason, as a consciousness that is already
recognized in and for itself, which in its pure consciousness
unites all self-consciousness. It is the simple, spiritual essence
which, in attaining consciousness, is at the same time real Substance, into which the earlier forms return as into their ground,
of excretion and the genitals, the highest and lowest parts in the animal organization,
are intimately connected :just asspeech and kissing, on the one hand, and eating, drinkingand spitting, on the other, are all done with the mouth.'

212

C. (AA.) REASON

so that, in comparison with the latter, they are merely particu~
lar moments of its Becoming, moments which do indeed break
loose and appear as independent forms, but in fact have existence and reality only as grounded in that Becoming, and possess
their truth only in so far as they are and remain in it.
349. If we take this goal-and this is the Notion which for
us has already appeared on the scene-in its reality, viz. the
self-consciousness that is recognized and acknowledged, and
which has its own self-certainty in the other free self-consciousness, and possesses its truth precisely in that 'other'; in other
words, if we look on this still inner Spirit as Substance that has
already advanced to the stage of having an outer existence, then
in this Notion there is disclosed the realm of ethical life. For this
is nothing else than the absolute spiritual unity of the essence
of individuals in their independent actual existence; it is an intrinsically universal self;,.consciousness that takes itself to be
actual in another consciousness, in such ,wise that this has complete independence, or is looked on as a Thing, and it is precisely therein that the universal self-consciousness is aware of
its unity with it, and only in this unity with this objective being
is it self~consciousness. This ethical Substance, taken in its
abstract universality, is on]y law in the form of thou~ght; but it
is no less immediately actual self-consciousness, or it is custom. The
sin'gle individual consciousness, conversely, is only this existent
unit in so far as it is aware of the universal consciousness in
its individuality as its own being, since what it does and is, is
the universal custom.
350. It is in fact in the Jife of a people or nation that the
Notion of self-conscious Reason's actualization--of beholding,
in the independence of the 'other', complete unity with it, or
having for my object the free thinghood of an 'other' which
confronts me and is the negative of myself, as my own being
for-myself~that the Notion has its complete reality. Reason is
present here as the fluid universal Substance, as unchangeable
simple thinghood, which yet bursts asunder into many completely independent beings, just as light bursts asunder into
stars as countless self~]uminous points, which in their absolute
being-for-self are dissolved, not merely implicitly in the simple
independent Substance, but explicitly for themselves. They are
conscious of being these separate independent beings through
a

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF·CONSCIOUSNESS

213

the sacrifice of their particularity, and by having this universal
Substance as their soul and essence, just as this universal again
is their own doing as particular individuals, or is the work that
they have produced.
35 I. 'the purely particular activity and occupation of the
individual refers to the needs which he has as a natural creature,
i.e. as a merely immediate individuality. That even these, its commonest functions, are not frustrated, but enjoy an actual existence, is due to the universal sustaining medium, to the might
of the entire nation. But, in the universal Substance, the individual has thisJorm of subsistence not only for his activity as such,
but no less also for the content of that activity; what he does is
the skill and customary practice of all. This content, in so far
as it is completely particularized, is, in its actual existence, con ..
fined within the framework of the activity of all. The labour of
the individual for his own needs is just as much a satisfaction
of the needs of others as of his own, and the satisfaction of his
own needs he obtains onlythrough the labour of others. As the
individual in his individual work already unconsci~usly performs
a universal work, so again he also performs the universal work
as his conscious object; the whole becomes, as a whole, his own
work, for which he sacrifices himself and precisely in so doing
receives back from it his own self. There is nothing here which
would not be reciprocal, nothingin relation to which the independence of the individual would not, in the dissolution of its
being-for-selfin the negation of itself, give itself its positive signifi..
canceofbeingJor itself. This unity ofbeing..for-another or making oneself a Thing, and of being-foraself) this universal Substance, speaks its universal language in the customs and la'ws of
its nation. But this existent unchangeable essence is the expression of the very individuality which seems opposed to it; the
laws proclaim what each individual is and does; the individual
knows' them not only as his universal objective thinghood, but
equally knows himselfin them, or knows them as particulariz.ed
in his own individuality, and in each of his fellow citizens. In
the universal Spirit, therefore, each has only the certain'ty of
himself, of finding in the actual world nothing but himself; he
is as certain of the others as he is of himself. I perceive in all
of them the fact that they know themselves to be only these
independent beings, just as I am. I perceive in them the free

C. (AA.) REASON

unity with others in such wise that, just as this unity exists
through me, so it exists through the others too~I regard them
as myself and myself as them.
352. In a free nation, therefore, Reason is in truth realized.
I t is a present living Spirit in which the individual not only
finds his essential character, i.e. his universal and particular
nature, expressed, and present to him in the form of thing hood,
but is himself this essence, and also has realized that essential
character. The wisest men of antiquity have therefore declared
that wisdom and virtue consist in living in accordance with the
customs of one's nation.
353. But from this happy state of having realized its essential
character and of living in it, self-consciousness, which at first
is Spirit only immediately and in principle, has withdrawn, or else
has not yet realized it; for both may equally well be said.
354. Reason must withdraw from this happy state; for the
life of a free people is only in principle or immediat.ely the reality
of an ethical order. In other words, the ethical order exists
merely as something given; therefore this universal Spirit itself
is a separate, individualspirit, and the customs and laws intheir
entirety area specific ethical substance, which only in the higher
stage, viz. in Spirit's consciousness of its essence,sheds this limitation and in this knowledge alone has its absolute truth, not
directly asi t immediately is. In the latter form it is a limited ethical
substance, and absolute limitation is just this, that Spirit is in
the form of [mere] being.
355. Further, therefore, the single, individual consciousness
as it exists immediately in the real ethical order, or in the nation,
is a solid unshaken trust in which Spirit has not, for the individual, resolved itself into its abstract moments, and therefore he
is not aware of himself as heing a pure individuality on his own
account. But once he has arrived at this idea, as he must, then
this immediate unity with Spiri t, the [mere] being of hiJ!lself in
Spirit, his trust, is lost. Isolated and on his own, it is he who
is now the essence, no longer universal Spirit. This individuality
of self",consciousness is,it is true, a moment in universal Spirit
itself, but only as a vanishing quantity which, appearing on its
own, is at once resolved within universal Spirit; and enters consciousness merely as trust. In thus establishing himself-and
each moment, because it is a moment of the essence, must suc-

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

215

ceed in exhibiting itself as the essence-the individual has
thereby placed himself in opposition to the laws and customs.
These are regarded as mere ideas having no absolute essentiality, an abstract theory without any reality, while he as this
particular 'I' is his own living truth.
356. Or, self-consciousness has not yet attained this happy state
ofbeing the ethical substance, the Spirit of a people. For having
turned back from its role of observer, Spirit, at first, is not yet
as such realized through itself; it is established only as an inner
essence or as an abstraction. In other words, Spirit is, at first,
immediate; but existing immediately, it is separate and individual. It is the practical consciousness, which steps into its world
which it finds already given, with the aim of duplicating itself
in this distinct form of something separate and individual, of
producing itself'as this individual, as this existent counterpart
ofitself, and of becoming conscious of this unity of its own actuality with the objective being of the world. Self-consciousness
has ..thecertainty of this unity; it holds that the unity is implicitly
already present, or that this agreement of itself with thinghood
already exists, and has only to become sojor it through its, own
agency; or thatthe production of that unity is equally the finding of it. Since this unity means happiness, the individual is
sent out into the world by his own spirit to seek his happiness.
357. If, then,jor us the truth of this rational self-consciousness
is the ethical substance, here, jor that self-consciousness, it is the
beginning of its ethicatexperience of the world.- In so far as
it has not yet become the ethical substance, this movement
presses forward to it, and what is superseded in the movement
are the individual moments which for self:..,consciousness are
valid in their isolation. They have the form of an immediate
will or natural impulse which obtains its satisfaction, which is itself
the content of a fresh impulse. If, however, self~consciousness
has lost the happiness of being in the substance, these natural
impulses are bound up with an awareness that their goal is the
true character and essential nature of self·consciousness. The
ethical substance has sunk to the level of a predicate devoid
of self, whose living subjects are individuals who themselv~s
have to provide the filling for their universality and to fulfil
their essential nature through their own efforts. Taken in the
former sense, then, those forms are the coming-to-be of the

C. (AA.) REASON

ethical substance and precede it; in the latter, they succeed it
and reveal toself.consciousnesswhatits essential nature is. In the
former case, the immediacy or rawness of the impulses gets lost
in the process of getting to know what their truth is, and their
content takes on a higher form. In the latter case, what is lost
is the false idea of the consciousness which places its essential
nature in those impulses. Inthe former case, the goal they attain
is the ethical Substance, while, in the latter, it is the conscious~
ness of that Substance, a consciousness which knows the Substance to be its own essence; and to that extent this process
would be the coming in to existence of morali ty, of a higher form
than the ethical Substance. But these forms, at the same time,
constitute only one side of morality's entry into existence, that,
namely, which belongs to being:for-selj, or in which consciousness sets aside its Ends~not the. side where morality arises from
the [ethical] substance itself. Since these moments cannot as
yet carry the significance of being made into Ends opposed to
the 10stethicaLorder, they signify here, it is true, no more than
what they immediately are, and the goal which they strive to
attain is the ethical Substance; but since in our times that form
of these moments is more,familiar in which they appear after
consciousness has lost its ethical life and, in the search for it,
repeats those forms, they may be represented more in terms of
this sort.
3SR Self.. consciousness which is at first only the Notion of
Spirit, en teTS on this path wi th the characteristic of holding itself
to be, as a particular spirit, essential being; and its aim, there·
fore, is to give itself asa particular individual an actual exis tence
and to enjoy itself as an individual in it.
359. In holding itself to be, qua being-j()r-self, essential being,
it is the negativity of the 'other'. In its consciousness, therefore,
it appears as the Positive in contrast to something which eer..
tainlyis, but which hasforit the significance ofsomething with·
out intrinsic being; consciousness appears split into this given
actuality and the End which it realizes by superseding that
actuality, an End which, in fact, it makes an actuality in
place of that which was given. Its primary End, however, is its
immediate abstract being-Jor-self; in other words, seeing itself as
this particular individual in another, or seeing another self·consciousness as itself. The experience of what the truth of this End

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

21 7

is raises self-consciousness to a higher level} and from now on
it is itselfits own End, in so far as it is at the same time universal
and has the law directly within it. In carrying out this law of
its heart, however, it learns that the individual, in doing so,
cannot preserve himself, but rather tht the good can only be
accomplished through the sacrifice of the individual: and selfconsciousness becomes virtue. What virtue learns from experience can only be this, that its End is already attained in principle, that happiness is found directly in the action itself, and
that action itself is the good. The Notion or principle of this
entire sphere, viz. that thinghood is Spirit's very heing-jor-itselj,
becomes in the course of this experience a truth for self-consciousness. Having discovered this, self-consciousness thus
knows itself to be reality in the form of an individuality that
directly expresses itseif, an individuality which no longer
encounters resistance from an actual world opposed to it, and
whose aim and object are only this expressing of itself
a. Pleasure and Necessity

360. Self-consciousness which, onthewhole, knowsitselfto be

reality, has its object in its own self, but as an object which ini..
tially is merely jor self-consciousness, and does not as yet possess
[objective] being which confronts it as a reality other than its
own; and self,;;consciousness, by behaving as a beihg..for-self,
aims to see itself as another independent being. This primary
End is to become a ware of itself as an individual in the other
self. . consdousness, or to make this other into itself; it is certain
that this other is in principle already itself. In so far as it has
lifted itself out of the ethical Substance and the tranquil being
of thought to its being-for-selJ, it has left behind the law of e~s­
tom and existence, the knowledge acquired through observation, and theory, as a grey shadow which is in the actofpassing
out of sight. For the latter is rather a knowledge of something
whose being-for-self and actuality are other than those of this
self-consciousness. Instead of the heavenly .. seeming Spirit
of the universality of knowledge and action in which the feeling and enjoyment of individuality are stilled, there has
entered into it the Spirit of the earth, for which true actuality
is merely that being which is the actuality of the individual consciousness.

c.

218

{AA.) REASON

I t despises intellect and science
The sllpreme gifts of man
It has given itself to the devil
And must perishl
36 I. I t plunges therefore into life and indulges to the full the
pure individuality in which it appears. It does not so much
make its own happiness as straightway take it and enjoy it. The
shadowy existence of science, laws and principles, which alone
stand between it and its own reali ty, vanishes like a lifeless mist
which cannot compare with the certainty of its own reality. It
takes hold ofHfe much as a ripe fruit is plucked, which readily
offers itself to the hand that takes it.
362. Its action is only in one respect an action of desire. It
does not aim at the destruction of obj ective being in its en tirety,
but only at the form of its otherness or its independence, which
is a show devoid of essence; for it holds this objectivity to be
in principle the same essence as itself, or its selfhood. The element
in which desire and its object subsist, as mutually indifferent
and independent, is animate existence; the enjoyment of desire
puts an end to this existence so far as it belongs to the object
ofdesire. But here this element which gives to both a separ~te
actuality is rather the category, a being which is essentially
in the form of thought. I t is therefore the consciousness of indepen ..
dence~let it be natural consciousness, or consciousness de ..
veloped into a system of la ws-which preserves the individuals
each for himself. This separation is not in itself a/act for self..
cqnsciousness, which knows the otlJer ,as its o.wn selfhood. It
attains therefore to the enjoyment of pleasure, to the conscious ..
ness Qfits actualization in a consciousness which appears as in ..
dependent, or to the vision of the unity of the two independent
self.. consdousnesses. It attains its End, but only to learn there
what the truth of that End is. It comprehends itself as this par..
ticular individual who exists for himself, but the realization of
this End is itself the setting.. aside of the latter. For it is not as
this particul4T individual that it becomes an object to itself, but
rather as the unity of itself and the other self.. consciousness,
hence as an individual that is only a moment, or a universal.
363. The pleasure enjoyed has indeed the positive signifi..
I

Faust, Part I (adapted).

ACTUAL IZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

21 9

cance that self-consciousness has become objective to itself; but
equally it has the negative one of having reduced itself to a
moment. And since it grasped its realization in the former sense
only, its experience is of a contradiction in which the attained
reality of its individuality sees itself destroyed by the negative
essence confronting it, which is devoid of reality and content,
and which yet is the power which destroys it. This essence is
nothing else than the Notion of what this individuality in itself
is. It is, however, as yet the poorest form of self-realizing Spirit;
for it is aware of itself at first only as the abstraction of Reason,
or is the immediacy of the unity of being-for-itself and being-initself; its essence is, therefore, only the abstract category. Nevertheless it no longer has the form of immediate simple being, as
it has for Reason in its observational role where it is abstract
being or, posited in the for~ of an alien being, is thinghood in
general. Here in this thinghood there has entered being-for-self
and mediation. It therefore makes its appearance asa circle
whose content isthe developed pure relation of the simple ,essentialities. The realization attained by this individuality consists
therefore in nothing more than this, viz. that it has castforth
this circle ofab~tractions from its confinement within simple selfconsciQgsness, into the element where they are jor self"consci o\Jsness, in other words, are expanded into an objective existence. The object, then, that is for self-consciousness as it takes
its pleasure its ess~nce is the e~pansion of those empty essentiali~
ties ofpure uni ty, of pure difference, and their relation; beyond
this, the object which the individuality experiences as its essence,
has no content. It is what is called necessity; for necessity, fate,
and the like, isjust that about which we cannot say what it does,
what its specific Jaws and positive content are, because itis the
absolllte pure Notion itself\;,iewed as [mere] being, arelalion that
is simple and empty, but also irresistible and imperturbable,
whose work is mereJy the nothingness of individuality. It is this
fixed relation, because what is related is the pure essentialities
or empty abstractions. Unity, difference, and relation are categories each of which is nothing in and for itself, but only in
relation to its opposite, and they cannot therefore be separated
from one another. They are related to one another through
their Notion, for they are pure Notions themselves; and this absolute relation and abstract movement constitutes necessity. The

220

C, (AA.) REASON

merely single individuality which, in the first instance, has only
the pure Notion of Reason for its content, instead of having
taken the plunge from dead Theory into Life, has there~
fore really only plunged into the consciousness of its own 1ife~
lessness and has as its lot only empty and alien necessity, a dead
actuality.
364. The transition is made from the form of the one or unit
into that of universality, from one absolute abstraction into the
other, from the purpose of pure heing-for-selfwhich has thrown
off al1 community with others, into the sheer opposite which
is thus equally abstract heing-in-itselj. Consequently, the form
in which this appears is that the individual has simply perished,
and the absolute unyieldingness of individual existence is pulverized on the equally unrelenting but continuous world of actuality. Since it is, as consciousness, the unity of itself and its
opposite, this downfall is still for it its goal and realization, as
also the contradiction of what was for it essence and what is
in itself essence. It experiences the double meaning implicit in
what it did, viz. when it tookhold of life and possessed it; but
in doing so it really laid hold of death.
365. This transition of its living being into a lifeless necessity
therefore appears to it as an inversion which is not mediated by
anythingatall. The mediating agency would have to be that in
which both sides would be one, where, therefore, consCiousness
recognized onemomeI?t in the other: its purpose and action
in fate, and its fate in its purpose and action, that is, would
recognize its own essence in this necessity. But this unity is, for
this consciousness, just pleasure itself, or the simple single feeling> and the transition from the moment of this its purpose into
the moment of its true essence is for it a sheer leap into its antithesis. For these moments are notcontainedand linked together
in feeling, but only in the pure self, which is a universal or
thought. Consci<;msness, therefore, through its experience in
whichitshould havefound its truth, has really become a riddle
to itself, the consequences o[its deeds are for it not the deeds
themselves. What befalls it Is,10r it, not the experience of what
it is in itself, the transition is not a mere alteration of the form
of the same content and essence, presented now as the content
and essence, and again as object or [outwardly] beheld essence
of itself. The ahstract necessity therefore has the character of the

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

221

merely negative, uncomprehended power of universality, on
which individuality is smashed to pieces.
366. This is as far as the manifestation of this form of self..
consciousness goes. The final moment of its existence is the
thought of the loss of itself in necessity, or the thought of itself
asa being that is aqsolutely alien to it. However, self.. conscious..
ness has in itselfsurvived this loss; for this necessity or pure uni ..
versality is its own essence. This reflection of consciousness into
itself, the knowledge that necessity is itself, is a new form of consciousness.
b. The law oj the heart and the frenzy oj self-conceit
367. What necessity truly is in self-consciousness, it is for this
new form of self-consciousness, in which it knows'its own self
to be the principle ofnecessi ty. I t knows that it has the universal
oflaw immediately within itself, and because the law is immediately
present in the being-for-self ofconsciousness, it is called thelaw
of the heart. This form takes itself to be, qua individuality,
essence like the previous form; but the new form is richer
because its being-for-seif has for it the character of necessity or
universali ty.
368. The law, therefore, which is immediately self.. consciousness's own law, or a heart which, however, has within it
a law, is the End which self-consciousness proceeds to realize.
We have to see whether its realization corresponds to this
Notion and whether in that realization it will find that this its
law is its essential nature.
369. This heart is confronted by a rea] world; for in the heart
the law is, in the first place, only for its own self, it is not yet
realised, and is therefore at the same time something other than
what the Notion is. This other is thereby characterized as a
reality which is the opposite of what is to be realized, and consequentlyis the contradiction of the law and the individuality.
This reality is, therefore, on the one hand a law by which the
particular individuality is oppressed, a violent ordering of the
world which contradicts the law of the heart, and, on the other
hand, a humanity suffering under that ordering, a humanity
that does not follow the law of the heart, but is subjected to
an alien necessity. It is evident that this real world which
appears over against the present form of consciousness is

222

C. (AA.) REASON

nothing else but the foregoing discordant relationship ofindivi.
d uali ty and its tru th, the rela tionshi p ofa cruel necessi ty by which
the former is oppressed. For us, the preceding movement
appears to stand over against the new form, because the latter
in itself has resulted from it, and the moment from which it
has come is therefore necessary for it; but to the new form that
moment appears as something already given, since it is not con~
scious of its origin, and it holds that its essential nature is rather
to be for its own self, or the negative element relatively to this
positive in-itself.
370. This individuality therefore directs its energies to getting rid of this necessity which contradicts the law of the heart,
and also the suffering caused by it. And so it is no longer characterized by the levity of the previous form of self-consciousness,
which only wanted the particular pleasure of the individual;
on the contrary, it is the earnestness of a high purpose which
seeks its pleasure in displaying the excellence of its own nature,
and in promoting the welfare of mankind. What it realizes is
itself the law, and its pleasure is therefore atthe sam'e time the
universal pleasure of all hearts. To it the two are undivided;
its pleasure is what conforms to the law, and the realization
ofthelaw of universal humanity procures for it its own particular pleasure. For within its own self, individualityand theneces~
sary are immediately one; the law is the law of the heart. Individuality is not as yet dislodged from its seat, and the unity of
both has not been brought about by the mediating agency of
the individuality itself, has not yet been achieved by discipline.
The realization of the immediate undisciplined nature passes for
a display of its excellence and as productive of the welfare of
humanity.
371. The law, on the other hand, which confronts the law of
the heart is separated fronl the heart, and exists in its own right.
H umani ty which is bound by this law does not live in the blessed
unity of the Jaw with the heart; but either lives in their cruel
separation and in suffering, or at least dispenses with the enjoymentofitselfin obeying the law, and lacks the consciousness
of its own excellence in transgressing it. Because that authoritative divine and human ordinance is separated from the heart,
it is for the latter a mere show which ought to lose what is still
associated with it, viz. the power of authority and reality. In

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

223

its content it may well by chance agree with the law of the heart,
and then the latter can submit to it; but for the heart, what
is essential is not the bare conformity to law as such, but that
in the law it has the consciousness of itsefh that therein it has
satisfied itself. Where, however, the content of universal
necessity does not agree with the heart then necessity, even as
regards its content, is in itself nothing and must give way before
the law of the heart.
372. The individual, then, carries out the law ofhis heart. This
becomes a universal ordinance, and pleasure becomes a reality
which absolutely conforms to law. But, in this realization, the
law has in fact escaped the individual; it directly becomes
merely the relation which was supposed to be got rid of. The
law of the heart, through its very realization, ceases to be a law
of the heart. For in its realization it receives the form of an
[affirmative] being, and is now a universal power for which this
particular heart is a matter of indifference, so that the individual, by setting up his own ordinance, no longer finds it to be
his own. CQnSeqJlently, what theindividual brings into being
through thereaHzation ofbis law, is not hislaw; on the contrary,
since the realization is in principle bis own, hut actually is for
him analienaffair, what he brings aboutis merely the entanglementof himself in the actual ordinance, an entanglement in
it, Inor~over, notas a superior power which is only a1ien to him,
but one which is hostile. By his act he places himselfin, or rather
posits himself as, the universal element of existent reality, and
his act is supposed to have, even according to his own interpretation, the value ofa universal ordinance. But he has thereby
freed himselffrorn himself; he goes on growing qua universality,
on his own account and purges himselfofhis particularity. The
individual who wants to recognize universality only in the form
of his immediate being ..for-self does not therefore recognize
himself in this free universality, while at the same time he
belongs to it, for it is his doing. This doing, therefore, has the
reverse significance; it contradicts the universal ordinance. J.<10r
the individual's act is supposed to be the act of his particular
heart, not a free universal reality; and at the same time he has
in fact recognized the latter, for his action has the significance
of positing bis essential being as a free reality, i.e. of acknowledging the real world to be his own essential being.

224

C. (AA.) REASON

373. The individual has, by the principle of his action, determined the more precise way in which the actual universality,
to which he has attached himself, turns against him. His deed,
qua actuality, belongs to the universal; but its content is his own
individuality which, as this particular individuality, wants to
preserve i tselfin opposi tion to the universal. I t is not any specific
law the setting-up of which would be in question; on the contrary, the immediate unity of the individual heart with universa1ity is the thought, elevated into a supposedly valid law,
that, in whads law, every heart must recognize its own self. But
only the heart of this individual has placed its reality in its deed,'
which expresses for him his being-for-self or his pleasure. The deed
is supposed to have immediately the status of a universal; that
is to say, it is in truth something particular, and has merely
the form of universality; the particular content of the heart as
such is supposed to have the statusofa universa1. Consequently;
others do not find in this content the fulfilment of the law of
their hearts, butrather that of someone else; and, precisely in
accordance with the universal law that each shall find in what
is law his own heart, they turn against the reality he set up, just
ashe turned against theirs. Thus, justas the individual at first
finds only the rigid law, now he finds the hearts ormen themselves, opposed to his excellent intentions and detestable.
374. Because this consciousness at first knows universality
only as immediate, and necessity as necessity of the heart, the
nature of the realization and the activity is unknown to it; it
does not know that thisrealization as what affirmatively is, is in
truth rather the implicit universal in which the individuality of
consciousness, which entrusts itself to it in order to be this particular immediate individuality, really ,perishes; instead of
acquiring a being of its own, it therefore attains to being the
alien~tion of itself. But that in which it does notrecognize itself
is no longer a dead necessity, but a necessity animated by the
universal individuality. It took this divine and hum'an ordinance which it found as an accepted authority to be a dead
authority in which not only its own self-to which it clings as
this particular independent heart opposed to the universalbut also those subject to that ordinance would have no consciousnessofthemselves; but it finds that this ordinance is really
animated by the consciousness of all, that it is the law of every

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF.CONSCIOUSNESS

225

heart. I t learns from experience that the reality is a vivified ordinance, and it learns this in fact precisely in realizing the law
ofits own heart; for this means nothing else than that individuality becomes an object to itself in the form of universality in
which, however, it does not recognize itself.
375. Thus what emerges from the experience of this shape
of self-consciousness as the true, contradicts what this consciousness isfor itself. But what it is for itself, has itself the form of
absolute universality for it, and it is the law of the heart which
is immediately one with the consciousness of self. At the same
time, the established living order is equally its own essential being
and work; it produces nothing else but that; that order is in
equally immediate unity with self-consciousness. In this way
self-consciousness is related to a twofold antithetic essence;
it is in its own selfacontradiction, and is distraught in its inmost
being. The law of this particular heart is alone that in which
self-consciousness recognizes itself; but the universally valid
order has, through the realizing of that law, equally become
for self-consciousnessitsown essential heingand its own reality.
Thus what contradicts i tselfinitsconsciousness hasfor it in each
case the form of essence and of its own reality .
3 76 . In giving expression to this moment of its' self-conscious
downfall as the result of its experience, it reveals itself to be
this inner perversion of itself, to be a deranged consciousness
which findsthat its essential being is immediately non-essential,
its reality immediately an unreality. The derangement cannot
be taken to mean that in general something devoid of essence
is regarded as essential,somethingunrealas real, so that what
for one person 'is essential or real would not be so for another,
and that the consciousness ofrealityand unreality, or ofessenti~
alityand unessentiality, would thus fall apart. If something is
in fact real and essential for consciousness in general, but is
not so for me, then in the consciousness of its nothingness I have
at the same time~sinte I am consciousness in general-the
consciousness of its reality; and since they are both fixed [in
my consciousness], this is a unity which is madness in general.
But in this state only an object is deranged for consciousness,
not consciousness as such within and for itself. But in the outcome of experience which here has come to view, consciousness,
in its law, is aware of being itself this reality; and at the same

2::26

c.

(AA.) REASON

time, since the very same essentiality, the same reality, is

alienated from it, it is, qua self-consciousness, qua absolute reality,
aware ofits own unreality. In other words, it holds the two sides
in their contradiction to be immediately its essential being,
which is thus in its inmost being distraught.
377. The heart-throb for the welfare of humanity therefore
passes into the ravings of an insane self-conceit, into the fury of
consciousness to preserveitselffrom destruction; and it does this
by expelling from itself the perversion which it is itself, and by
striving to look on it and express it as something else. I t therefore
speaks of the universal order as a perversion of the law of the
heart and of its happiness, a perversion invented by fanatical
priests, gluttonous despots and their minions, who compensate
themselves for their own degradation by degrading and
oppressing others, a perversion which has led to the nameless
misery of deluded humanity. In this its derangement, consciousness declares individuality to be the source of this derangem-entandperversion, but one that is alien and accid ental.
I t is the heart, however, or the individuality of consciousness
that would be immediately universal, that is itself the source
of this derangement and perv(rsion,and the outcome of its
actipn is merely that its cons¢iousne!)s becomes aware of this
contradiction. For the True isJor it the law oftheheart~ome­
thing merely intcrlded which, unlike the established order, has
OQt stood the te$t Qf time, bu t ra ther when thus tested is over ..
thrown. This its law ought to have reality; the law, then, is for
i tquqrea!itYlquavalid ordinancc,itsownaimandessen tial nature;
but reaJity, that very Jaw qua valid ordinance, is on the contrary
immediately for it somethihg which is not valid. Similarly, its
own reality, the heart itselfas a particular individual consciousness, is for it its essence; but,its purpose is to establish that particular individuality as an [objective] being. Thus it is rather
its self as not a particular individual that is immediately for it
its essence, or its purpose has the form of a law, hence the form
of a universality, which it is for its own consciousness. This its
Notion becomes by its own action its object; thus the heart
learns rather that its self is not real, and that its reality is an
unreality. It is therefore not an accidental and alien individuality, but just this partjcular heart, which in all its aspects is,
in its own self, perverted and perverting.

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF.CONSCIOUSNESS

227

378. While, however, the immediately universal individuality
is perverted and the source of perversion, this universal ordinance, since it is the law of all hearts, i.e. of what is perverted,
is no less itself essentially perverted, as the ravings of the
deranged consciousness declared. On the one hand, this ordinance proves itself to be a law of all hearts, by the resistance
which the law of one individual heart encounters from other
individuals. The established laws are defended against the law
of an individual, because they are not an unconscious, empty,
and dead necessity, but a spiritual universality and Substance,
in which those in whom this spiritual substance has its actuality
live as individuals, and are conscious of themselves ; so that even
when they complain about this ordinance as if it went against
their own inner law, and maintain against it the opinions of
the heart, they cling to it with their hearts, as being their essential being; and, if this ordinance is taken from them, or they
place themselves outside it, they lose everything. Since it is precisely in this that the reality and power of public order consist,
the latter thus appears as the self-identical essence alive in
everyone, and individuality appears as its form. But this ordinance is eq ually a perversion.
379. The fact that it is the law of all hearts, that all indivi.
duals are immediately this universal, means that the ordinance
is a reality which is only that of the individuality that isfor itself,
or as only the reality ofthe heart. The consciousness which sets
up the law of its heart therefore meets with resistance from
others, because it contradicts the equally individual laws of their
hearts j and these others in their resistance are doing nothing
else but setting up and claiming validity for their own law. The
universal that we have here is, then, only a universal resistance
and struggle of all against one another, in which each claims
validity for his own individuality, but at the same time does
not succeed in his efforts, because each meets with the same
resistance from the others, and is nullified by their redprocal
resistance. What seems to be public order, then, is this universal
state of war, in which each wrests what he can for himself, executes justice on the individuality of others and establishes his
own, which is equally nullified through the action of the others.
It is the 'way of the world', the show of an unchanging course
that is only meant to be a universality, and whose content is

c. (AA.) REASON

rather the essenceless play of establishing and nullifying indivi~
dualities.
380. Ifwe contrast the two sides of the universal ordinance,
we see that this latter universality has for its content the restless
individuality which regards [mere] opinion or individuaHty as
law, what is real as unreal, and what is unreal as real. But it
is at the same time the side of the reality of the ordinance, for
to it belongs the individuality's heing-for-self. The other side is
the universal in the form of a tranquil essence; bu tit is for that
very reason only something inner which, though not absolutely
non-existent, still has no reality and can itself become a reality
only by getting rid of the individuality which has arrogated
reality to itself. This shape of consciousness which, in the law,
is aware of itself, which knows itself in what is intrinsically true
and good, not as an individuality but only as it becomes an
essential being; and which knows individuality to be perverted
and the source of perversion, and therefore knows it must sacri·
fice the individuality of consciousness-'"'this shape of conscious~
ness is Virtue.
c. Virtue and the way of the world
"381. In the first shape of active Reason, self-consciousness
took itself to be pure individuality, and it was confronted by
an empty universality. In the second, the two sides of the anti ..
thesis each had both moments within them, law and individuality; but one side, the heart, was their immediate unity, the
other their antithesis. Here, in the relationship of virtue and
the 'way of the world', the two members are each severally the
unity and anti thesis of these moments, or are each a movement
oflaw and individualitytowards one another, but a movement
of opposition. For the virtuous consciousness law is the essential
moment, andindividualitytheone to be nullified, and therefore
both in its oWn consciousness as well asin the 'way of the world'.
In the former case, one's own individuality is to be brought
under the discipline of the universal, the intrinsically true and
good~ but under that discipline it still remains a personal consciousness. True discipline requires nothing less than the sacrificeofthe entire personality as proof that individual peculiarities are in fact no longer insisted on. In this individual sacrifice,
the individuality in the 'way of the world' is at the same time

ACTUALIZATION OF

SELF~CONSCIOUSNESS

229

eradicated, for it too is a simple moment common to both. In
the 'way of the world', individuality behaves in a way which
is the reverse Dfits behaviour in the virtuous consciousness, viz.
it makes itself the essential moment, whereas what is intrinsically
good and true it subordinates to itself. Further, the 'way of the
world', too, is for virtue not merely this universal which is per~
verted by individuality; on the contrary, the absolute order is like~
wise a common moment, only one that is not present for con~
sciousness as an existent reality, bu t as the inner essence of the
'way of the world'. That order, strictly speaking, has not first
to be broughtinto existence by virtue, for to bring into existence
is, qua action, a consciousness ofindividuality, and individuality
is really what has to be nullified; but this nullifying ofindividu~
ality merely makes room, as it were, for the in-itself of the 'way
of the world' to enter into existence on its own account.
382. The genera] content of the actual 'way of the world' we
already know; looked at more closely, it is again nothing else
but the two preceding movements of self~consciousness. From
them has issued the shapeQf virtue; since they are its origin,
they are antecedent to it; but virtue proceeds to Dl;lllify its ori~
gin, and to realize itself, in other words, to become/or itself.
The. 'way of the world' is thus, on the one hand, the single in~
dividuality which seeks its [own] pleasure and enjoyment. It
is true that in doing so it destroys itself, and thus satisfies the
universal, but this very satisfaction, like there~t of the moments
of this relationship, is a perverted form and movement of the
universal. The reali ty is only the individuality of the pleasure
and enjoyment to which, however, the universal is opposed, a
necessity which is merely the empty form of the universal, a
merely negative reaction and an action devoid of content. The
other moment of the 'way of the world' is the individuality
which claims to be law in its own right, and in its own conceit
disturbs the existing order. The universal law, it is true, preserves itself in face of this conceit, and no longer makes its
appearance as something opposed to consdousness and empty
of content, as a blind necessity, but as a necessity witkin consciousness itself. But, when it exists as the conscious relation of an absolutely contradictory reality, it is madness; as an objective reality,
however, it is perversion in general. The universal, then,
does dispJay itself in both aspects as th,e might which moves

C. (AA.) REASON

•

them, but the existence of this might is merely a universal
perversion.
383. It is from virtue now that the universal is to receive its
true reality by nullifying individuality, the principle of the perversion. Virtue's purpose is, by so doing, to reverse again the
perverted 'way of the world' and to make manifest its true
essence. This true essence is at first only implicit in the 'way
of the world', only its in-itself; it is not yet actual, and consequently virtue only believes it. This faith virtue proceeds to
raise to sight, without, however, enjoying the fruits of its labour
and sacrifice. For in so far as it is an individuality, it is the activity
of the conflict it wages with the 'way of the world'; but its aim
and true nature is to conquer the reality of the 'way of the
world'. The bringing into existence of the good thus effected
is thus the cessation of its activity or of the consciousness of indivi·
duality. What will be the outcome of this conflict itself, what
virtue learns from it, whether, by the sacrifice it makes of itself,
the 'way of the world' succumbs while virtue triumphs-this
must be decided by theriature of the living weapons borne by
the combatants. For the weapons are nothing else butthe nature
of the combatants themselves, a nature which only makes its
appearance for both ofthem reciprocally. Whattheir weapons
are is already evident from what is implicitly present in this
conflict.
384. The universal is true for the virtuous consciousness in
itsfaith, or is implicitly true; i tis no t yetan actual, bu tan abstract,
universality; in this consciousness itselfit is present as a purpose,
in the ~way of the world' as an inner principle. It is precisely
in this determination that the universal is present in virtue, too,
in relation to the 'way of the world'. For virtue as yet only wills
to accomplish the good, and does not, to begin with, claim that
it is a reality. This characteristic can also be looked at in this
way: the good, in making its appearance in the conflict with
the 'way of the world', thereby presents itself as being for an
other, as something that does not have a being of its own, for
otherwise it would not want to make itself true by conquering
its opposite. That it is, to begin with, only for an other, means
the same as was shown in the opposite way of looking at it, viz.
that it is, to begin with, an abstraction which has reality, not
in its own right, but only in its relation to the 'way of the world'.

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

231

385. The good or the universal, then, as it comes to view
there, is what are called gifts, capacities, powers. It is a mode
of the spiritual, in which it is represented as a universal, which
requires the principle of individuality to give it life and move~
ment, and in this principle has an actual existence. This uni·
versal is put to good use by the principle of individuality, in so
far as thIs principle lives in the virtuous consciousness, but is
misused in so far as it dings to the 'way of the world'~a passive
instrument which, controlled by a free individuality which is
indifferent to the use it makes of it, can also be misused for the
production of an actual existence which destroys it: a lifeless
material lacking an independence of its own, which can be
formed this way or that, or even to its 0\\:,0 ruin.
386. Since this universal is equally at the disposal of the virtuous consciousness and the 'way of the world" it is not
apparent whether virtue thus armed will conquer vice. The
weapons are the same; they are these capacities and powers.
Virtue has, it is true, held in reserve its belief in the original
unity of its own purpose and the essential nature of the 'way
of the world', a reserve that is intended to faU on the enemy
from the rear during the figh t, and in principle to achieve that
aim. As a matter of fact, therefore, the knight of vittues own
part in the fighting is, strictly speaking) a sham-fight which he
cannot take seriously~because he knows that his true strength
lies in the fact that the good exists absolutely in its own right,
Le. brings itself to fulfilment-a sham-fight which he also dare
not anow to become serious. For what he turns against the
enemy and finds turned against himself, and what he runs the
risk of wasting and damaging both in his own case as well as
that of the eneIl1Y, is not to be the good itself; for he fights to
preserve and act;omplish that. What are risked in the fight are
only the gifts and capacities which are not themselves at issue.
But th~se arc, in fact, nothing else but just that very universal
in which individuality has been nullified, which is supposed to
be preserved and realized by the conflict. But, at the same time,
this universal ~s already realized directly by the very notion of
the conflict, it is the in~itse1f, the universal, and its realization
means merely this, that it is at the same time for an 'other'.
The two aspects specified above, in accordance with each of
which it became an abstraction, are no "longer separated; it is

t,

c.

(AA.) REASON

especially in and through the conflict that the good is established in both modes. The virtuous consciousness, however,
enters into conflict with the 'way of the world', as if this were
something opposed to the good; what the conflict offers to it
is the universal, not merely as an abstract universal, but as a
universal animated by individuality and existing for an other,
in other words, the actual good. Therefore, wherever virtue
comes to grips with the 'way of the world', it always hits upon
places which are the actual existence of the good itself which,
as the in-itself·of the ~wa y of the world', is inextricably in terwoven in every manifestation of the 'way of the world', And
in the actuality of that in-itself, virtue has its own existence,
too; for virtue, therefore, the 'way of the world' is invulnerable.
All the moments which in virtue itself were supposed to be
risked and sacrificed, are just such existences of the good, and
hence are inviolable relationships. Consequently, the conflict
c~n only be an oscillation betwe.en preserving and sacrificing;
or rather tbere can be neither a sacrifice of what is one's own,
nor a viQI~tion Qf what is alien. Virtue is not merely like the
combatant who, in the Gonflict, is only concerned with keeping
his sword bright,but it has even started the fightjn order to
preserve the weapons. And not orily can it not use its own
weapops, it musta,lso preserve intact those of theenem y and
prg1-ect them against its own attack, for all are noble parts of
the good, on behalf of which it went into battle.
387. For this enemy, on the other hand, what is the essence
is not thein-itself, the implicit universal, but individuality; its
power, therefore, is the negative principle for which nothing
is established or absolutely sacred, but which can risk and
endure the loss of anything and everything. In doing so, it is
just ascertain of victory through its own resources, as through
the .contradiction in which its opponent gets entangled. What
virtueholcls to bean intrin&icb~ing,Jhe'wayofthewol'ld' regards
as mereJy an [indifferent] object; it is free from every principle
that virtue holds to be established, and by which it is bound.
Such a principle the 'way of the world' has in its power, since
it regards it as something it can either set aside or let be, as
it can also the virtuous knight who is fast ... bound by it. The latter
cannot disentangle himselffrom it, as ifit were a cloak thrown
round him from which he could free himself by leaving it

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF.CONSCIOUSNESS

behind; for to him it is something essential which he must not
gIve up.,
gBB.Finally, as regards the ambush from which the intrin.sically good is to attack the 'way of the world' cunningly from
the rear, this is essentially a vain hope. The 'way of the world'
is the alert, self-assured consciousness that cannot be got at from
behind, but faces in every direction; for its nature is that everything is [merely] an object for it, that everything stands in front
of it. But when the intrinsically good is an [indifferent] object
for the enemy, then it is involved in the conflict we have seen;
but in so far as it is not such an object but possesses intrinsic
being, it is the passive instrument of gifts and capacities, a
material lacking reality. Ifrepresented as a real being, it would
be a dormant consciousness, one remaining in the background,
no one knows where.
g8g. Virtue, therefore, is conquered by the 'way of the world'
because its purpose.is, in fact, the abstract, unreal essence, and
because its action as regards reality rests on distinctions which
are purely nornfnal. It wanted to consis.t in bringing the good
into actual e?,istence by the sacrifice of individuality, but the
side of reality .is itselfnothing else but the side of individuality.
Thegood was supposed to be that which has an implicitheing,
and to be opposed to what is ; butthein-itsel~ taken in its real
and true sense, is rat4er being itself. The in-itself is, in the first
instance, the abstraction Q[ essence in contrast to reality; but an
ab.straction is precisely whatis not true, but exists only1or consciousness, which means, however, that it is itself what is called
real; for the real is that whi~h is essentially for an other, or is
being. But the consciousness of virtue rests on this distinction
between the in",itselfand being, a distinction which has no truth.
The 'way of the world' was supposed to~ be the perversion of
the good because it had individuality for its principle; only,
individuality is the principle of the real world; for it is precisely
individuality that is consciousness, whereby what exists in itself
exists eq ually for an other; it does pervert the U nchangea bIe,
but it perverts it in fact from the nothing 01 abstraction into the
being of reality.
390. Thus the 'way of the world' triumphs over what, in
opposition to it, constitutes virtue, triumphs over that which is
the essenceless abstraction of essence. However, it does not

234

C. (AA.) REASON

triumph over something real but over the creation of distinctions that are no distinctions; it glories in this pompous talk
about doing what is best for humanity, about the oppression
of humanity, about making sacrifices for the sake of the good,
and the misuse of gifts. Ideal entities and purposes of this kind
are empty, ineffectual words which lift up the heart but leave
reason unsatisfied, which edify, but raise no edifice; declamations which specifically declare merely this: that the individual
who professes to act for such noble ends and who deals in such
fine phrases is in his own eyes an excellent creature-a puffingup which inflates him with a sense of importance in his own
eyes and in the eyes of others, whereas he is, in fact, inflated
with his own conceit.
Virtue in the ancient world had its own definite sure meaning, for it had in the spiritual substance of the nation a foundation
full of meaning, and for its purpose an actual good already in
existence. Consequently, too, it was not directed- against the
actual world as againstsomething generally perverted, and against
a 'way of the world'. But the virtue we are considering has its
bdngoutside of the spiritual substance, it is an unreal virtue,
a virtue in imagination and name only, which lacks that substantial content. The emptiness of this rhetoric which
denounces the 'way of the world' would be at once revealed
if the meaning of its fine phrases had to be stated. These, therefore, are assumed to be something the meaning of which is familiar. The request to say what this familiar meaning is would
be met either by a fresh flood of pht1lses or by at:l appeal to
the heart, which inwardly says what they mean-which amounts
to admitting that it is in fact unable to say what the meaning
is. The fatuousness of this rhetoric seems, too, in an unconscious
way to have come to be a certainty for the culture of our time,
since all interest in the whole mass of such rhetoric, and the
wayitis used to boost one's ego, has vanished-a loss ofinterest
which is expressed in the fact that it produces only a feeling
of boredom.
391. The result, then, which issues from this antithesis con~
sists in the fact that consciousness drops like a discarded cloak
its idea of a good that exists [only] in principle, but has as yet
no actual existence. In its conflict it has learnt by experience
that the 'way of the world' is not as bad as it looked; for its

ACTUALIZATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

235

reality is the reality of the universal. With this lesson in mind,
the idea of bringing the good into existence by means of the
sacrifice of individuality is abandoned; for individuality is precisely the actualizing of what exists only in principle~ and the
perversion ceases to be regarded as a perversion of the good,
for it is in fact really the conversion of the good; as a mere End,
into an actual existence: the movement of individuality is the
reality of the universal.
392. However, with this result, that which as the 'way of
the world' stood opposed to the consciousness of what existed
[only] in principle, has in fact likewise been conquered and has
vanished. In that antithesis, individuality's being-for-self was
opposed to essence or the universal, and appeared as a reality
separated from what exists [only] in itself or in principle. But,
since reality has shown itself to be in undivided unity with the
universal, then, just as the in-itself of virtue is merely an aspect,
so does the being-for-self of the 'way of the world' also prove
to be no more than that. The individuality of the 'way of the
world' may well imagine that it acts only for itself or in its own
interest. It is better than it thinks, for its action is at the same
time an implicitly universal action, When it acts in its own
interest, it simply does not know what it is doing; and when
it avers that everyone acts in his own interest, it is merely asserting that no one knows what action is. When it acts for itself,
it simply gives reality to what, to begin with, exists only in itself.
The purpose of its being-for-self, which it imagines is opposed
to what virtue is in itself, its shallow cunning, as also its finespun explanations which know how to demonstrate the presence of self-interest in every action-all these have vanished,
just as the purpose of virtue that exists only in itself, along with
its rhetoric, have vanished.
393. Thus the activity of individuality, all that it does, is in
its own self an End; the employment of its powers, the play of
these powers in action, is what gives them life; otherwise they
would be a lifeless in-itself. But the in-itselfis not an unrealized
abstract universal that lacks an existence, but rather is itself
immediately the present, real existence of the process of individuality.

c.

(AA.) REASON

C. INDIVIDUALITY WHICH TAKES ITSELF TO BE REAL IN
AND FOR ITSELF

394. Self-consciousness has now grasped the Notion of itself
which, to begin with, was only our Notion of it, viz. that in its
certainty of itself it is all reality; and End and essence are for
it henceforth the spontaneous interfusion of the universal-of
gifts and capacities-and individuality. The individual
moments of this fulfilling and interfusion, prior to the unity in
which they have coalesced, are the Ends hitherto considered.
These have vanished, being abstractions and chimeras belonging to those first shallow shapes of spiritual self-consciousness,
and having their truth only in the imaginary being of the heart,
in imagination and rhetoric, not in Reason. This, being now
absolutely certain of its reality, no longer seeks only to realize
itself as End in an antithesis to the reality which immediately
confronts it but, on the contrary, has the category as such for
the object of its consciousness.
I n other words, self-'consciousness determined as being for
itseif, or as the negative self-consciousness in which Reason at
first made its appearance, is set aside; this self-consciousness
came face to face with a reality supposedly the negative of it,
and only by overcoming it did it realize its End. But since End
and intrinsic heing have proved to be the same as being:for-another and the reality confronting it, truth is no longer separated
from certainty, no matter whether the proposed End is taken
as certainty of self and the realization ofit as truth, or whether
the End is taken for truth and the reality for certainty. On the
contrary, intrinsic being and End in and for itself are the certainty ofimmediate reality itself, the interfusion ofheingMin-itselj
and heing-for-itselj, of the universal and individuality. Action
is in its own self its truth and reality, and individuality in its
setting~forth or expression is, in relation to action, the End in
and for itself.
395- With this Notion of itself, therefore, self-conr;c1ousness
has returned into itself out of those opposed detenninations
which the category had for it, and which characterized the re~
lation of self-consciousness to the category in its observational
and also active roles. It has for its object the pure category
itself, or it is the category which has become aware of itself.

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

237

Its account with its previous shapes is thereby closed; they lie
forgotten behind it, and no longer confront it as a world given
to it, but are developed solely within itself as transparent
moments. Yet they still fall apart within its consciousness as a
movement of distinct moments, a movement which has not yet
brought them together into their substantial unity. But in all
these moments self",consciollsness holds fast to the simple unity
of [objective] being and the self, a unity which is its genus.
396. In so doing, consciousness has cast away all opposition
and every condition affecting its action; it starts afresh from
itself, and is occupied not with an other, but with itself. Since
individuality is in its own self actuality, the material of its efforts
and the aim of action lie in the action itself. Action has, there'"
fore, the appearance of the movement of a circle which moves
freely within itselfin a void, which, unimpeded, now expands,
now contracts, -and is perfectly content to operate in and with
its own self. The element in which individuality sets forth its
shape has the significance solely of putting on the shape of individuality; it is the daylight in which consciousness wants to
display itself. Action alters nothing and opposes nothing. It is
the pure form of a transition from a state of not being seen to
one of being seen, and·· the content which is brought out into
the daylight and displayed, is nothing else but what this action
already is in itself. It is implicit: this is its form as a unity in
thought; and it is actual-this is its form as anexistent unity. Action
itselfis a content only when, in this determination of simplicity,
it is contrasted with its character as a transition and movement.

a. The spiritual animal kingdom and deceit, or the fmatter in hand' itself
397. This intrinsically real individuality is at first again a
single and specific one. The absolute reality which it knows itself
to be is, therefore, as it will become aware, an abstract, universal
reality lacking filling and content, merely the empty thought
of this category. We have to see how this Notion ofintrinsically
real individuality characterizes itself in its moments, and how
its Notion of itself enters into its consciousness.
398. The Notion of this individuality, which as such knows
itself to be all reality, is to begin with a result: it has not yet
set forth its movement and reality, and is posited here immedz'ately as a simple!irt::itself or implicit being. Negativity, howeve~,

238

C. (AA.) REASON

which is the same as that which is manifested as move·
ment, is present in the simple in-itself as a determinateness; and
[mere] being, or the simple in-itself, becomes a definite range
of being. Accordingly, individuality appears on the scene as an
original determinate nature: original, for it is implicit; originally
determinate, for the negative moment is present in the in-itself
and this latter is thus a quality. This limitation of being, however, cannot limit the action of consciousness, for here consciousness is a relation purely of itself to itself: relation to an other,
which would he a limitation of it, has been eliminated. The
original determinateness of the nature is, therefore, only a
simple principle, a transparent universal element, in which the
individuality remains as free and self-identical as it is unirnpeded in unfolding its different moments, and in its realization is simply in a reciprocal relation with itself; just as in the
case of indeterminate animal life, which breathes the breath
oflife, let us say, into the element of water, or air or earth, and
within these again into more specific principles, steeping its
entire nature in them, and yet keeping that nature under its
own control, and preservingitselfas a unity, in spi te of the limitation iItJposed by the element, and remaining in the farm of
this particul'ilr organization the saIne general animal life.
399. This determinate original nature of consciousness which
remains free and entire in it appears as the immediate alld
sole proper content of that which for the individual is its End.
Admittedly, it is a determinate content, but it is only a content
at all in so far as we consider the in-itseifin isolation. In truth,
however; it is the reality that is permeated by individuality,
actuality as it is present in consciousness qua individual, and
it is, in the first instance, posited as [merely] being, not yet as
acting. But as regards action, that determinateness is, on the one
hand, not a limitation it would want to overcome, for, regarded
as an existent quality, it is the simple colour of the dement in
which it moves; on the other hand, however, negativity is a
determinateness only in being; but action is itself nothing else but
negativity. Therefore, when individuality acts, deternlinateness
is dissolved in the general process of negativity or in the sum
total of every determinateness.
400. In action and the consciousness of action, the simple
original nature now splits up into the distinction which action

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

239

implies. Action is present at first in the form of object, an object,
too, as pertaining to consciousness, as End, and hence opposed
to a reality already given. The second moment is the movement of the End conceived as passive, and realization conceived
as the relation of the End to the wholly formal actuality, hence
the idea of the transition itself, or the means, The third moment
is, finally, the object, which is no longer in the form of an End
directly known by the agent to be his own, but as brought out
into the light of day and havingfor him the form of an 'other'.
The Notion of this sphere req uires that these various aspects
be grasped in such a way that the content in them -remains the
same without any distinction, whether between individuality
and being in general, or between End as against individuality
as an original nature, or between End and the given reality;
or between the means and that reality as an absolute End, or
between.the reality brought about by the agent as against the
End, or the original nature, or the means.
40 I. First of all, then, the originally determinate nature [or
natural predisposition] of individuality, its immediate essence, is
notas yet posited as active, and as such is called special capacity,
talent, character) and so on. This peculiar tinge of Spirit is to
be looked on as the sole content of the End itself and as the
sole reality. Ifwe thought of consciousness as going beyondthat,
and as wanting to give reality to a diiferentcontent, then we
should be thinking ofit as a Nothing working towards Nothing.
Further, this original essence is not merely the content of the
End, Q,ut is in itself the reality as well, which otherwise has the
appearance of being a given material of the action, of being a
reality found to begin with, which is to be shaped by the action.
That is to say, action simply translates an initially implicit being
into a being that is made explicit; the being-in-itself of the
reality opposed to consciousness is reduced to a mere empty
show. This consciousness, then, when bringing itself to act, does
not let itself be led astray by what is merely the show of a given
reality, and equally it has to avoid floundering about in empty
thoughts and Ends, and has to hold on to the original content
ofits essence. True, this original content is only explicitfor con~
sciousness when the latter has made it into a reality; but the
distinction between a content, which is explicitfor consciousness
only within-consciousness itself, and an intrinsic reality outside it,

C. (AA.) REASON

no longer exists. Consciousness must act merely in order that
what it is in itself may become explicit for it; in other words,
action is simply the coming-to-be of Spirit as consciousness. What
the latter is in itself, it knows therefore from what it actually is.
Accordingly, an individual cannot know what he [really] is until he has made himselfa reality through action. However, this
seems to imply that he cannot determine the End of his action
until he has carried it out; but at the same time, since he is
a conscious individual, he must have the action in front of him
beforehand as entirely his own, i.e. as an End. The individual who
is going to act seems, therefore, to find himself in a circle in
which each moment already presupposes the other, and thus
he seems unable to find a beginning, because he only gets to
know his original nature, which must be his End,Jrom the deed,
while, in order to act, he must have that End beforehand. But
for that very reason he has to start immediately, and, wh~tever
the circumstances, without further scruples about beginning,
means, or End, proceed ,to action; for his essence and intrinsic
nature is beginning, means, and End,aH in one. As beginning,
this nature is present in the circumstances of the action; and
theintereslwhich the individuaLfinds in something is the answer
alreadygiven to the question, 'whether he should act, and what
should be done in a given case'. For what seems to he a given
reality is in itself his own original.nature, which has merely the
illusory appearance of an [objective] being-an appearance
implied in the Notion of action with its twofold aspect, but
which shows itself to be his own original nature by the ~nterest
he takes in it. Similarly, the ~how' or the means is determined
in and for itself. Talent is likewise nothing else but the determinate, original individuality considered as an inner means, or as
a transition from End to an achieved reality. But the actual means
and the real transition are the unity of talent with the nature
of the matter in hand, present in that interest: talent represents
in the means the side of action, interest the side ofcontent; both
are individuality itself, as an interfusion of being and action.
What we have, therefore, is a set of given circumstances which
are in themselves the individual's own original nature; next, the
interest which treats them as its own or as its End; and finally,
the union [of these] and the abolition of the anti thesis in the
means. This union itself still falls within consciousness and the

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

241

whole just considered is one side of an antithesis. This illusory
appearance of an antithesis which still remains, is removed by
the transition or the means; for the means is a unity of inner
and outer, the antithesis of the specific character it has as an
inner means. It therefore rids itself of that character and posits
itself-this unity of action and being-equally as an outer, as
an individuality that has itselfbecome a reality, i.e. an individuality which is posited for individuality itself as [objectively]
existent. In this way, the entire action does not go outside itself,
either as circumstances, or as End, or means, or as a work done.
402. But with 'work done' the difference of the original
natures seems to enter; the work, like the individual's original
nature which it expresses, is something specific; for the negativity implicit in action, being freely discharged by it as an
existent reality, is present in the action as a quality. Consciousness, however, as against the work, is determined as that in
which the quality is present as negativity in general, i.e. as action ;
it is thus the universal as against the specific character of the
work done. It can therefore compare one work with another,
and. by so doing grasp individualities themselves as different; it
can regard an individual whose work is more wide ..ranging as
possessing greater energy of will or a richer nature, i.e. a nature
whose native quality is less limited; and another, on the other
hand, as a weaker and poorer nature.
403. In contrast with this unessential quantitative difference,
'good' and 'bad'would express an absolute difference; buthere
this is not in place. Whether something is held to be good or
bad, it is in either case an action and an activity in which an
individuality exhibits and expresses itself, and for that reason
it is all good; and it.would, strictly speaking, be impossible to
say what 'badness' was supposed to be. What would be called
a bad work is the individual life of a specific nature, which
therein gives itself reality. It would only be put down as a bad
work by a comparing reflection, which, however,js an idle
affair, since it goes beyond the essential nature of the work t
which is to be a self"expression of the individuality, and in it
looks for and demands something else, no one knows what. The
comparison co.uld only have regard to the above .. mentioned difference. But this, being a quantitative differ.ence, is in itself not
an essential one; and here, specifically, because the things

242

C. (AA.) REASON

compared would be different works or individualities. But these
have no connection with one another; each is purely selfa
related. The original nature is alone the in-itself, or what could
be laid down as a standard for judging the work, and conversely. Both, however, correspond to each other: there is
nothingfor individuality w~ich has not been made so by it, or
there is no reality which is not individuality's own nature and
doing, and no action nor 'in-itself of individuality that is not
real; and only these moments are to be compared.
40 4, Therefore, feelings of exaltation, or lamentation, or
repentance are altogether out of place. For all that sort of thing
stems from a mind w~ch imagines a content and an in-itself
which are different from the original nature of the individual
and the actual.carrying-out of it in the real world. Whatever
it is that the individual does, and whatever happens to him,
that he has done himself, and he is that himself. He can have
only the consciousness of the simple transference of himself from
the night of possibility into the daylight of the present, from
theabstractin-itselfinto the significance of actual peing, and can
have only the certainty that what happens to him in the latter
is nothing else but what lay dormant in· the former. It is true
that the consciousness of this unity is likewise a comparison,
but what is compared is merely an illusory appearance of an
antithesis, an appearance of the form [of antithesis] which, for
self-conscious Reason that is aware that individuality in its own
selfis reality, is nothing more than anjUusory show. The individual, therefore, knowing that in his actual world he can find
nothing else but its unity with himself, or only the certainty
of himself in the truth of that world, can experience only joy 'in
himself.
4 0 5. This is the Notion which consciousness forms of itself,
of itself as an absolute interfusion of individuality and being,
Let us see whether this Notion is confirmed by experience, and
whether its reality corresponds to it. The work produced is the
reality which consciousness gives itself; it is that in which the
individual is explicitly for himself what he is implicitly or in
himself, and in such a manner that the consciousness, for which
the individual becomesexp1icit in the work, is not the particular, but the universal, consciousness. In his work, he has placed
himselfaltogetherin the dement of universality, in the quality-

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

243

less void of being. The consciousness which withdraws from its
work is, in fact, the universal consciousness in contrast to its
work, which is determinate or particular-and it is universal
because it is absolute negativity or action in this antithesis. It
thus goes beyond itself in the work, and is itself the qualityless void which is left unfilled by its work. But if their unity
before was preserved in the Notion, this happened simply
because the work qua existent was sublated. But it is supposed
to exist, and we have to see how io its existence the individuality
will preserve its universality, and will know how to satisfy itself.
In the first place, we have to consider by itself the work produced. It has received into itself the whole nature of the individuality. Its being is therefore itself an action in which all differences interpenetrate and are dissolved. The work is thus
expelled into an existence in which the quality of the original
nature in fact turns against other determinate natures,
encroaches on them, and gets lost as a vanishing element in
this general process. Although within the Notion of the objectively
real indi vidualityall themomen ts-circumstances, end,
means, and realization-have the same value, and the original
specific nature has the value of no more than a universal element, on the other hand, when this element becomes an obj ective" being, itsspecificcharacter as such comes to light in the work
done, and obtains its truth in its dissolution. More precisely,
the form which this dissolution takes is that, in this specific
character, the individual, qua this particular individual, has
become aware of himself as actual; but the specific character
is not only the content of the reality, but equally its form; in
other words, the reality simply as such is just this quality of
being opposed to self-consciousness. Looked at from this aspect,
the reality is revealed as a reality that has vanished from the
Notion, and is merely an alien reality that is found given. The
work is, i.e. it exists for other individualities, and is for them
an alien reality, which they must replace by their own in order
to obtain through their action the consciousness of their unity
with reality; in other words, their interestin the work which
stems from their original nature, is something different from this
work's own peculiar interest, which is thereby converted into
something diff~rent. Thus the work, is, in general, something
perishable, which is obliterated by the counter-action of other

244

C. (AA.) REASON

forces and interests, and really exhibits the reality of the indivi~
duality as vanishing rather than as achieved.
406. Consciousness, then, in doing its work, is aware of the
antithesis ofdoing and being, which in the earlier shapes of consciousness was at the same time the beginning of action, while
here it is only a result. But in fact this antithesis was likewise
the foundation, in that consciousness proceeded to act as an
implicitly real individuality; for the action presupposed the specific original nature as the in-itself of the individuality, and the
content of that nature was achievement simply for the sake of
achievement. Pure action, however, is a self-identical form with
which, therefore, the specific character of the original nature is
not in agreement. Here, as elsewhere, it is a matter of indifference which of the two is called Notion and which reality.
The original nature has only an ideal existence, or is the initselfin contrast to the action in which it first becomes a reality;
or in other words, the original nature is the being both of the
individuality as such and of the individuality in the form of
work, while action is the original Notion as an absolute transition, or as the coming-to..be [of the reality]. This disparity
between Notion and reality which lies in its-essence, is learnt
by consciousness from experience in its work; in work, therefore, consciousness becomes what it is in truth, and its empty
Notion of itself vanishes.
407. In this fundamental contradiction inherent in work~
which is the truth of this essentially rea] individuality-alLthe
aspects of the individuality thus appear again as contradictory;
that is to say, the work, qua the content of the whole individuality, when transferred from the doingofit, which is the negative
unity holding captive all the moments of that content, now lets
the moments go free; and in the element of existence they
become indifferent to one another. Notion and reality are thus
separated into purpose, and that which is the original essentiality. It is accidental if the purpose has a truly essential nature,
or if the in-itself is made the purpose. Even so, Notion and
reality again fall apart as a transition to reality and as purpose;
in other words, it is accidental if a means is chosen which
expresses the purpose. And finally the entirety of these inner
moments (whether they possess an inner unity or not), i.e. the
action of the individual, is again in an accidental relationship

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

245

to reality in general; fortune decides as well in favour of an illdisposed purpose and an ill-chosen means, as against them.
40B. If, now, consciousness is thus made aware in its work
ofthe antithesis ofwilling and achieving, between end and means,
and, again, between this inner nature in its entirety and reality
itself, an antithesis which in general includes within it the conm
tingency of its action, yet the unity and necessity of the action
are no less present, too. The latter aspect overlaps the former,
and the experience of the contingency of the action is itselfonly
a contingent experience. The necessity of the action consists in
the fact that purpose is related simply to actuality, and this unity
is the Notion of action; action takes place because action is in
and for itself the essence of actuality. In the work, it is true,
there is revealed the contingency possessed by achievement
when contrasted with willing and doing; and this experience,
which seems as ifit must he accepted as truth, contradicts that
Notion of action. If, however, we consider the content of this
experience in its completeness, it is seen to be the vanishing
work. What is preserved is not the vanishing: the vanishing is
itself actual and is bound up with the work and vanishes with
it; the negative itself perishes along with the positive whose
neg~ti ve it is.
409. This vanishing of the vanishing lies in the Notion of the
intrinsically realindividuality itself; for that in which the work
vanishes or what vanishes in the work, and wnat was supposed
to give experience, as it was called, its supremacy over individuality's own Notion of itself, is the objective reality. Objective
reality, however, is a moment which itself no longer possesses
any truth on its own account in this consciousness; that truth
consists solely in the unity of this consciousness with the action,
and the true work is only that unity of doing and being, of willing
and achieving. Consciousness, then, because of the fundamental certainty ofits actions, holds the reality opposed to that
certainty to be for it alone; for self-consciousness which has
returned into itself, and for which all antithesis has vanished,
antithesis can no longer take this form ofbeingJor itseLJin anti..
thesis to reality. On the contrary, then, the antithesis and the
negativity manifested in work affect not merely the content of
tl.le work or the content of consciousness as well, but affect' the
reality as such, and hence affect the antithesis present in that

c.

(AA.) REASON

reality, and present only in virtue of it, and the vanishing of
the work . .In this way, then, consciousness is reflected out of
its perishable work into itself, and preserves its Notion "and its
certainty as what objectively exists and endures in face of the
experience of the contingency of action. I t experiences in point
offact its Notion, in which reality is only a moment, i.e. something for consciousness, not something which exists in its own
right; it experiences it as a vanishing moment, and reality therefore has for consciousness only the value of being as such, whose
universality is one with action. This unity is the true work; it
is the very heart of the matter [die Sache selbstJ which completely
holds its own and is experienced as that which endures, independently of what is merely the contingent result of an individual
action, tlle result of contingent circumstances, means, and
reality.
410. The 'heart of the matter' is only opposed to these
moments in so far as they are supposed to be isolated, but as
an interfusion of the reality and the individuality it is essentially
their unity. his equally an action and, qua action, pure action
ingeneral, hcncejustas muchan action of this particular individual; and this action as still hisj~ antithesis to reality, is a purpose. Equally, it is the transition from this determinateness into
the opposite, and lastly itis a reality which is explicitly present
for consciousness. The 'heart of the matter' thus expresses the
spiritual essentiality in which all these moments have lost all
validity of their own, and are valid therefore only as universal,
and in which the certainty consciousness has of itself is an objective entity, an objective fact for it, an object born of self-consciousness as its own, without ceasing to be a free object in the
proper sense. The Thing of sense-certainty and perception now
acquires its significance through se1f..,consciousness and through
it alone; on this rests the distinction between a Thing and a
cause or a 'matter in hand'. A movement corresponding to that
from [sense- J certainty to perception will run its course here.
41 I. In the 'matter in hand', then, in which the interfusion
of individuality and objectivity has itselfhecome objective, selfconsciousness has come into possession ofi ts true Notion, or has
attained to a consciousness of its substance. At the same time,
this consciousness as it exists here is one that has just now come
into being, and hence is an immediate consciousness of its sub-

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

247

stance; and this is the specific way in which spiritual being is
present here; it has not yet developed into a truly real substance. The 'matter in hand' has, in this immediate consciousness of its substance, the form of simple essence which, as a universal, contains within itselfall its various moments and belongs
to them, but, again, is also indifferent to them as specific
moments, and is free and independent, and as this free, simple,
ahstract 'matter in hand' has the value of essential being. The
various moments of the original determinateness or of the 'matter in hand' of this particular individual, the moments of his
End, of the means, of the action itself, and of the reality, all
these are, on the one hand, single particular moments for this
consciousness, which, in comparison with the 'matter in hand',
it can abandon and surrender. On the other hand, however,
they alJ have this 'matter in hand' as their essence but only in
such a way that it, being their abstract universal, can be found
in each of these various moments, and can be a predz'cate of them'.
The 'matter in hand' is not yet a subject; but those moments
count as subject bec~use they fall on the side of indi.v£dualityin
general, whereas the 'matter in hand' is at first only the simple
universal. It is the genus which is found in all these moments
as species of itself, and is equally free and independent of them.
4 12. Consciousness is cal1~d honest when it has on the one
hand attained to the idealism which the 'matter in hand'
expresses, and on the other hand possesses the truth in it qua
this formal universality; a consciousness which is concerned
solely with the 'matter in hand' and thetefore busies itselfsolely
with the various moments or, species of it; and when it does
not attain the 'matter in hand' in one of these moments or in
one meaning, it for that very reason gets hold of it in another.
Consequently, it does in fact always obtain the satisfaction
which it should enjoy in virtue of its Notion. Whichever way
things tUfn out, it has accomplished and attained the 'matter
in hand', for this being the universal genus of those moments
is the predicate of them all,
.
413. If this consciousness does not convert its purpose into
a reality, it has at least willed it, i.e. it makes the purpose qua
purpose, the mere doing which does nothing, the 'heart of the
matter', and can therefore e>tplain and console itself with the
fact that all the same something was taken in hand and done.

C. (AA.) REASON

Since the universal itself contains subsumed under it the negative moment or the vanishing, the fact that the work annihilates
itself, this too is its doing. It has incited the others to do this,
and in the vanishing of its reality still finds satisfaction, just' like
naughty boys who enjoy themselves when they get their ears
boxed because they are the cause of its being done. Or, again,
suppose it has not even attempted to carry out the 'matter in
hand', and has done absolutely nothing, then it has not been
able to; the 'matter in hand' is for it just the unity of its resolve
and the reality; it asserts that the rea1ity would be nothing else
but what it was possible for it to do. Finally, suppose something
of interest to him has come his way without any effort on his
part, then for him this reality is the 'matter in hand' just because
of the interest he finds in it, even though that reality has not
been produced by him. If it is a piece of good fortune that has
befallen him personally, then he is sure that it is his own doing
and his own desert; if, on the other hand, it should be an event
ofhistorical importance which does not really concern him, he
makescitdikewise hisown; and an interest for which he has done
nothing is, in his own eyes,a party interest which he has
favoured or opposed, and even combated or supported.
414. The integrity of this consciousness, as wen as the satisfaction it experiences in all its relationships, obviously consists in
the fact that it does not bring together its thoughts about the
~matter in hand'. For it, the 'matter in hand' is as much its
own affair as not a work at all, or is a mere action and an empty
purpose, or even a reality involving no action at all; it makes
one meaning after another the subject of this predicate, and
forgets them one after another. Now, the 'matter in hand' in
being merely willed, or evenin being incapable of realization,
has the meaning of an empty purpose and of a unity of wining
and achievement only in thought. The consolation for the failure
of the purpose which at least was willed, or at least simply done,
as well as the satisfaction of having given others something to
do, makes simple doing, o·r thoroughly bad work, the essence
of the whole affair; for that work is to be called bad which is
no wo·rk at all. Finally, in the lucky event of finding the reality
already in being, this 'being' becomes without any effort the
'matter in hand' itself.
415. The truth about this integrity, however, is that it is not

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

'249

as honest as it seems. For it cannot be so unthinking as to let
these various moments actually fall apart in that way; it must
be directly aware o(,their antithesis because they are absolutely
interrelated. The pure action is essentially the action of this particular individual, and this action is equally essentially a reality
ora 'matter in hand'. Conversely, the reality is essentially only
as his doing and as action in general as well; and his action is
at the same time only as action in general and so} too, as reality
in general. While, then, it seems to him that his concern is on]y
with the 'matter in hand' as an ahstract reality, it is also a fact
that he is concerned with it as his own doing. But just because
he is concerned merely with being active and busy, he is not
really in earnest about it; he has only to do with some objective
matter and with one that is his own. Since, finally, he seems
to will only his own affair or his own action, it is again a matter
ofdealing with an affair in general or with a reality that endures
in its own right.
416. Just as the 'matter in hand' itself and its moments
appear here as content, they are equally necessary, too, asf(Jrms
in consciousness. They appear as content only to vanish, each
making room for the other. They must therefore be present in
the character of superseded forms; but as such they are aspects
of consciousness itself. The 'matter in hand' is present as the initself or the reflection into itselfofconsciousness; the supplantingofthe moments by one another finds expression there, however, in their being established in consciousness, not as they are
in themselves but only as existing for another consciousness.
One of the moments of the content is exposed by it to the light
of day and made manifest to others; but consciousness is at the
same time reflected back from it into itself and the opposite is
equally present within consciousness which retains itfor itself
as its own. At the same time what occurs is not that one or other
of the moments is'merely exposed, and another mere1y retained;
on the contrary, consciousness operates alternately with them,
for it must make one as well as -another essential for itself and
for the others. The whole is the spontaneous interfusion ofindividuality and the universal; but because this whole is present for
consciousness only as the simple essence, and thus as the abstraction, of the 'matter in hand' its separate moments faB apart
outside of that 'matter in hand' and of one another. As a whole,

C. (AA.) REASON

it is only exhaustively exhibited by alternately exposing its
moments and retaining them for itself. Since in this alternation
consciousness keeps, in its reflection, one moment for itself and
as essential, while another is only externally present in it, or
is for others, there thus enters a play of individualities with one
another in which each and all find themselves both deceiving
and deceived.
417. An individuality sets about carrying out something; by
so doing it seems to have made something its own affair; it acts,
and in acting becomes involved with others and seems to itself
to be having to do with reality. The others therefore take its
action for a sign of its interest in the 'matter in hand' as such,
and its purpose to be the carrying-out of the. matter per se, regardless whether this is done by the first individuality or by
them. Accordingly, when they point out that this matter has
already been accomplished by them, or, if it has not, offer and
furnish their assistance, then this consciousness has really left
the position they believe it to occupy; it is its own action and
its own effort thatconstitllteitsinterest"in the 'matter in hand',
and when.the othe.rsbecomeawarethat this was really the;'matter inhand,' then they feel theyhavebeen deceived. But actually their eagerness to com.e and help was itself nothing else but
a desire to see and exhibit their own action, not the matter in
hand itself; that is, they wanted to deceive the others in just
the same way that they complain of having been deceived.
Since it now turns Ollt that its own action and eifort, the play
of its own powers, is the 'heart of the matter'·, it seems that consciousness is occupied with its own interest, not with that of
others, and is anxious only about action as its own action, not
about action as the action of others, and hence seems to allow
the others to do as they like about the matter they have in hand.
But again they are mistaken; that consciousness has already left
the position they thought it occupied. It is not concerned with
the 'matter in hand' as its own particular affair, but simply as
a 'matter in hand', as a universal, which is for everyone. It interferes, therefore in the action and work of others, and, if it can
no longer take the work out of their hands, it at least shows
an interest in it by passing judgement on it; if it gives it the
stamp of its approval and praise, this is meant to imply that,
in the work, it praises not only the work itself, but also its own

INDIVIDU,ALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITS.ELF

25 1

generosity and moderation in not having damaged the work
as work, nor damaged it by its censure. In showing an interest
in the work, it is enjoying its own self; and the work which it
censures is equally welcome to it for just this enjoyment of its
own action which its censure provides. Those, however, who
think or pretend to think that they have been deceived by this
interference, wanted really themselves to practise the same kind
of deceit. They pretend that their action and efforts are some~
thing for themselves alon~ in which they have only themselves
and their own essential nature in mind. However, in doing
something, and thus bringing themselves out into the light of
day, they directly contradict by their deed their pretence of
wanting to exclude the glare of publicity and participation by
all-and sundry. Actualization is, on the contrary, a display of
what is one's own in the element of universality whereby it
becomes, and should become) the affair of everyone.
418. It is, then, equally a deception of oneself and of others
if it is pretended that what one is concerned with is the 'matter
in hand' alone. A consciousness that opens up a subject-matter
soon learns that others hurry along like flies to freshly pouredout milk, and want to busy themselves with it; and they learn
about that individual that he, too, is concerned with the sub~
jeet-matter, not as an object, but as his own affair. On the other
hand, if what is supposed to be essential is merely the doing
of it, the employment of powers and capacities, or the expres~
sion of this particular individuality, then equally it is learned
by all parties tha.t they all regard themselves as affected and
invited to participate, and instead ofa mere 'doing') or separate
action, peculiar to the individual who opened up the subjectmatter, something has been opened up that is for others as well,
or is a subj eet-ma tter on its own account. In both cases the same
thing happens and only has a different significance by contrast
with what was assumed and was supposed to be accepted. Consciousness experiences both sides as equally essential monlents,
and in doing so learns what the nature of the 'matter in hand' really
is, viz. that it is neither merely something which stands opposed
to action in general, and to individual action, nor action whieh
stands opposed to a continuing being and which would be the
free genus of these moments as its species. Rather is its nature
such that its being is the action of the single individual and of

c.

(AA.) REASON

all individuals and whose action is immediately for others, or
is a 'matter in hand' and is such only as the action of each and
everyone: the essence which is the essence of all beings, viz. spiritual essence. Consciousness learns that no one of these moments
is subject, but rather gets dissolved in the universal' matter in hand';
the moments of the individuality which this unthinking consciousness regarded as subject, one after the other, coalesce into
simple individuality, which, as this particular individuality, is
no less immediately universal. Thus the 'matter in hand' no
longer has the character of a predicate, and loses the characteristic of lifeless abstract universality. It is rather substance permeated by individuality, suhject in which there is individuality
just as much qua individual, or qua thz's particular individual, as
qua all individuals; and it is the universal which has being only
as this action of all and each, and a reality in the f~ct that this
particular consciousness knows it to be its own individual reality
and the reality of aU. The pure ~matter in hand' itself is what
was defined above as 'the category', being that is the'!, or
the 'I' thatis being, but in the form ofthought which is stilJdistinguished from actual self-consciousness. H.ere, however, the
moments of actual self-consciousness in so far as we call them
its content (purpose, action, and reality),. and also in so far as
we callthem i tsform (being-for .. self and being.. for ..another), are
posited as one with the simple category itself, and the category
is thereby at the same time the entire content.

b. Reason as lawgiver
419. Spiritual essence is, in its simple being, pure consciousness,
and this self-consciousness. The originally determinate nature of
the individual has lost its positive meaning of being in itself the
element and the purpose ofits activity; it is merely a superseded
moment, and the individual is a selfin the form of a universal
self. Conversely) theformal 'matter in hand' gets its filling from
the active, self-differentiating individuality; for the differences
within the latter constitute the content of that universal. The
category is in itself, or implicit, as the universal of pure consciousness; it is eq ually for itself or explici t, for the self of consciousness
is equally a moment of it. It is absolute being, for that universality is the simple self-identity of being.
420. Thus what is object for consciousness has the signifi-

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

253

canee of being the True; it is and it is authoritative, in the sense
that it exists and is authoritative in and for itself. I tis theahsolute
'matter in hand', which no longer suffers from the antithesis
of certainty and its truth, between universal and individual,
between purpose and its reality, but whose existence is the reality
and action ofself.. consciousness. This 'matter in hand' is therefore
the ethical substance; and consciousness of it is the ethical consciousness. Its object is likewise for it the True, for it combines
selfmconsciousness and being in a single uni ty. I t has the value
of the Absolute, for se]faconsciousness cannot and does not want
any more to go beyond this object, for in it, it is in communion
with itself: it cannot, for it is all being and all power; it does
not want to, for it is the self or the wi] I of this self. The object
is in its own self real as object, for it contains within itself the
distinction characteristic of consciousness; it divides itself into
'masses' [Massen] or spheres which are the determinate laws of
the absolute essence. These 'masses', however, do not obscure·
the Notion, for the moments of being and pure consciousness
and of the self remain enclosed within it-a unity which con ..
stitutes the essence of these ~masses' and which, in this dis..
tinction, no longer lets these moments fall apart from one
another;
421, These laws or 'masses' of the ethical substance are immediately acknowledged. We cannot ask for their origin and
justification, norean we look for any other warrant; for something other than essence that is in and for itself could only be
seW-consciousness itself. But seW·consciousness is nothing but
this essence, for His itself the being-for selfofthis essence which
is the truth, just because it is as much the self of consciousness
as it is its in-itself or pure consciousness.
422. Sinee self-consciousness knows itself to be a moment of
the heing-for-self of this substance, it expresses the existence of
the law within itself as follows: sound Reason knows immediatelywhat is right and good. Just as it knows the law immediately, so too the law is valid for it immediately, and it says
directly: 'this is right and good' -and, moreover, this particular
law. The laws are determinate; the law is the 'matter in hand'
itself filled with a significant content.
423. What is thus given immediately must likewise be
accepted and considered immediately. Just as in the case of

254

C. (AA.) REASON

sense-certainty, we had to examine the nature of what it immediately expressed as being, so here, too, we have to see how the
being expressed by this immediate ethical certainty, or by the
immediately existing 'masses' of the ethical substance, is constituted. Examples of some such laws will show us this; and since
we take them in the form of declarations of the sound Reason
which knows them, lJ..'e do not have first to introduce the moment
which has to be made valid in them, considered as immediate
ethical laws.
424. 'Everyone ought to speak the truth.' In this duty as
expressed unconditionally, the condition will at once be
admitted: ifhe knows the truth. The commandment, then, will
now run: everyone ought to speak the truth at all times, accord,.
ing to his knowledge and conviction. Sound Reason, this ethical
Substance precisely, which knows immediately what is right
and good, will also explain that this condition was already so
much part and parcel of tha t uni versa] maxim that this is how
it meant that commandment to be understood. But, with this
admission, it in fact admits that already, in the very act of
saying the commandment, it really violates it. It said: everyone
ought to speak the truth; but it meant :he ought to speak it
according to his knowledge and conviction; that is to say, what
it said was different from what it meant; and to speakotherwise
than one means, means not speaking the truth. The untruth
or inapt expression in its improved form now runs: everyol}e
ought to speak the truth according to his knowledge and con'"
viction at the time. But with this correction, what the proposition wanted to enunciate as universally necessary and intrinsically valid, has really turned round into something completely
contingent. For speaking the truth is made contingent on
whether I can know it, and can convince myself of it; and the
proposition says nothing more than that a confused lUlJddle of
truth and. falsehood ought to be sPQkenjust as anyone happens
to know, mean) and understand it. This contingency of the content has universality merely in the propositional form in which
it is expressed; hut as an ethical proposition it promises a universal and necessary content, and thus contradicts itself by the
content being contingent. Finally, if the proposition were rectified bysaying that the contingency of the knowledge and conviction of the truth ought to be dropped, and that the truth ought

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

255

also to be known, then this would be a commandment which
directly contradicts the one we started from. Sound Reason was
at first supposed to possess immediately the capacity to speak the
truth; now, however, it is said that it ought to know, that is to
say, that it does not immediately know what is true. Looking at
this from the side of the content, then this has dropped out in
the demand that we should know the truth; for this refers to
knowing in general: we ough t to know. What is demanded is, there·
fore, really something free of all specific content. But here the
point in question was about a specific content, a distinction in the
ethical substance. Yet this immediate determination of the substance is a content which showed itself to be really completely
contingent and which, when raised into universality and
necessity by making the law refer to knowing [instead of to content], in fact vanishes.
425. Another celebrated commandment is: 'Love thy
neighbour as thyself.' I tis directed to the individual in his rela~
tionship with other individuals and asserts the commandment
as a relationship between two individuals, or as a relationship
of feeling Actiy~ love--=for love that does not act has no existenceand is thereforehargly intended here-aims at removing
an evil from someone and being good to him. For this purpose
I have to distinguish what is bad for him, what is the appropriate good to counter this evil, and what in general is good for
him; i.e. I must love him intelligently. Unintelligent love will
perhaps do him more harm than hatred. Intelligent, substantial
beneficence is, however, in its richest and most important form
the intelligent universal action of the state-an action compared with which the action ofa single individual, as an individual, is so insignificant that it is hardly worth talking about.
The action of the state is, moreover, of80 great a power that,
if the action of the individual were to opposeit, and either were
intended to be a downright, explicitly criminal act, or the individual out of love for someone else wanted to cheat the universal out of its right, and its share in the action, such an action
would be altogether useless and inevitably frustrated. The only
significance left for bendicence, which is a sentiment, is that of
an action which is quite single and isolated, of help in [a situation
of] need, which is as contingent as i tis transi tory. Chance d etermines not only the occasion of the action but also whether it

C. (AA.) REASON

is a 'work' at all, whether it is not immediately undone and
even perverted into something bad. Thus this acting for the
good of others which is said to be necessary, is of such kind that
it may, or may not, exist; is such that, ifby chance the occasion
offers, the action is perhaps a 'work' and is good, but also perhaps not. This law, therefore, as little has a universal content
as the one we first considered, and does not express, as an absolute ethical law should, something that is valid in and for itself.
In other words, such laws stop short at Ought, they have no
actuality; they are not laws, but merely commandments.
426. It is evident, however, from the very nature of the case,
that we must give up all idea of a universal, absolute content.
For any determinateness placed in the simple substance (whose
nature is to be simple) is inadequate to it. The commandment
in its simple absoluteness itself expresses an 1,'mmediate ethical
being; the distinction appearing in it is a determinateness, and
therefore a content subsumed under the absolute universality
of this simple being. Since, then, all idea of an absolute content
must be given up, it can only claim a formal universality; or
that it is not seW-contradictory. For universaHty that lacks a
content is [merely] formal, and an absQlute contentitselfis tanta~
mount to a distinction which is no distinction, Le. to absence
of content.
427. All that is left, then, for the making ofa law is the mere
form of universality, or, in fact, the talltology of consciousness
which stands over against the content, and the knowledge, not
of an existing or a real content, but only of the essence or selfidentity of a content.
428. The ethical nature, therefore, is not itse1fsimply as such
a content, but only a standard for deciding whether a content
is capable of being a law or not, i.e. whether iris or is not selfcontradictory. Reason as the giver of laws is reduced to a
Reason which merely critically examines them.

Reason as testing laws
429. A distinction within the simple ethical substance is for
it an accident which -appeared, as we sawin specific command~
ments, as the contingency of the knowledge [of the circumstances], of the circumstances themselves, and of the action.
The comparison of that simple being with the determinateness
c,

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

257

corresponding to it was made by us; and in that comparison
the simple substance has shown itself to be a formal universality,
or pure consciousness which is free from the content and stands
over against it, and is a knowing of it as something determinate.
This universality in this way remains the same as what the ~mat­
ter in hand' itself was. ijut in consciousness it is something else;
it is, namely, no longer the unthinking; inert genus, but is
related to the particular and regarded as the power over it and
as its truth. This consciousness seems at first to be the same pro·
cess of testing which formerly we carried out, and it seems that
its action cannot be;anything other than what has already happened, viz. a comparison of the universal with the determinate
particular which, 48 previously, would reveal their disparity.
Here, however, the relationship of the content to th€ universal
is different, since the latter has acquired a different significance;
it isa}ormal universality of which the determina.te content is
capable, for in that universality.the content is considered only
in relation toitself. When we were testing, the universal pure
substance stoop over against the determinateness, which displ,ayeq itselfas.a contingency of the consciousness into which
the substance eut.ered. Here, one term of the comparison has
vanished; the1)niversaLis no longer the affirmatively present
and authoritative.substance, or that which is right in and for
itself, hut a simple knowing or a form, which compares a content only with itself, and considers whether it is a tautology.
Laws are no longer given, buCtesled; and for the consciousness
which tests them they are already given. It takes up their CfJntent
simply as it is, without concerning itself, as we did, with the
particularity and contingency inherent in its reality; it is concerned with the commandment simply as commandl)lent, and
its attit~de towards it is just as uncomplicated as is its being
a criterion for testing it.
430. But tbat is the reason why this testing does not get very
far. Just because the criterion is a tautology, and indifferent
to the coutent,one content isjustas acceptable to it asitsopposite. SlJPPose the question is: Ought it to be an absolute law
that thcreshould be property? Absolute, and not on grounds
of utility for other ends.: the essence of ethics consists just in
law being identical with itself and through this self-identity,
i.e. through having its ground in itself, it is unconditioned.

C. (AA.) REASON

Property, simply as such, does not contradict itself; it is an iso·
lated determinateness, or is posited aa merely self·identical. Non.
property, the non.ownership of things, or a common ownership
of goods, is just as little self-contradictory. That something
belongs to nobody, or to the first~comer who takes possession
ofit, or to all together, to each according to his need or in equal
portions-that isa simple determinateness, aJormal thought, like
its opposite, property. Admittedly, if a thing that belongs to
no one is considered as a necessary object oJa need, then it is necessary that it become the property of some particular individual;
and the contradiction would stem rather from the freedom of
the thing being made into a law. But by non-ownership of the
thing is not meant absolute non·ownership, but that it shall
come into someone's possession according to the individual's
need, and, moreover, not in order to be kept, but to be used
immediately. But to provide for the need in such a completely
arbitrary way is contradictory to the nature of the conscious
individual who alone is under discvssion. For such an individual must think of his need in the form ofuniversality , must pro ..
vide for the whole of his existence, and acquire a lasting possession. This being so, the idea ofa thing beiog arbitrarily allotted
to the first self.. cons do us individual who comes along anrlneeds
it, does not :accord with itself. In a sodetyhased on acornmon
ownership ofgoods, in which provision would be made in ac·
cordance wi th a universal fixed rule, either each receives as
much as he needs-in which case there is a contradiction
between,this inequality and the essential nature of that consciousness whoseprinc1ple is the equality ofindividuals--or, in
accordance with that principle} goods will he equally distributed, and in this case the share is not related to the need,
although such a relationship alone constitutes the very notion
of 'sharing' .
43 I. Still, ifin this way [the notion of] non-property appears
contradictory, this is only because it has notbeen left as a simple
determinateness. The same applies to- [the notion of] property,
if this is resolved into its moments. The single thing,that is my
property is held as such to be something universal, 'Solidly estah·
lished, and permanent; but this contradicts its nature, which
consists in its being used and in vanishing. At the same time,
itisheld to be mine, something which everyone else acknowledges,

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

259

and lets alone. The fact, however, that I am acknowledged
implies rather my equality, my identity, with everyone, and
that is the opposite of exclusiveness. What I possess is a Thing,
i.e. something which is for others in general and is only for me
in a quite general, undefined way; that 1 possess it, contradicts
its universal thinghood. Consequently, property isjust as much
an all-round contradiction as non-property; each contains
within it these two opposed, self-contradictory moments of individuality and universality. But each of these determinatenesses when thought of as simple, as property or non-property,
without explicating them further, is as simple as the other, i.e.
is not self-contradictory. The criterion oflaw which Reason possesses within itself fits every case equally well, and is thus in
fact no criterion at all. It would be strange, too, if tautology,
the maxim of contradiction, which is admitted to be only a
formal criterion for the cognition of theoretical truth, i.e. something which is quite indifferent to truth and falsehood, were
supposed to be more than this for the cognition of practical
truth.
432. In both the above moments, which fill the former
emptiness of spiri tual being, the process of placing immediate
determinatenessesin the ethical su bstance, and then getting to
know whether they are laws, has been eliminated. The result
thereforeseems to be that neither specific laws nor a knowledge
of them is admissible. But the substance is the consciousness of
itself as absolutely essential beiI1g, which, therefore, can give
up neither the distinction within it nor the knowledge of that distinction. That law . .giving and the testing of laws have proved
to be futile; means that both, when taken .singly and in isolation,
are merely unstable moments of the ethical consciousness; and
the movement in which they appear has the formal meaning
that the ethical subs tance thereby exhibits itself as consciousness.
433. In so far as these two moments are more precise determinations of consciousness of the 'matter in hand', they can be
regarded as forms of the honest consciousness which, as previously in the case of its formal moments, now busies itself with
a supposed content of the good and the right, and with testing
such established truth, and fancies that in sound Reason and
intelligent insight it possesses that which gi ves force and validity
to commandments.

C. (AA.) REASON

434. However, without this honesty, laws do not have
validity as the essence of consciousness, nor, similarly, does the
testing of them count as an action within consciousness. On the'
contrary, these moments, appearing each by itself immediately
as a reality, express in the one case an invalid establishing and
existence of actual laws, and in the other case an equally invalid
immunity from them. The law, as a specific law, has a contingent content; this means here that it is the law of a single consciousness and has an arbitrary content. To legislate immediately in that way is thus the tyrannical insolence which makes
caprice into a law and ethical behaviour into obedience to such
caprice--obedience to laws which are merely laws and not at
the same time commandments, So, too, the second moment, in
so far as it is isolated, means testing the laws, moving the immovable, means the insolence of a knowledge which argues
itself into a freedom from absolute laws, treating them as an
alien caprice.
435. In both forms, these moments are a negative relation
to substance or real spiritual being; or we may say that in them
substancecioes-not as yet possess its reality, but rather that consdousnesscontains them still in the form ofits own immediacy,
and that substance is at first only a willing and knowing by this
particular individual, or the 'ought to be' of an unreal commandment and a knowledge offormal universality. But since
these modes have been superseded,consciousness has returned
intothe universal and those antitheses have vanished. Spiritual
being is actual substance through these modes being valid, not
in isolation, but only as superseded [moments] ; and the unity
in which they are merely moments is the self of consciousness
which, being from now on posited in the spiritual being, makes
that being actual, full-filled, and seW·conscious.
436. The spiritual being thus exists first of all for self-con~
sciousness as law which has an intrinsic being; the universality
associated with testing the law, a merely formal, nolan essential
universality, is now behind us. The law is equally an eternal
law which is grounded not in the will of a particular individual,
but is valid in and for itself; it is the absolute pure will of all
which has the form of immediate being. AJso, it is not a commandment, which only ought to be: it is and is valid; it is the universal 'I' of the category, the 'I' which is immediately a reality,

INDIVIDUALITY REAL IN AND FOR ITSELF

26r

and the world is only this reality. But since this existent law
is valid unconditionally, the obedience of seJf~consciousness is
not the serving of a master whose commands were arbitrary,
and in which it would not .recognize itself. On the contrary,
laws are the thoughts of its own absolute consciousness,
thoughts which are immediately its own. Also, it does not believe
in them, for although belief does perceive essential being
it perceives it as something alien to itself. Ethical self-con~
sciousness is t'mmediately one with essential being through the
universality of its sell; belief, on the other hand, starts from the
individual consciousness; it is the movement of that consciousness
always towards this unity, but without attaining to the presence
of its essential being. The above consciousness, on the other
hand, has put its merely individual aspect behind it, this media~
tion is finished and complete, and only because this is so, is this
consciousness immediate self~consciousness of the ethical sub~
stance.
437. The difference between self~consciousness and essence,
is therefore, perfectly transparent. Because of this, the dis~
tinctions in essence itself are not accidental determinatenesses;
on the contrary, in virtue of the unity of essence and self-con,..
sciousness (this latter being the only possible source of dis~
parity), they are 'masses' articulated into groups by the lifenf
the unity which permeates them, unalienated spirits trans~
parent to themselves, stainless celestial figures that preserve in
aU their differences the undefiled innocence and harmony .of
their essential nature. The relationship of self-consciousness to
them is equally simple and clear. They are, and nothing mpre;
this is what constitutes the awareness ofits relationship to them.
Thus, Sophocles' Antigone! acknowledges them as the unwritten
and infallible law of the gods.
They are not of yesterday or today, but everlasting,
Though where they came from, none of us can tell.
They are. If I inquire after their origin and confine them to
the point whence they arose, then I have transcended them;
for now it is I who am the universal, and they are the conditioned
and limited. If they are supposed to be validated by my insight,
then I have already denied their unshakeable, intrinsic being,
1

Sophocles, Antigone,

n.

456--7.

c. (AA.) REASON

and regard them as something which, for me, is perhaps true,
but also is perhaps not true. Ethical disposition consists just in
sticking steadfastly to what is right, and abstaining from all
attempts to move or shake it, or derive it. Suppose something
has been entrusted to me; it is the property of someone else
and I acknowledge this because it is so, and I keep myself unfalteringly in this relationship. If I should keep for myself what
is entrusted to me, then according to the principle I follow in
testing laws, which is a tautology, I am not in the least guilty
ofcontradiction ; for then I no longer look upon it as the property of someone else: to hold on to something which I do not
regard .as belonging to someone else is perfectly consistent.
Alteration of the point of view is not contradiction; for what we
are concerned with is not the point of view, but the object and
content, which ought not to be self-contradictory. Just as I
can-as I do when I give s.omething away-alter the view that
it is my property into the view that it belongs to someone else,
without becoming guilty of a contradiction, so I can equally
pursue the reverse course. It is not, therefore, because I find
something is not self-contradictory that it is right; on the contrary, iLis right because it is what is right. That something is
the propertyof'another, this is fundamental; I have not to argue
about it, or hun t around for or en tertain thoughts, connections,
aspects, ofvarious kinds; I have to think neither of making laws
nor of testing them. All such thinking on my part would upset
that relation, since, if I liked, I could in fact just as well make
the opposite conform to my indeterminate tautological knowledge and make that the law. But whether this or the opposite
determination is the right, that is determined in and Jor itself.
I could make whichever of them I liked the law, and just as
well neither of them, and as soon as I start to test them I have
already begun to tread an unethical path. By acknowledging
the absoluteness of the right, I am within the ethical substance;
and this substance is thus the essence of self-consciousness. But
this self-consciousness is the actuality and existence of the su bstance, its self and its will.

(BB.) SPIRIT
VI. SPIRIT
438. Reason is Spirit when its certainty of being all reality
has been raised to truth, and it is cQDscious of itself as its own
world, and of the world as itself. The coming-to-be of Spirit
was indicated in the immediately preceding movement in
which the object of consciousness, the pure category, rose to
be the Notion of Reason. In Reason as observer, this pure unity of
the I and being, ofbeingjor itself and being in itself, is determined
as the in-itself or as being, and the consciousness of Reason finds
itself. But thetruth of observation is rather that it leaves behind
it thisiUlJ,nedia.te instinct which merely find& Reason, this unconscious existence of Reason. The intuited category, the found
Thing, enters conspjOllsnessas the being:for-self of the 'I', which
is now aware ofitselfas the selfin objective being. But this determination of the category, of being-for-self opposed to beingin-itself, is equaUy one. . sided and is a moment that supersedes
its.elf. The category is therefore determined for consc~ousness
as it is in its universal truth, as a being that is in and for itself.
This still abstract determination which constitutes the 'matter
in hand' itselfis at first only spiritual essence, and its consciousness [only] a formall.cnowing of it, which busies itself with all
kinds ofcontent qfthe essence. This consciousness, asapt;t.rticular individual, is still in fact distinct from substance, and
eith~r makes arbitrary laws or fancies that in simply knowing laws it. possesses them in their 'own absolute nature. Or,
looked ;;ttJrom the side of su bstance, this is spiritual essence that
is in and for itself, but which is not yetconscioumess of Itself. But
essence that is in apdfor itself, and which is at the Same time
actual as consciousness and aware pf itself, this is Spirit.
439. Its spiritual essence h;;ts already been designated as ethical substance; but Spirit is the actuality of that substance. It is
the self of actual consciousness to which it stands opposed, or
rathe;f \yhich it opposes to itself as an objective, actual world,
but a.w9rld which has completely lost the meaning for the self

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of something alien to it, just as the self has completely lost the
meaning of a being-for-self separated from the world, whether
dependent on it or not. Spirit, being the substance and the universal, self-identical, and abiding essence, is the unmoved solid
ground and starting-point for the action of all, and it is their purpose and goal, the in-i tself of every self-consciousness expressed
in thought. This substance is equally the universal work produced by the action of all and each as their unity and identity,
for it is the being-for-self, the self, action. As substance, Spirit is
unshaken righteous self-identity; but asbeing-for-selfit is a fragmented being, self-sacrificing and benevolent, in which each
accomplishes his own work, rends asunder the universal being,
and takes from it his own share. This resolving of the essence
into individuals is precisely the moment of'the action and the
self of all; it is the rnovement and soul of substance and the
resultant universal being. Just because it is a being that is
resolved in the self, it is nota dead essence, but is actual and
alive.
440. Spirit is thus self;,;s up porting , absolute, real being. All
previous shapes of consciousness are abstract forms of it. They
result from Spirit analysing itself, distinghishing its moments,
and dwelling for a while with each. This isolating of those
moments presupposes Spirit itselfand subsists therein; in other
words, ~he isolation exists onlyinSpiritwbich is a concreteex'istence. In this isolation th~y have the appearance of really
existing as such; but that they are only moments or vanishing
quantities is shown by their advance'andretreat into their
ground and essence; and this essence isj ust this movement and
resolution of these moments. Here, where Spirit, or Spirit's re. .
flection into itself, is posited, we may briefly recall this aspect
of them in our own reflec'tion: they were consciousness, selfconsciousness, and Reason. Spirit, then 'is consciousness in
general which embraces sense-ce'rtainty, perception, and the
Understanding, in so far as in its self-analysis Spirit holds fast
to the moment of being anobjectively existent actuality to itself,
and ignores the fact that this actuality is its ownbeing;...for~self.
If, on the contrary, it hoJds fast to the other moment of the
analysis, viz. that its object is its own heing-J'Or.. self, then it is
self-consciousness. But as immediate consciousness of the being
that is in and Jor itself, as unity of consciousness and self.:;con ..

SPIRIT

sciousness, Spirit is consciousness that has Reason; it is consciousness which, as the word 'has' indicates, has the object in a shape
which is implicitly determined by Reason or by the value of the
category, but in such a way that it does not as yet have for
consciousness the value of the category. Spirit is that consciousness which we were considering immediately prior to the
present stage. Finally, when this Reason which Spirit has is intuited by Spirit as Reason that exists, or as Reason that is actual
in Spirit and is its world, then Spirit exists in its truth; it is
Spirit, the ethical essence that has an actual existence.
441. Spirit is the ethical life of a nation in so far as it is the
immediate truth-the individual that is a world. It must advance
to the consciousness of what it is immediately, must leave
behind it the beauty of ethical life, and by passing through a
series of shapes attain to a knowledge of itself. These shapes,
however, are distinguished from the previous ones by the fact
that they are real Spirits, actualities in the strict meaning of
the word, and instead of being shapes merely of consciousness,
are shapes of a world.
442. The living ethical world is Spirit in its truth. When Spirit
first arrives at an abstract knowledge of its essence, ethical life
is submerged in theformal universalityaflegaHty or law. Spirit,
whichhenceforthis divided within itsel~ traces one afits worlds,
the realm oj culture, in the harsh reality of its objective element;
over againstthis realm, it traces in the element of thought the
world of heliif or faith, the realm of essential being. Both worlds,
however, when grasped by Spirit-which, after this loss of itself,
withdraws into itself-when grasped by the Notion, are confounded and revolutionized by the insight [of the individual]
and the diffusion ofthat insight, known as the Enlightenment;
and the realm which was divided and expanded into this world
and the heyond, returns into self·consciousness which now, in
theform ofmorality, grasps itself as the essentiality and essence
as the actual self; it no longer places its world and its ground outside ofitself, but letseverythingfadeinto itself, and, as conscience,
is Spirit that is certain of itse1f.
443. The ethical world, the world which is rent asunder into
this world and a beyond, and the moral view of the world,
are thus the Spirits whose process and return into the simple
self-consciousness of Spirit are now to be developed. The goal

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

and outcome of that process will appear on the scene as the
actual self-consciousness of absolute Spirit.
A. THE TRUE SPIRIT. THE ETHICAL ORDER

444. Spirit is, in its simple truth, consciousness, and forces
its moments apart. Action divides it into substance, and consciousness of the substance; and divides the substance as well
as consciousness. S~bstance, as the universal essence and End,
stands over against the individualized reality; the infinite middle
term is self-consciousness which, being the implicit unity of itself
and substance, now becomes that unity explicitly and unites
the universal essence and its individualized reality. The latter
it raises to the former and acts ethically, the former it brings
down to the latter and realizes the End, the substance which
had an existence only in thought. It brings into existence the
unity of its self and substance as its own work, and thus as an
actual existence.
445. In this separation of the moments of consciousness, the
simple suhstancehas, on the one hand, preserved the antithesis
to self-consciousness, and on the other, it eq uallyexhibits in
its own self the nature of consciousness, viz. to create distinctions
within itself, exhibiting itself as a world articulated into its
[separate] spheres. It thus splits itself up into distinct ethical
substances, into a human and a divine law. Similarly, the selfconsciousness confronting the substance assigns to itself according to its nature one of these powers, and as a knowing., is on
the one hand ignorant of what it does, and on the other knows
what it does, a knowledge which for that reason is a deceptive
knowledge. It learns through its own act the contradiction of
those powers into which the substance divided itself and their
mutual downfall, as well as the contradiction between its knowledge of the ethical character of its action, and what is in its
own proper nature ethical, and thus finds its own downfall. In
point of fact, however, the ethical substance has developed
through this process into actual self-consciousness; in other
words, this particular self has become the actuality of what it
is in essence; but precisely in this development the ethical order
has been destroyed.

THE ETHICAL ORDER

a. The ethical world. Human and Divine Law: Man and Woman

446. The simple substance of Spirit, as consciousness, is
divided. In other words, just as the consciousness of abstract
sensuous being passes over into perception, so also does the immediate certain ty of a real ethical si tua tion ; and j us t as for senseperception simple being becomes a Thing of many properties,
so for ethical perception a given action is an actual situation
with many ethical connections. For the former, however, the
superfluous plurality of properties concentrates itself into the
essential antithesis of individuality and universality; and still
more for ethical perception, which is the purified substantial
consciousness, does the plurality of ethical moments become the
duality of a law of individuality and a law of universality. But
each ofthese divisions ofsubstance remains Spirit in its entirety;
if in sense-perception things have no other substance than the
two determinations of individuality and universality, here these
determinations express only the superficial antithesis of the two
sides.
447. In the essence we are considering here, individuality
has the meaning of self-consciousness in general, not of a particular, contingent consciousness. In this determination, therefore,
the.ethical substance is actual substance, absolute Spirit realized
in the plurality of e}(istent consdousnesses; this spirit is the community which, when we entered the sphere of Reason in its
practical embodiment, wasjor us absolute essence, and here has
emerged on its own account in its truth as conscious ethical essence,
and as essence jor the consciousness which here is our object.
It is Spirit which isjor £tseljin that it preserves itse1fin its reflection in individuals; and it is implicitly Spirit, or substance, in
that it preserves them within itself. As actual substance, it is a
nation, as actual consciousness, itis the citizens of that nation. This
consciousness has its essence in simple Spirit, and the ,certainty
of itself in the actuality of this Spirit, in the nation as a whole;
it has its truth, therefore, not in something that is not actual,
but in a Spirit that exists and prevails.
448. This Spirit can be called the human law, because it is
essentially in the form of a reality that is conscious of itself. In
the form of universality it is the known law, and the prevailing
custom; in the form of individuality it is the actual certainty

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of itself in the individual as such, and the certainty of itself as
a simple individuality is that Spirit as government. Its truth
is the authority which is openly accepted and manifest to all;
a concrete existence which appears for immediate certainty in the
form an existence that has freely issued forth.
449. Confronting this clearly manifest ethical power there
is, however, another power, the Divine Law. For the ethical
power of the state, being the movement ofseIf-conscious action,
finds its antithesis in the simple and immediate essence of the
ethical sphere; as actual universality it is a force actively opposed
to individual being-for-self; and as actuality in general it finds
in that inner essence something other than the ethical power of
the state.
450. It has already been mentioned that each of the opposites in which the ethical substance exists contains the entire
substance, and all the moments ofits content. If, then, the community is that substance conscious of what it actually does, the
other side has the form of immediate substance or substance
that simply is. The latter is thus on the one hand the inner
Notion or general possibility of the ethical sphezre in general,
but on the other hand equally contains within it the motnent
of self-consciousness. This moment which expresses the ethical
sphere in this element ofimmediacy or [simple] being, or which
is an immediate consciousness ofitself, both as essence and as this
particular self, in an 'other" i.e. as a natural ethical community-this is the Family. The Family, as the unconscious, still
inner Notion [of the ethical order], stands opposed to its actual,
self-conscious existence; as the element of the nation's actual existence, it stands opposed to the nation itself; as the immediate
being of the ethical order, it stands over against that order
which shapes and maintains itself by working for the universal;
the Penates stand opposed to the universal Spirit.
45 I. However, although the Family is immediately determined as an ethical being, it is within itselfan ethical entity only
so far as it is not the natural relationship of its members, or so
far as their connection is an immedialeconnection of separate,
actual individuals; for the ethical' principle is intrinsically universal, and this natural relationship isjust as much a spiritual
one, and it is only as a spiritual entity that it is ethical. We
have to see what constitutes its peculiar ethical character. In

THE ETHICAL ORDER

the first place, because the ethical principle is intrinsically uni ..
versal, the ethical connection between the members of the
Family is not that offeeting, or the relationship of lave. It seems,
then, that the ethical principle must be placed in the relation
of the individual member of the Family to the whole Family as
the Substance, so that the End and content of what he does and
actually is, is solely the Family. But the conscious End motivating the action of this whole, so far as it is directed towards that
whole, is itself the individua1, The acquisition and maintenance
of power and wealth i~ in part concerned only with needs and
belongs to the sphere of appetite; in part, they become in their
higher determination something that is only mediated. This determination does not fall within the Family itself, but bears on
what is truly universal, the community; it has, rather, a negative relation tothe Family, and consists in expe1ling the individual from the Family, subduing the natural aspect and
separateness of his existence, and training him to be virtuous,
to a Bfe in and for the universal. The positive End peculiar to
the Family is the individual as such. Now, in order that this
relationship be ethical, neither he who performs the action, nor
heto whom the action refers, can be in an accidental relationship
as happens perhaps in rendering some assistance or service in
aparticular case. The c@ntentofthe ethical action must be sub ..
stantial or wh01e and universal; therefore it can only berelated
to the whole individual or t'o the individual qua universal. And
this, again, must not be understood as if it were only imagined
that doing him a service would promote his total happiness,
whereas the service, being an immediate and actual deed,produces only a particular effect on him. Nor must we imagine
that service in the fortn of education , i.e, in a series of efforts,
really has him in his entirety for object, and produces him as
a 'work'; for apart from the purpose which is negatively connected with the Family, the actual deed has only a limited content. Finally, just as little should we understand the service as
a help in time of need by which in truth the individual in his
entirety is rescued; for such help is itse1fa complete1y contingent
act, the occasion of which is an ordinary reality which canei ther
be or not be. The deed, then, which embraces the entire existence of the b1ood-relation, does not concern the citizen, for he
does not belong to the Family, nor the individual who is to

27 0

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

become a citizen and will cease to count as this particular individual; it has as its object and content this particular individual who belongs to the Family, but is taken as a universal being
freed from his sensuous, i.e. individual, reality. The deed no
longer concerns the living but the dead, the individual who,
after a longsuccession ofseparate disconnected experiences, concentrates himselfinto a single completed shape, and has raised
himself out of the unrest of the accidents of life into the calm
of simpJe universality. But because it is only as a citizen that
he is actual and substantial, the individual, so far .as he is not
a citizen but belongs to the Family, is only an unreal impotent
shadow.
452. This universality which the individual as such attains
is/Jure being, death; it is a state which has been reached immediately, in the course of Nature, not the result of an action consc£ously done. The duty of the member of a Family is on that
account to add this aspect, in order that the individual's ultimate being, too, shaH not belong solely to Nature and remain
something irrational, butshallhesomething done, andthe right
of consciousness be asserted in it. Or rather, the meaning of
the action is that because in truth the calm.and universality
of a self.,.conscious being do not belong to Nature, the illusory
appearance that the death of the individual results from a eonscious action on the part of Nature may be dispelled, and the
truth established. What Nature did in the individual is that
aspect in which his development into a universal is exhibited
as the movement of an [immediate] existent. This movement
falls, it is true, within the ethical community, and has this for
its End; death is the fulfilment and the supreme 'work'
which the individual as such undertakes on its behalf. But in
so far as he is essentially a particular individual, it is an accident
that his death was directly connected with his 'work' for the
universal and was the result of it; partly because, if his death
was such a result, it is the natural negativity and movement of
the individual as a [mere] existent, in which consciousness does
not return into itself and become self-consciousness; or partly
because, since the movement of what [merely] exists consists
in its being superseded and becoming a being-for-self, death
is the side of diremption in which the attained being ..for-se1f
is something other than the mere existent which began the

THE ETHICAL ORDER

movement. Because the ethical order is Spirit in its immediate
truth, the sides into which its consciousness sunders itself also
fall into this form of immediacy, and individuality passes over
into this abstract negativity which, being in its own self without
consolation and reconciliation, must receive them essentially
through a real and external act. Blood-relationship supplements,
then, the abstract natural process by adding to it the movement
of consciousness, interrupting the work of Nature and rescuing
the blood-relation from destruction; or better, because destruction is necessary, the passage of the blood-relation into mere
being, it takes 00 itself the act of destruction. Through this it
comes about that the dead, the universal being, becomes a being
that has returned into itself, a being-far-self, or, the powerless,
simply isolated individual has been raised to universal individuality. The dead individual, by having liberated his being from
his action or his negative unity, is an empty singular, merely
a passive being-for-another, at the mercy of every lower
irrational individuality and the forces of abstract material elements, all of which are now more powerful than himself: the
fOTITIer on accountof the life they possess, the latter on account
ofthelr negative nature, The Family keeps away from thedead
this dishonouringofhim by unconscious appetites and abstract
entities, and puts its own action in their place, and weds the
blood-relation to the bosom of the earth, to the elemental
imperishahle individuality. The Family thereby makes him a
member ofa community which prevails over and holds under
control the forces of particular material elements and the lower
forms of life, which sought to unloose themselves against -him
and to destroy him.
453. This l~stduty thus constitutes the perfect divine law, or
the'positive ethical action towards the individual. Every other
relationship to him which does not remain one simply of love
but is ethical, belongs to human law and has the negative significance ofraising the individual above his confinement within
the natural community to which he in his [natural] existence
belongs. Now, although human right has for its content and
power the actual ethical substance that is conscious of itself~
i.e. the entire nation, while the divine right and law has for its
content and power the individual who is beyond the real world,
yet he is not without power. His power is the abstract, pure

27 2

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

uni versal, the elemental individ ual which eq uallyd raws back in to
the pure abstraction which is its essence the individuality that
breaks Joose from the element, and constitutes the self-conscious
reality of the nation-draws it back into the essence which is
its ground. How this power is manifested in the Notion itself,
we shall see in the ensuing development.
454. Now, in the one law as in the other there are also dif~
ferencesand gradations. For since bothJaws have within them
the moment of consciousness, difference is developed within the
laws themselves, and this constitutes their movement and their
own peculiar life. Consideration of these differences reveals the
way in which they operate, and the mod~ ofself.;.consciousness
of the two universal essential natures of the ethical world, and
also their connection and transition into one another.
455. The community, the superior law whose validity is openly
apparen t, has its real vitality in the governm;en t as tha t in which
it has an individual form. Governmentis the reality of Spirit
that is refle.cted into itself, the simple self of the entire ethical
substance. This simple power does indeed aUowthe Family to
e~pand into its constituentmembers,and to give to each part
an cinduring being and a being-for".se1fof its own. Spirit··.has
in this its reality or its objective existence, and thePamily is
the element ofthis reality. But Spirit isatthe same time the power
of the whole, which brings these parts to.gether again into a
negative unity, giving thelllthe feelingoftheirlackofindepen~
dence, and keeping them aware that they have their life only
in the whole. The community may, o.n the one hand, organize
itself into systems of personal independence and property~ of
laws relating to persons and things; and, on the other hand)
the various ways of working for Ends which-are in the first instance particular Ends-those of gain and enjoyment~itmay
articulate into their own special and independent associations.
The Spirit of universal assembly and association is the simple
and nega tive essence of those systems which tend to isolate
themselves. In order not to let them become rooted and set In
this isolation, thereby breaking up the whole and letting the
[communal] spirit evaporate, government has from time to.
time to shake them to their core by war. By this means the
government upsets their established order; and violates their
right to independence, while the individuals who, absorbed in

THE ETHICAL ORDER

their own way of life, break loose from the whole and strive
after the inviolable independence and security of the person,
are made to feel in the task laid on them their lord and master,
death. Spirit, by thus throwing into the melting.pot the stable
existence of these systems, checks their tendency to fall away
from the ethical order, and to be submerged in a [merely]
natural existence; and it preserves and raises conscious self into
freedom and its own power. The negative essence shows itself
to be the real power of the community and the force of its self·
preservation. The community therefore possesses the truth and
the confirmation of its power in the essence of the Divine Law
and in the realm of the nether world.
456. The Divine Law which governs the family has likewise
on its side differences within itselfwhose interrelationships con·
stitute the living process of its actuality. But among the three
relationships, of husband and wife, parents and children,
brothers and sisters, the relationship of husband and wife is in
thefirstplace the one in which one consciousness immediately
recognizes itself in another, and in which there is knowledge
of this mutual recognition. Because this self-recognition is a
natural and not an ethical one, it is only a representation, an
image of Spirit, not actually Spirit itself. A representation or
image, however, has its actual existence in something other
than itself. This relationship therefore has its actual existence
not in itself but in the child-an ~other', whose cominginto
existence is the relationship, and is also that in which the relationship itself gradually passes away; and this alternation of
successive generations has its enduring basis in the nation. ,The
dutiful reverence of husband and wife towards each other is
thus mixed with a natural relation and with feeling, and the
return·into,.self of the relationship does not take place within
the relationship itself; similarly with the second rda tionship,
the dutiful reverence of parents and children towards one
another. That of parents towards their children is emotionally
affected by the fact that the objective reality of the relationship
does not exist in them, but in the children, and by their witness· .
ing the development in the children of an independent existence
which they are unable totake back again; the independent existence of the children remains an alien reality, a reality all its
own. That ofchildren towards parents is emotionally affected,

274

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

conversely, by the fact that they derive their existence from, or
have their essential being in, what is other than themselves, and
passes away, and by their attaining independenc~ and a
self-consciousness of their own only by being separated from
their source-a separation in which the source dries up.
457. Both these relationships are confined within the transition and the disparity of the sides which are assigned to them.
The relationship in its unmixed form is found, however, in that
between brother and sister. They are the same blood which has,
however, in them reached a state of rest and equilibrium.
Therefore, they do not desire one another, nor have they given
to, or received from, one another this independent being-forself; on the contrary, they are free individualities in regard to
each other. Consequently, the feminine, in the form of the
sister, has the highest intuitive awareness of what is ethicaL She
does not attain to consciousness of it, or to the objective existence
of it, because the law of the Family is an implicit, inner essence
which is not exposed to the daylight of consciousne;ss, but
rell1ainsan inner feeling.andthedivine element that is exempt
from an existence in die real world . The woman is associated
with these household gods [PenatesJand beholds in them both
her universal substance and her particular individuality, yet
in such a way that this relation of her individuality to them
is at the same time not the natural one·ofdesire. As a daughter,
the woman mustnow see her parents pass away with a natural
emotion and ethical resignation, for it is only at the cost of this
relationship that she can achieve that existence of her own of
which she is capable. Thus in the parents, she does nothehold
her own being".for-self in a positive form. The relationships of
mother and wife~ however, are those of particular individuals,
partly in the form of something natural pertaining to desire,
pardy in the form of something negative which sees in those
relationships only something evanescent and also, again, the
particular individ ual is for that very reason a contingent e~e­
ment which can be replaced by another individual. In theethi-·
cal household, it is not a question of this particular husband,
this particular child, but simply of husband and children generally; the relationships of the woman are based, not on feeling,
but on the universal. The difference between the ethical life
of the woman and that of the man consists just in this, that in

THE ETHICAL ORDER

275

her vocation as an individual and in her pleasure, her interest
is centred on the universal and remains alien to the particularity
of desire; whereas in the husband these two sides are separated;
and since he possesses as a citizen the self-conscious power of
universality} he thereby acquires the right of desire and, at the
same time, preserves his freedom in regard to it. Since, then,
in this relationship of the wife there is an admixture of particularity, her ethical life is not pure; but in so far as it is ethical,
the particularity is a matter ofindifference, and the wife is withou t the moment of knowing herself as this particular self in the
other partner. The brother, however, is for the sister a passive,
similar being in general; the recognition of hers elfin him is pure
and unmixed with any natural desire. In this relationship,
therefore, the indifference of the particularity, and the ethical
contingency of the latter, are not present; but the moment of
the individual self, recognizing and being recognized, can here
assert its right, because it is linked to the equilibrium of the
blood and is a relation devoid of desire. The loss of the brother
is therefore irreparable to the sister and her duty towards him
is the highest. l
458. This relationship is at the same time the limit at which
the self~contained !ifeof the Family breaks up and goes beyond
itself. The brother is the member of the Family in whom its
Spirit becomes an individuality which turns towards another
sphere, and passes over into the consciousness of universality.
The brother leaves this immediate, elemental, and therefore,
strictly speaking, negative ethical!ife of the Family, in order
to acq uire and produce the ethical life that is conscious of itself
and actuaL
459. He passes from the divine law, within whose sphere he
lived, over to human law. But the sister becomes, or the wife
remains, the head of the household and the guardian of ,the
divine law. In this way, the two sexes overcome their [merely]
natural being and appear in their ethical significance, as diverse
beings who share between them the two distinctions belonging
to the ethical substance. These two universal beings of the ethical
world have, therefore, their specific individuality in naturally distinct self-consdousnesses, because the ethical Spirit is the immediate unity of the substance with self..consciousness-an imme1

Cf. Antigone, l. 910.

C. (BB.) sPtRIT

diacy which appears, therefore, both from the side of reality and
of difference, as the existence of a natural difference. It is that
side which, in the shape of individuality that is real to itself,
showed itself in the Notion of spiritual being as an originally
determinate nature. This moment loses the indeterminateness
which it still has there, and the contingent diversity of dispositions and capacities. It is now the specific antithesis of the two
sexes whose natural existence acquires at the same time the sig..
nificance of their ethical determination.
460. The difference of the sexes and their ethical content
remains, however, in the unity of the substance, and its move ..
ment is Just the constant becoming of that substance. The husband is sent out by the Spirit of the Fami1y into the community
in which he finds his self-conscious being. Just as the Family
in this way possesses in the community its substance and enduring being, so, conversely, the community possesses in the Family
the formal element of its actual existence., and in the divine law
its power and authentication. Neither of the two is by itselfabsolutelyvalid; human law proceeds in its living process from the
divine, the law valid on earth from that of the nether world,
the conscious from the unconscious, mediation from hnmediacy~and eq ually returns whence it came. The power of the
nether world, on the other h~nd, has its actual existence on
earth; through consciousness, it becomes existence and
activity.
461. The universal ethical beings are, then, the substance
qua universal, and the substance qua an individulli consciousness. Their universal actuality is the nation and the F~mily;
while they have their natural self and operative individuality
in man and woman. In this content of the ethical world we
see achieved those ends which the previous insubstantial forms
of consciousness set themselves; what reason apprehended only
as object has becomeself..consciollsness, and what the latter possessed only within itself is now present as a trLle, objective
reaJity.. What observation knew as a giL'en object in ,which the
self had no part, is here a given custom, but a reality which
is at the same time the deed and the work of the subject finding
it. The individual who seeks the pleasure of enjoying his individuality, finds it in the Family, and the necessity in which that
pleasure passes away is his own self·consciousness as a citizen

THE ETHICAL ORDER

of his nation. Or, again, it is in knowing that the law 'of his
own heart is the law of all hearts, in knowing the consciousness
of the self as the acknowledged universal order; it is virtue,
which enjoys the fruits ofits sacrifice, which brings about what
it sets out to do, viz. to bring forth the essence into the light
of day, and its enjoyment is this universal life. Finally, con..
sciousness of the 'matter in hand' itself finds satisfaction in the
real substance which contains and preserves in a positive man ..
ner the abstract moments of that empty category. That sub ..
stance has, in the ethical powers, a genuine content that "takes
the place of the insubstantial commandments which sound
Reason wanted to give and to know; and thus it gets an in~
trinsically determinate standard for testing, not the laws, but
what is done.
462. The whole is a stable equilibrium of all the parts, and
each part is a Spirit at home in this whole, a Spirit which does
not seek its satisfaction outside of itself but finds it within itself,
because ids itselfinthis equilibrium with the whole. This equi
librium can, it is true, only be a living one by inequality arising
in it, and beinghroughtback to equilibrium by Justice. Justice,
however, is neither an alien entity remote from this whole, nor
the reality (unworthy of the name of Justice) of mutual malice,
treachery, ingratitude, etc.· which would execute judgement in
an unreasoning, arbitrary manner; by misunderstanding the
con text of the action, and b.y unconscious acts of omission and
commission. On the contrary, it is the Justice of human law
which brings back into the universal the element of being-for~
selfwhich has broken away from ,the balanced whole, viz. the
independent classes and individuals; it is the government of the
nation, which is the self;.affirming individuality of the universal
essence and the self;.conscious will of all. The Justice, however,
which brings back to equilibrium the universal in its ascendancy over the individual is equally the simple Spirit of the
individual who has suffered wrong; it is not split up ihto two~
the one who has suffered the wrong and an entity in a remote
beyond. The individual himself is the power of the nether
world, and it is his Erinys, his 'fury', which wreaks vengeance.
For his individuality, his blood, still lives on in the household,
his substance has an enduring reality. The wrong which can
be inflicted on the individual in the ethical realm is simply this,
m

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

that something merely happens to him. The power which inflicts
this wrong on the conscious individual of making him into a
mere Thing, is Nature; it is the universality not of the community,
but the abstract universality of mere being; and the individual,
in avenging the wrong he has suffered, does not turn against
the former, for it is not at its hands that he has suffered, but
against the latter. As we saw, the consciousness of [those who
share] the blood of the individual repair this wrong in such a
way that what has simply happened becomes rather a work deliberately done, in order that the mere being of the wrong, its ultimate
form, may also be something willed and th us something agreeable.
463. The ethical realm is in this way in its enduring existence
an immaculate world, a world unsullied by any internal dissension. Similarly, its process is a tranquil transition of one of
its powers in to the other, in such a wa y that each preserves and
brings forth the other. We do indeed see it divide itself into two
essences and their reality; but their antithesis is rather the authentication of one through the other, and where they come into
direct contact with each other as real opposites, their middle
term and common dement is their immediate interpenetration.
The one extreme, the universal self..,consciousSpirit, becomes,
through the individuality of the man, united with its other
extreme, its force and element, with unconscious Spirit. On the
other hand, the divine law has its individualization~or the
u,nconscious Spirit of the individual its real existence-in the
woman, through whom, as the middle term, the unconscious
Spirit rises out of its unreality into actual existence, out of a
state in which it is unknowing and unconscious into the realm
of conscious Spirit. The union of man and woman constitutes
the active middle term of the whole and the element which
sunders itself into these extremes of divine and human law. It
is equ(:lJly their immediate union which converts those first two
syllogisms into one and the same syllogism, and unites into one
process the opposite movements; one from actuality down to
unreality} the downwardmovernent of human law, organized
into independent members, to the danger and trial of death;
and the other, the upward movement of the law of the nether
world to the actuality of the light of day and to conscious existence. Of these movements, the former falls to man, the latter
to woman.

THE ETHICAL ORDER

279

h. Ethical action. Hu.man and Divine knowledge. Guilt and Destiny
464. The way in which the antithesis is constituted in this
ethical realm is such that self-consciousness has not yet received
its due as a particular individuality. There it has the value, on
the one hand, merely of the universal will, and on the other,
of consanguinity. This particular individual counts only as a
shadowy unreality. As yet, no deed has been committed; but
the deed is the actual self. It disturbs the peaceful organization
and movement of the ethIcal world. What there appears as
order and harmony of its two essences, each of which authenti·
cates and completes the other, becomes through the deed a
transition of opposites in which each proves itself to be the nonreali ty, rather than the au then tication, of itself and the other.
It becomes the negative movement, or the eternal necessity, of
a dreadful fate which engulfs in the abyss of its single nature
divine and human law alike, as well as the two self-consciousnesses in which these powers have their existence-and
for us passes over into the absolute being-for-self of the purely
individual self.,.consciousness.
465. The ground from which this movement starts and on
which it takes place, is the ethical realm; what is active in this
movement, however, is self-consciousness. Qy.a ethical consciousness, it is the simple, pure direction of activity towards
the essentiality of ethical life, i.e. duty. In it there is no caprice
and equally no struggle, no indecision, since the making and
testing of law has been given up; on the contrary, the essence
of ethical life is for this consciousness immediate, unwavering,
without contradictiop. Oonsequently, we are not faced with the
sorry spectacle ofa collision between passion and duty, nor with
the comic spectacle of a collision between duty and duty-a
collision which, as regards its content, is the same as that
between passion and duty; for passion is equally capable of
being seen as a duty, because when consciousness separates itself
from its immediate) substantial essence and withdraws into
itself, it becomes the merely formal universal into which one
content as wen as another fits equally well-as we found before.
But the conision of duties is comic because it expresses a contradiction, viz. the contradiction of an Absolute that is opposed
to itse1f: an Absolute, and then the nothingness of this so-called

~80

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

Absolute or duty. The ethical consciousness, however, knows
what it has to do, and has already decided whether to belong
to the divine or the human law. This immediate firmness of
decision is something implicit, and therefore has at the same
time the significance ofa natural being as we have seen. Nature,
not the accident of circumstances or choice, assigns one sex to
one law, the other to the other law; or conversely, the two
ethical powers themselves give themselves an individual existence and actualize themselves in the two sexes.·
466. Now, because, on the one hand, the ethical order essentially consists in this immediate firmness of decision, and for
that reason there is for consciousness essentially only one law,
while, on the other hand, the ethical powers are real and effective in the self of consciousness, these powers acq uire the significance of excluding and opposing one another: in self-consciousness they exist explicitly, whereas in the ethical order they are
only implicit. The ethical consciousness, because it is decisively
for one of the two powers, is essentially character; it does not
accept thatbothhavethe same essential nature. For this reason,
the opposition between them appears as an unfortunate collision
of duty merely with a reality which possesses no rights of its
own. The ethical consciousness is, qua,self-consciousness, in this
opposition and as such it at once proceeds to force into subjection to the law which it accepts, the reality which is opposed
to it, or else to outwit it. Since it sees right only on one side
and wrong on the other, that consciousness which belongs to
the divine law seesin the other side only the violence of human
caprice, while that which holds to human law sees in the other
only the self-will and disobedience of the i!1dividual who insists
on being his own authority. For the commands of government
have a universal, public meaning open to the light of day; the
will of the other law, however, is locked up in the darkness of
the nether regions, and in its outer existence manifests as the
will of an isolated individual which, as contradicting the first,
is a wanton outrage.
467. In this way there arises in consciousness the antithesis
of the known and the unknown, just as in substance there was
an antithesis of the conscious and the unconscious; and the absolute right of ethical self.. consciousness comes into conflict with
the divine right of essential being. For self-consciousness, qua

THE ETHICAL ORDER

consciousness, the world of objective reality as such has an
essential being; but according to its substance it is the unity
of itself and this opposite; and ethical self-consciousness is the
consciousness of that substance; therefore the object, in its
opposition to the subject, has lost entirely the significance of
having an essential being of its own. Just as those spheres in
which it is only a Thing have long since vanished, so too have
these spheres in which consciousness gives a fixed existence to
something from out of itself and converts an isolated moment
into essence. Against such one-sidedn~ss, the actual world has
a power of its own; it stands leagued with truth against consciousness, and itselfshows the latter what truth is. The ethical
consciousness, however, has drunk from the cup of substance
and has forgotten all the one-sidedness of being-for~self, of its
ends and peculiar notions, and has, therefore, at the same time
drowned in this Stygian water a1l essentiality of its own, and
all independence of the objective, actual world. Its absolute
right is, therefore, that when it acts in accordance with ethical
law, it shall find in this actualization nothing else but the fulfilment of this law itself, and the deed shaH manifest only ethical
action. ~Vhat is ethical, being at once absolute essence and absolute power, cannotsufferanyperversion of its content. Ifit were
only absolute essence without power, it could suffer perversion
by the individuality; but this, as an ethical consciousness, when
it gaveupits one-sidedbeing-for-self, renounced itsright to per~
vert the can tent; jus t as, conversely, mere power would be perverted by essence if it were a one-sided being-for-self. On
account of this uuity, the individuality is the pure form ofsubstartcewhich is the content, and the action is the transition from
thoughtto,actuality merely as the movemehtofan insubstantial
antithesis whose moments have no particular, distinctive content and no essentiality ofthcir own;Oonseq uendy, the absolute
right of the ethical consciousness is that the deed, the shape in
which it actualizes itself, shaH be nothing else but what it knows.
468. But the ethical essence has split itself into two laws, and
consciousness, as an undivided attitude towards law, is assigned
only to one, Just as this simple, unitary consciousness insists,
as its absolute right, that the essence has appeared to it, qua ethical, as the essence is in £tselj,so too this essence insists on the
right belonging to its reality, or on its own right to be a twofold

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

essence. But at the same time this right of the essence does not
stand over against self.. consciousness, as if the essence existed
somewhere else; on the contrary, it is self.. consciousness's own
essence; it has its existence and its power in self-consciousness
alone, and its antithesis is the act ofself.. consciousness itself. For
this latter,just because it is a selfto itself and advances to action,
raises itself, out of simple immediacy, and spontaneously splits
itself into two. By this act it gives up the specific quality of the
ethical life, of being the simple certainty of immediate truth,
and initiates tne division of itself into itself as the active principle, and into the reality over against it, a reality which, for
it, is negative. By the deed, therefore, it becomes guilt. For the
deed is its own doing, and 'doing' is its inmost nature. And the
guilt also acquires the meaning of crime; for as simple, ethical
consciousness, it has turned towards one law, but turned its
back on the other and violates the latter by its deed. Guilt is
not an indifferent, ambiguous affair, as if the deed as actually
seenjn the lightofday couJd,or perhaps could not, be the action
ofthe self, as if with the doing ofitthere could be linked some ..
thing external and accidental that did not belong to it, from
which aspect, therefore, the action would be innocent. On the
contrary, the action is itself this splitting into two, this explici t
self-affirmation and the e~tablishingoveragainst itself of an
alien external reality; that there is su,.ch a reality, this stems from
the action itself and results from it. Innocence, therefore, is
merely non-action, like the mere being of a stone, not even that
ofa child. As regards content, however, the ethical action contains the moment of crime, because it does not do away with
the natural allocation of the two laws tothe two sexes, but rather,
being an undivided attitude towards the law, remains within
the sphere of natural immediacy, and, qua action, turns this one~
sidedness in to guilt by seizing on only one side of the essence,
and adopting a negative attitude towards the other, i.e. violating it. The place in the universal ethical life of guilt and crime,
of deeds and actions} will find more definite expression later;
but this much is immediately evident, that it is not this particular individual who acts and is guilty; for as this self he is only
the unreal.shadow, or he existsmere1y as a universal self, and
individuality is purely theformal moment of the action as such,
the content being the laws and customs which, for the indivi-

THE ETHICAL ORDER

dual, are those of his class and station. He is the Substance qua
genus, which by its determinateness, becomes indeed a species,
though the species remains at the same time the universal of
the genus. Self-consciousness within the nation descends from
the universal only as far down as mere particularity, and not
down to the single individuality which posits an exclusive self,
an actual existence which in its action is negative towards itself.
On the contrary, its action rests on secure confidence in the
whole, unmixed with any alien element, neither with fear nor
hostility.
469. Ethical self-consciousness now learns from its deed the
developed nature of what it actually did, as much when it
obeyed divine law as when it followed human law. The law
that is manifest to it is linked in the essence with its opposite;
the essence is the unity of both; but the deed has only carried
out one law in contrast to the other. But the two laws being
linked in the essence, the fulfilment of the one evokes the other
and-the deed haying made it so-calls it forth as a violated
and now hostile entity demanding revenge. In the action, only
one aspect of the resolve as such is clearly manifest. The resolve,
however, is in itself the negative aspect which confronts the
resQlve with an 'other') with something aliell to the resolve
which.knows what it does. Actuality therefore holds concealed
within it the other aspect which is alie.n to this knowledge, and
does not reveal the whole truth about itself to consciousness;
the son does not recognize his father in the man who has
wronged him and whom he slays, nor his mother in the queen
whom he makes his wife. In this way, a power which shuns the
light of day ensnares the ethical self-consciousness., a power
which hreaks forth only after the deed is done, and seizes the
doer in the act., For the accomplished deed is the removal of
the antithesis between the knowing self and the actuality con ..
fronting it. The doer cannot deny the crime or his gJIilt: the
significance of the deed is that what was unmoved has heen
set in motion, and that what was locked up in mere possibility
has been brought out into the open, hence to link together the
unconscious and the conscious, non~being with being. In this
truth, therefore, the deed is brought out into the light of day,
as something in which the conscious is bound up with the unconscious, what is one's own with what is alien to it, as an entity

c.

(BB.) SPIRIT

divided within itself, whose other aspect consciousness experi~
ences and also finds to be its own, but as the power it has vio~
lated and roused to hostility.
470. It can be that the right which lay in wait is not present
in its own proper shape to the consciousness of the doer, but is
present only implicitly in the inner guilt of the resolve and the
action. But the ethical consciousness is more complete, its guilt
more inexcusable, if it knows biforehand the law and the power
which it opposes, if it takes them to be violence and wrong,
to be ethical merely by accident, and, like Antigone, knowingly
commits the crime. The accomplished deed completely alters
its point of view ; the very performance of it declares that what
is ethical must be actual; for the realization of the purpose is the
purpose of the action. Doing directly expresses the unity of actuality and substance; it declares that actuality is not an accident
ofessencf; but that, in union with essence, it is not granted to
any right that is not a true right. The ethical consciousness
must, on account of this actuality andona-ceount of its deed,
acknowledge its opposite as its own actuality,must acknowledge its guilt.
Beca:use we suffer we acknowledge we have erred;1
471. Withthisaeknowledgement there is no longer any confliet between ethical purpose and actuality; it signifies the
return to an ethical frame of mind, which knows that nothing
counts but right. But the doer thereby surrenders his own
characterandthe reality of his self, and has been ruined. His being
consists in his belonging to his ethical law , as his substance;
in acknowledging the opposite law, the other ceases to be for
him his substance, and instead of attaining actuality it has
become an unreality, a sentiment or disposition. The substance
does appear, it is true, in the individuality as his 'pathos" and
the individuality appears as'lhatwhich animates the sllbstance
and hence stands above it; but the substance is a 'pathos' that
is at the same time his character. The ethical individuality is
directly and intrinsically one with this his universal aspect,
exists in italone, and is incapable of surviving the destruction
of this ethical power by its opposite.
472. Buta t the same time, this individ uali ty has the certain ty
that that individuality whose 'pathos' is this opposing power
I

Antigone, 1. 926.

THE ETHICAL ORDER

285

suffers no more injury than it has inflicted. The movement of
the ethical powers against each other and of the individualities
calling them into life and action have attained their true end
only in so far as both sides suffer the same destruction. For
neither power has any advantage over the other that would
make it a more essential moment of the substance. The equal
essentiality of both and their indifferent existence alongside
each other means that they are without a self. In the deed they
exist as beings with a self, but with a diverse self; and this COna
tradicts the unity (Jf the self, and constitutes their unrighteous ..
ness and necessary destructiori. Character likewise, in respect
of its 'pathos' or substance, in part belongs to one only; in part,
from the aspect of knowing, the one character like the other
is split up into a conscious and an unconscious part; and since
each itself calls forth this opposition and its not .. knowing is,
through the deed, its own affair, each is responsible for the guilt
which destroys it. The victory of one power and its character,
and the defeat of the other, would th\.ls be only the part and
the incomplete work which irresistibly advances to the equilib
dum ofthe two. Only in the downfall of both sides alike is abso ..
lute right accomplished, and the ethical substance as the nega ..
tive power which engulfs both sides, that is, omnipotent and
righteous Destiny, steps on the scene.
473. Ifboth powers are taken according to their specific con ..
tent and its individuaJization, we are presented with the picture
of the conflict between them in their individual forms. On its
formal side, it is the conflict of the ethical order and self-CODa
sciousness with unconscious Nature and the contingency stem..
ming from Nature. The latter has a right against the former,
because this is only true Spirit, is only in an immediate unity with
its substance. On the side of content, it is the clash between
divine and human law. The youth comes away from the uncon..
Sci09S Spirit of "the Family, and becomes the individuality of
the community. But that he still belongs to the Nature from
w hieh he wrenched himself free is evidenced by the fact tha t
he emerges in the contingent form of two brothers, each of
whom with equal right takes possession of the community; the
inequality of the earlier and later birth, an inequality which
is a natural difference, has no importance for them when they
enter the ethical life of the community. But the government,
m

C, (BB.) SPIRIT

as the unitary soul or the self of the national Spirit, does not
tolerate a duality of individuality·; and the ethical necessity of
this unity is confronted by the natural accident of there being
more than one. These two brothers therefore fall into dispute
and their eq ual right to the power of the state destroys them
both, for they were equally wrong. Looked at from the human
point of view, the one who has committed the crime is the one
who, not being in actual possession, attacks the community at
the head of which the other stood, while, on the other hand,
he has right on his side who knew how to apprehend the other
merely as an isolated individual, detached from the community, and, taking advantage of his powerlessness, banished
him; he has struck only at the individual as such, not the community, not at the essence of human right. The community,
attacked and defended by what is merely particular, and so
without a substantial content, preserves itself, and the brothers
bring about their own destruction through their reciprocal
action, For individuality, which for the sake of its being-forself, puts the whole inpedl, has expelled itself from the community, and is the source of its own destruction. The comm:qnity, however, will honour the one who was found on its
side; but the government, the restored unitary self of the
community, will punish him who already proclaimed its
devastation on the walls ofthe city, by depriving him of the
last honour. He who wantonly attacked the Spirit's highest
form of consciousness, the Spirit of the community, must be
stripped of the honour of his entire and finished being, the
honour due to the Spirit of the departed.
474. But if the universal thus easily knocks off the very tip
of the pyramid anci, indeed, carries off the victory over the
rebellious principle of pure individuality, viz. the Family, it has
thereby merely entered ona conflict with the divinelaw, a confEct of self-conscious Spirit with what is unconscious. For the
latter is the other essential power, and is therefore not destroyed, but merely wronged, by the conscious Spirit. But it
has only the bloodless shade to help it in actually carrying out
ilslaw in face of the power and authority of that other, publicly
manifest law. Being the law of weakness and darkness it therefore at first succumbs to the powerful law of the upper world,
for the power of the former is effective in the underworld, not

THE ETHICAL ORDER

on earth. But the outwardly actual which has taken away from
the inner world its honour and power has in so doing consumed
its own essence. The publicly manifest Spirit has the root of
its power in the nether world. The self-certainty and selfassurance of a nation possesses the truth of its oath, which binds
all into one, solely in the mute unconscious substance of all,
in the waters of forgetfulness. Thus it is that the fulfilment of
the Spirit of the upp~r world is transformed into its opposite,
and it learns that its supreme right is a supreme wrong, that
its victory is rather its own downfall. The dead, whose right
is denied, knows therefore how to find instruments of vengeance, which are equally effective and powerful as the power
which has injured it. These powers are other communities
w hose altars the dogs or birds defiled with the corpse, which
is not raised into unconscious universality by being given back,
as is its due, to the elemental individuality [the earth], but
remains above ground in the realm of outer reality, and has
now acqpiredas a force of divine law a self.. conscious, real
universality. Theyr~se up in hostility and destroy the community which has dishonoured and shattered its own power,
the sacreg claims of the Family.
475. In this representation, the movement of human and
divineJaw finds its necessity expressed in individuals in whom
",the universaLappears as a 'pathos', and the activity of dle movement ~ppears as the action of individuals, which gives the
appearance of contingency to the necessity of the activity. But
individualityan,d action constitute the principle of individuality as such, a principle which in its pure universality was called
inner divine law. As a moment of the visible community its
activity is not cpnfinedmereiy to the underworld, or tojts outer
existence, butit ha;s an equally vi~iblee~istence and movement
in the actual nation. Taken in this form, what was represented
as a simple mqvementof the individualized 'pathos' acquires
a driferent look, and the crime and consequent destruction of
the community acquire the proper and -characteristic fonn of
their existence. HumanJaw in its universal ex.istence is the community, in its activity in general is the manhood of the community, in its real and effective activity is the government. It
is, moves, and maintains itself by consuming and absorbing into
itself the separatism of the Penates, or the separation into

288

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

independent families presided over by womankind, and by keeping them dissolved in the fluid continuity of its own nature. But
the Family is, at the same time, in general its element, the individual consciousness the basis of its general activity. Since the
community only gets an existence through its interference with
the happiness of the Family, and by dissolving [individual] selfconsciousness into the universal, it creates for itself in what it
suppresses and what is at the same time essential to it an internal
enemy-woman.kind in general. Womankind--the everlasting
irony [in the life] of the community-changes by intrigue the
universal end of the government into a private end, transforms
its universal activity into a work of some particular individual,
and perverts the universal property of the state into a possession
and ornament for the Family. Woman in this way turns to ridicule the earnest wisdom of mature age which, indifferent to
purely private pleasures and enjoyments, as well as to playing
an active part, only thinks of and cares for the universal. She
makes this wisdom an object of derision for raw and irresponsible youth and unworthy of their enthusiasm. In general, she
maintains that itis the power of youth that really counts; the
worth of the son lies in his being the lord and master of the
mother who bore him, that ofthehrotherasheingone in whom
the sister finds man on a level of equality, that of the youth
as heing one through whom the daughter ,freedfrom her dependence [on the family] obtains the enjoyment and dignity of
wifehood. The community, however, can only maintain itself
by suppressing this spirit of individualism, and, because it is
an essential moment, all the same creates it and, moreover, creates it by its repressive attitude towards it as ahostile principle.
However, this principle, being merely evil and futile in its
separation from the universal end, would be quite ineffectual
if the community itself did not recognize the power of youth
(the manhood which, while immature, still stands within the
sphereofindividuality), as the power of the whole. For thecoma
munity is a nation, is itself an individuality, and essentially is
only such for itself by other individualities being jor it, by
excluding them from itse1fand knowing itself to be independent
of them. The negative side of the community, suppressing the
isolation ofindividuals within it, but spontaneously active in an
outward direction, find~ its weapons in individuality. War is the

THE ETHICAL ORDER

Spirit and the form in which the essential moment of the ethical
substance, the absolute freedom of the ethical self from every
existential form, is present in its actual and authentic existence.
While, on the one hand, war makes the individual systems of
property and personal independence, as well as the personality
of the individual himself, feel the power of the negative, on the
other hand, this negativity is prominent in war as that which
preserves the whole. The brave youth in whom woman finds
her pleasure, the suppressed principle of corruption, now has
his day and his worth is openly acknowledged. Now, it is physical strength and what appears as a matter of luck, that decides
on the existence of ethical life and spiritual necessity. Because
the existence of ethical life rests ons trengthand luck, thedecz'sion
is already madethatits downfall has come. Just as previously only
the Penates succumbed to the national Spirit, so nowthe living
Spirits of the nation succumb through their own individuality
and perish in a universal community, whose simple universality
is soulless and dead, and is alive only in the single individual,
qua single. The ethicaLshape of Spirit has vanished and another
takes its place.
476. This ruin of the ethical Substance and its passage into
another form is thus determined by··· the fact that the ethical
consciousness isdiFectedon to theJaw in away that.is essentially
"immediate. This determination ofimmediacy means that N ature
as such en ters in to the ethical act, the reality of which simply
reveals the contradiction and the germ ofdestruction inherent
in the beautiful harmony and tranquil equilibrium of theethical Spirit itself. For this immediacyhasthe ·con tradic tory mean ing of being the unconscious tranq uilli ty ofN ature, and also the
self-conscious restless tranquillity of Spirit. On account oLthis
natural aspect, thisethicaLqationis, ingeneral,an individuality
determined by Nature and therefore limited, and thus meets
its downfall 3,t the hands of another. But with the vanishing
ofthisdeterminateness~which in the form of areal existence is
a limitation, butequaUy the negative element in general and the
self of the individuality~the life of Spirit and this Substance,
which is self-consdous in everyone, is lost. The substance e,merges
asa formal universality inthem, nolongerdwel1ing inthem as a
livingSpirit; onthecontrary, the simple compactness Dftheir individualityhasbeenshatteredintoamultitudeofseparateatoms.

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

c. Legal status
477. The universal unity into which the living immediate
unity of individuality and substance withdraws is the soulless
community which has ceased to be the substance-itselfunconscious--ofindividuals, and in which they now have the value
of selves and substances, possessing a separate being..for-self.
The universal being thus split up in to a mere multiplicity of
individuals, this lifeless Spirit is an equality, in which all count
the same, i.e. as persons. What in the world of the ethical order
was called the hidden divine law, has in fact emerged from
its inward state into actuality; in the former state the individual
was actual, and counted as such, merely as a blood-relation of
the family. As this particular individual, he was the departed
spirit devoid of a self; -now, however, he has emerged from his
unreal existence. Because the ethical substance is only the true
Spirit, the individual theref~re withdraws into the certainty of
his ownself; he is that substance as the positive universal, but
his actuality consists in his being a negative universal self. We
saw the powers and shapes of the ethical world swallowed up
in the simple necessity of a blank Destiny. This power of the
ethical world is the substance reflected into its simple unitary
nature; butthat being which is reflected back into itself, that
very necessity of blank Destiny, is nothing else but the~T' of
self-consciousness.
478. This, therefore, counts henceforth as a being ·that is
in and for itself. To be so acknowledged is its substantiality.
But it is an abstract universality because its content is this
rigid unyielding self, not the self that is dissolved in the
substance.
479. Personality, then, has stepped out of the life of the ethi~
cal substance. I tis the independence of consciousness , an inde·
pendence which has actual validity. The non-actual thought of
it which came from renouncing the actu.al world appeared
earlier as the Stoical seW·consciousness. Just as this proceeded
from lordship and bondage, as the immediate existence of selfconsciousness, so personality has proceeded from the imm'ediate
life of Spirit, which is the universal dominating will of all, and
equally their service ofohedience. What was for Stoicism only
the ahstractionof an intrinsic reality is now an actual world. 8toi-

THE ETHICAL ORDER

cism is nothing else but the consciousness which reduces to its
abstract form the principle oflegal sta tus, an independence tha t
lacks the life of Spirit. By its flight from the actual world it
attained only to the thought of independence; it is absolutely
for itself, in that it does not attach its being to anything that
exists, but claims to give up everything that exists and places
its essence solely in the unity of pure thought. In the sanle
way, the right of a person is not tied to a richer or more
powerful existence of the individual as such, nor again to a
universal living Spirit, but rather to the pure One of its
abstract actuality, or to that One qua self-consciousness in
general.
480. Now ,jus t as the abstract independence of Stoicism exhibited [the process of] its actualization, so too will this last form
ofindependence [ = personality) recapitulate the process of the
first form. The former passes over in to the sceptical confusion
ofcons do us ness , into a negative rambling which, lacking any
stable form, strays fortuitously from one form of being and
thought to another, dissolving them, it is true, in [its] absolute
independence butno less recreating them; itis, in fact, merely
the contradiction of a consciousness which is at once indepen ..
dent and dependent. Personal independence in the sphere of
legal right is really a similar general confusion and reciprocal
dissolution of this kind. For what counts as absolute, ess.ential
being is self-consciousness as the sheer empty unit of the person.
In contrast to this empty universality, substance has the form
offttlness and content, and this content is now set free and is unorganized; for the Spirit that subdued it and held it together
in its unity is no longer present. This empty unit of the person
is, therefore, in its reality a contingent existence, and essentially
a process and an action that comes ,to no lasting result. Like
Scepticism, theformalismoflegalright is thus by its very nature
without a peculiar content of its own; itfinds before it~ manifold existence in the form of 'possession' and, as Scepticism did,
stamps it with the same abstract universality, whereby it is
called 'property'. But whereas in Scepticism the reality so determined is called an illusory appearance and has only a negative
value, in legal right it has a positive value. That negative value
consists in the actual having the significance of the self qua
thought, qua the implicit universal; the positive value in the case

29 2

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of legal right, however, consists in its being mine in the sense
of the category, as something whose validity is recognized and
actual. Both are the same abstract universal. The actual content
or the specific character of what is mine-whether it be an
external possession, or also the inner riches or poverty of spirit
and character-is not contained in this empty form, and does
not concern it. The content belongs, therefore, to an autonO
mOllS power, which is something different from the formal universal, to a power which is arbitrary and capricious. Consciousness of right, therefore, in the very fact of being recognized as
having validity, experiences rather the loss of its reality and its
complete inessentiality; and to describe an individual as a 'perm
son' is an expression of contempt.
48 I. The free power of the content determines itself in such
a way that the dispersion of the content into a sheer multiplicity
of personal atoms is, by the nature of this determinateness., at
the same time gathered into a single point, alien to them and
soulless as well. This single poin t is, on the one hand, like the
unyielding r~gidity of their personality, a merely single peTsonality ; but in contrast to their empty singleness , it has at the
sametime the significance for them ofthe whole content, hence
of real essence, and as against their presumedly absolute, but
intrinsicallyessenceless.,reality it is absolute power and absolute
actuality. This lord and master of the world holds himself in
this way-to he the absolute person, at the same time embracing
wi thin himself the whole of existence, the 'person for whom there
exists no·superior Spirit. He is a person, but the solitary person
who stands over against all the rest. These constitute the real
authoritative universality of that person; for the single individual as such is true only as a universal multiplicity of single
individuals. Cut off from this multiplicity, the solitary self is,
in fact, an unreal, impotent self. At the same time it is the·con ..
sciousness of the content which has placed itself in antithesis
to that universal personality. But this content, liberated from
the negative power controlling it, is the chaos ofspiritual powers
which, in their unfettered freedom, become elemental beings
raging madly against one another in a frenzy of destructive
activity. Their impotent self-consciousness is the defenceless
enclosed arena of their tum ul t. In this know ledge of himself as
the sum and substance ofa11 actual powers, this lord and master
m

THE ETHICAL ORDER

293

of the world is the titanic self-consciousness that thinks of itself
as being an actual living god. But since he is only the formal
selfwhich is unable to tame those powers, his activities and selfenjoyment are equally monstrous excesses.
482. The lord of the world becomes really conscious of what
he is, viz. the universal power of the actual world, in the destructive power he exercises against the self of his subjects, the self
which stands over against him. For his power is not the union
and harmony of Spirit in which persons would recognize their
own self-consciousness. Rather they exist, as persons, on their
own account, and exclude any continuity with others from the
rigid unyieldingness of their atomicity. They exist, therefore,
in a merely negative relationship, both to one another and to
him who is their bond of connection or continuity. As this eontinuity, he is the essence and the content oftheir merely formal
self, but a content alien to them, and a hostile being which in
reality deprives them of that very thing which they regard as
their essen tial na ture, viz. the completely empty form of beingfor-self; and, again, as the continuity of their. personality, he
destroys this very personality itself. Legal personality thus
learns rather that it is without any substance, since the alien
content makes itselfauthoritative in it, and does so because that
content is the reality of such personality. On the other hand,
by indulging in this destructive activity in this insubstantial
arena, the lord ofthe world obtainsfor himselfthe consciousness
of his complete supremacy. However, this self is a mere laying..
waste of everything and therefore merely beside itself, and is
really the abandonment of its own self-consciousness.
483. Such, then, is the c'onstitution of that aspect in which
self-consciousness, qua absolute Being, is actual. But the consciousness that is driven back into itse/ffrom this actuality ponders
this its inessential nature. Earlier we saw the Stoical independence of pure thought pass through Scepticism andfind its truth
in the Unhappy Oonsciousness-the truth about what con~
stitutes its own true being. If this knowledge appeared then
merely as the one-sided view of consciousness as consciousness,
here the actual truth of that view has become apparent. This
truth consists in the fact that this universally acknowledged authority
of self-consciousness is the reality from which it is alienated.
This acknowledgement of its authority is the universal actuality

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

294

of the self; but this actuality is directly the perversion of the
self as well; it is the loss of its essence. The actuality of the self
that did not exist in the ethical world has been won by its return
into the 'person' ; what in the former was harmoniously one now
emerges in a developed form, but as alienated from itself.
B.

SELF~ALIENATED

SPIRIT. CULTURE

484. The ethical Substance kept the antithesis confined
within its simply unitary consciousness, and preserved this con~
sciousness in an immediate unity with its essence. Essence has,
therefore, the simple determinateness of mere being' for consciousness, which is directed immediately upon it, and is the
essence in the form of custom. Consciousness neither thinks of
itself as thz's particular exclusive self, nor has substance the
significance of an existence excluded from it) with which
it would have to become united only by alienating itself from
itselfand at the same time producing the substance itself. But
the Spiritwhose selfis an absolutely discrete unit has its content
confronting it as an equally hard unyielding reality, and here
the world has the character of being something external, the
negative ofself-consciousness. This world is, however, aspiri~
tualentity,it is in·itselftheinterfusion of being and individu~
aHty; <this its existence is the work of self-consciousness, but it
is also an alien reaHtyalready present and.given, a reality which
has a being of its own and in which it does not recognize itself.
This real world is the external essence and the free content of
legal right-But this external world, which the lord of the world
oflegal righttakes to himself,is not merely thiselemen tal being
confronting the self as something contingently given ; on the
contrary, it is his work, but not in a positive, rather in a nega ..
tive, sense. It obtains its existence through se1f-conSclousness's
own externalization and separation of itself from its' essence
which, in the ruin and devastation which prevail in the world
onegal right,.seems to inflict on self-consciousness from without,
the violence of the liberated elements. These by themselves are
sheer ruin and devastation and the dissolution of themselves.
This dissolution,-however, this negative nature of theirs, isjust
thesdf; it is their subject, their activity, and their process. But
this activity and process whereby the substance becomes actual

CULTURE

295

is the alienation of the personality, for the self that has an absolute significance in its immediate existence, i.e. without having
alienated itself from itself, is without substance, and is the
plaything of those raging elements. Its substance, therefore, is
its externalization, and the externalization is the substance, i.e.
the spiritual powers ordering themselves into a world and
thereby preserving themselves.
485. Substance is in this way Spirit, the self-conscious unity
of the self and essence; each has for the other the significance
ofalienation. Spirit is the consciousness of an objective real world
freely existing on i~s own account; but this consciousness is confronted by the unity of the self and essence, actual consciousness
by pure. consciousness. On the one side, actual self-consciousness,
through its externalization, passes over into the actual world,
and the latter back into actual self-consciousness. On the other
side, this same actuality-both person and objectivity~is
superseded; they are purely universaL This their alienation is
pure consciousness or essence. The present actual world has its antithesis direct! yin i tSiheyond, whichis both the thinking of i tand
its thought;,form,Just as the beyond has in the present world
its actuality, but an actuality alienated from it.
486. COIlseq uendy, thisS piritconstruc tsforitself not merely
a world, but a world that is double, divided and self-opposed.
The world of the ethical Spirit is its own present world; and
therefore each of its powers exists in this unity, and in so far
as they are qistinct from one another they are in equilibrium
with the whole. Nothing has the significance of being the negative.of self-consciousness; even the departed spirit is present in
his blood- Tela tionship, in the self of the family, an d the universal
power of the government is the will, the self of the nation. Here,
however, what is present has the significance only of an objec tive
reality, the consciousness of which exists in a beyond; each
single moment qua essence receives this, and with it actuality,
from al1 ~other', and so far as it is actual, its essence is something
other than its own actuality. Nothing has a Spirit that is
grounded within itself and indwells it, but each has its being
in something outside of and alien to it. The equilibrium of the
whole is not the unity which remains with itself, nor the con·
tentment that comes from having returned into itself, but rests
on the alienation of opposites. The whole, therefore, like each

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

single moment, is a self-alienated actuality; it falls apart into
a realm in which self-consciousness as well as its object is actual,
and into another, the realm of pure consciousness which, lying
beyond the first, is not a present actuality but exists only for
Faith. Now, just as the ethical world which is separated into
divine and human law in their various forms, and its consciousness which is separated into knowing and not-knowing, returns
from that dividedness into its destiny, ,into the self as the negative
power of this antithesis, so these two realms of the seW·alienated
Spirit will also return into the self; but if the former was the
first, merely immediately valid self, the single person, this second
realm, which returns out of its exiernaliz,ation into itself) will
be the universal self, the consciousness which has grasped its
Notion, and these spiritual worlds, aU of whose moments insist
on a fixed actuality and non-spiritual existence of their own,
will dissolve in pure intellectual insight. This insight, as the self
that apprehends itself, completes [the stage of] culture; it apprehends nothing but self and everything as self, i.e. it ,comprehends
everything, wipes out the objectivity ofthings and converts all
intrinsic being in to a being for itself In its hos tility,toFaith as
the alien realm of essence lyingin the'heyond ,it is the Enlighten,..
m,ent. This EnHghtenmentcompletes the alienation of Spirit
in this realm, too, in which thatSpiri ttakes/refuge, and where
it is conscious ·ofan unrufHed peace, I 1:.U psets the housekeeping
oiS piritin the household ofFal th by bringing in to that house~
hold the tools and utensils of tltis world" a world which that
Spiriteannotdeny is its own, ,because its consciousness likewise
belongs to it. In this negative activity pure insight at the same
time realizes itself, and produces its own object"rhe unknowable
ahsolute Being and the principle of utility. Since in this way actu ..
ality has lost all substantiaHtyand nothing in ithas intrinsic
being, not only the realm of Faith) hut also the reahn of the
actual world, is overthrown. This revolution gives birthto absolute freedom, and wi th this freedom the previously alienated
Spirit has co.mplete1y returned into itself, has abandoned this
region of culture and passes on to another region, the region
of the moral consciousness.
I.

THE WORLD OF SELF-ALIENATED SPIRIT

487. The world of this Spirit breaks up into two. The first

CULTURE

297

is the world of reality or of its self-alienation; but the other is
that which Spirit, rising above the first, constructs for itself in
the Aether of pure consciousness. This second world, standing
in antithesis to that alienation, is for that very reason not free
from it; on the contrary, it is really only the other form of that
alienation which consists precisely in being conscious of two different worlds, and which embraces both. Therefore, it is not
the self~consciousness of absolute being as it is in and for itself,
not religion, that is here dealt with but Faith, so far as this is
aflightfrom the real world and thus is not in and for itself. This
fligh t from the realm of the present is, therefore, in its own self
dual-natured. Pure consciousness is the element into which
Spirit raises itself, but it is not only the element of Faith, but
equally of the Notion" Consequently, both together make their
appearance at the same time, and the former comes into consideration only in its antithesis to the latter.

its

a. Culture and
realm of actuality
488, The Spirit ofthis world is a spiritual essence that is permeated bya self-consciousness which knows itself, and knows
the eSsence as an actuality confronting it. But the existence of
this world, as also the actuality of self-consciousness, rests on
the process in which the latter divests itself of its personality,
thereby creating its world. This world it looks on as something
alien, a world, therefore, of which it must now take possession.
But the renunciation of its being..for-self is itself the product of
the actu;::!'l world, and by this renunciation, therefore, self-consciousness directly takes possession of this world. Or we may
say that self-consciousness is merely a 'something', it has actuality only in so far as it alienates itself from itself; by so doing,
itgives itse1fthe character ofa universal, and this its universality
is its authentication and actuality. This equality with everyone
is, therefore, not the equality of the sphere of legal right, not
that immediate recognition and validity of self-consciousness
simply because it is; on the contrary, to be valid it must have
conformed itself to the universal by the mediating process of
alienation. The non-spiritual universality of the sphere of legal
right accepts every natural form of character as well as of existence and justifies them. The universality which counts here,

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

however, is one that has made itselfwhat it is and for that reason
is actual.
489. It is therefore through culture that the individual
acquires standing and actuality. His true orlginal nature and subs tance is the aliena tion of himself as S piri t from his natural being.
This externalization is, therefore, both the purpose and the existence of the individual; it is at once the means, or the transition,
both of the [mere] thought-Jorm of substance into actuality, and,
conversely, of the specific individuality into essentiality. Thisindividuality moulds itself by culture into what it intrinsically is, and
only by so doing is it an intrinsic being that has an actual existence; the measure of its culture is the measure of its actuality
and power. Although here the self knows itself as this self, yet
its actuality consists solely in the setting-aside of its natural self.
Oonsequently, the originally specific nature is reduced to the unessential difference of quantity, to a greater or lesser energy of
will. But the purpose and content of the will belong solely to
the universal substance itself and can only be a universal. The
particularity of a nature which becomes purpose and content is
something powerless and unreal; it is a (kind' of being which
vainly and ridiculously strains every nerve to get going; it is
the contradiction of giving to what is particular an actuality
which is immediately a universal. If, therefore, individuality
is erroneously supposed to be rooted in the particularity ofnature
and character, then in the actual world there areno individualities and no characters, but everyone is like everyone else; but
this presumed individuality really only exists in someone's
mind, an imaginary existence which has no abiding place in this
world, where only that which externalizes itself, ana, therefore,
only the universal, obtains an actual existence. That is why such
an imagined existence is esteemed for what it is, for a kind of
being. 'Kind' is not quite the same as espece, ~the most horrid
of all nicknames; for it denotes mediocrity and expresses the
highest degree of contempt' .1 'Kind' and 'good of its kind' are,
however, German expressions which add an air of honesty to
this meaning, as if it were not really meant so badly; or, again,
consciousness is, in fact, not yet aware what 'kind', and what
'culture' and 'reality' are.
490. What, in relation to the single individual, appears as his
1

Diderot, Nephew of Rameau.

CULTURE

299

culture, is the essential moment of the substance itself, viz. the
immediate passage of the [ mere] thought-form of its universality into actuality; or, culture is the simple soul of the
substance by means of which," what is implicit in the substance,
acquires an acknowledged, real existence. The process in which the
individuality moulds itself by culture is, therefore, at the same
time the development of it as the universal, objective essence,
i.e. the development of the actual world. Although this world
has come into being through individuality, it is for self-consciousness immediately an alienated world which has the form
of a fixed and solid reality over against it. But at the same time,
certain that this world is its substance, it sets about making it
its own. It gains this power over it through culture which,
looked at from this aspect, has the appearance of self-conscious ..
ness making itself conform to reality, and doing so to the extent
that the energy of its o'riginal character and talent permits.
What appears here as the power and authority of the individual
eXf'rcised over the substance, which is thereby superseded, is
the same thing as the actualization of the substance. For the
power of the individual consists in conforming itself to that substance, i,e. in externalizing its own self and thus establishing
itself as substance that has an objective existence. Its culture
andits own actuality are, therefore, the actualization of the substance itsel£
491. The self knows itself as actual only as a transcended sel£
Therefore, it is not constituted by the unity of consciousness of
itselfand the object; on the contrary, the object is, for the self,
its negative. Thus, by means of the self as soul of the process,
substance is so moulded and developed in its moments that one
opposite stirs the other into life, each by its alienation from the
other gives it an existence and equallyreceives from it an existence of its own. At the same time, each moment possesses its
ownspecific nature as something unchallengeably valid and as
a firm reality vis-it-vis the other. Thinking fixes this difference
in the most general way by the absolute antithesis of good and
bad which, shunning each other, cannot in any way become
one and the same. The soul of this fixed being, however, is the
immediate transition into its opposite; existence is really the
perversion of every determinateness into its opposite, and it is
only this alienation that is the essential nature and support of

300

C, (BB.) SPIR IT

the whole. We have now to consider this process in which the
moments are stirred into life and given an existence of their
own; the alienation will alienate itself, and the whole will,
through this alienation, return fnto its Notion.
492, We have first to consider the simple unitary substance
itself in the i mmedia te organization of its momen ts, which are
present in the substance but as yet have not been stirred into
life. In the same way that Nature displays itselfin the universal
elements of Air, Water, Fire, and Earth: Air is the enduring,
purely universal, and transparent element; Water, the element
that is perpetually sacrificed; Fire, the unity which energizes
them into opposition while at the same time it perpetually
resolves the opposition; lastly, Earth, which is the firm and solid
knot of this articulated whole, the subject of these elements and
of their process, that from which they start and to which they
return; so in the same way, the inner essence or simple Spirit
of self-conscious actuality displays itself in similar such universal-but here spiritual-'masses' or spheres, displays itself
as a world. In thefirst sphere it is an implicitly universal, selfiden tical spiritual being; in the second it is explicitly for itself
and has become inwardly divided against itself, sacrificing and
abandoning itself; in the third, which as self-consciousness is
Subject, it possesses directly in its own self the force of Fire.
In the first it is conscious of itself as an intrinsic being; hutin
the second it develpps an explicitheing of its own by sacrificing
the universal. Spirit, however, is itself at once the essence and
the actuality of the whole, which sunders itself into a substance
which endures, and a substance which sacrifices itself,and
which at the same time also takes them back into its unity; it
is both the outburst of flaming Fire which consumes the subM
stance, and also the abiding form of that substance. We see
that these spheres correspond to the community and the family
in the ethical world, without, however, possessing the native
Spirit peculiar to the latter, On the other hand, while Destiny
is alien to this Spirit, here self-consciousness is and knows itself
to be the real power of these spheres.
493. We have to consider how, in the first instance, these
two members are represented within pure consciousness as
thoughts, or as having only an implicit being; and also how they
are represented in actual consciousness as having an objective

CULTURE

301

existence. In the simple form of thoughts, the first is the Goodthe self~accordant, immediate, and unchangeable essence of
every consciousness, the independent spiritual power of the initself, 'alongside which the activity of actual consciousness is
something merely incidental. Its other, on the contrary, is the
passive spiritual ~ssence, or the universal in so far as it surrenders
itselfand allows individuals to get in it the consciousness of their
separate existence; it is the essence that is null and invalid, the
Bad. This absolu te break~up of the essence is itself permanent.
While the first essence is the foundation, starting.. point, and
result ofindivid'uals who in it are purely universal, the second,
on the other hand, is partly their seW-sacrificing bcing-foranother, and partly, for that very reason, their perpetual
return-to-selfas separate individuals and the perpetual process
in which they develop a being of their own.
494. But [secondly], these simple thoughts of Good and Bad
are likewise immedia tel yself. . aliena ted; they are actual and are
present in actual consciousness as obJective moments. Thus the
first essence is state power, the other is wealth. As state power is
the simplesuhstancerso too is ittheuniversal 'work~~the'absolute
'heartofthematter'itselfinwhich individuals find their essential
nature expressed, and where their separate' individuality is
merely a consciousness of their universality. I t is also the !work'
and the simple result from which the sense that it results from
their doing has vanished; it remains the absolute foundation and
subsistence of all that they do. -This simple, ethereal substance
of their life is, in virtue of this determination oftheh unchange
ableself~identity, [mere]heingand, in addition, merely a beingfor-another. It is thus directly the opposite, of itself, wealth.
Although this is indeed something passive, something devoid
of inner worth, it is equally the perpetually produced result of
the labour and activity of all, just as it is dissipated again in
the enjoyment ofall. It is true that in the enjoyment, theindivi ..
duality develops an awareness of himself as a particular individual, but this enjoyment itself is the result of the general
activity, just as reciprocally, wealth produces universal labour
and enjoyment for all. The actual has simply the spiritual significance of being immediately universal. Each individual is
quite sure that he is acting in his own interest when seeking
this enjoyment; for it is in this that he becomes conscious of
a

302

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

his own independent existence and for that reason does not take
it to be something spiritual. Yet, even when looked at from an
external point of view, it is evident that each in his own
enjoyment provides enjoyment for all, just as in working for
himselfhe is at the same time working for all and all are working
for him. His being for himself is therefore in itself universal and
his self-interest is something merely in his mind, something that
cannot get as far as making a reality of what it means to do,
viz. to do something that would not benefit all.
495. In tbese two spiritual powers, then, self-consciousness
recognizes its substance, content, and purpose; in them it
beholds its dual nature: in one it sees what it implicitly is, in
the other what it is explicitly for itself. But it is at the same" time,
qua Spirit, the negative unity of their subsistence and of the
separation of individuality from the universal, or of actuality
and the self. Dominion and wealth therefore confront the
individual as objects, i.e. as things from which he knows himself
to be free, and between which he believes he can choose, or
even chooseneither. As this free and pure consdousnessheconfronts the essence as something which is merely/or him. He has,
then, the essence, qua essence, within himself. In this pure consciowm,ess the moments ofsuhstance,are for him,notstatepower
and wealth, butthe thoughts of Good and Bad. But further, selfconsciousness is the relationofitspure consciousness tOltsactual
consciousness, of what is in the fOfm of thought to what exists
objectively: it is essentially judgement. It is true that the immediate determinations of the two sides of objective reality have
already made clear which is Good and which is Bad; the Good
isst,ate power, the Bad is wealth. But this first judgement cannot
beregarded as a spiritual judgement; for in it one side has been
determined only as a being-in-itseif, or as the positive, the other
only as a being;for-itself, and as the negative. But as spiritual
essences each is the interfusion of both momen ts, and is therefore not exhaustedin those determinations; and self-consciousness which is self-related is both in andjor itself. It must therefore he related to each determination in a twofbld manner, with
the result that their nature, which consists in being selfalienated determinations, will be brought to light.
496. Now, self-consciousness holds that object to be good,
and to possess intrinsic being, in which it finds itself; and that

CULTURE

to be bad in which it finds the opposite of itself. Goodness is
the likeness of objective reality to it, Badness, however, their
unlikeness. At the same time, what for self-consciousness is good
and bad, is intrinsically good and bad; for it isjust that in which
these two moments of intrinsic being, and ofbeingJor it, are the
same. It is the actual Spirit of the objective realities, and the
judgementis the proofofits power within them, a power which
makes them into what they are in themselves. It is not how they
are like or unlike directly in themselves, i.e. not abstract beingin-,itself or being-far-itself, that is their criterion and their truth,
but how they are in the relation of Spirit to them: their likeness
or unlikeness to Spirit. Spirit's relation to them, in virtue of
which they lose their initial status of objects and develop their
own in-itself or intrinsic nature, becomes at the same time their
reflection into themselves, through which they acquire an actual
spiritual being; and what their Spirit is, comes to view. But
just as their first immediate determinatt'on is distinct-from the relation of Spirit to them, so also will the third moment, their
own proper Spirit; be distinct from the second. First of all,
their second in-itself, which stems from the relation of Spirit
to them, must, of course, turn out to be different from
the immediate in-itself; for this mediation of Spirit rather acts
on the immed£ate determiQ.ateness and makes it into something
else.
497. It follows, then, that the consciousness that is in and
fdr itselfdoesfind in the state power its simple essence and subsistence in general, but not its individuality as such; it does find
there its intrinsic being, but not what it explicitly is Jor itself.
Rather,itfinds that the state power disowns action qua individual action and subdues it into obedience. The individual,
therefore, faced with this power rcflects himself into himself;
it is for him an oppressor and the Bad; for, instead of being
of like nature to himself, its nature is essentially different from
that of individuality. Wealth, on the other hand, is the Good;
it leads to the general enjoyment, is there to be made use of,
and procures for everyone the consciousness of his particular
self. It is implicitly universal beneficence; if it refuses a particular
benefi t andcloes n<;>t choose to satisfy every need, this is accidental and does not detract from its universal and necessary nature
of imparting itself to all and being a universal provider.

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

498. These two judgements give the thoughts of Good and
Bad a content which is the opposite of what they had for us.
But self-consciousness was at first only incompletely related to
its objects, viz. only according to the criterion of being-far-self.
Oonsciousness has eq uall y, however} an intrinsic nature of its own
and must likewise make this aspect a criterion, and only when
it has done this is the spiritual judgement complete. According
to this aspect, the state power expresses its essence; this power
is in part the established law, and in part government and command, which regulates the particular activities within the
action of the whole. The one is the simple Substance itself, the
other is its action which animates and sustains itself and everyone, The individual thus finds therein his ground and essence
expressed, organized, and manifested. On the other hand, the
individual, through the enjoyment of wealth, gains no experience of his universal nature, hut only getsatransito.ryconsdou~­
ness and et:tjoyment of himst:lf qua single and independent individual, and of the disparity between himself and his essence.
The IN" otions ofGood and Bad thus Tcceivehereacon tent w hieh
is the opposite of what they had before.
499. Each of these two ways of judging finds a liken.ess- and
a disparity; in thefirst caseCOllSciOl;tSness judges the&tatepow:er
to be essentially different from it, and the enjoyment of wealth
to accord with its own nature; while in the second case itjudg.t:s
the state power to (;1,Qcord with its nature and the enjoyment
of wealth to beessentiaJly different from it. We have before us
a twofold finding oflikenessanda twofold finding of qisparity,
an antithetical relation between the two real essentialities. We
must ourselves judge these different judgements and apply to
tht:m the criterion set up. According to this, the conscious rela ..
tionwhich finds likeness is the Good; that whiehfinds disparity
is the Bad; and these two forms of the relation we are henceforth
to hold fast as diverse shapes of consciousness. By forming
diverse relationships., consciousness itself comes to be determined as diverse, as being good or had; not because it had for
its principle either being..for-itself or pure being-in-itself, for
both areequallyessentialrnoments. In the twofold Judging eon...
sidered above, the principles were thought of as separate, and
therefore con tained merely abstract ways ofjudging. Actual consciousness has within it both principles, and the distinction

CULTURE

between them falls solely within its own essence, viz. in the relation of itself to the actual.
500. There are two antithetical forms of this relation: one
is a relationship to the state power and wealth as to something
of)ike nature to itself; the other as to something disparate from
it. The consciousness which finds them of like nature to itself
is noble. It sees in public authority what is in accord with itself,
sees in it its own simple essence and the factual evidence of it,
and in the service of that authority its attitude towards it is one
of actual obedience 3;nd respect. Similarly, in the case of wealth,
it sees that this procures for it awareness of its other essential
side, the consciousness ofheingjor itself; it therefore looks upon
wealth likewise as essential in relation to itself, and acknowledges
the source ofits enjoyment as a benefactor to whom it lies under
an obligation.
501. The consciousness which adopts the other relation is,
on the contrary, ignohle. It dings to the disparity between the
two essentialities, thus sees in the sovereign power a fetter and
a su ppres sion of its own heing-for-self, and therefore hates . the
ruler, obeys only with a secret malice, and is always on the point
of revolt ..ltsees, too, in wealth, by which it attains to the
enjoyment of its ownself-centred existence, only the disparity
with its permanent essence; since through wealth it becomes consciousofitselfmerely as an isolated individual, conscious only
ora transitory enjoyment, loving yet hating wealth, and with
the passing of the enjoyment, of something that is essentially
eva-nescent, it regards its relation to the rich as also having
vanished.
502. Now, these relations express, in the .first instance, the
judgement, the determination, of what these two essential rea1i~
ties are as objects for consciousness, not as yet what they are in
and for the.mseIves. The reflection which is presented in the
judgement is partly an affirmation of the one as of the other
only jor us, and is therefore an equal annulling of both; it is
not yet the reflection of them<for consciousness itself. Partly,
at first, they simply are essences, they have not become such, nor
do they possess self-consciousness: that for which they are is Dot
that which animates them, they are predicates which are not
yet themselves subject. On account of this separation; the whole
of the spiritual judgement falls apart into two consciousnesses,

306

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

each of which is subject to a one-sided determination. Now,
just as at first the indiJIerence of the two sides of the alienationone of which was the in~itselfofpure consciousness, viz. the specific thoughts of Good and Bad, the other their existence as state
power and wealth-was raised into a relation between them,
into a judgement, so must this external relation be raised to
an inner unity, or to a relation of thought to actuality, and the
Spirit ofboth forms ofthejudgement must make its appearance.
This happens when the judgement becomes a syllogism, i.e.
becomes the' mediating process in which the necessity and the
middle term of both sides of the judgement come to view.
503. The noble consciousness thus finds itself, in the judgement, confronting the state power in such a way that the latter
is, indeed, not y.et a self, but only the, universal substance; it
is, however, conscious of being the essence of that substance, its
end and absolute content. Being so po~itively related to it,
it adopts a negative attitude to its own ends, to its particularcontent and existence, and lets them vanish. This consciousness
is the heroism of service, the virtue which sacrifices the single individual to the universal, therehybringing this into existence~
the person, one who voluntarily renounces possessions and
enjoyment and acts and is effective in the interests of the ruling
power.
504. Through this process the universal becomes united with
exis tence in general, just as the [merely] existent consciousness
through this renunciation develops into an essential existence.
That from which this consciousness alienates itself in" serving
the universal is the consciousness that is immersed in ,[mere]
existence; but the being that is alienated from itself is the initself. Through this development, therefore, it wins self-respect
and the respect of others. The state power, however, which was
at first only the universal in thov.ght, the in~itse/f, becomes
through this very process the universal in existence, actual power.
This it actually is only in the aetua1 obedience which it gets
through self. consdousnes~ judging the state power to be the
essence, and through the free sacrifice ofself-consciousness to it.
This action which unites the essence with the self produces the
twofold actuality: the self that has a true actuality, and the state
power as the True which is acknowledged as such.
505. Through this alienation, however, the state power is not

CULTURE

a self-consciousness that knows itself as state power. It is only
its law, or its in-itself, that has authority; it has as yet no particular
will. For the self-consciousness that serves the state power has
not as yet renounced its own pure self and ,made it the active
principle of the state power; it has only given that power its
mere being, has only sacrificed its outer existence to it, not its intrinsic being. This self~consciousness is deemed to be in conformity with the essence and is acknowledged on account ofwhat
it intrinsically is. In it the others find their own essence exemplified, but not their own being-for..self-find their thought, or
pure consciousness, fulfilled, but not their individuality. It
therefore possesses authority in their thoughts and enjoys honour.
I t is the haughty vassal who is active on behalf of the state power
in so far as the latter is not a personal will, but an essential will;
the vassal who knows himself to be esteemed only in that honour,
only in the essential representation of him in general opinion,
not in the gratitude shown to him by an individuality, for he
has not helped this individuality to gratify his being.:for-selj. Mis
language,were he tos tand lin relation to the state power which
has not yet come into being, would take the form ofcf)unsel,
imparted for the general good.
506. State power, therefore, still lacks a will with which to
oppose counsel, and the power to decide which of the different
opinions is best for the general good. It is not yet a government,
and therefore not yet in truth an actual state power. The beingfor-self, the will, which,as will is not sacrificed, is the inner,
separated Spirit of the various classes and 'estates', and this,
in spite of its chatter about the gene.ralgood, reserves to itself
what suits its own best interest , and is inclined to make this chatter about the general good a substitute for. action. The sacrifice
of existence which happen~ in the service of the state is indeed
complete when it has gone as far as death; but the hazard of
death which the individual survives leaves him with a definite
existence and hence wi tha particular self-interest, and this makes
his counsel about what is bestJor the general good ambiguous
and open to suspicion. It means that he has in fact reserved
his own opinion and his own particular will in face of the power
of the state. His conduct, therefore, conflicts with the interests
of the state and is characteristic of the ignoble consciousness
which is always on the point of revolt.

308

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

507. This contradiction which being-for-self must resolve,
that of the disparity between its being..Jor-self and the state
power, is at the same time present in the following form. That
renunciation of existence, when it is complete, as it is in death,
is simply a renunciation; it does not return into consciousness;
consciousness does not survive the renunciation, is not in and
for itself, but merely passes over into its unreconciled opposite.
Consequently, the true sacrifice of be ing-for-seif is solely that in
which it surrenders itself as completely as in death, yet in this
renunciationnoless preserves itself. It thereby becomes in actu
ality what it is in itself, becomes the identical unity of itself and
of its opposed self. The separated inner Spirit, the self as such,
having come forward and renounced itself, the state power is
at the same time raised to the position of having a self of its
own. Without this renunciation of self, the deeds of honour, the
deeds of the noble consciousness, and the counsels based on its
insight would retain the ambiguity possessed by that private
reserve of particular intention and selfmwill.
508. But this alienation takes place solely in language, which
here, appears in its characteristic significance. In the world ,of
ethical order, in law and command" and in the actual world, in
counsel only, language has the essence for its content and is the
form ofthat content; but here it has for its content the form
itself, the form which language itself is, and is authoritative as
language. It is the power ofspeech , as that which performs what
has to be performed. For it is the real existence ofthe pure self
as self; in spcech~ self-consciousness, qua independent separate:individuality, comes as such into existeocc,so that it existsfor others.
Otherwise the'!', this pure 'I', is non~existent, is not there; in
evero/ other expression it is immersed in a reality, and is ina
shape from which it can withdraw itself;itis reflected backinto
itselffrom its action, as well as from its physiognomic expression, and dissociates itself from such an imperfect existence, in
which there is always at once too Oluch as too little, letting it
remfl..in lifeless behind. Language, however, contains it in its
purity, it alone expresses the' 1', the' I' itself. This real exis tence
of the 'I' is, qua real existence, an objectivity which has in it
the true nature of the'!'. The'!, is this particular 'I'~but
equally the universal 'I' ; its manifesting is also at once the externalization and vanishing of this particular 'I', and as a result
m

CULTURE

the 'I' remains in its universality. The 'I' that utters itself is
heard or perceived; it is an infection in which it has immediately
passed into unity with those for whom it is a real existence, and
is a universal selfaconsciousness. That it is perceived or heard
means that its real existence dies away; this its otherness has been
taken back into itself; and its real existence is just this: that
as a self-conscious Now, as a real existence, it is not a real existF.nce, and through this vanishing it is a real existence. This
vanishing is thus itselfat once its abiding; it is its own knowing
of itself, and its knowing itselfas a self that has passed over into
another self that has been perceived and is universal.
509. Spirit obtains this actuality here because the extremes,
of which it is the unity, are also directly determined as being
actualities on their own account. Their unity is broken up into
two rigid, unyielding sides, each of which is for the other an
actual object excluded from it. Conseq uendy, the unity appears
as a middle term, which is excluded· and distinct from the
separated, actuaLexistence of the sides; it has, therefore, itself
an actual objective existence distinct from its sides, and has
reality jor them, i.e, is something that exists. The spiritual sub ..
stance enters as such into existence only when it has gained for
its two sides self... consciousnesses which know this pure self as
an actual existence having immediate validity,,, and in knowing
this are also immediately aware that they are such actual exist~
ences only through the mtd~ation of their self-alienation.
Through that pure self, the mO'ments of substance are so far
purified as to be the self-knowing category, and thus to be
moments of Spirit ; through this mediation Spirit ·comes to exist
qua Spirit as a reality,It is thus the middle term which presupposes those extrem.es and is crea ted by their e"istence---..:b ut
equally it is the spiritual whole issuing forth between them,
which sunders itselfintothem and only by means of this contact
creates eachinto the whole in terms of its own princip~e. The
fact that both extremes are already implicitly reduced to
moments and setapart produces their unity, and this is the process which brings both into a unity, interchanges their determinations, and unites them in each extreme. This mediation thus
posits the Notion of each of the two extremes in its actuality,
or makes what each is in itself into its Spirit.
5 10. The two extremes, the state power and the noble

310

c.

(BB.) SPIRIT

consciousness, are split up by the latter: the state power into the
abstract universal which is obeyed, and into the self-centred
will which, however, does not yet conform to the universal; and
the noble consciousness into the obedience rendered by the existence which is not self-centred, or the intrinsic being of self-respect and honour, and into the still unsurrendered being-for..
self, the will that still reserves its independence. The two
moments into which both sides are purified and which, therefore, are moments of language, are the abstract universal, called
'the general good' , and the pure self which, in serving the state,
renounced its own many and various interests. Both are essentially the same; for pure self is just the abstract universal, and
consequently their unity is expressed as their middle term. But
theselfis.atfirst actual only in consciousness, in the one extreme,
while the in-itself is actual only in the s ta te power, the other
extreme. What consciousness lacks is the actual transference to
itofthestatepower, not merely in the form of honour; and what
is lacking in the state power is that it should be obeyed, not
merely as the so~cal1ed 'general good?" but as will, Of that it
should. endow the self with the power of decision, The unity
of the Notion in which/the state power still stands and into
which consciousness has been purified becomes actual in this
process of mediation, thesimple existence of which as middle term
is language. Howeyer, the sides of the unity are not yet selves
which exist as selves; for thesta,e power has yet to be energized
into a self. This language is, therefore, Itot yet Spirit that com-'
pletely knows and expresses itself.
5 I I. The noble consciousness, being the extreme which is the
self, appears as the source of the language by which the sides
of the relation are shaped into animated wholes. The heroism
ofsilentservice becomes the heroism of flattery. This vocal reflection of service constitutes the spiritualself~separating middle
term and reflects back into itself not only its own extreme, but
also reflects backinto this self the extreme of universal power,
making that power, which is at first only implicit, into a power
that is explicit with an existence of its own, makes it into a self..
consciousindividua1ity. The result is thattheSpirit of this power
is now an unlimited monarch: unlimited, because the language of
flattery raises this power into its purified universality; this
moment being the product of language, of an existence which

CULTURE

has been purified into Spirit, is a purified self-identity; a
monarch, for such language likewise raises individuality to its
extreme point; what the noble, consciousness divests itself of as
regards this aspect of the simple spiritual unity is the pure intrinsic being of its thinking, its very'!'. Expressed more definitely,
it raises the individuality, which otherwise is only a presulned
existence, into the existence of its pure form, by giving the
monarch his own proper name; for it is in the name alone that
the difference of the individual from everyone else is not presumed,
but is made actual by all. In the name, the individual counts as
a pure individual, no longer only in his own consciousness, but
in the consciousness of everyone. By his name, then, the
monarch is absolutely separated off from everyone else, exclusive and solitary; as monarch, he is a unique atom that cannot
impart any of its essential nature. This name is thus the reflection-into-self, or the actuality which the universal power has in
its owrz self; through the n~me the power is the monarch. Conversely, he, this particular individual, thereby knows himself,
this individual, to be the universal power, knows that the,nobles
not only are ready 'and prepared for the service of the state
power, but that they group themselves round the throne as an
ornamental setting, and that they are continually telling him who
sits on it what he is.
512. The language of their praise is in this way the Spirit
that in the state power itselfuni tes the two extremes. It reflects the
abstract power into itself and gives ~t the moment of the other
extreme, the being:for-selfthatwills and decides, and by so doing
gives it a self-conscious existence; or otherwise expressed, this
individual, actual self-consciousness attains to the certain knowledge of itself as the power of the s ta te. I t is the point of the self
into which the many points or selves through renouncing their
own inner certainty, are fused into one. Since, however, this Spirit
proper of state power consists in its obtaining actuality and
nourishment from the sacrifice of action and thought by the
noble consciousness, it is an independence that is self-alienated; the
noble consciousness, the extreme of heingJ'or-self, receives back
the other extreme, that of actual universality, in return for the
universality of thought which it relinquished; the power of the
state has passed to the noble consciousness. In it, that power is
first made truly effective; in the being-for-self of the noble

312

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

consciousness it ceases to be the inert entity which it appeared to
be as the extreme of abstract being-in-itself. Considered as it
is in itself, state power that is reflected into itself, or has become
Spirit, simply means that it has become a moment of self-consciousness, i.e. it exists only as superseded. Consequently, it is now
essence in the form of something, the Spirit of which is that it
is to be sacrified and surrendered, i.e. it exists as wealth. It does,
indeed, at the same time have a continuing existence as a reality
vis-a-vis weal th, into which it is ever changing in accordance with
its Notion; but it is a reality whose Notion is just this process
of passing over-by way of the service and honour done to it
and from which it derives its existence~into' its opposite, into
the relinquishment of power. Thus the peculiar self that is its
will knows that through the debasement of the noble consciousneSs it has become a universality that renounces itself, has
become a completely separate and contingent individuality
which is at the mercy of every more powerful will. What
remains to it of universally acknowledged and incommunicable
independence is the empty name.
S! 3. While, therefore, the noble consciousness hehaves as if
it wereconj'orming to the universal power, the truth about it is
rather that in its service' it retains its own being",for,.self, and
that in the genuine renunciation of its personality, it actually
-sets aside and rends in pieces the universal Substance. Its Spirit
is a completely disparate relationship: on the one hand, ioits
position of honour it retains its own will; on the other hand,
it gives up its will, butin so doing it in part alienates itself from
its own inner nature and becomes utterly at variance with itself,
and in part subjects to itself the universal s·ubstance and makes
it completely at variance with itself. It is dear that, as a result,
the specific character which it was judged to have in comparison with what was called the ignoble consciousness has disappeared and .with it theJatter too. The ignoble consciousness
has achieved its purpose, viz. to bring the universal power
under the con trol of being-far-self.
£)14. Self-consciousness, thus enriched by the universal
power, exists as universal beneficence, oris wealth which is itself
in turn an object for consciousness. For although wealth is, for
consciousness, the deposed universal, the latter has not yet by
this first subjection returned absolutely into the self. The self

CULTURE

has not yet for object itself qua self, but the subordinated universal essence. Since this object has only just come into being,
consciousness has formed an immediate relation with it and thus
has not yet exhibited its disparity with it; we have here the
noble consciousness which preserves its being-far-self in the universal which has become unessential, and therefore acknowledges the object and is grateful to the benefactor.
S I 5. Wealth already contains within it the moment of beingfor-self. It is not the self-less universal of state power, or the
na'lve inorganic' nature of Spirit; it is s tate power which wills
to hold its own against those who would take possession of it
for their own enjoyment. But since wealth has merely the form
of essence, this one-sided being>-for-self which has no intrinsic
being of its own, but is rather the cancelling of it, is in its
enjoyment theessenceless return of the individual into himself.
It therefore itself requires to be ensouled; and the movement
ofits reflection consists inlhis, that wealth which is only for itself,
develops an intrinsicheing ofles own, that, instead ofheing a cancelled essence, it develops an essential being. It thus receives
withinitselfa Spiritofitsown. Since the form of this movement
has already been setforth in detail, it issufficienthere tocharacterize its content.
5 16. The noble consciousness, then, is not related here to the
object as an essence in general ;on the contrary, what is alien
to it is its own.being-:for~self. ItJinds confronting it its own, but
alienated, selfas such, in the shape of an objective fixed reality
which it has to receive from another fixed being".for-self. Its
object is a being-far-self, i.e. its own being-far-self; but, because
iti's an object, it is at the Same time ipso facto an alien reality
which has its own being-for..self,which ,,;has a will of its own;
i.e. it seesselfin the power ofan alien will<on which it is dependent for possession of its own self.
5 I 7. Self;.;consciousness can make abstraction from every
particular aspect, and for that reason, even when it is tied to
one of them, it retains the recognition and intrinsic validity of
itselfas an independent being. Here, however, as regards the
aspect of that pure actuality which is its very own, viz. its own
'1', it finds that it is outside of itself and belongs to another,
finds its personality as such dependent on the contingent personality of another, on the accident ofa moment, on a caprice,

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

Dther utterly unimportant circumstance. In the sphere
what is in the power Df an Dbjective being appears as
a contingent content frDm which it is pDssible to. make abstractiDn,
and the contrDlling pDwer dDes nDt affect the self as such; Dn
the cDntrary, the self is acknowledged. Here, hDwever, the self
sees its self-certainty as such to' be cDmpletely devDid Df essence,
sees that its pure personality is absDlutely not a persDnality. The
spirit Df its gratitude is, therefore, the feeling Df the mDst profDund dejection as well as Df extreme rebelliDn. When the pure
'I' beholds itself outside of itself and rent asunder, then everything that has cDntinuity and universality, everyt~ing that is
called law, gDod, and right, is at the same time rent asunder
and is destroyed. All identity dissDlves away, fDr the utmDstdisparity now Dccupies the scene; what is absolutely essential is
now absolutely unessential, being-fDr",self is nDW external to.
itself: the pure 'I' its.e1f is absolutely disrupted.
5 18. Therefore, although this consciousness receives back
from riches the objectivity of its being~fDr."gelf a,nd supersedes
it, it is not only~ like the preceding reflection, incomplete in
principle, hu t is conscious Df upt being satisfied.; the reflection,
in which the self reqeives itself as something Dbjectiveto it, is
thus a direct contradictiDn IDdged in the pure 'I' itself.Q,ua·self,
hDwever, it stands, at the same time directly abDve this contradictiDn ; it is absolutely elastic and therefore 4gain supersedes this supersession of its self, rejects this disDwning of itself
which wDuldmake its being~{Dr..,self into somethigg alien, and
rebels against this reception of itself, and in this very reception
is consciDus of itself.
519. Since, then, the condi tion of this consciousness is linked
with this absolute disruption, the distinction within its Spirit
Df being noble, as oppDsed 19 ignDble, falls away and both are
the same. The beneficent Spiritof'wealthcan, further, b.edistinguished frDm thatDfthe consciousness receiving the benefit, and
has to be cDnsidered separately. The Spirit Df wealth was an
essenceless being-for..,self, sDmethingtD he sacrificed for others.
But by imparting itself it becomes intrinsic being; in fulfilling its
destiny, which is to' sacrifice itself, it rids itself of the singleness
which characteri;zes its merely self-centred enjoyment, and as
such subDrdinated individuality it is universality Dr eSJence. What
it imparts, what it gives to' Dthers, is being-fDr-self. It dDes not.
Dr SDme
Df law,

CULTURE

however, give itself over as a nature that has no self, as the uncontrolled surrender of the condition of life, but as a self-con ..
scious being in control of itself; it is not the inorganic power
of the element that is known by the consciousness receiving it
to be essentially transitory, but is the power over the self, the
power that knows itself to be independent and arbitrary, and at the
same time knows that what it dispenses is the self of another.
Wealth thus shares its dejection with the recipient; but in place
of rebellion appears arrogance. For in one respect it knows as
well as the recipient that heing-for-self is a contingent Thing;
but it is itself this contingency in the power of which personality
stands. In this arrogance which fancies it has, by the gift of a
meal, acquired the self of another's'!' and thereby gained for
itself the submission of that other's inmost being, it overlooks
the inner rebellion of the other; it overlooks the fact that all
res train ts have been cast off, overlooks this sta te of sheer disruption in which, the self-identity of being..for..self having
become divided against itself, all identity, all existence, is disrupted, and in which the sentimentand view-point of the benefa.ctor suffer rnostdistortion. It stands on the very edge of this
innerroost abyss, ofthis bottomless depth, in which allstabHity
and Substance have vanished; and in this depth it sees nothing
buLa common thing, a plaything of its whims, an accident of
its caprice. Its Spirit is a subjective opinion wholly devoid of
essentiality,a superficiality from which Spirit has fled.
520. Just as se1f..conscioUSl)ess had its own language with
state ·powef, inoth~r words, just as Spirit emerged as actively
mediating between these extremes, so also has se1f...consciousness
its ownJanguage in dealing with wealth; but still more so when
it rebels. The language that gives wealth a sense of its essential
significance, and thereby gains possession of it, is likewise the
language offla ttery, hu t ofhase flattery; for what it pronounces
to be an essence} it knows to he expendable, to be without any
intrinsic being. The language of flattery, however, as we h.ave
already observed, is Spirit that is still one-sided. For although
its moments are indeed the self which has been refined by the
discipline of service into a pure existence, and the intrinsic being
of power, yet the pure Notion in which the simple, unitary self
and the in.itselj, the former a pure 'I' and the latter this pure
essence or thought, are the same~this unity of the two sides

316

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

which are in reciprocal relation is not present in the consciousness that uses this language. The object is still for consciousness
an intrinsic heing in contrast to the self, that is, the object is not
for consciousness at the same time consciousness's own self as
such. The language of this disrupted consciousness is, however,
the perfect language and the authentic existent Spirit of this
entire world of culture. This self.. consciousness which rebels
against this rejection of itself is eo ipso absolutely self-identical
in its absolute disruption, the pure mediation of pure self-consciousness with itself. It is the sameness of the identical judgement in which one and the same personality is both subject and
predicate. But this identical judgement is at the same time the
infinite judgement; for this personality is absolutely dirempted,
and subject and predicate are utterly indifferent, immediate
beings which have nothing to do with one another, which have
no necessary unity, so much so that each is the power of a separate independent personality. The being-for-self [of this COnsciousness] has its own being-for-seIffor object as an out-and ..
out'~other' ,and yet, at the sarnetime, directly as its own seIfitself as 'an 'other'; not as if this had a different content, for
the content is the same selfintheform ofan absolute antithesis
and a completely indifferent existence orits own. Here, then,
we have the Spirit of this real world of culture, Spirit that 'is
conscious ofits elfin its truth and in its Notion.
52 I. ltis this absolute and universalinversion and alienation
of the actual world and of thought; itls pure culture. What is
learnt in this world is that neither the actuality of power 'and
wealth, nor their specific Notions, 'good' and 'bad', or the consciousness of~good' and 'bad' (the noble and the ignoble consciousness), possess truth; on the contrary, all these moments
become inverted, one changing into the' other, and each is the
opposite of itself. The universa.l power, which is the Substance,
when it acquires a spititual.nature of its own through the principle of individuality, receives its'ownself merely asa name,
and though it is the actuality of power, is really the powerless
being that sacrifices its own self. But this expendable, self~l~ss
being, or the self that has become a Thing, is rather the return
of that heinginto itself; it is being-for-self that is explicitly for
itself, the concrete existence of Spirit. The thoughts of these two
essences, of'good' and 'bad', are similarly inverted in this move-

CULTURE

ment; what is characterized as good is bad, and vice versa. The
consciousness of each of these moments, the consciousnesses
judged as noble and ignoble, are rather in their truth just as
much the reverse of what these characterizations are supposed
to be; the noble consciousness is ignoble and repudiated, just
as the repudiated consciousness changes round into the nobility
which characterizes the most highly developed freedom of selfconsciousness. From a formal standpoint, everything is o~t..
wardly the reverse of what it is for itself; and, again, it is not
in truth what it is for itself, but something else than it wants
to be; being..for-selfis rather the loss of itself, and its self-aliena ..
tion rather the preservation of itself. What we have here, then,
is that all the moments execute a universal justice on' one
another, each just as much alienates its own self, as it forms
itselfinto its opposite and i'n this way inverts it. Tnle Spirit,
however, is just this unity of the absolutely separate moments,
and, indeed, it is just through the free actuality of these selfless extremes that, as their middle term, it achieves a concrete
existence. It exists in the universal talk and destructive judge..
ment which strips oftheir significance all those moments which
are supposed to count as the true being and as actual members
of the whole, and is equally this nihilistic game which it plays
with itself. This judging and talking is, therefore, what is true
and invincible, while it overpowers everything; it is solely with
this alone that one has truly to do with in this actual world.
In this world, the Spirit of each part finds expression, or is
wittily talked about, and finds said about it what it is. The honest
individual takes each momentto bean abiding essentiality, and
is the uneducated thoughtlessness of not knowing that it is
eq uaUy doing the reverse. The disrupted consciousness, however, is consciousness of the perversion, and, moreover, of the
absolute perversion. What prevails in it is the Notion, which
brings together in a unity the thoughts which, in the honest
individual, lie far apart, and its language is therefore clever and
witty.
522. The content of what Spirit says, about itself is thus the
perversion of every Notion and reality, the universal deception
of itselfand others; and the shamelessness which gives utterance
to this deception is just for that reason the greatest truth. This
kind of talk is the madness of the musician 'who heaped up and

3 IB

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

mixed together thirty arias, Italian, French, tragic, comic, of
every sort; now with a deep bass he descended into hell, then,
contracting his throat, he rent the vaults of heaven with a falsetto tone, frantic and soothed, imperious and mocking, by
turns',l To the tranquil consciousnes which, in its honest way,
takes the melody of the Good and the True to consist in the
evenness of the notes, i.e. in unison, this talk appears as a 'rig..
marole of wisdom and folly, as a medley of as much skill as
baseness, of as many correct as false ideas, a mixture compounded of a complete perversion of sentiment, of absolute
shamefulness, and of perfect frankness and truth. It will be unable to refrain from entering into all these tones and running
up and down the entire scale of feelings from the profoundest
contempt and dejection to the highest pitch of admiration and
emotion; but blended with the latter will be a tinge of ridicule
which spoils them.'2 The former, however, will find in their
very frankness a strain of reconciliation, will find in their subversive depths the all-powerful note which restores Spirit to
itself.
5~3. Ifwe contrast with the speech of this mind which is fully
aware ofits confused state, the speech of that simple consciousness of the true and the good, we find that in face of the frank
and self-conscious eloquence of the educated mind, it can be
no more than taciturn; for to the latter it can say nothing that
it does not already know and say. If it gets beyond speaking
in monosyllables, it says, therefore, the same thing that is said
by the educated mind, but in doing so also commits the folly
of imagining it is saying something new and different. Its very
words 'shameful', 'ignoble' are already this folly, for the other
says them about itself. This latter mind perverts in its speech
all that is unequivocal, because what is self-identicalis only an
abstraction, but in its actual existence is in its own self a perversion. The plain mind, on the other hand, takes under its protection the good and noble i.e. what retains its self-identity in
its utterance, in the only way here possible-that is to say, the
'good' does not lose its, value because it may he associated or
mixed with the 'bad', for this is its condition and necessity, and
in this fact lies the wisdom ofN ature. Yet this plain mind, while
1

Diderot. Nephew of Rameau.

2ibid.

CULTURE

3'9

it imagined it was contradicting what was said, has, in doing
so, merely condensed into a trivial form the content of Spirit's
utterance; in making the opposite of the noble and good into
the condition and necessity of the noble and good, it thoughtlessly
supposes itself to be saying something else than that what is
called noble and good is in its essence the reverse of itself, or
that, conversely, the 'bad' is the 'excellent'.
524. If the simple consciousness compensates for this
dull, uninspired thought by the actuality of the excellent, by
adducing an example of the latter, either in the form of a fictitious
case or a true story, thus showing that it is no empty name
but actually exists, the universal actuality of the perverted
action stands opposed to the whole of the real world in which
the said example constitutes something quite single and
separate, an espece, a mere 'sort' of thing; and to represent the
existence of the good and noble as an isolated anecdote,
whether fictitious or true, is the most disparaging thing that
can be .said ahout.it. Final1y, should the plain mind demand
the dissolution of this whole world of perversion, it cannot
demand of the indiVcidual that he remove himself from it, for even
Diogenes in his tuh is conditioned by it, and to make this
demand of the individual is just what is reckoned to be bad,
viz. to care for himself qua individual. But if the demand for this
removalisdirected to the universal individuality, it cannot mean
thatReasonshould give up again the spiritually developed consciousness it has acquired, should submerge the widespread
wealth. of its moments again jn the simplicity of the natural
heart, and relapse into the wilderness of the nearly animal consciousness, which is also called Nature or innocence. On the
contrary, the demand for this dissolution can only be directed
to the Spirit of culture itself, in order that it return out of its
confusion to itself as Spirit, and win for itself a still higher consciousness.
525. But in point of fact, Spirit has already accomplished
this in principle. The consciousness tha t is a ware of its disruption and openly declares it, derides ·existence and the universal confusion, and derides its own self as well; it is at the
same time the fading, but still audible, sound of all this confusion. This vanity of all reality and every definite N'otion,
vanity which knows itself to be such, is the double reflection

320

c.

(BB.) SPIRIT

of the real world into itself: once in this particular self of consciousness qua particular, and again in the pure universality of
consciousness, or in thought. In the first case, Spirit that has
come to itselfhas directed its gaze to the world of actuality and
still has there its purpose and immediate content; but, in the
other case, its gaze is in part turned only inward and negatively
against it, and in part is turned away from that world towards
heaven, and its object is the beyond of this world.
526. In that aspect of the return into the self, the vanity of
all things is its own vanity, it is itself vain. It is the self..centred
self that knows, not only how to pass judgement on and chatter
about everything, but how to give witty expression to the contradiction thatis present in the solid elements of the actual world,
as also in the fixed determinations posited by judgement; and
this contradiction is their truth. Looked at from the point of
view of form, it knows everything to be self-alienated, beingfor-self is separated from being-in-itself; what is meant, and
purpose, are separated from tru th; and from both again, the
being~for-another, the ostensible meaning from the real meaning, from the true thing and intention. Thus it knows how to
give correctexpression to each moment in relation to itsopposite, in general, how to express accurately the perversion of
everything; it knows better than each what each is, no matter
what its specific nature is. Since it knows the substantial from
the side of the disunion and conflict whkh are united within
the substantial itself, but not from the side of this unioo, it
understands verywell how to pass judgement on it, but has lost
the ability to comprehend it. This vanity at the same time needs
the vanity of all things in order to get from them the conscious ..
ness of self; it therefore creates this vanity itself and is the soul
that supports it. Power and wealth are the supreme ends of its
exertions, it knows that through renunciation and sacrifice it
forms itselfinto the universal, attains to the possession of it, and
in this possession is ~niversaUy recognized and accepted: state
power and wealth are the realand acknowledged powers. How..
ever, this recognition and acceptance is itself vain; and jus t by
taking possession ofpower and wealth itknows them to be without a self of their own, knows rather that it is the power over
them, while they are vain things. The fact that in possessing
them it is itself apart from and beyond them, is exhibited in

CULTURE

3 21

its witty talk which is, therefore, its supreme interest' and the
truth of the whole relationship. In such talk, this particular self,
qua this pure self, determined neither by reality nor by thought,
develops into a spiritual self that is of truly universal worth.
It is the self-disruptive nature of all -relationships and the conscious disruption of them; but only as self-consciousness in
revolt is it aware of its own disrupted state, and in thus knowing
it has immediately risen above it. In that vanity; all content
is turned into something negative which can no longer be
grasped as having a positive significance. The positive object
is merely the pure (P itself, and the disrupted consciousness in
itself this pure self-identity of self-consciousness that has
returned to itself.

b. Faith and pure insight
527. The Spirit of self. . alienation has its existence in the
world of culture. But since this whole has become alienated
from itself, there stands beyond that world the unreal world
of pure consciousness, or of thought. Its content is in the form of
pure thought, and thought is its absolute element. Since, how,.
ever, thoughtis in the first instance [only] the element of this
world, consciousness only has these thoughts, but as yet it £:loes
not think them, or is unaware that they are thoughts; they exist
forconsciollsness in the form of picture-thoughts. For it steps out
of its actual world into pure consciousness, yet is itselfgenerally
still in the sphere of the actual world and its determinateness.
The disrupted consciousness is only in itself, or implicitly, the
self-identity of pure consciousness, a fact that is known to us, but
not to itself. Thus, it is only the immediate elevation of itself, an
elevation it has not yet accomplished within itself, and it still
has within it its opposite principle by which it is conditioned,
without having become master of it through the movement
ofmeciiation. Consequent1y, the essence of its thought has for
it the value of essence, not merely in the form of the abstract
in-itself, but in the form of a common actuality, of an actuality
that has merely been raised into another element without h£lving lost therein the specific character of an actuality that does
not exist merely in thought. I t is essential to distinguish it from
the inMitselfwhich is the essence of the Stoic consCiousness. What
counted for the latter was merely the form of thought as such

3 22

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

which, besides, has any alien content taken from the actual
world. Whatcoun ts, however, for the consciousness we are dealingwith is not theform of thought. This, too, is ,essentially distinct
from the in-itselfof the virtuous consciousness for which (lssence,
though it stands in a relationship to the actual world and is
the essence of the actual world itself, yet is initially-a non-actual
essence, In the consciousness under discussion' essence, although
lying beyond the actual world, none the less counts as an actual
essence. In the same way, what is intrinsically right and good
in the sphere of legislative Reason, and the universal that is
adopted by consciousness in testing laws, these also do not pos·
sess the character of actuality. Therefore, whlIe pure thought
fell within the world of culture itself as an aspect of the alienation, viz. as the standard for judging Good and Bad in the
abstract, through having passed through the process of the
whole, it has become enriched with the moment of actuality
and thereby with content. B\.!.t this actuality of the essence is
at the same time only an actuality of pure, not of actual, consciousness; although it is raised into the element of thought it
does not yet eount as a thought for this actual cons.ciousness;
rather it lies for the latter beyond its'· own ac tuality, for it is
the flight from this actuality.
528. Religiort-for it is obviously religion that we are speaking about~in the{orm in which it appears here as the faith
belonging to the world of culture, does not yet appear as it is
in and for itself. We have alreadyseenit in other characteristic
forms, viz. as the Unhappy Consciousness, as a shape of the
insubstantial process ofconsciousness itself. It made its appearance, too, in the ethical Substance as faith in the underworld,
though consciousness of the departed spirit is, strictly speaking,
notfaith, not essence posited in the element of pure consciousness beyond the actual world, but has itself an immediate presence; its elementis the family. Here, however, religion in part
has proceeded from the Substance and is the pure consciousness
ofit; in part, this pure consciousness is alienated from its actual
consciousness the essence from its existence. True, it is thus no
longer the insubstantial process of consciousness, but it still has
the characteristic of an antithesis to actuality as this actuality
in general, and of an antithesis to self-consciousness in particular. I t is therefore essentially merely a belief.

CULTURE

529. This pure consciousness of absolute Being is an alienated
consciousness. We have now to look more closely at the specific
nature of that of which it is the 'other', and we must consider
it only in connection with this 'other'. To begin with, this pure
consciousness seems to have over against it only the world of
actuality; but since it is the flight from this world and therefore
has the character of an antithesis to it, it bears this world within
itself; pure consciousness is therefore in its own self alienated
from itself, and faith constitutes only one aspect of it. At the
same time, the other aspect has already come to view. Pure consciousne~s, namely, is reflection out of the world of culture in
such a way that the Substance of that world, and also the
'masses' or groups into which it is articulated, are shown to be
what they are in themselves, spiritual essentialities, absolutely
restless processes or determinations which are directly cancelled
in their opposite. Their essence, simple consciousness, is thus
the simplicity of absolute difference which isat once no difference.
Consequently, it is pure being..Jor-self, not as this single self but
as the immanently universal self in the form of a restless process
which attacks and pervades the passive essence of the 'matter
in hand'. In it is thus to be found the certainty that at once
knows itselfto be the truth, pure thought as the ahsolute Notum
in the might of its negativity, which eliminates everything objective that supposedly stands over against consciousness, and
makes it into a being which has its origin in consciousness. This
pure consciousness is at the same time equally simple., just
because its difference is no difference. But as this form of simple
reflection-into-self, it is the element of faith in which Spirit
has the determinateness of positive unive.rsality, of being-in,..itself
in contrast to that being-for-self of self-consciousness. Forced
hack into itself out of the essenceless, merely dissolving world,
Spirit, in accordance with its truth, is in an undivided unity,
at once the absolute movement and negativity of its process of manifestation, as well as its inwardly satisfied essence and its positive
repose. But coming generally under the determinateness of
alienation, these two moments fall apart into a dual consciousness. The former is pure insight as the spiritual process which
focuses itself in self-consciousness, a process which is confronted
by consciousness of what is positive, the form of objectivity or
of picture-thinking, and which turns against it; but pure

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

insight's own object is only the pure (1'. The simple consciousness
of the positive, or of tranquil self-identity, on the other hand,
has for its object the inner essence qua essence. Pure insight has,
therefore, in the first instance, no content of its own, because
it is negative being-for-self; to faith, on the other hand, there
belongs a content, but without insight. If the former does not
step outside self-consciousness, the latter certainly has its content in the element of pure self-consciousness, but in thought,
not in Notions, in pure consciousness, not in pure self-consciousness.
Hence faith is certainly pure consciousness of essence, i.e. of the
simple inner being, and thus is thought-the cardinal factor in
the nature of faith, which is usually overlooked. The immediacy
of the presence of essence in it is due to the fact that its object
is essence, i.e. pure thought. This immediacy, however, so far as
thoughtenters into consciousness, or pure consciousness enters into
self-consciousness, acq uires the significance of an objective being
which lies beyond the consciousness of the self. It is through
this significance which the immediacy and simplicity of pure
thoughtohtains in consciousness, that the essence of faith is no
longer a [pure] thought, but is reduced to the Jevel ofsomething
imagined,; and becomes a supersensihle world which is essenti ..
ally an ~()ther' in relation to self-consciousness. In pure insight,
on the other hand, thetransitionofpure thought in to consciousness has the opposite determination ; objectivityhas the significance of a merely negative content, a content which is reduced
to a moment and returns into the self; that is to say, only the
selfis really the object of the self, or the object only has truth so
far as it has the form of the self.
530. Just as faith and pure insight belong in common to the
element of pure consciousness, so also are they in cornmon the
return from the actual world of culture. Oonsequently, they
present themselves according to three aspects. First, each is an
intrinsic being on its own account, apart from all relationships;
second, each stands in relationship with the actual world in an
antithesis to pure consciousness; and third, each is related
within pure consciousness to the other.
53 I. In the consciousness of the heliever, the aspect of being
in andjor itselfis its absolute object whose content and determination we already know. For according to the Notion of faith
it is nothing else butthe actual world raised into the universalit)

CULTURE

of pure consciousness. The articulation of this world, therefore,
constitutes the organization of the world of faith, except that
in the latter the parts do not alienate themselves in their spiri~
tualization, but are Beings, each with an existence of its own,
Spirits which have returned into themselves and abide with
themselves. The movement of their transition [into one
another] is therefore only for us an aliena tion of the specific
character in which they exist in their distinctiveness, and is only
for us a necessary series; for faith, however, their difference is a
tranquil diversity and their movement a [real] happening.
532. To name them briefly according to the external deter~
mination of their form: just as in the world of culture state
power, or the Good, was primary, so here, too, the first is the
Absolute Being, Spirit that is in and for itself in so far as it is
the simple eternal substance. But in the actualization of its
Notion, in being Spirit, it passes over into being-for-another, its
self~identity becomes an actual, self-sacrificing absolute Being; it
becomes a self, buta mortal, perishable self. Consequently, the
third moment is the return of this alienated self and of the
humiliated substance into their originalsimplicity; only in this
way is substance represented as Spirit.
533. These distinct Beings, when brought hack to themselves
by thought, out of the flux of the actual world, are immutable
eternal Spirits, whose being lies in thinking the unity which they
constitute. Removed thus from self-consciousness, these Beings
are nevertheless actively present in it; for if the absolute Being
were to remain unmoved in the form of the first simple substance, it would remain alien to self~consciousness. But the
externalization of this substance, and then its Spirit, involves
themomen t of actuali ty and thereby makes itself a participant
in the self~consciousness of the believer, or the believing consciousness belongs to the actual world.
534. According to this second relationship, the believing
consciousness partly has its actuality in the real world of culture,
and constitutes the Spirit and the existence of that world which
we have already considered; partly, however, the believing
consciousness confronts this its own actuality as something
worthless, and is the process of overcoming it. This process does
not consist in the believing consciousness making brilliant
remarks aboutthe perversion of its real world; for it is the simple

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

na"ive consciousness which reckons such brilliance as vanity,
since it still has the real world for its purpose. On the contrary,
contrasted with the tranquil realm of its thought, the real world
is a soulless existence, which therefore has to be overcome in
an external manner. This obedience of service and praise, by
setting aside sense-knowledge and action, produces the consciousness of unity with the absolute Being, though not as a
unity that is actually perceived; on the contrary, this service
is only the perpetual process of producing that unity, a process
which does not completely attain its goal in the present. The
[religious] community, it is true, does so, for it is universal selfconsciousness; hut for the individual self-consciousness, the
realm of pure though t necessaril y remains a beyond of its actual
world, or since this beyond, through the ex ternalization of the
eternal Being, has entered the actual world, the actuality is an
uncornprehendeci, sensuous actuality. But one Sensuous actuality remains indifferent to the other, and the beyond has only
received the further character of remoteness in space and time,
The Notion, however, the actuaHty of Spirit present to itself,
remains in the .consciousness ofthe·believer the inner being, which
is everything and which acts, but does not itself come forth.
535. In pure Insight, however, the N olion, is alone the actual;
and this third aspect of Faith, that of being an object for pure
Insight, is really the true relation in which F.aith here appears.
Pure Insight itself, like Faith, is to be considered partly in and
for itself, and partly in its relationship to the actual world so
far as this is still present in a positive form, viz. as a vain consciousness, and lastly, in that relation to faith mentioned above.
536. We have seen what pure insight is in and for itself. As
faith is the tranquil pure consciousness of Spirit as essence, so is
pure insight the self-consciousness of Spirit as essence; it therefore knows essence, not as essence, but as absolute self. It therefore seeks toaholish every kind of independence other than that
of self-consciousness, whether it be the independence of what
is actual, or of what possesses intrinsic being, and to give it the
form of Notion. Pure.insight is not only the certainty of self-conscious Reason that it is all truth: it knows that it is.
537. However, in the form in which the Notion of pure insight first makes its appearance, it is not yet realized. Accordingly, its consciousness still appears as contingent, as single and

CULTURE

separate, and its essence appears for it in the form of an end
which it has to realize. It has, to begin with, the intention of making pure insight universal, i.e. of making everything that is actual
into a Notion, and into one and the same Notion in every selfconsciousness. The intention is pure, for it has pure insight for
its content; and this insight is likewise pure, for its content is
solely the absolute Notion, which meets with no opposition in
an object, nor is it restricted in its own self. In the unrestricted
Notion there are directly found the two aspects: that everything
objective has only the significance of being-jor-selj, of self-consciousness, and that this has the significance of a universal, that
pure insight is to become the property of every self-consciousness. This second aspect of the intention is a result of culture
in so far as in this culture, the difference of objective Spirit,
the parts and the determinations which its judgement imposed
on the ~orld, as well as the differences which appear as natural
predispositions, have all been upset. Genius, talent, special
capacities generally, belong to the world of actuality, in so far
as this world still contains the aspect of being a spiritual animal
kingdom in which individuals, amid confusion and mutual violence, chea Land struggle over the essence of the actual world.
These differences, his tru~, have no place in this world as honest
especes ; individ uality neither is contented with the unreal 'matter in hand' itself nor has it a particular content and ends
of its own. On the contrary, it counts merely as something universally acknowledged, viz. as an educated individuality; and,.
the difference is red uced toone ofless or 'more energy, a quantitative difference, Le. a non-essential difference. This last difference, however, has been effaced by the fact that in the completely disrupted state of consciousness difference changed
round into an absolutely qualitative difference. There, what
isfor the'!' an 'other' is only the 'I' itself. In this infinite judgement all one-sidedness and peculiarity of the original beingfor ..self has been eradicated; the self knows itself qua pure self
to be its own object; and this absolute identity of the two sides
is the element of pure 'insight. Pure insight is, therefore, the
simple, immanently differentiated essence, and equally the universal work or achievement and a universal possession.' In this
simple spiritual substance, self... consciousness gives itselfand preserves for itself in every object the consciousness of this its own

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

particular being or of its own action, just as conversely, the
individuality of self~consciousness is therein self-identical and
universal. This pure insight is thus the Spirit that calls to every
consciousness: be jor yourselves what you all are in yourselvesreasonable.
II. THE ENLIGHTENMENT

538. The peculiar object against which pure insight directs
the power of the Notion is faith, which is the form of pure con~
sciousness confronting it in the same element. But it also has
a relation to the actual world for, like fai th, it is the return
from the actual world into pure consciousness. We have, first
of aU, to see the nature of its activity as it is directed against
the impure intentions and perverse insights of the actual world.
53.9. We have already mentioned the tranquil consciousness
that stands opposed to this turmoil which, having once settled
down starts up all over again; it constitutes the side of pure
in~ightand intention. This tranquil consciousness, however, as
wesgw,- has no special insight into the world of cuI tun~; this latter
has itse1Lratherthe mostpainfulfeeling'i.and the truest insight
about itself: the feeling that all its defences have hroken down,
that every part ofits being has heen tortured on the rack and
every bone broken; it is also the language of this feeling and
the brilliant talk which pronounces judgement on every aspect
of its condition. Here, therefore, pure insight can have no
activity and content of Its own and thus can only behave as
the formal and faithful 4ppr~ke:nsion of its own hrilliant insight
into the worldandofits own peculiar language. Since this lan~
guage is that of a distracted mind, and the pronouncement only
some twaddle uttereclon the spur of the moment, which is again
quickly forgotten, and exists as a whole only for a third con~
sciou&ness, this latter can only be distinguished as pure insight
if it brings these scattered traits into a general picture and then
makes them into an insight for everyone.
540. By this simple means it will clear up the cOl)fusion of
this world. For we have found that itis not the groups [Massen]
and the specific Notions and individualities that are the essence
of this actuality, hut that this has its substance and support
solely in theSpirit which exists qua judging'and discussing, and

CULTURE

tha t the in teres t of having a con ten t for this argumen ta tion and
chatter alone preserves the whole and the groups into which
it is articulated. In this language of insight, its self-consciousness is for it still a being existing on its own account, this single individual; but the vanity of the content is at the same time the vanity
of the self that knows itself to be vain. When the placidly
apprehending consciousness makes a collection of the most telling and penetrating versions of all this brilliant talk, the soul
that still preserves the whole, then the vanity of witty judgements perishes with that other ~anity, the vanity of existence.
The collection shows to mos't people a better wit, or to everyone
at least a more varied wit, than their own, and shows that
'knowing better' and 'judging' are in general something universal and now universally known. With this, the sole remaining interest is eradicated, and the individual judgement is
resolved into the universal insight. However, the knowledge of
essence is still firmly established ~s superior to empty knowledge, and pure insight only manifests its own peculiar activity
in so far as it opposes itself to faith.
a. The struggle of th~ Enlightenment with Superstition

541. The various modes of the negative attitude ofco nscio usness, the attitude of scepticism and that of theoretical and
practical idealism, are inferior shapes compared with that of
pure insight and its diffusion, of the Enlightenmint; for pure insight
is born of the substance [of Spirit], knows the pure self of consciousness to be absolute, and enters into dispute with the pure
consciousness of the absolute essence of all reality. Since faith
and insight are the same pure consciousness, but as regards form
areopposed~the essence is for faith [ mere] thought, not Notion,
and is therefore the sheer opposite of self-consciousness, whereas
forpure insight the essence is the self-their nature is such that
each is for the other the sheer negative of it. In their appearance
as mutually opposed, all content faUs to faith, for each moment,
in its tranquil element of thought, obtains an enduring being.
Pure insight, however, is in the first instance devoid of content
and is rather the pure vanishing of it; but by the negative movement towards what is negative to it, it will realize itself and
give itself a content.
542. It knows that faith is opposed to pure insight, opposed

33 0

Co (BB.) SPIRIT

to. ReasDn and tru th. Jus t as it sees fai th in general to. be a tiss ue
Dfsuperstitions, prejudices, and errDrs, so. it further sees the CDnsciDusness of this cDntent Drganized into. a realm Df error in
which false insight, CDmmon to. the mass DfpeDple, is immediate,
naIve, and unreflective; but also. it has within it the moment
Df reflectiDn-intD-self, or Df self-cDnsciousness, separated frDm
its na"ivety, in the shape Df an insight which remains independently in the backgrDund, and an evil intentiDn by which the
general mass Df the peDple is befDDled. The masses are the victims Df the deception Df a priesthood which, in its enviDus cDncei t,
hDlds itself to. be the sDle pDssessDr of insight and pursues its
Dther selfish ends as welL At the same time it conspires with
despotism which, as the synthetic, nDn-notiDnal unity Df the real
and this ideal realm-a curiDusly inconsistent entity-stands
abDve the bad insight Df the multitude and the bad intentions
Df the priests, and yet unites both within itself. From the stupidity and cDnfusiDn of the people brough t abDut by the trickery
Df priestcraft, despDtism, which despises both, draws fDr itseif
the advantage Df undisturbed domination and the fulfilment
ofits desires and caprices, but is itself at the same time this same
dullness of insight, the same superstition and errDr.
543. The Enlightenment does nDt attack these three aspects
Dfthe enemy without making adistinctiDn. For since its essence
is pure insight, what is universal in and fDr itself, its true relatiDn
to. the other extreme is that in which it concerns itself with the
common and identical element in both. The aspect of individuality,
iSDlating itselffrDm the g.eneral naive consciDusness, is-its antithesis which it cannot directly affect. The will of the deceiving
priesthoDd and of the Dppressive despot is, therefore} nDt
directly the Dbject of its activity; its object is the insight devoid
Df will which has no. separable individuality of its own, the
Notion of rational self-consciDusness which has its existence in
the general mass but is nDt yet present there qua NotiDn. Pure
insigh t, however, in delivering this honest insight and its essenti ..
ally naive nature from prejudices and errors, wrests from the
hands of the bad intention the reality and power of its deceit,
for whose realm the naOive consciousness of the general mass Df
the people provides its basis and material-i.e. the heing-forself[ oftha t realm] has its substance in the simple, na'ive consciDusness as such.
-

CULTURE

33 1

544. The relation of pure insight to the na'ive consciousness
of absolute Being now has a twofold aspect. On the one hand,
pure insight is itself the same as that consciousness. On the other
hand, this na'ive consciousness gives complete liberty to absolute
Being, as well as to its parts, in the simple element of its thought,
and allows them to subsist there and to be valid only as its
implicit being, and hence to be objectively valid; but in this
implicit being it renounces its own being-for~self. In so far as,
according to the first aspect, this faith is for pure insight in itself
pure self-consciousness and has only to become this explicitly
for itself, pure insight-has, in this Notion of self-consciousness,
the element in which, instead of false insight, it realizes itself.
545. Since from this aspect both are essentially the same and
the relation of pure insight takes place through and in the same
element, the communication between them is direct and their
giving and receiving is an unimpeded flow of each into the
other. Whatever wedges of any sort may be driven into consciousness, it is in itselfthis simplicity in which everything is dissolved, forgotten, and unbiased, and which therefore is absolutely receptive to the Notion. It is on this account that the
communication of pure insight is comparable to a silent expansion or to the dijJusion, say, of a perfume in the unresisting atmosphere. It is a penetrating infection which does not make itself
noticeable beforehand as something opposed to the indifferent
elementinto which it insinuates itself, and therefore cannot be
warded off. Only when the infection has become widespread
is that consciousness, which unheedingly yielded to its influence, aware o/it. For though the nature of what consciousness
received into itself was simple and homogeneous with it, yet
it was also the simplicity of an introreflected negativity which
subsequently also develops, in keeping with its nature, into
something opposed to it and thereby reminds consciousness of
its previous state. This simplicity is the Notion, which is the
simple knowing that knows itself and also its opposite, but
knows this opposite to be reduced to a moment within it. Consequently, when consciousness does become aware of pure insight, the latter is already widespread; the struggle against it
betrays the fact that infection has occurred. The struggle is too
late, and every remedy adopted only aggravates the disease,
for it has laid hold of the marrow of spiritual life, viz. the Notion

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

33 2

of consciousness, or the pure essence itself of consciousness.
Therefore, too, there is no power in consciousness which could
overcome the disease. Because this is present in the essence itself,
its manifestations, while still isolated, can be suppressed and
the superficial symptoms smothered. This is greatly to its ad~
vantage, for it does not now squander its power or show itself
unworthy of its real nature, which is the case when it breaks
out in symptoms and single eruptions antagonistic to the con ..
ten t of fai th and to its connection with the reality of the world
outside of it. Rather, being now an invisible and imperceptible
Spirit, it infiltrates the noble parts through and through and
soon has taken complete possession of all the vitals and members
of the unconscious idol; then 'one fine morning it gives its com~
rade a shove witH the elbow, and bang! crash! the idol lies on
the floor'.1 On 'one fine morning' whose noon is bloodless if
the infection has penetrated to every organ of spiritual life.
Memory alone then still preserves the dead form of the Spirit's
previous shape as a vanished history, vanished one knows not
how. And the new serpent of wisdom raised on high for adoration has in this way painlessly cast merely a withered skin.
546. But this silent,ceaseless weaving of the Spirit in the
simple inwardness of its substance, Spirit concealing its action
from itself, is only one side of the realization of pure insight.
Its diffusion consists not merely in the fact that like goes
together with like, nor is its actualization merely an expansion
in which there is no antithesis. On the contrary, the action of
the negative essence is no less essentially a developed, self-differenting movement which, being a conscious act, must give
its moments a definite manifest existence and must appear on
the scene as a sheer uproar and a violent struggle with its anti.
thesis.
547. W e have therefore to see how pure insight and intention
behaves in its nega#ve attitude to that 'other' which it finds con~
fron ting it. Pure insigh t and in ten tion which takes up a nega tive
attitude can only be-since its Notion is all essentiality and
there is nothing outside of it~the negative of itself. As insight,
therefore, it becomes the negative of pure insight, becomes untruth and unreason, and, as intention, it becomes the negative
of pure intention, becomes a lie and insincerity of purpose.
1 Diderot's

Nlphew of Rameau.

CULTURE

333

548. It entangles itself in this contradiction through engaging in dispute, and imagines that what it is attacking is 'Something other than itself. I t only imagines this, for its essence as
absolute negativity implies that it contains that otherness
within itself. The absolute Notion is the category; in that
Notion, knowing and the object known are the same. Consequently, what pure insight pronounces to be its other, what
it asserts to be an error or a lie, can be nothing else but its own
self; it can condemn only what it is itself. What is not rational
has no truth, or, what is not grasped conceptually, 'is not. When,
therefore, Reason speaks of something other than itself, it speaks
in fact only of itself; so doing, it does not go outside of itself.
This struggle with its antithesis, therefore, also has the significance of being the actualization of insight. For this consists pre
cisely in the process of developing the moments and taking them
back into itself. One part of this process is···the differentiation
in which intellectual insight confronts its own self as object; so
long as it persists in this relationship it is alienated from itself.
As pure insight itisdevoid dfaB content; the process of its realiza~
don consists in its making'itselJ i ts con ten t; for nothing else can
become its content because it is the seW· conscious ness of the
category. But since in confronting the content, pure insight at
first knows itonlyas a content and not yet as its own self, it does
not recognize itselfin it. Complete insight is therefore attained
when the content, which to begin with was objective to it, is
recognized as its own. Its result~ however, will thus be neither
the re .. establishment of the errors it struggles against, nor
merely its original Notion, but an insight which recognizes the
absolute negation of itself to be its own actual existence, to be
its own se1f,or an insight whose Notion recognizes its own self.
This nature of the struggle of the Enlightenment with errors,
that offighting itselfin them, and ofcondemning in them what
it itself asserts, is explicitfor us, or what En1ightenmen~ and its
struggle is in itself. It is the first aspect of this struggle, however,
the defilement of Enlightenment through the adoption by its
self-identical purity of a negative attitude, that is an object for
faith, which therefore comes to know it as falsehood, unreason,
and as ill-intentioned, just as Enlightenment regards,faith as
error and prejudice. As regards its content, it is in the first instance an empty insight whose content appears to it to be somem

334

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

thing other than itself; conseq uently, itjindsit given in the shape
of a content which is not yet its own, as something that exists
quite independently of it, finds it given in faith.
549. The way, therefore, in which Enlightenment appre~
hends its object in the first instance and generally, is that it takes
it as pure insight, and, not recognizing itself therein, decla,res it
to be error. In insight as such, consciousness apprehends an
object in such a way that it becomes the essence of consciousness, or becomes an object which consciousness permeates, in
which consciousness preserves itself, abides with itself, and
remains present to itself, and since it is thus the movement of
the object, brings it into existence. It is just this that Enlighten~
ment rightly declares faith to be, when it says that what is
for faith the absolute Being, is a Being of it1i own consciousness,
is its own thought, something that is a creation of consciousness
itself. Thus what Enlightenment declares to be an error and
a fiction is the very same thing as Enlightenment itself is.
Enlightenment that wants to teach faith the new wisdom does
not teU it anything new; for its object is also for it just this,
viz. a pure e$s.ence of its own cOQsciqusness, so that this consciousness does not take itself to be lost and negated in tha:t
object, but rather puts its trust in it., i.e. it finds itself as this
particular consciousness, or as self~consciousness, precisely in the
object. Whomsoever I t:rust., his certainty oj himself i1i for me the
certainty oj myself; I recognize in him my own being..for-self,
know that he acknowledges it and tha"t it is for him purpose
and essence. Trust, however, is faith, because the consciousness
of the believer is directly rel{lted to its object and is thus also in~
tuitively aware that it is one with it and in it. Further, since
what is object (or me is that in which I recognize myself, I am
for myselfat the same time in that oQject in the form of another
self-consciousness, i.e. one which has become in that object
aHenated from its particular individuality, viz. from its natural
and contingent existence, but which partly remains therein se]f~
consciousness, partly, in that object, IS an essential consciousness
just as pure insight is. The Notion of pure insight implies not
merely that consciousness recognizes itself in the object of its
insight and is immediately present in it without first leaving the
element of though t and returning into itself; it also implies that
consciousness is aware of itself as being also the mediating move-

CULTURE

335

ment, aware of itself as being the activity of producing the
object. This unity of itself as unity of self and object is thereby
explicit for it in thought. Faith, too, is just this consciousness.
a bedience and action form a necessary momen t, through
which the certainty that absolute Being is comes about. This
action of faith does not indeed make it appear as if absolute
Being itself is produced by. it. But the absolute Being of faith
is essentially not the abstract essence that would exist beyond
the consciousness of the believer; on the contrary, it is the Spirit
of the [religious] community, the unity of the abs tract essence
and self-consciousness. That it be the Spirit of the community,
this requires as a necessary moment the action of the community. It is this Spirit, only by being produced by consciousness;
or rather, it does not exist as the Spirit of the community without
having'been produced by consciousness. For essential as is the
producing of it, this is equally essentially not the sole ground
of absolute Being, but only a moment. Absolute Being is at the
same time in and for itself.
550. On the other side, the Notion of pure insight is something other to itself than its own object; for it is just this negative
determination thatconstitutes the object. Thus, from the other
side, it also declares the essence of faith to be somethirig alien
to consciousness, to be not ,its essence but a changeling foisted
on it. But here Enlightenment is foolish; faith regards it as not
knowing what it is saying, and as not understanding the real
facts when it talksahout priestly deception and deluding the
people. It talks aboutthisasifbysome hocus-pocus of conjuring
priests consciousness had been palmed off with something absolutely alien and'olher' to it in place of its own essence; and at
the same time it says that this is an essence of consciousness,
that consciousness believes in it, puts its trust in it, and seeks to
make it favourably disposed towards itself, i.e. consciousness
beholds in it its pure essence just as much as its own single and
universal individuality, and through this action produces this
unity of itself with its essence. Thus what it asserts to be alien
to consciousness, it directly declares to be the inmost nature of
consciousness itself. How then can it possibly talk about deception
and delusion? Since, in the same voice, it asserts the very"opposite of what it maintains regarding faith, it really reveals itself
to faith as the conscious lie. How are delusion and deception

33 6

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

to take place where consciousness in its truth has directly the
certainty of itself, where in its object it possesses its own self, since
it just as much finds as produces itself in it? The distinction
no longer exists even in words. If the general question has been
propounded, whether it is permissible fa delude a people} the
answer would in fact have to be that the question is pointless,
because it is impossible to deceive a people in this matter. Brass
instead of gold, counterfeit instead of genuine money,"may well
be passed off in isolated cases; many may be persuaded to
believe that a battle lost was a battle won, and other lies about
things of sense and isolated happenings may be made credible
for a time; but in the knowledge of that essential being in which
consciousness has the immediate certainty of itself, the idea of
delusion is quite out of the question.
551. Let us see further how faith experieuGes the Enlighten
ment in the diJIerent moments of its own consciousness, to
which the view mentioned above referred to only generally.
These moments are: pure thought or, as object, absolute Being
in and for itself; then its relation~asa knQwing~toabsolute
Being, the grou:nd oj its belief;, and las tly, its relation to absolute
Being ip its acts) or its worship gtnd scrl/i~~. IQst as pure insight
hasJajled to re.cognize itSelf andha~denied itselfin beliefgenerally, so too in these moments.it wiJI behave in an eq ually perverse manner.
552. Pyre insight adopts a negative attitude to the gtbsolute
, Being of the believing consciousn~ss. This Being is pure thought,
and pJ-lre thought posited withi:n.itselfas an object Qr ~s essence.;
in the believing consciousne&§, this intrinsic being of thou,gh t
acquires atthesame time for cons.ciousness that isfor itself, the
form,--but only the empty form~f objectivity; it has the
character of something presented to consciousness. Topurejn~
sight, however, since it is pure consciQusness from the side of
the selftha.t isfor itself, the 'other' appears as something negative
of self-consciousness. This could still be taken either as the pure
intrinsic being of thought, or also as the being of sense-certainty,. But
since it is at the same time for the self, and this self, qua self
that has an object, is an actual consciousness, the objectproper
as such is for pure insigh t an ordinary Thing ofsense.. certainty
that merely is. This its obj~ct is manifest to itin the picture~thought
M

1

The subject of a prize essay proposed by Frederick the Great in 1778.

CULTURE

337

of faith. It condemns this picture-thought, and in it its own
object. But in apprehending the object of faith as insight's own
object, it already does faith a wrong. For it is saying that the
absolute Being offaith is a piece of stone, a block or wood, which
has eyes and sees not, or again, a piece of dough which, having
come from the field is transformed by man and returned to
earth again; or in whatever other ways faith anthropomorphizes absolute Being, making it into an object that it can
represen t to itself.
553. Enlightenment, which professes to be pure, here converts what is for Spirit eternal life and Holy Spirit into an
actual, perishable thing, and defiles it with sense-certainty's view
of it, a viewpoint which is essentially trivial and definitely
absent from faith in its worship, so that Enlightenment is completely in the wrong when it imputes this view to faith. What
faith reveres, it certainly does not regard as stone or wood or
dough, nor any other kind of temporal, sensuous thing. If
Enlightenment has a mind to say that, all the same, its object
is also this, or even ,that it ,is essentially and in truth this, then
firs tly, fai th is eq ually well aware of that' also' which, however,
lies ou tside of its worship; secondly, however, faith does not
regard such things as stones, etc. as possessing intrinsic being;
on the contrary, what has jnt'rinsic being for faith is solely the
e~sential being of pure though t.
554. The second moment is the relation offaith to this absolute Being as a consciousness that knows it. For faith, asa think ..
ing, pure consciousness, this Being is immediately present; but
pure consciousness isju~t as much a mediated relation of certainty
to truth, a relation w hieh constitutes th~ ground of faith.F Df
Enlightenment, this ground becomes equally a fortuitous knowledgi()/fortuitous events. But the ground of knowledge is the conscious universal, and in its truth is absolute Spirit which, in
abstract pure consciousness, or in thought as such, is merely
a bsoluteBeing, but, qua self-consciousness, is knowledge of itself.
Pure insight characterizes this conscious universal, the simple,
selfoknowing Spirit,eq ually as a negative of self-consciousness. It
is true that pure insight is itself pure mediated, i.e. self-mediated
thought, is a pure knowing; but since it is a pure insight, a pure
knowing, that does not as yet know itself, Le. is not aware that
it is this pure, mediating movement, the mediation seems to

33 B

c,

(BB,) SPIRIT

insight, as does everything that is itselfinsight, to be an 'other'.
In its realization, therefore, it develops this moment which is
essential to it; but this moment seems to it to belong to faith
and to have the character ofsomething external to pure insight,
to be a fortuitous knowledge of narratives of real events, real
in the ordinary sense of the word. Here, therefore, it falsely
charges religious beliefwith basing its certainty on some particular historical evidences which, considered as historical evidences,
would certainly not guarantee the degree of certainty about
their conten't which is given by newspaper accounts of any
happening-further, that its certainty rests on the accidental
preservalionofthese evidences; on the one hand, the preservation
by means of paper, and on the -other hand, by the skill and
honestyoftheir transference from one piece of paper to another,
and lastly, on the correct interpretation of the meaning of dead
words and letters. In fact, however, it does not occur to faith
to fasten its certainty to such evidences and such fortuitous circumstances. Faith, in its certainty, is an unsophisticated rela...
tionship to its absolute object, a pure knowing of it which does
not mix up letters, paper, and copyists in its consciousness of
absolute Being, and does not bring itself into relation with it
by means ofthings ofthat kind. On the contrary, thisconsclousness is the self-mediating ground of its knowledge; it is Spirit
itself which bears witness to itself, both in the inwardness of the
individual consciousness and through the universal presence in
everyone of faith in it. If faith wants to appeal to historical
evidences in order to get that kind of foundation, or at least
confirmation, of its content that Enlightenment talks about,
and seriously thinks and acts as if that were a matter of im..
portance, then it has already let itself be corrupted by the
Enlightenment; and its efforts to establish and consolidate
itself in such a way -are merely evidence it gives of its corruption by the Enlightenment.
555. There still remains the third side, the reLa#onto absolute
Being of consciousness as action. This action is the setting",aside of
the particularity of the individual, or of the natural mode of
its being..for-self, whence proceeds its certainty of being pure
self-consciousness, of being, in accordance with its action, i.e.
as an independent inpividual, one with absolute Being. Since, in
action, purposiveness and End are distinguished, and pure insight

CULTURE

339

in relation to this action equally adopts a negative attitude and,
as in the other moments, denies its own self, it must, as regards
purposiveness, exhibit itself as lacking in in telligence, since insigh t
united with intention, i.e. the harmony of End and Means,
appears to it as an 'other', or rather as the opposite of insight;
as regards the Enn itself, however, it has to make badness,
enjoyment, and possession its End and so prove itself to be the
impurest kind of intention, since pure intention, qua 'other', is
equally impure intention.
556. Accordingly, we see that as regards purposz'veness,
Enlightenment finds it foolish when the believer gives himself
the superior consciousness of not being in bondage to natural
enjoyment and pleasure by actually denying himself natural
enjoyment and pleasure, and demonstrating by his actions that his
contempt for them is no lie but is genuine. Similarly, Enlighten~
ment finds it foolish that the individual absolves itself of its
quality of being absolutely individual, excluding all others and
of possessing property ofits own, by itself giving up its property;
for thereby it shows in truth that it is not in earnest with this
isolation of itself, hut is raised above the natural necessity of
isolating itself, and. in this ~bsolute isolation of being-for~self
denying that others are the same as itself. Pure insight finds both
to be of no purpose as well as wrong: the purpose of showing
oneself to be free of pleasure and possession is not served by
denying oneself pleasure and giving away a possession; in the
opposite case, therefore, it will declare the man a fool who, in
order to eat, has recourse to actually eating. Insight also finds
it wrong to deny oneself a meal and to give away butter and
eggs, not fo.r money, no.r money for butter and eggs, but simply
to give them away without receiving anything in return; it de..
dares a meal or the possession of things of that sort to he an
End in itself, and hence in fact declares itself to be a very impure
intention) which treats such enjoyment and possession assome·
thing wholly essential. Again, it also affirms as a pure intention
the necessity of rising above natural existence, above acquisitiveness about the means of existence; only it finds it foolish
and wrong that this elevation should be demonstrated by deeds;
in other words, this pure insight is in truth a deception, which
feigns and demands an inner elevation, but declares that it is
superfluous, foolish, and even wrong to be in earnest about it,

C. (RB.) SPIRIT

to put this elevation into actual practice and demonstrate z'ts truth.
Pure insight thus denies itselfboth as pure insight-for it denies
directly purposive action-and as pure intention-for it denies
the intention of proving itself freed from the Ends of a separate
individual existence.
557. It is thus that Enlightenment lets itself be understood
by faith. It presents itselfin this bad light because, just by being
in relation to an 'other') it gives itselfa negative reality, or exhibits
itselfas the opposi te ofi tself; but pure insigh t and inten tion m us t
enter into this relationship, for it is their realization. This at
first appeared as a negative reality. Perhaps its Positive reality
is better constituted. Let us see how things stand with this. If
all prejudice and superstition have been banished, the question
arises, What next? What is the truth Enlightenment has propagated
in their stead? It has already declared that this positive content
is in its extirpation of error, for that alienation of itself is Just
as much its positive reality. In its approach to what, for faith,
is absol uteS piri t, i tin terprets an y determinateness i tdiscovers there
as wood, stone,etc., as particular, realthings. Since in this way
it grasps in general:every determinateness, i.e. all content and
filling, as somethingfinite, asa human entity and (mere] idea, absolute Being becomes for it a vacuum to which no determinations,
no predicates, can be attributed. Theattrihution of predicates
to such a vacuum would be in itselfrepl'ehensible; and it is just
in such a union that the monstrosities ofsuperstition have been
produced. Reason,pure insight,is certainly not empty itself, since
the negative of its elf isJor it, and is its content; on the contrary,
it is rich, but rich only in particularity and limitations. To let
nothing of that sort appertain to absolute Being or be attributed
to it, this is the prudent behaviour of Reason, of pure insight,
which knows how to put itselfand its finite riches in their proper
place, and how to deal with the Absolute in a worthy manner.
558. In contrast to this empty Being there stands, as the
second moment of the positive truth of Enlightenment, the
singleness in general ofconsciousness and of all being, a singleness
excluded from absolu te Being and in the form of absolute heingin-and..Jor.. itselj. Consciousness, which in its very first reality is
sense-certainty and mere 'meaning', returns here to this from
the whole course of its experience and is again a knowledge of
what is purely negative of itself, or of things oj sense, i.e. of things

CULTURE

34 1

which immediately and indifferently confront its being-Jor-selj.
Here, however, it is not an immediate, natural consciousness; on
the contrary, it has become such for itself. Whereas at first it was
at the mercy of every sort of entanglement into which it was
plunged by its unfolding, and now has been led back by pure
insight to its first shape, it has experienced that shape as result.
Being based on the nothingness of all the other shapes of con
sciousness, and hence of everything beyond sense-certainty, this
sense-certainty is no longer mere 'meaning', but rather absolute
truth. This nothingness of everything that lies beyond sensecertainty is no doubt merely a negative proof of this truth; but
it is not susceptible of any other. For the positive truth of sense
certainty is in its own self the immediate being~for-self of the
Notion itself qua object, and that too in the form of othernessthe positive truth that ,every consciousness is absolutely certain
that it is, and that there are other real things outside of it, and
that in its natural being it, like these things, is in and for itself
or absolute.
559. Lastly, the third moment of the truth of Enlightenment is
the relation of the individual being to absolute Being, is the
relation between the first two moments. Insight, qua pure insight of what is identical or unrestricted, also goes beyond what is
not identical, viz. beyond finite reality, or beyond itself,as mere
otherness. For the beyond of this otherness it has the vmd to
which, therefore, it relates the sensuous reality. In the determination of this relation, both of the sides do not enter. as content;
for one of them is the void, and it is only through the other,
the sensuo us reality, that a con ten t is present. But the form of
the relation, to the determination of which the side of the inM
itselfcon tri b u tes) can be a matter ofchoice; for the form is somcM
thing intrinsically negative, and therefore self.. opposed: being as
well as nothing, the in-self as well as its opposite; or, what is the
same thing, the relation of the actual world to the in ai/self qua
a beyond, is as much a negating as a positing of that actual world.
Finite reality can therefore, properly speaking, be taken just
as one needs. The sensuous is therefore now related positively
to the Absolute as to the in-itself, and sensuous reality is itself
an intrinsic being; the Absolute makes it, fosters and cherishes
it. Then, again, it is related to the Absolute as an opposite, as
to its own non-being; in this relationship it is not anything in
m

m

34 2

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

itself, but exists only for an 'other'. Whereas in the preceding
shape of consciousness, the Notions of the antithesis were determined as Good and Bad, in the case of pure insight, on the other
hand, they become the purer abstractions of being-in-itself and
being-for-an 0 ther.
560. Both ways of viewing the positive and the negative relations of the finite to the in-itself are, however, in fact equally
necessary, and everything is thus as much something in itself
as it i8for an 'other:!; in other words, everything is useful. Every..
thing is at the mercy of everything else, now lets itself be used
by others and i8ior them, and now, so to speak, stands again
on its hind legs, is stand-offish towards the other, is for itself,
and uses the other in its turn. From this, we see what is the
essence and what is the place of man regarded as a Thing that
is conscious of this relation. As he immediately is, as a natural
consciousness per se, man is good, as .an individual he is absolute
and all else exists for him; and moreover, since the moments
have for him, qua self-conscious animal, the significance of universality,e.verything exists for his pleasure and delight and, as
one who has come from the hand of God, he walks the earth
as in a garden planted for him. He must also have plucked the
fruit ofthe tree ofthe knowledge of Good and Evil. He possesses
in this an advantage which distinguishes him fromaH other
creatures, for it happens that his intrinsically good nature is
also so constituted that an excess of pleasure does it harm, or
rather his individuality has also its beyond within it, can go
beyond itselfand destroy itself. To counter this, Reason is for
him a useful instrument for keeping this excess within bounds,
or rather for preserving himself when he oversteps his limit; for
this is the power of consciousness. Enjoyment on the part of
the conscious, intrinsically universal being, must not itself be
something determinate as regards variety and duration, but
universal. 'Measure' or proportion has therefore the function
of preventing pleasure in its variety and duration from being
cut short; i.e. the function of , measure' is immoderation. Just
as everything is useful to man, so man is useful too, and his
vocation is to make himselfa member of the group, of use for
the common good and serviceable to all. The extent to which
he looks .after his own interests must also be matched by the
extent to which he serves others, and so far as he serves others,

CULTURE

3~

so far is he taking care Df himself: one hand washes the Dther.
But wherever he finds himself, there he is in his right place;
he makes use Df Dthers and is himself made use Df.
56 I. Different things are useful to Dne another in different
ways; but all things are mutually serviceable through their own
nature, viz. through being related to the Absolute in two ways,
the one positive, whereby they exist entirely on their own
account, the other negative, whereby they exist for others. The
relation to absolute Being, or religion, is therefore of all useful
things the supremely useful; for it is pure utility itself~ it is this
enduring being of all things, or their being. . in-and-Jor-themselves,
and it is their downfall, or their being-Jor-another.
562. To faith, of course, this positive outcOffl.e of Enlightenment is as much an abomination as its negative attitude to ..
wards belief. This [enlightened] insight into absDlute Being
which sees nothing in it but just absolute Being, the J£tre supreme,
or the void~this intention to regard everything in its immediate
existence as having.intrinsic being or as good, and finally, to
regard the relation of the individual conscious being to absolute
Being, religion, as exhaustively expressed in the Notion of
u,tility-all this is for faith utterly detestable. This wisdom, peculiar to. Enligh tenment, at the same time necessarily seems to.
faith to be undiluted platitude, and the confession of platitude;
because it consists of knowing nDthing of absolute Being Df,
what amounts to the same thing, in knDwing this quite flat truism about it, just that it is only absolute Being; and, on the other
hand, in knowing only what is finite and, morepver, knowing
it as truth, and thinking that this know ledge of the finite as true
is . . the highes t knowledge attainable.
563. Faith has the divine right, the right of absolute selfidentity or of pure thought, as against Enlightenment, and
receives at its hands nothing but wrDng; for Enlightenment distorts all the moments Df faith, changing them into something
different from what they are in it. But Enlightenment has only
a human right as against faith and for the support of its
own truth; for the wrong it commits is the right to be non~identi­
cal, and consists in perverting and altering, a right which
helongs to the nature of self-consciousness as against simple essential being or thought. But since the right of Enlightenment is the
right of self-consciousness, it will not only also retain its own

344

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

right, so that two equal rights of Spirit could be left confronting
each other, neither being capable of satisfying the other: it will
maintain its absolute right because self-consciousness is the
negativity of the Notion, a negativity which is active not only
on its own account, but which also takes within its grasp its
opposite. And because faith itself is a consciousness it will not
be able to deny Enlightenment its right.
564. For Enlightenment does not employ principles peculiar
to itself in its attack on faith, but pdnciples which are implicit
in faith itself. Enlightenment merely presents faith with its own
thoughts which faith unconsciously lets fall apart, but which
Enlightenment brings tagether; it merely reminds faith when
ane afits own modes is present to. it, af the athers which it also.
has, but which it always forgets when the other one is present.
Enlightenment shows itself to faith to be pure insight by the
fact that, in a specific moment, it sees the whole, brings forward the other moment which is opposed to it, and, canverting
one into the other, brings to notice the negative essence af both
thaughts, the Notian. To faith, it seems to be a perversion and
a lie because it points out the otherness afits moments; in doing
so., it seems directly to make something else out of them than
they arein theirseparateness;but this 'other' is equally essential
and, in truth, is present in the believing consciousness itself, only
this does not thinkabout it, but puts it away somewhere. Consequently, it is neither alien to faith, nor can faith disavaw it.
565. Enlightenment itself, however, which reminds faith of
the appasite a~pect of its separated moments, is just as little en1ightened abaut itself. It has a purely negative attitude to faith
so far as it excludes its own content from its purity and takes
that content to be the negative ofitself. It therefore neither recognizes itself in this negative, in the content af faith, nar for this
reasan does it bring the two thaughts together, the one which
it puts forward itself, and the one to which it appases the first.
Since it does not recognize that what it candemns in faith is
directly its own thought, it is itself in the antithesis of the twa
maments, anly one of which-viz. in every case the one oppased
tofaith-or-it acknawledges, but separates the ather fram the first,
just as faith does. Consequently, Enlightenment do.es not produce the unity af both as their unity, i.e. the Notion; but the
Nation comes into being for it af its own accard, in other wards~

CULTURE

345

Enlightenmentfinds the Notion there merely as something given.
For, in itself, the realization of pure in8igh t is just this" that in ~
sight, whose essence is the Notion, at first becomes for itself an
absolute 'other' and repudiates itself--for the antithesis of the
Notion is an absolute antithesis-and then out of this otherness
it comes to itself, or to its Notion. But Enlightenment is onlythis movement, it is the still unconscious activity of the pure
Notion, an activity which, though it does arrive at its object,
takes it to be an other, and, too, does not know the nature of the
Notion, viz. that it is the undifferentiated which absolutely
sunders itself. As against faith, then, insight is the might of the
Notion in so far as it is the movement and the relating of the
moments lying asunder in its consciousness, a relating in which
their contradiction comes to light. Herein lies the absolute right
of the authority which insight exercises over faith; but the reality
on which it exercises this authority lies just in the fact that the
believing consciousness is itself the Notion, and therefore itself
acknowledges the opposite [aspect] which insight puts before
it. Insight therefore/retains its right as against faith because it
makes valid in (aith.what is necessary to faith itself and what
faith possess.es in itself.
566. At first, Enlightenment affirms this moment of the
Notion, that it is an act of consciousness; opposing faith, it maintains that the absolute Being offaith is a Being of the believer's
own consciousness qua a self, or thatthis absolute Being is a
product of consciousness. To faith, its absolute Being, while it
is possessed ofintrinsic being for the believer, is also at the same
time not like an alien thing which is just found in him, no one
knowing how and whence it came. On the contrary, the faith
of the believer consistsjust in hisfinding himse1fas this particular
personal consclousnessin the absolute Being, and his obedience
and service consist in producing; through his own activity, that
Being as his own absolute Being. Enlightenment, strictly speaking, only reminds faith of this, if faith rounclly asserts that the
in-itseIJofabsolute Being is beyond the activity ofconsciousness.
But while Enlightenment, it is true, corrects the one-sidedness
offaith by bringing to its notice the opposite moment of apt ion
in contrast to being-and it is being which faith is alone thinking
Ofhere-and yetdoes not itself bring its own thoughts together,
it isolates the pure moment of action and asserts that the in-itself

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of faith is only a product of consciousness. This action, taken in
isolation .and opposed to the in-itself, is, however, a contingent
action and, qua an activity of picture~thinking, is a creating of
fictions-picture~thoughts which possess no intrinsic being; and
this is how Enlightenment regards the content of faith. But,
conversely, pure insight equally says the reverse. In maintaining the moment of utherness which the Notion has within it, it
pronounces [absolute] Being to be for faith something .which
in no way concerns consciousness, lies beyond it, is alien to it
and unknown. The case is similar with faith. On the one hand,
it puts its trust in absolute Being, and in doing so obtains the
certainty of itself; on the other hand, for faith, absolute Being
is unsearchable in all its ways and in its Being unattainable.
567. Further, Enlightenmentmaintains against the believer
a right which the latter himself concedes" when Enlightenment
regards the object of the believer's veneration as stone and
wood, or else as something fini te and an thropomorphic. For
since this consciousness is divided within itself, having a beyond
of the real world anda world that is altogether this side of the
world beyond, thereis, as a matter of fact, also ,present in it this
view of the thing of sense according to which it counts as a being
that is in (:lnd for itself; hut faith does not bring together these
two thoughts of absolute Being, which is for it at one time pure
essence and at another time an ordinary thing of sense. Even its
pure consciousness is affected by the latter view; for the dif.
ferences of the, supers ensible world, because this is without the
Notion, are a series of independent shapes and their movement
is a happening, i.e. they exist only in picture~thinking,and have
within them the marks of sensuous existence. Enlightenment,
on its side, equally isolates the actual world as an entity forsaken by Spirit, isolates deteuninateness as unmoved finitude, as if it were not even a moment in the spiritual movement
of essential being, not nothing, but also not something that
absolutely is, but something that is evanescent.
568. I t is clear that the same is the case with the ground of
knowledge. Faith itself acknowledges a contingent knowledge;
for i~ has a relationship to contingent things, and absolute Being
itself exists for faith in the form of a pictorial representation
of a common reality, Consequently, the believing consciousness, too, is a certainty which does not possess the truth within

CULTURE

347

itself, and it confesses itself to be such an unessential consciousness, to be of this world and separated from the Spirit that is
certain of itself and self-authenticated. But it forgets this
moment in its immediate spiritual knowledge of absolute Being.
Enlightenment, however, which reminds it of this, in its turn
thinks only of contingent being and forgets the other-thinks
only of the mediation which takes place through an alien third
term, not of the mediation in which the immediate is itself the
third term through which it mediates itself with the other, viz.
with its own self.
569- Finally, Enlightenment in its view of the action of faith
finds the rejection o£enjoyment and possessions wrong and purposeless. As to the rejection being wrong, Enlightenment is in
agreement with faith on this point; for faith itself acknowledges
tuis reality of possessing, holding on to, and enjoying, property.
In holding on to property its behaviour is all the more selfcentred and stubborn, and in its enjoyment it is all the more
crudely self-abandoned, since its religious 'act of giving up possessions and enjoyment falls on the far side of this reality and purchases freedom for itself on thatside. This service of sacrifice
of natural impulses and enjoyments has, in fact, owing to this·
a;.ltithesis, no truth. Retention occurs along with sacrifice; the
latter is merely a symbol which performs real sacrifice on only
a small portion, and is therefore in point of fact only a sacrifice
in imagination.
570. As regards purposiveness, Enlightenment finds it inept to
throwaway one possession in order to know and to prove that
one is liberated from all possessions, to deny oneself one
enjoyment in order to know and to prove that one is liberated
from all enjoyment. Faith itselfapprehends the absolute action
as a universal action; not only is the action of its absolute Being
as its object a universal action for faith, but the individual consciousness, too, has to show that it is liberated entirely and
generally from its sensual nature. But throwing away a single
possession, or renouncing a single enjoyment, is notthis universal action; and since in the action the purpose, which is a
universal purpose, and the performance, which is a single performance,would be bound to presen t themselves to consciousness as essentially incompatible, that action shows itself to he
one in which consciousness has no part, and thus this kind of

c,

(BB,) SPIRIT

action is seen to be really too na'ive to be an action at all. It
is too na'ive to fast, in order to prove that one is liberated from
. the pleasures of the table; too nalve to rid the body of another
pleasure, as Origen did, in order to show that that pleasure is
finished and done with. The action itself proves to be an external
and single operation; but desire is rooted inwardly and is a universal. Its pleasure disappears neither with the instrument nor
by abstention from particular pleasures.
571. But Enlightenment on its side here isolates the inward,
the unreal, as opposed to reality, just as it held fast to the externality of the Thing as opposed to the inwardness offaith in the
latter's contemplation and devotion. It places the essential factor in the intention, in the thought, and thereby saves itself the
trouble of actually accomplishing the liberation from natural
aims. On the contrary, this inwardness is itself the formal element which has its filling in the natural impulses, which are
justified simply by the fact that they are inward, that they
belong to universal being, to Nature.
5,72. Enlightenment, then, holds an irresistible authority
over faith because, in the believer~s own consciousness,are
found the very momen tsw hich Enligh ten men thas established
as valid. Examining the effect of this authority more closely,
its behaviour towards faith seems to rend asunder the beautiful
unity of trust and immediate certainty, to pollute its spiritual consciousness with mean thoughts of sensuous reality, to destroy the
soul which is composed and secure in its submission, by the vanity
of the Understanding and of self.-will and selfafulfilment. But
as a matter of fact, the result of the Enlightenment is rather
todD away with the thoughtless, or rather non-notional, separation
which is presen tin faith. The . . believing consciousness weighs
and measures bya twofold standard; it has two sorts of
eyes, two sorts of ears, speaks with two voices, has duplicated
all ideas without comparing the twofold meanings. In other
words, faith lives in two sorts of non-notional perceptions, the
one the perceptions of the slumbering consciousness which lives
purely in non-notional thoughts, the other those of the waking
consciousness which>1ives solely in the world of sense; and in
each of them it has its own separate housekeeping. The
enlightenment illuminates that heavenly world with ideas
beJongingto the world ofsense , and pointsout this finitude which

CULTURE

349

faith cannot deny, because it is self.. consciousness and hence is
the unity to which both kinds ofideas belong and in which they
do not fall apart; for they belong to the same indivisible unitary
self into which faith has passed.
573. As a result, faith has lost the content which filled its
element, and collapses into a state in which it moves listlessly
to and fro within itself. It has been expelled from its kingdom;
or, this kingdom has been ransacked, since the waking consciousness has monopolized every distinction and expansion of
it and has vindicated earth's ownership of every portion of
it and given them back to earth. Yet faith is not on that account
satisfied, for this illumination has everywhere brought to light
only single, separate entities, so that what speaks to Spirit is
only a reality without any substance, and a finitude forsaken
by Spirit. Since faith is without any content and it cannot
remain in this void, or since, in going beyond the finite which
is the sole content, it finds> only the void, it is a sheer yearning,
its truth an empty beyond, for which a fitting content can no
longer be found, for everything is bestowed elsewhere. Faith
has, in fact, become the same as Enlightenment, viz. the consciousness of the relation ofwhat is in itse1ffinite to an Absolute
without predicates, an Abso]ute unknown and unknowable;
but there is this difference, the latter is satisfied Enlightenment,
but faith is unsatisfied Enlightenment. However, we shaH see
whether Enlightenment pan remain satisfied; that yearning of
the troubled Spirit which mourns over the loss of its spiritual
world lurks in the background. Enlightenment itself bears
within it this blemish of an unsatisfied yearning: as pure object,
in its empty absolute Being; as action and movement, in going heyond
its individual self to an empty and unfulfilled beyond; as an
object with aeontent, in the lack of seljhood in the thing that is
'useful'. Enlightenment will rid itself of this blemish; a closer
examination of the positive result which is its truth will show
that in that result the blemish is in principle already removed.

b. The .truth oj Enlightenment
574. The listless movement of Spirit which no longer creates
a distinction within itself has thus entered into its own self
beyond consciousness, which, on the other hand, sees itself
clearly. The first moment of this clarity is determined in its

35 0

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

necessity and condition by the fact that pure insight, or insight
that is implicitly Notion, actualizes itself; it does so when it posits
otherness or determinateness within itself. In this way it is
negative pure insight, i.e. a negation of the Notion; this
negation is equally pure; and thus there has come into being
the pure Thing, the absolute Being, that has no further
determination whatever. Characterized more precisely, pure
insight, qua absolute Notion, is a distinguishing of differences
which are no longer differences, of abstractions or pure Notions
which are no longer self-supporting, but are supported and
distinguished only by the movementas a whole. This distinguishing
of what contains no difference consists simply in the fact that
the absolute Notion makes itself into its object and posits itself
as the essence over against that movement. This results in the
essence being without that side wherein abstractions or
differences are held apart, and therefore becomes pure thought in
the form of a pure Thing. This,. then, is just the listless,
uncollsciousmovement to and fro within itselfofSpiritto which
faith was reduced when it lost a content that contained a
difference; it is at the same time that movement of pure self~
consciousness for which the essence is supposed to he the
absolutely alien beyond. For because this pure se1fconsciousness moves about in pure Notions, in differences that
are not differences, it collapses in fact into the unconscious
movement to and fro of Spirit,!.e. into pure jeeling, or pure
thinghood. The self"alienated Notion-for the Notion here isstiH
standing at the stage of this alienation-does not, however,
recognize this identical essence of the two sides-the movement
of self-consciousness and of its absolute Being-does not
recognize their identical essence which is, in fact, their substance
and enduring being. Since the Notion is unconscious of this
unity, absolute Being has value for it only in the form of a
beyond standing over against it, while the consciousness making
these distinctiions and in this way having the in-itself outside
of it, is held to be a finite consciousness.
575. In regard to that absolute Being, Enlightenment is
caught up in the same internal conflict that it formerly
experienced in connection with faith, and it divides itself into
two parties. One party proves itself to be vic torious by breaking
up into two parties; for in so doing, it shows that it contains

CULTURE

35 1

within itself the principle it is attacking, and thus has rid itself
of the one~sidedness in which it previously appeared. The inter~
est which was divided between itself and the other party now
falls entirely within itself, and the other party is forgotten,
because that interest finds within itself the antithesis which
occupies its attention. At the same time, however, it has been
raised into the higher victorious element in which it exhibits
itself in a clarified form. So that the schism. that arises in one
of the pa.rties and seems to be a misfortune, demonstrates rather
that party's good fortune.
576. The pure essence itself has no difference in it; con~
sequently, the way in which it does obtain a difference is that
two such pure essences exhibit themselves for consciousness, or
there is a twofold consciousness of the essence. Pure absolute
Being is only in pure thought, or rather it is pure thought itself,
and therefore utterly beyond the finite, beyond self-consciousness,
and is only Being in a negative sense. But in this way, it is just
[mere] being, the negative of self-consciousness. As the negative
ofself.. consciousnessit is also related to it; it is an external being
which, related to self-consciousness within which differences
and determinationf411, receives within it the differences of
being tasted, seen, etc. ; and the relationship is that of sense-certaintya,nd perception.
577. Ifwestartfrom this sensuous being into which that nega~
tive beyond necessarily passes., but abstract from these specific
ways in which consciousness is related to it, then what remains
is pure m4tt~r as a listless, aimless movem~pt to and fro within
itself. In this conn,ection, it is important to bear in mind that
pu.re m4tier is merely w ha t is left over when weahstract from seeing,
feeling, tasting, etc., i.e. it is not matter thatis seen, tasted, felt,
etc.; what is seen, felt, tasted, is not matter, but colour, a stone,
a salt, etc. Matter is rather a pure ahstraction; and so what we
are presented with here is the pure essence oj thought, or pure
thought itself as the Absolute, which contains no differences,
is indeterminate and devoid of predicates.
578. One party of the Enlightenment calls absolute Being
that predicateless Absolute which exists in thought beyond the
actual consciousness which formed the starting-point; the
other calls it matter. If these were to he distinguished as Nature
and Spirit, or God, then the unconscious and aimless inner

35 2

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

movement to and fro would lack the wealth of developed life
which would make it Nature, and the self-differentiated COlla
sciousness which would make it Spirit or God. The two, as we
saw, are absolutely the same Notion; the difference lies not in
what they actually are, but simply and solely in the different
starting-points of the two developments, and in the fact that
each sticks to its own point in the movement of thought. If they
could disregard their own starting-points they would meet and
would recognize that what to the one is, so it pretends, an
abomination) and to the other, a folly, is the same thing. For
to the one, absolute Being is in its pure thinking, or is immediately for pure consciousness, is outside finite consciousness,
the negative beyond of it. If it would reflect, firstly, that the
simple immediacy of thought is nothing else but pure being, and
secondly, that what is negative for consciousness is at the same
time related to it, that in the negative judgement the (is'
(copula) holds together as well as separates the terms, it would
come to see that this beyond, characterized as something exist..
iug externally, stands in ·a relation to consciousness and is thus
the same as what is caned pure matter: the missing moment of
presence would be gained. The other Enlightenmentstarts from
sensuous being, then abstractsfrom the sensuous relationoftasting, seeing, etc., and makes that being into a pure in-itself, into
an ahsolute matte;f, into what is neither felt nor tasted. Thisheing
has in this way become something simple without predicates,
the essence of pure consciousness; it is the pure N otionas implicitly
existent, or pure thought within itself. This insight does not con ..
sciously take the reverse step from what is, what simply is, to what
is thought, which is the same as what simply is, does not take
the step from the pure positive to the pure negative; although,
after all, the positive is pure solely through negation, while the
pure negative, as pure, is in its own self seW·identical and just
for that reason positive. Or again, they have not arrived at the
Notion found in Descartes's metaphysics, that being and
thought are, in themselves, the same; they have not arrived at
the thought that being, pure being, is not something concretely
real but a pure abstraction, and conversely, pure thought, selfidentity or essence, partly is the-negative of self.. consciousness and
therefore being, partly, as immediately simpJe., is likewise nothing else but being; thought is thinghood, or thinghood is thought.

CULTURE

353

579. Essence, here, is split into two in such a way that, to
begin with, two different ways of considering it are involved.
In part, essence must contain difference within itself; in part,
just because of this, the two ways of considering it merge into
one; for the abstract moments of pure being and the negative,
by which they are distinguished, are then united in the object
so considered. The universal common to both is the abstraction
of a pure, inward Qsc:illation, or of pure self-thinking. This
simple rotatory motion must become more complex because it
is itself oOly motion by distinguishing its moments. This distinguishing of the moments leaves their unmoved [unity] behind
as the empty husk of pure being, which is no longer actual
thought, no longer has any life within it; for this process of differentiation is, qua difference, an the content. This process, however, which places itselfoutside of that unity, is an alternationan alternation which doesIlOt returnintoitselj, of heing.jor..,an-other ,
and of beingifor-s{}lf; it is reality in the way this is an object
for tbeactual_consciousness of pure, insight-U tHity.
5,80. Bad as Utility may look to faith or sentimentality, or
even to theabstractJhought that calls itself speculation) which
clings to the in-itselj,yeti tis in U tilitythat pure insight achieves
its reali~ationandhas itself for its object, an object which it now
no 10Qger repudiates and which, too, no longer has for it the
value of the void or the pure beyond. For pure insight is, as
we saw, the existent Notion itself,or pure self·identical personality distinguishing itselfwithinitselfinsuch a way that each
of the distinguished moments is itself pure Notion, i.e. is at the
same time not distinguished; pure insight is simple, pure selfconsciousness which isj01 itself as well as in itselfin an immediate
upity. Its being-in.,. itself is ,therefore not an enduring being, but
in its difference immediately ceases to be something; such a
being, however, that is immediately withoutsupport is not an
intrz'nsic being, but is.essentiaHy jor an other which is the power
that absorbs it. But this second moment which is opposed to
the first, to the heing-in~itselh equal1y vanishes immediately like
the first; or, as a being which is only jor an other, it is rather
the vllnishingitself, and there is posited the accomplished retwn
into itself, being..,jor-self This simple being-for-self, however, as
self-identity, is rather a [mere] being, or is thereby jor an other.
This nature of pure insight in the unfolding of its moments,

354

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

or insight qua object, is expressed in the Useful. What is useful,
is something with an enduring being in itself, or a Thing; this
being.. in-itselfis at the same time only a pure moment; hence
it is absolutely for an other, but equally is for an 'other' merely
what it is in itself; these opposed moments have returned into
the indivisible unity of being-for-self. While the Useful does
express the Notion of pure insight, it is not pure insight as such
but insight conceived by it in the form of object; it is merely the
restless alternation of those moments, of which one indeed is
itself the accomplished return into itself, but only as a beingfor-self, i.e. as an abstract moment appearing on one side over
against the others. The Useful itself is not a negative essence,
having in itself these moments in their antithesis and, at the
same time as undivided in one and the samerespecl, or as thought,
as they are qua pure insight; the moment of being-for-selfis certainly presept in the Useful, but not in such a way that it
overarches the other moments, the in-itselfand the being-for-an
other, in which case it would be the'selj.Pure ,insight has, therefore, inthe Useful its own Notion in its pure moments for object;
it,isthe awareness ofthis metaphysics, butnot,asyetthe comprehension ofit ; consciousness has not yetreached'theunity of Being
and Notion itself Since the Useful still has ,the form ofan object
for pure insight, it does have a world, one which, it is true,is
no longer in andfor itself, but yet a world which it distinguishes
from itself. Only, since the antitheses have emerged at the
summit of the Notion, the next stage win see them come in to
collision, and the Enlightenment will taste the fruits ofits deeds.
58 I. Looking at the objectobtained, in relation to this whole
sphere, we see that the actual world of culture was summed
up in the vanity of self-consdo us ness , into a being"'for~selfwhose
content is still that confused world ofculture and which is ~till
the single, individual Notion, not yet the explicitly universal
Notion. Butreturnedinto itself, that Notion is pure· insight-pure
consciousness as pure sel}; or nega tivity, just faith is pre cis el y
the same as pure thQught, or positivity. In that self, faith has the
moment that makes it complete; but perishing through being
thus completed, it is in pure insight that we now see the two
moments: as absolute Being, which is simply thought or the negative, and as matter, which has positive being. This completeness
still lacks that actual world of self-consciousness which belongs

as

CULTURE

355

to the vain consciousness-the world out of which thought raised
itself to itself. What is thus lacking is obtained in Utility in so
far as pure insight there acq uires positive objectivity; pure in~
sight is thereby an actual consciousness satisfied within itself.
This objectivity now constitutes its world; it has become the
truth of the entire preceding world, of the ideal, as well as of
the real, world. The first world of Spirit is the widespread "realm
of its self-dispersed existence and of the self~certainty of its individual forms,just as Nature disperses its life into infinitely various
forms without the genus of those forms having an actual existence. The second world contains the genus and is the realm of
intrinsic being or truth over against that certainty. The third
world; however, that of the Useful, is the truth which is equally
the certainty of itself. The realm of the truth of faith lacks the
principle of actuality, or the certainty of self as. this particular
individual. But the actuality or the certainty of self as this particular individual lacks intrinsic being. In the object of pure insight both worlds~re united. The Useful is the object in so far
as self-cQnsciousn~,ss penetrates it and has in it the certainty of its
individual self, its enjoyment (its being:for-self) ; self-consciousness
sees right into the object, and this insight contains the true
essence of the object (whichis to be something that is penetrated
[by consciousness], or to be jor an (ollter'). This insight is thus
itself a true knowing, and self-consciousness has equally directly
the universal certainty ofitself, its pure consciousness, in this relationship in which, therefore,ttuth as well as presence and actuality are united. The two worlds are reconciled and heaven is
transplanted to earth below.
III.

A:aSOL UTE FREEDOM AND TERROR

58~. Consciousness has found its Notion in Utility. But it
is partly still an object, and partly, for that very reason, still an
End to be attained, which consciousness does not find itself to
possess immediately. Utility is still a predicate of the object,
not itself a subject or the immediate anc;l sole actuality of the
object. It is the same thing that appeared before, when beingfor-selfhad not yet shown itse1fto be the substance of the other
moments, a demonstration which would have meant that the
Useful was directly nothing else but the self of consciousness and that this latter was thereby in possession of it, This

356

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

withdrawal from the form ofobjectivity of the Useful has, however, already taken place in principle and from this inner revolution there emerges the actual revolution of the actual world,
the new shape of consciousness, absolute freedom.
583. In fact, what we have here is no more than an empty
show of objectivity separating self-consciousness from posses ..
sion. For, partly, all, existence and validity of the specific
members of the organization of the actual world and the world
of faith have, in general, returned into this simple determination as into their ground and spiritual principle; partly, however, this simple determination no longer possesses anything of
its own, it is rather pure metaphysic, pure Notion, or a pure
knowing by self-consciousness. That is to say, of the being-inand-for-itself of the Useful qua object, consciousness recognizes
that its being-in-itselfis essentially a being-for-an-other; being-in ..
itself, as devoid of self, is in truth a passive self, or that which
is a self for another self. The object, however, exists for con .. _
sciousness in thisabstractform of pure being-in-itself, for consciousnessis pure insightwhose distinctions are in the pure form
ofNotions. Butthe being-for~selfinto which being-for-an..other
returns, i.e. the self, is not a self belonging exclusively to what
iscaUed object and distinct from the'r; for consciousness, qua
pure insight, is not a single self which could be confronted by
theobjectasequallyhaving aselfofits own, but is pure Notion,
the gazing of the self into the self, the absolute seeing of £tse/f
doubled; the certainty of itself is the universal Subject, and its
conscious Notion is the essence of all actuality. If, then, the Usefu] was mere1y the alternation of the moments, an alternation
which did not return into its own unity, and hence was still an
object for knowing, it now ceases to be this. For knowing is itself
the movement of those abstract moments, it is the universal self,
the self ofitself as well as of the object and, as universal, is the
self-returning unity of this movement.
584. Spirit thus comes before us as absolute freedom. It is selfconsciousness which grasps the fact that its certainty of itself
is the essence of all the spiritual 'masses', or spheres, of the real
as wel1 as of the supersensible world, or conversely, that essence
and actuality are consciousness!s knowledge of itself. It is conscious ofits pure personality and therein of all spiritual reality,
and all reality is solely spiritual; the world is for it simply its

CULTURE

357

own will, and this is a general will. And what is more, this will
is not the empty thought of will which consists in silent assent,
or assent by a representative, but a real general will, the will
of all individuals as such. For will is in itself the consciousness
of personality, or of each, and it is as this genuine actual will
that it ought to be, as the self-conscious essence of each and
every personality, so that each, undivided from the whole,
always does everything, and what appears as done by the whole
is the direct and conscious deed of each.
585. This undivided Substance of absolute freedom ascends
the throne of the world without any power being able to resist
it. For since, in truth, consciousness alone is the element in
w hieh the spiritual beings or powers have their substance, their
entire system which is organized and maintained by division
into 'masses' or spheres has collapsed, now that the individual
consciousness conceives the object as having no other 'essence
than self-consciousness itself, or as being absolutely Nntion.
What made the Notion into an existent objectwas its diremption
into separate subsistent spheres, but when the object becomes
a Notion, there is no longer'anything in it with a continlling
existence; negativity has permeated all its moments. It comes
into existence in such a way that each individual consciousness
raises itself out of its allotted sphere, no longer finds its essence
and its work in this palticular sphere, but grasps itself as the
Notion of win~ grasps aU spheres as the essence ofthis will, and
therefore can ouly realize itself in a work which is a work of
the whole. In this absolute freedom, therefore, alLsocialgroups
ordasses which are the spiritual spheres into which the whole
is articu1ated are abolished; the individual consdousnessthat
belonged to any such sphere, and willed and fulfilled itself in
it,hasput aside its limitation; its purposeis the general purpose,
its language universal law, its work the universal work.
586. The object and the [moment of] dijference have here lost
the meaning of utility, which was the predicate-of alLreal being;
consciousness does not begin its movement in the object as if
this were something alien from which it first had to return into
itself; on the contrary, the object is for it consciousness itself.
The antithesis, copsists, ther~fore, solely in the difference
between the individual and the universal consciousness; hut the
individual consciousness itself is directly in its own eyes that

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

which had only the semblance of an antithesis; it is universal consciousness and will. The beyond of this its actual existence hovers
over the corpse of the vanished independence of real being,
or the being of faith, merely as the exhalation of a stale gas,
of the vacuous Etre supreme.
587. After the various spiritual spheres and the restricted
life of the individual have been done away with, as well as his
two worlds, all that remains, therefore, is the immanent movement of universal self-consciousness as a reciprocity of self-consciousness in the form of universality and of personal consciousness: the universal wiH goes into itself and is a single, individual
will to which universal law and work stand opposed. But this
individual consciousness is no less directly conscious of itself as
1,lniversal will; it is aware that its object is a law given by that
will and a work accomplished by it; therefore, in passing over
into action and in creating objectivity, it is doing nothing individual, but carrying out the laws and functions of the state.
588. This movement is thus the interaction of consciousness
with itself in ,which it lets nothing break loose to become afree
ohjectstanding over agains tit. Itfollows from this that i tcannot
achieve anything positive, either universal works of language
or of reality., either of laws ,and general institutions 'of conscious
freedom, or of deeds and works of a freedom that wills them.
The workwhichconscious freedom might accomplish 'would consist in that freedom, qua universal substance, making itself into
an object and into an enduring being. This otherness would be the
moment of difference in it whereby it divided itself into stable
spiritual 'masses' or spheres and into the members of various
powers. These spheres ,would be partly the 'thought- things' of
a power that is separated into legislative, judicial, and executive
powers; but partly, they would be the real essences we found in
the real world ofculture , and, looking more closely at the content
of universal action, they would be the particular spheres of
labour which would be further distinguished as more specific
'estates' .or classes. Universal freedom, which would have
separated itse1fin this way into its constituent parts and by the
very fact of doing so would have made itselfinto an existent Substance, would thereby he free from particular individuality, and
would apportion the plurality of individuals to its various con~
stituent parts. This, however, would restrict the activity and

CULTURE

359

the being of the personality to a branch of the whole, to one
kind of activity and being; when placed in the element of being,
personality would have the significance of a specific personality; it would cease to be in truth universal self-consciousness. Neither by t4e mere idea of obedience to self-given laws
which would assign to it only a part of the whole, nor by its
being represented in law-making and universal action, does selfconsciousI}ess let itself be cheated out of reality, the reality of
itselfmaking the law and accomplishing, not a particular work,
but the universal work itself. For where the self is merely represented and is present only as an idea, there it is not actual; where
it is represented by proxy, it is not.
589. Just as the individual self-consciousness does not find
itselfin this universal work of absolute freedom qua existent Substance, soli ttle does it find itself in the deeds proper and individual
actions of the will of this freedom. Before the universal can performa deed it mus t concentrate itself into the One of individuality and put at the head anindividual self.,consdousness; for
the universal win is only an actual will in a self, which is a One.
But tberebyall other individuals are excluded from the entirety
of this deed and have only a limi tecl share in it, so that the deed
would not be a deed of the actual universal self*consciousness.
Universal freedom, therefore, can produce l1either;:i positive
work nor a deed; there is left for it only negative ·action; it is
m.erely thefury of destruction.
590. But the supreme reality and the reality which st~nds
in the greatest antithesis to universal freedoJp, or rather the sale
object that will still exist for that freedom, is the freedom and
individuality of actual self-consciousness itself. For that universality which does not let itself advance to the reality of an
organic articulation, and whose aim is to maintain it&elf in an
unbroken continuity, at the same time creates a distinction
wi thin itself, becauseit is movement or <;onsciousness in general.
And, moreover, by virtue ofitsown ab~traction, it divides itself
into extremes equally abstract, into a simple, inflexible cold
universality, and into the discrete, absolute hard rigidity and
self-willed atomism of actual self-consciousness. Now that it has
completed the destruction of the actual organization of the
world, and exists now just for itself, this is its sole object, an
object that no longer has any content, possession, existence, or

,J

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

'J,

outer extension, but is merely this knowledge of itself as an absolutely pure and free individual self. All that remains of the
object by which it can be laid hold of is solely its abstract existence as such. The relation, then, of these two, since each exists
indivisibly and absolutely for itself, and thus cannot dispose of
a middle term which would link them together, is one of wholly
unmediated pure negation, a negation, moreover, of the individual as a being existing in the universal. The sole work and deed
of universal freedom is therefore death, a death too -which has
no inner significance or filling, for what is negated is the empty
point of the absolutely free self. It is thus the coldest and
meanest of all deaths, with no more significance than cutting
off a head of cabbage or swallowing a mouthful of water.
591. In this ft~t, commonplace monosyllable is contained the
wisdom of the government, the abstract intelligence of the universal will, in the fulfilling of itself. The government is itself
nothing else but the self-established fbeus, or the individuality,
of the universal will. The government, which wills and executes
its wiUfrom a single point, at the same time wins and executes
a specific order and action. On the one/hand, it exCludes all
other individuals from its act, and on the other hand; it thereby
constitutes itself a government that isa specific will, and so
standsopposedtothe universal will; consequently, itisabsolutely
impossible for it to exhibit itself as anything else but a jaction.
What is called government is merely the victorious faction, and
in the very fact orits being a faction lies the direct necessity
onts overthrow; and its being government makes it, conversely,
into a faction, and [so] guilty. When the universal win maintains that what the government has actually done is a crime
committed against it, the government, for its part, has nothing
specific and outwardly apparent by which the guilt of the will
opposed to it could be demonstrated; for what stands opposed
to it as the actual universal wiU is only an unreal pure will, inten~
tion. Being suspected, therefore, takes the pi ace, or has thesignificance and effect, of being guilty; and the -external reaction
against this reality that lies in the simple inwardness of intention, consists in the cold, matter-of~fact annihilation of this
existent self, from which nothing else can be taken away but
its mere being.
592. In this its characteristic work, absolute freedom becomes

CULTURE

explicitly objective to itself, and self-consciousness learns what
absolute freedom in effect is. In itself, it is just this q,bstract selfconsciousness, which effaces all distinction and all continuance
of distinction within it. It is as such that it is objective to itself;
the terror of death is the vision of this negative nature of itself.
But absolutely free self-consciousness finds this its reality quite
different from what its own Notion of itself was, viz. that the
universal will is merely the positive essence of personality, and
that this latter knows itselfin it only positively, or as preserved
therein. Here, however, this self-consciousness which, as pure
insight, completely separates its positive and its negative
nature-completely separates the predicateless Absolute as
pure Thought and as pure Matter-is confronted with the absolute transition of the one into the other as a present reality. The
u~iversal will, qua absolutely positive, actual self-consciousness,
because it is this self-conscious reality heightened to the level
ofpure thought or of abstract matter, changes round into its negative nature and shows itself to be equally that which puts an
end to the th.inking of ones~lj, or to self-consciousness.
593. Ab~olu.teJreedom a~ pure self-identity of the universal
will thus has within it negation; but this means that it contains
difference in gen~ral, and this again it develops as an actual difference. For pure negativity has in the self-identical universal
will the element of subsistence, or the Substance in which its
moments are realized; it has the mat~er which it can utilize
in a(:cordance with its own determinateness; and in so far as
this Substance has shown itself to be the negative element for
the individual consciousness, the organization of spiritual
'masses' or spheres to which the plurality of individual con~
sdousnesses ar~ assigned thus takes shape once more. These in..
dividuals who have fel tt he fear ofdeath, of their absolute master,
again submit to negation and distinctions, arrange themselves
in the various spheres, and return to an apportioned and limited
task, but thereby to their substantial reality.
594. Out of this tumult, Spirit would be thrown back to its
starting-point to the ethical and real world of culture, which
would have been merely refreshed and rejuvenated by the fear
of the lord and master which has again entered men's hearts.
Spirit would have to traverse anew and continually repeat this
cycle ofnecessity if the result were only the complete in terpenel

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

tration of self-consciousness and Substance-an interpenetration in which self-consciousness, which has experienced the
negative power ofits universal essence acting on it, would desire
to know and find itself, not as this particular individual, but
only as a universal, and therefore, too, would be able to endure
the objective reality of universal Spirit, a reality excluding selfconsciousness qua particular. But in absolute freedom there was
no reciprocal action between a consciousness that is immersed
in the complexities of existence, or that sets itself specific aims
and thoughts, and a valid external world, whether of reality or
thought; instead, the world was absolutely in the form of consciousness as a universal will, and equally self-consciousness was
drawn together out of the whole expanse of existence or manifested aims and judgements, and concentrated into the simple
self. The culture t6 which it attains in interaction with that
essence is, therefore, the grandest and the last, is that of seeing
its pure, simple reality immediately vanish and pass away into
empty nothingness. In the world of culture itself it does not get
as far as to behold its negation or alienation in thisform of pure
abstraction; on the contrary, its negation is filled with a content, either honour or wealth, which it gains in place of the
self that it has alienated from itself; or the language of Spirit
and insight which the disrupted consciousness acquires; or it
is the heaven offaith, or the Utility of the Enlightenment. All
these determinations have vanished in the loss suffered by the
selfin absol u te freedom; its negation is the death tha tis withou t
meaning, the sheer terror of the negative that contains nothing
positive, nothing that fills it with a content. At the same time,
however, this negation in its real existence is not something
alien; it is neither the universal inaccessible neqssity in which
the ethical world perishes, nor the particular accident of private
possession, nor the whim of the owner on which the disrupfed
consciousness sees itself dependent; on the contrary, it is the
universal will which in this its ultimate abstraction has nothing
positive and therefore can give nothing in return for the sacrifice. But for that very reason it is immediately one with selfconsciousness, or it is the pure positive, because it is the pure
negative; and the meaningless death, the unfilled negativity of
the self, changes round in its inner Notion into absolute positivity. For consciousness, the immediate unity of itself with the

CULTURE

universal will, its demand to know itself as this specific point
in the universal will, is changed round into the absolutely opposite experience. What vanishes for it in that experience is
abstract being or the immediacy of that insubstantial point, and
this vanished immediacy is the universal will itself which it now
knows itself to be in so far as it is a pure knowing or pure will.
Consequently, it knows that will to be itself, and knows itself
to be essential being; but not essential being as an immediate
existence, not will as revolutionary government or anarchy striving to establish anarchy, nor itself as the centre of this faction
or the opposite faction; on the contrary, the universal will is its
pure knowing and willing and it is the universal will qua this pure
knowing and willing. It does not lose itseljin that will, for pure
knowing and willing is much more it than is that atomic point
ofconsciousne,ss. It is thus the interaction of pure knowing with
itself; pure knowing qua essential being is the universal will; but
this essential being is abolutely nothing else but pure knowing.
Self-consciousness is, therefore, the pure knowing of essential
being qua pure knowing. Further, as an individual self, itis only
the form of the subject or of real action, a form which is known
by it as Jorm. Similarly, objective reality, being, is for it simply
aselfiess form; for that reality would be something that is not
krtown. This knowing, however, knows knowing to be essential being.
595. Absolute freedom has thus removed the antithesis
between the universal and the individual will. The selfalienated Spirit, driven to the extreme of its antithesis in which
pure willing and the agent of that pure willing are still distinct,
reduces the antithesis to a transparent form and therein finds
itself. Just as the realm of the real world passes over into the
realm of faith and insight, so does absolute freedom leave its
self-destroying reality and pass over inJo another land of selfconscious Spirit where, in this unreal world, freedom has the
value oftruth. In the thought of this truth Spirit refreshes itself,
in so far as it is' and remains thought, and knows this being which
is enclosed within self-consciousness to be essential being in its
perfection and completeness. There has arisen the new shape
of Spirit, that of the moral Spirit.

C. (BB.) SPIRIT
C. SPIRIT THAT IS CERTAIN OF ITSELF. MpRALITY

596. The ethical world showed its fate and its truth to be
the Spirit that had merely passed away in it, the individual self.
This legal person, however, has its Substance and fulfilment out~
side of that world. The movement of the world of culture and
faith does away with this abstraction of the person, and,
through the completed alienation, through the ultimate
abstraction, Substance becomes for Spirit at first the- universal
will, and finally Spirit's own possession. Here, then, knowledge
appears at last to have become completely identical with its
truth; for its truth is this very knowledge and any antithesis
between the two sides has vanished, vanished not only jor us
or t'n itself, but for seW·consciousness itself. In other words, self8
consciousness has gained the mastery over the antithesis within
consciousness itself. This antithesis rests on the antithesis of the
certainty of self and of the object. Now, however, the object
is for consciousness itself the certainty of itself, viz~ knowledgejust as the certainty of itself as such no longer has ends of its
own, is therefore no longer [contained] within a determ.inate~
ness, but is pure knowledge.
597. Th us for self-consciousness, its knowledge is the Substance itself. This Substance is for it just as immediate-as it isabso~
lutely mediated in an indivisible unity. It is immediate, like the
ethical consciousness which knows its duty and does it, and is
bound up with it as with its own nature; but it is not character,
as that ethical consciousness is which, on account ofIts immediacy, is a specifically determined Spirit, belongs only to one
of the ethical essentialities, and has the charact,eristic of not
knowing. It is absolute mediation , like the consciousness which cultivates itself, and the consciousness which believes; for it is
essentially the movement of the self to set aside the abstraction
of immediate existence, and to become conscious of itself as a uni~
versal-and yet to do so neither by the pure alienation and
disruption of itself and of actuality, nor by fleeing from it.
Rather, it is immediately present to itse1fin its substance, for this
is its knowledge, is the intuited pure certainty of itself; and just
this immediacy which is its own reality, is all reality, for the imme~
diate is being itself, and, as pure immediacy purified by absolute
negativity, it is being in general, or all being.

MORALITY

598. Absolute essential being is, therefore, not exhausted
when determined as the simple essence of thought; it is all reality,
and this reality is only as knowledge. What consciousness did
not know would have no significance for consciousness and can
have no power over it. Into its conscious will all objectivity,
the whole world, has withdrawn. It is absolutely free in that
it knows its freedom, and just this knowledge is its substance
and purpose and its sole content.
'
a. The moral view oj the world
599. Self-consciousness knows duty to be the absolute
essence. It is bound only by duty, and this substance is its own
pure consciousness, for which duty cannot receive the form of
something alien. However, as thus locked up within itself, moral
self-consciousness is not yet posited and considered as consciousness. The object is immediate knowledge, and, being thus permeated purely by the selfisnot an object. But becauseself-consciousness is,essentially a mediation and negativity, its Notion
impliesrelatibntoan otherness and [thus] is consciousness. This
otherness, becausecluty constitutes the sale aim and object of
consciousness, is, onthe.one hand, a reality completely without
significaQce for consdousness.Butbecause this consciousness is
so completely locked up within itself, it behaves with perfect
freedom and indifference towards this otherness; and therefore
the existence of this otherness, on the other hand, is left completely free by self-consciousness, an existence that similarly is
related only itself. The freer self-consciousness becomes, the
freer also is the negative object of its consciousness. The object
has thus become a complete world within itselfwith an individuaHtyof its own, a self-subsistent whole of laws peculiar to
itself,as wen as an independent operatibn of those laws, and
a free realization ofthem-in general, a Nature whose laws like
its actions belong to itselfas a being which is indifferent to moral
self.. consciousness, just as the latter is indifferent to it.
600. From this determination is developed a moral view of
theworldwhichconsistsin the relation between the ahsoluteness
of morality and the absoluteness of Nature. This relation is
based, on the one hand, on the complete indifference. and independence of Nature towards moral purposes and activity,
and, on the other hand, on the consciousness of duty alone as

to

366

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

the essential fact, and of Nature as completely devoid of inde~
pendence and essential being. The moral view of the world contains the dev~lopmen t of the momen ts which are presen t in this
relation of such completely conflicting presuppositions.
601. To begin with, then, the moral consciousness as such
is presupposed; duty is the e~sence for this consciousness which
is actual and active, and in its actuality and action fulfils its
duty. But this moral consciousness is at the same tim.e. faced
with the presupposed freedom of Nature; in other words, it
learns from experience that Nature is not concerned with giving
the moral consciousness a sense of the unity of its reality with
that of Nature, and hence that Nature perhaps may let it
become happy, or perhaps may not. The non.. moral consciousness, on the other hand, finds, perhaps by chance, its realization
where the moral consciousness sees only an occas,ion for acting,
but does 110t see itself obtaining, through its action, the happiness of performance and the enjoyment of achievement. Therefore, it finds rather cause for complaint about such a state of
incompa tibilitybetween its elfa nd existence, and about the injustice which restricts it to having its object merely as a pure
duty, but refus.es to let it see the object and itself realized.
602. The moral consciousness cannot forego happiness and
leave this element out of its absolute purpose. The pur-pose,
which is expressed aspure duty, essen dan yim plies this individual
self-consciousness; individual conviction and the knowledge of it
constitu te an absolute element in morali ty. This elemen t in the
ohjectified purpose,.in thefuljilledd u ty, is the ind£vidualconscious~
ness that beholds itself as realized; in other words, it is
enjoyment, which is thus implied in the Notion of morality, not
indeed immediately, in morality regarded as sentiment or disP9sition, but.only in the Notion of its actualization. This, however, means that enjoyment is also implied in morality as disposition, for this does not remain disposition in contrast to
action, but proceeds to act Of to realize itself. Thus the purpose,
expressed as the whole with the consciousness of its moments,
is that the fulfilled duty is just as much a moral action as a.realized individuality, and that N.ature, the aspect of individuality
in contrast to the abstract purpose, is Qne with this purpose.
Necessary as is the experience of the disharmony of the two
sides, because Nature is free, even so, what is essential is duty

MORALITY

alone, and Nature contrasted with it is devoid of a self. 'That
purpose in its entirety which the harmony of the two constitutes,
contains within it actuality itself. It is at the same time the
thought of actuality. The harmony of mornlity and Nature-or,
since Nature comes into account only in so far as consciousness
experiences its unity with it-the harmony of morality and
happiness, is thought of as something that necessarily is, i.e. it
is postulated. For to say that something is demanded, means that
something is thought of in the form of being that ·is not yet
actual-a necessity not of the Notion qua Notion, but of being.
But necessity is at the same time essentially relation based on
the Notion. The heing that is demanded, then, is not the imagined being ofa contingent consciousness, hut is implied in the
Notion of morality itself, whose true content is the unity- of the
pure and the individual consciousness; it is for the latter to see
that this unity be,jor it, an actuality: in the content of the purpose
this is happilless, but in its form, is existence in generaL The
existence thus demanded, i.e. the unity of both, is therefore not
a wish nor, regarded as purpose, one who.se attainment were
s till·uncertain;itis rather a demand of Reason, oran immediate
certainty and presupposition of Reason.
60.3- That first experience and this postulate are not the sale
postulates, buta whole circle of postulates opens up. Nature,
thatis to. say, is not merely this wholly free, external made of
being in which, as a pure object, consciousness had to. realize
its purpose. This cansciousness is, in its own self, essentially ane
jorwhichthisotherfree.actualexistence is, Le. itis its:elfa contingent and natural existence. This Nature, which is farconsciausness its awn nature, is sensuousness, which in the shape afvalition, as instincts and inclinatians, passesses a specific essentiality
afits awn, or has its own individual purpases, and thus isoppased
tothepure wiU and its pure purpase. However, in contrast with
this oppasitian, pure consciousness has rather the relation af
sensuousness to it, the absalute unity af the latter with it, far
its essence. Both afthese, pure thought and the sensuous aspect
af cansciousness, are in themselves a single consciousness, and it is
precisely pure thought far which and in which this pure unity
is. But qua consciousness, what is explicit for it is the antithesis
of itself and impulses and instincts. In this canflict between
Reasan and sensuousness, the essential thing for Reason is that

368

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

the conflict be resolved, the result being the emergence of the
unity of both , a unity which is not the former original [i.e. immediate] unity of both in a single individual, but a unity which
proceeds from the known antithesis of both. Only such a unity
is actual morality, for in it is contained the antithesis whereby
the .self is consciousness, or first is an actual self in fact, and
at the same time a universal. In other words, in that unity there
is expressed that mediation which, as we see, is essential to
morality. Since, of the two moments of the antithesis, sensuousness is sheer otherness, or the negative, while, on the other hand,
the pure thought of duty is the essence, no element of which
can be given up, it seems that the resultant unity can only be
brought about by getting rid of sensuousness. But since sensuousneSS is itselfa moment of the process producing the unity,
viz. the moment of actuality, we have to be content, in the first
instance, with expressing the unity by saying that sensuousness
should be in conformity with morality. This unity is likewise a
postulated being; it is not actually there; for whatir there is consciousness, or the antithesis of sensuousness and pure consciousness. Buiat the same time, the unity is nolan in-itselfor merely
implicit like the first postulate in whichfree Nature,constitutes
an de men t oLthe unity, and inconseq uenee the harmony of
Nature with the moral consciousness falls outside of the latter.
On the contrary, Nature bereis that which is an element of
e.onsci.ousnessitself, and we have here to deal with morality as
such, with a morality that is the active self's very own. Consciousness has, therefore, itself to bring about this harmony and
continually to be making progress in morality. But the consummation of this progress has t.o be projected into a future
infinitely remote; for if it actually carne about, this would do
away with the moral cons.ciousness. For morality is only rnoral
consciousness as negative essence, for whose pure duty sensuousness has only a n~gative significance, is only not in conformity
with duty. But, in that harmony, morality qua consciousness, Le.
its actuality, vanishes, just as in the moral cQllsciousness,or in
thu actuality of morality, the harmony vanishes. Theconsummation, therefore, cannot be attained, hut is to be thought .of
merely as an absolute task, i.e. one which simply remains a task.
Yet at the same time its con tent .has to be thought of as something which simply must he, and must not remain a task:

MORALITY

whether we imagine the [moral] consciousness to be altogether
done away with in this goal, or not. Which of these really is
the case can no longer clearly be determined in the dim remoteness of infinity, to which for that very reason the attainment
of the goal is postponed. Strictly speaking, we shall have to say
that a definite idea on this point ought not'to interest us, and
ought not to be looked for, because it leads to contradictions~
the contradiction of a task which is to remain a task and yet
ought to be fulfilled, and the contradiction of a morality which
is no longer to be [a moral] fonsciousness, Le. not actual. However, the idea that a perfected morality would involve a contradiction would do harm to the sanctity of the very essence
of morality, and absolute duty would appear as something unreal.
604. The first postulate was the harmony of morality and
objective Nature, the final purpose of the world; the other, the
harmony of morality and the sensuous will, the final purpose
of self-consciousness as such. The first, then, is harmony in the
form ofan implicit being, the other, in the form of bting-for-self.
But what connects, as middle term, these postulated two
extrenle final purposes is the movement of actual conduct itself.
They are harmonies whose moments, in their abstract distinctiveness, have not yet developed into objects [for consciousness]. This occurs in the actuality in which the sides appear
in consciousness proper ~ each as theotherof the other. The postulates arising ftom this now contain the harmonies both in and
ftJr themselves, whereas previously they were postulated only
as separate, one being in itself or implicit and the other being
for itself or explicit.
605. The moral consciousness as the simple knowing and wilUng of pure duty is, in the doing of it, brought into relation
with the object which stands in contrast to its simplicity, into
relation with the actuality of the complex case, and tl1ereby
has a complex moral relationship with it. Here arise, in relation
to content, the many laws generally, and in relation to form,
the contradictory powers of the knowing consciousness and of
the non-conscious.
In the first place, as regards the many duties, the moral
consciousness in general heeds only the pure duty in them; the
many duties qua manifold are specific and therefore 3,S such have

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

nothing sacred about them for the moral consciousness. At the
same time, however, being necessary, since the Notion of 'doing'
implies a complex actuality and therefore a complex moral relation to it, these many duties must be regarded as possessing an
intrinsic being of their own. Further, since they can exist only
in a moral consciousness, they exist at the same time in another
consciousness than that for which only pure duty qua pure duty
possesses an intrinsic being of its own and is sacred.
606. Thus it is postulated that it is another consciousness
which makes them sacred, or which knows and wills them as
duties. The first holds to pure duty, indifferent to all specific
content, and duty is only this indifference towards such content.
The other, however, contains the equally essential relation to
'doing', and to the necessity of the specific content: since for this
other, duties mean specific duties, the content as such is equal1y
essential as the form which makes the content a duty. This con ..
sciousnessiscons.eq uen tly onein which universal and particular
are simply one, and its Notion is, therefore, the same as the
N olion ofthe harmony of morality and happiness ...Eor this antithesisequ·aUyexpresses the separation of the self-equal moral
consciousness from that actuality which, asmani{oldbeing, con£lic;is with the simple essential nature ofduty. While, however,
the first postulate expresses the harmony of morality and
Natyre, as a harmony that simply is, because in it Nature is
this negative. aspect ofself."consciousness, is the Jl1omentQfheing,
this implicit harmony~ on the other hand, is nowe~~entiaUy
posited as consciousness. For what simplY is, now has the form
of the content of duty, or is the determinateness in the d~terminate
duty. The implicit harmony is thus the unity of what are simple
essentialities, essentialities of thougbt, and are therefore only in
a consciousness. This is then henceforth a master and ruler of
the world, who brings about the harmony of morality and
happiness, and at the sarpe time sanctifies duties in their multiplicity. This las t means this much, that for the consciousness
ofpl!-re duty~ the determinate or specific duty cannot straightway
be sacred; but because a specific duty, on account of the actual
'doing' which is a specific action, is likewise necessary, its necessity
faUs outside of that consciousness into another consciousness,
which thus mediates or hrings together the specific and the pure
duty and is the reason why the former also has validity.

MORALITY

371

607. In the actual 'doing', however, consciousness behaves
as this particular self, as completely individual; it is directed
towards reality as such, and has this for its purpose, for it wills
to achieve something. Duty in general thus falls outside of it
into another being, which is consciousness and the sacred lawgiver of pure duty. For the consciousness which acts, and just
because it acts, the validity of the other consciousness, that of
pure duty, is directly acknowledged; this pure duty is thus the
content of another consciousness, and is sacred for the consciousness that acts only mediately, viz. through the agency of
this other consciousness.
608. Because it is in this way posited that the validation of
duty, as something absolutely sacred, falls outside of actual consciousness, this latter accordingly stands altogether on one side
as the impeifectmoralconsciousness. Just as, in regard to its knowledge, it knows itself then as a consciousness whose knowledge
and conviction are imperfect and contingent; similarly, in
regard to its willing, it knows itself as a consciousness whose purposes are affected with sensuousness. On account of its unworthiness, therefore, it cannot look on happiness as necessary,
but as something contingent, and can expect it only as a gift
of Grace.
60g. But though its actuality is imperfect, all the same its
pure will and knowledge hold duty to be what is essential. In
the Notion, therefore, so far as the Notion is contrasted with
reality, or in thought, it is perfect. ~ut the absolute Being is
just this being that is thought, a being that is postulated beyond
reality. It is, therefore, the thought in which morally imperfect
knowledge and willing are held to be perfect, and the absolute
Being, since it gives full weight to this imperfection, bestows
happiness according to worthiness, i.e. according to the merit
ascribed to the imperfect moral consciousness.
610. In this, the moral view of the world is completed. For
in the Notion of the moral self-consciousness the two aspects,
pure duty and actuality, are explicitly joined in a single nnity,
and consequently the one, like the other, is expressly without
a being of its own, but is only a moment, or is superseded. This
becomes explici t for consciousness in the last phase of the moral
view of the world. That is to say, it places pure duty in a being
other than itself, i.c. it posits pure duty partly as something

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

existing only in thought, partly as something that is not valid
in and for itself; rather it is the non-moral [consciousness] that
is held to be perfect. Equally, it gives itself the character of a
consciousness whose actuality, not being in conformity with
duty, is superseded and, qua superseded, or in the idea of abso~
lute Being, no longer contradicts morality.
611. For the moral consciousness itself, however, its moral
view of the world does not mean that consciousness develops
therein its own Notion, and makes this its object. It is not conscious of this antithesis either as regards the form or the content;
it does not relate and compare the sides of this antithesis with
one another, but, in its development, rolls onward, without
being the Notion which holds ,the moments together. For it
knows only the pure,: essence, or the object so far as it is duty, so
far as it is an abstract object of its pure consciousness, as a pure
knowing, or as its own self. It thinks, therefore, only in abstrac~
dons, and does not comprehend [i.e. in terms of the Notion].
Consequently, the object of its actual consciousness is not yet
transparent to it; it is not the absolute Notion, which alone
grasps otherness as such, or its absolute opposite, ,as its own self.
It does indeed hold its own reality; like all obJective reality,
to be unessential; but its freedom is the freedom of pure thought,
incontras t to which, therefore, Nature likewise has "arisen as
an existence that is equally free. Because both are eq uaily
present in it, i.e. the freedom of [mere] being, and the inclusion
of this being within con~ciousness, its object becomes one that
hasheing, butat the same time exists only in thought; in the last
stage of the moral view of the world, the content is explicitly
suchthatits being is given···to it by thought, and this conjunction
of being and thought is pronounced to be what in fact it 1S-"imagining.
6 I 2. When we consider the moral view of the world in such
a way that this objective mode is nothing else than the very
N odon of moral self-consciousness which it makes objective to
itself, this awareness of the form of its origin gives rise to its
exposition in another shape. The first stage which forms the
starting-point is the actual moral self-consciousness, or the fact
that there is such a moral self-consciousness. For the Notion gives
itthisexplicitcharacter, viz. that all realityingeneral has essen~
tial being for it only so far as it is in conformity with duty; and

MORALITY

373

this essential being it characterizes as knowledge, i.e. as in im~
mediate unity with the actual self. Hence this unity is itself
actual, it is a moral, actual consciousness. This now, qua consciousness, pictures its content to itself as an object, viz. as the
final purpose of the world, as harmony of morality and all
reality. But since it thinks of this unity as object, and is not the
Notion which has mastery over the object as such, the unity
is a negative of self-consciousness for it, or it falls outside of it,
as something beyond its actual existence, and yet at the same
time is something that also has being, but a being existing only
in thought.
6 13. This self-consciousness which, qua self-consciousness, is
other than the object, is thus left with, the lack of harmony
between the consciousness of duty and reality, and that, too,
its own r.eality. Accordingly, the proposition now runs as follows: 'There is no moral, perfect, actual self-consciousness'; and,
since the moral sphere is at all, only in so far as it is perfect,
for duty is the pure unadulterate~ intrinsic being or in ..itself, and
morality consists only in conformity to this pure in ..itself.--the
second proposition simply runs: 'There is no moral existence
in reality.'
6 I 4. Since, however, in the third place, it is a single self, it
is in itself or implicit! y the unity of duty and reality. This unity
therefore becomes an object for it as perfect morality-hut as
a beyond of its reality, yet a beyond that ought to be actual.
615. In this goal of the synthetic unity of the first two propositions, the self-conscious reality [i.e. actual self-consciousness] as well as duty, is posited as only a superseded moment. For
neither ofthese two is single and separate; on the contrary, each
of them, whose essential determination lies in their being-free
from one another, is thus in the unity no longer free from the other,
and each therefore is superseded. Hence, as regards content,
they become as such, objects each of which counts ,as object
for the other, and as regards form, in such a way thatthis interchange is at the same time only imagined [i.e. occurs only. in
thought], Or, again, the actually non-moral sphere, because it is
eq ually pure thought, and is raised above its actual existence,
is yet, in imagination, moral, and is taken to be completely
valid. In this way, the first proposition, thatthere is a moral self~
consciousness, is reinstated, but is bound up with the second,

374

c, (BB,) SPIRIT

th,at there is none, i.e. that there is one, but only in imagination;
or, in other words, it is true that there is none, yet, all the same,
it is allowed by another consciousness to pass for one.
b. Dissemblance or duplicity
6 16. In the moral view of the world we see, on the one hand,
consciousness itself consciously produce its object; we see that it
neither encounters the object as something alien to it, nor does
the object come before it in an unconscious manner. On the
contrary, it proceeds in every case in accordance with a principle on the basis of which it posits objective being. It thus knows
this la tter to be its own self, for it knows i tselfto be the active agen t
that produces it. It seems, therefore, to attain here its peace
and satisfaction, for this can only be found where it no longer
needs to go beyond its object, because this no longer goes
beyond it. On the other hand, however, consciousness itself really
places the object outside itselfas a beyond of itself. But this object
with an intrinsic heing of its own is equally posited as being,
not free from self-consciousness, but as existing in the interest
of, and by means of, it.
617. The moral world-view is, therefore, in fact nothing
other than the elaboration of this fundamental contradiction
in its various aspects. ltis, to employ here a Kantian expression
where it is most appropriate, a 'whole nest' of thoughtless contradictions. The way in which consciousness proceeds in this development, is to establish one moment and to pass directly from
it to another, setting-aside the first; but now, as soon as it has
set up this second moment, it also sets it aside again, and really
makes the opposite moment the essential one. At the same time,
it is also aware of its contradiction and shiftiness, for it passes
from' one moment, immediately in its relation to this very
moment, over to the opposite. Because a moment has no reality
for it, it posits that very same moment as real: or, what comes
to the same thing, in order to assert one moment as' possessing
heing in itself, it asserts the opposite as the one that possesses
being in itself. In so doing it confesses that, as a matter offact,
it is in earnest with neither of them. We must examine more
closely the moments of this insincere shuffling.
618. Let us, to begin with, not question the assumption that
there is an actual moral consciousness, because the assumption

MORALITY

375

is made directly and not in connection with something preceding; and let us turn to the harmony of morality and Nature, the
first postulate. It is supposed to be an implicit harmony, not explicitly for actual consciousness, not present; on the contrary,
what is present is rather only the contradiction of the two. In
the present, morality is assume'd as already in existence, and actuality is so placed that it is not in harmony with it. The actual
moral consciousness, however, is one that ac~s; it is precisely
therein that the actuality of its morality consists. But in the very
doing or acting, the place [given to actuality] is displaced; for
the action is nothing other than the actualization of the inner
moral purpose, nothing other than the production of an actuality
determined by the purpose, or of the harmony of the moral purpose
and actuality itself. At the same time, the performance of the
action is a fact of which consciousness is aware, it is the presence
of this unity of actuality and purpose, and because, in the
accomplished deed, consciousness knows itself to be actualized
as this particular consciousness, or beholds existence returned
into itself-and enjoyment consists in this-there is also contained in the actuality of the moral purpose that form of actualitywhich is called enjoyment and happiness. Action, therefore, in fact directly fulfils Whatwas asserted could nottake place,
what was supposed to be merely a postula,te, merely a beyond.
Consciousness thus proclaims through its deed that it is not in
earnest in making its postulate, because the meaning of the
action is really this, to make into a present reality what was
not supposed to exist in the present. And, since the harmony
is postulated for the sake of the action-that is to say, what is to
to become actual through action, must be so in itself, otherwise
actuality would not be possible-the connection of action and
postulate is so constituted that, for the sake of the action, i.e.
for the sake oflhe actual harmony of purpose and actuality, this
harmony is postulated as not actual, as a beyond.
619. Since action does take place, the lack offitness between
purpose and reality is not taken seriously at alL On the other
hand, action itself does seem to be taken seriously. In point of
fact, however, the actual deed is only a deed of the individual
consciousness, and therefore itself only something individual,
and the result contingent. But the purpose of Reason as the universal, all-embracing purpose, is nothing less than the whole

c. (BB.) SPIRIT

world; a final purpose going far beyond the con ten t of this individual deed, and therefore to be placed altogether beyond anything actually done. Because the universal hest ought to be
carried out, nothing good is done. In fact, however, the nullity
ofwhat is actuallydone,and the reality of the whole purpose alone,
which are now postulated-these, too, are in every respect
again 'displaced'. The moral action is not something contingent
and restricted, for it has as its essence pure duty. This constitutes
the sole entire purpose; and thus the deed, no matter in what
other way its content is limited, is, qua actualization of that purpose, the accomplishment of the entire absolute purpose. Or ,
again, if reality is taken to be Nature, which has its own laws
and stands in contrast to pure duty, so that duty cannot realize
its law within Nature, ,then, since it is duty as such that essentially matters, what we are in fact concerned with is not the fulfilment of.pure duty, which is the whole purpose; for the fulfilment would really have as its purpose, not pure duty, but its
antithesis, reality. But th<?re is again a shift from the position
that it is not reality with which we are cone.erued; for according
to the Notion oEmoral action, pure duty is essentially an active
cousciou,snes8. Thus there c.ertainlyought to b.e action.; absolute
duty olJght to he expressed in the whole of Nature, aud moral
law to become natural law.
620. If then we allow that it is this highest good that essentially Inatters, then consciousness is not in earnest with morality
ata11. For in this highest good, Nature does not have a different
law from that of morality. Hence moral action itself is ruled
out, for action takes place only on the assumption of a negative
which is to be set aside by the action. But if N~tu,re is inconformity with the moral law, thelatter would in fact be violated
by the s"etting-aside of what is in existence. In the assumption
that the hjghest go09 is what essentially matters, there is
admitted a situation in which moral action is superfluous, and
does not 'take place at all. The postulate of the harmony of
morality and reality~a harmony posited by the Notion of
moral action~ which implies bringing the two into agreemtintis expressed from this point of view, too, in the form: 'Because
moral action is the absolute purpose, the absolute purpose is,
that there shQuld be no such thing as moral action.'
62 I. When we put together these moments, which conscious-

MORALITY

377

ness has traversed in its ideas of morality, it is clear that each
one in turn is superseded in its opposite. Consciousness starts
from the ideathat,Jor it, morality and reality do not harmonize;
but it is not in earnest about this, for in the deed the presence
of this harmony becomes explicit for it. But it is not in earnest
even about this deed, since the deed is something individual;
for it has such a high purpose, the highest good. But this again
is only a dissemblance of the facts, for such dissemblance would
do away with all action and all morality. In other words, consciousness is not, strictly speaking, in earnest with moral action:
what it really holds to be most desirable, to be the Absolute,
is that the highest good be accomplished, and that moral action
be superfluous.
622. From this result consciousness must go on still further
in its contradictory movement, and of necessity again dissemble
this suppression of moral action. Morality is the 'in-itself', the
merely implicit element; if it is to be actual, the final purpose
of the world cannotbe fulfilled; ra ther the moral consciousness
must exist on its own account and find itself confronted by a
Nature opposed to it. But it must be perfected in its own self.
This leads to the second postulate of the harmony ofitself and
the Nature which is immediately an elementin it, i.e. the sensenature. Moral self-consciousness asserts thatits purpose is pure,
is independent of inclinations and impulses., which implies that
it has eliminated within itself sensuous purposes. But this
alleged elimination ofthe element of sense it dissembles again.
It acts, brings its purpose into actual existence, and the self..
conscious sense..nature which is supposed to be eliminated is
precisely this middle term or mediating element between pure
consciousness and actual existence----,it i-s the instrument or
organ of the former for its realization, and what is called
impulse, inclination. Moral self",consciousness is nO,t, therefore,
in earnest with the >eliminationof inclinations and impulses, for
it isjust these that are theselj-realizing self-consciousness. But also
they ough t not to be suppressed, bu t only to be in conformity with
Reason. And they are in conformity with Reason, for moral
action is nothing else but consciousness realizing itself, thus giving itself the shape of an impulse, i.e. it is immediately the present
harmony of impulse and morality. But impulse is not in fact
merely this empty shape which could have within it a spring

C. (RR.) SPIRIT

of action other than the one it is, and be impelled by it. For
sense-nature is one which contains within itself its own laws and
springs of action; consequently, morality cannot therefore be
in earnest about being itself the mainspring of impulses, the
angle of inclination for inclinations. For since these have their
own fixed quality and peculiar content, the consciousness to
which they were to conform would be rather in conformity with
them-a conformity with which moral self-consciousness refuses
to comply. The harmony of the two is thus merely implicit,
merely postulated.
In moral action the actually present harmony ofmorality and
the sense-nature was just now asserted, but now is 'displaced';
the harmony is beyond consciousness in a nebulous remoteness
where nothing can any more be accurately distinguished
or comprehended; for our attempt just now to comprehend
this unity failed. In this [merely] implicit harmony, however,
consciousness surrenders itself altogether. This implicit harmony is itsmoralperfection, where the struggle of morality and
the sense ..nature,has ceased,and the latter is in conformity
with morality in a way that is beyond our comprehension. For
tha treason this.perfection is again only a dissemblance,afalsification of the situation,since as a matter of fact it would be
rather morality itself that was given up in that perfection,
because it is only consciousness of absolute purpose as pure purpose, one therefore opposed to all other purposes. Morality is
both the activity of this pure purpose, and also the consciousness
of rising above sense-nature, of being mixed up with sensenature and struggling against it. That consciousness is not in
earnest about the perfection of morality is indicated by the fact
that consciousness itself shifts it away into infinity, i.e. asserts
that the perfection is never perfected.
623.W~at consciousness really holds to he the truth of the
matter is only this intermediate state of imperfection, a state
nevertheless which at lea,st is supposed to he a progress towards
perfection. But it cannot even be that; for to advance in
morality would really be to move towards its disappearance.
That is to say, the goal would be the nothingness or the abolition, mentioned above, of morality and consciousness itself; but
to approach ever nearer to nothingness means to diminish.
Besides, 'advancing' as such, like 'diminishing', would assume

MORALITY

379

quantitative differences in morality; but there can be no question
of these in it. In morality, as in consciousness, for which the
moral purpose is pure duty, there cannot be any thought at all
ofdifferen~e, least of all of the superficial one of quantity ; there
is only one virtue, only one pure duty, only one morality.
624. Since, then, it is not moral perfection that is taken seriously, but ratherthe intermediate state, i.e. as just argued, non~
morality, we thus return, from another aspect, to the content
of the first postulate: viz. we cannot understand how happiness
is to be demanded for this moral consciousness on the ground
onts worthiness. It is aware of its imperfection and cannot, therefore, in point offact demand happiness as a desert, as something
of which it is worthy. Itean only ask for happiness to be granted
as a free act of grace, Le. it can only ask for happiness as such,
as something existing in and for itself, and can expect it, not
on the absolute ground mentioned above, but as coming to it
by chance and caprice. Here, then, non-morality declares just
what it is-that itis concerned not about morality, but solely
about happiness as such without reference to morality.
625. By this second aspect of the moral view of the world,
the other assertion of the first aspect, in which the disharmony
of morality and happiness is assumed, is also nullified. It is
claimed that experience shows that.· in this presen t world the
moral individual often fares badly, while the immoral indivi ..
dual often flourishes. But the intermediate state of an imperfect
morality, which has shown itself to be the essential one, dearly
shows that this observation, this supposed experience, is merely
a dissemblance of the true state of the case. For since morality
is imperfect, ie. morality in fact is not, what can there be in
the experience that morality fares badly? Since, at the same
time1 it has turned out that it is happiness simply as such that
is involved, it is evident that in making the judgement that the
immoral individual flourishes, it was not intended to imply that
an injustice occurred here. The designation of an individual
as immoral necessarily falls away when morality in general is imperfect, and has therefore only an arbitrary basis. Therefore,
the sense and content of the judgement·of experience is solely
this, that happiness simply as such should not have been the
lot of some individuals, i.e. the judgement is an expression of
envy which covers itself with the cloak of morality. 'The reason,

3 80

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

however, why so-called good luck should fall to the lot of others,
is good friendship, which grants and wishes them, and itself, too,
this lucky chance.
626. Morality, then, in the moral consciousness is imperfect;
this is now what is put forward. But it is the essence of morality
to be only the perfectly pure; imperfect morality is therefore
impure, or is immorality. Morality itself thus exists in ·another
being than. the actual conscibusness. This other being is a holy
moral lawgiver. The imperfect morality in consciousness, which
is the reason for making these postulates, means, in the first instance, that morality, when itis posited in consciousness as actual,
stands in relation to an 'other', to an existence, and therefore
itself receives within it otherness or difference, giving rise to a
whole variety of moral laws. The moral self.. consciousness at
the same time, however, holds these many quties to be unessential; for it is concerned only wi th the one pure duty, and the
many have no truthfor it in ,so far as they are specific duties. They
can therefore have their truth only in another being and are
made sacred-,w hich they ar~ not for the moral consdousness,...-,by.a holy lawgiver. Butthisagain is only a dissemblance of the
real position. For the moral self.. consciousnessis its own Abso..
lute, and duty is absolutely onlYiwhatitknows as duty. But duty
itknows only as puredu ty ; what is not -sacredfor it is notsacred
in itself, and whatis not in itse1fsacred, cannot be made sacred
by the holy being. The moral consciousness, too, is not really
in earnest about letting something be made sacred by another
conscz'ousnessthan itself;for that alone it holds tobesacred which
it has itself made sacred, and is sacred in it. It is, therefore, Just
as little in earnest about the holiness of this other being, for
inthis something was supposed to obtain an essentiality which
for the moral consciousness;, ie. in itself, it did not possess.
6;27. If the holy being was postulated in order thatin it.duty
might have its vaJidity, not as pure duty, but as a multiplicity
of specific duties, then this again must be dissembled, and the
other being alone must be holy in so far as only pure duty has
validity in it. Pure duty has a]so in point offact validity only
in another being, not in the moral consciousness. Although in
the latter it seems that pure morality alone has validity, the
position must be put in another way, for it is at the same time
a natural consciousness. In it, morality is affected and con~

MORALITY

381

ditioned by the sense"nature, and is therefore not free and inde m
pendent, but contingent on free will; in it, however, as pure
will, morality is contingent on knowledge. Morality, therefore,
in and for itself is in another heing.
628. This other being, then, is here the purely perfect
morali ty, for in it morali ty does not stand in a relation to Nature
and sense, But the reality of pure duty is its realization in Nature
and sense. The moral consciousness attributes its imperfection
to the fact that in it morality has a positive relation to Nature
and sense, because it holds that an essential moment in morality
is that it should have a negative, and only a negative, relation
to them. The pure moral being, on the other hand, because
it is above the struggle with Nature and sense, does not stand
in a negative relation to them. Therefore, in fact, there remains
for it only the positive relation to them, i.e. just what a moment
ago was, qua imperfect, held to be immoral. Buta pure morality
that was completely separated from reality, and so likewise was
without any positive relation to it, would be an unconscious,
unreal abstraction in which the concept of moraJity, which in ..
volves thinking of pure duty, wining} and doing it, would be
done away with. Such a purely moral being is therefore again
a dissemblance of the facts, and has to be given up.
629. In this purely moral being, however, the moments of
the contradiction, in which this synthetic presentation of them
flounders about, are hroughtdoser together; and consciousness
lets these opposites follow one after the other, one always being
replaced by the other, without bringing its thoughts together,
so that in the end it is forced to give up its moral view of the
world and seek refuge within itself.
630' It knows its morality to be imperfect because it is
affected by the sensemnatureand Nature opposed to it, which
in part adulterate morality itself as such, and in part give rise
to a host of duties by which in concrete cases of real action it
is embarrassed. For,eachcaseis the concrescence of many moral
relations, just as an object of perception in general is a thing
of many properties; and since the specific duty is a purpose, it
has a content, and its content is part of the purpose, and morality
is not pure. This latter therefore has its reality in another being.
This reality, however, means nothing else than that the being
of morality here is both intrinsic and explicit: explicit, i.e. it is

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

the morality ofa conscious being, and intrinsic, i.e. it has an existence and a reality. In that first, imperfect consciousness morality
is not realized. There, it is the 'in-itself', or merely implicit
being in the sense ofa mere 'thought-thing'; for it is associated
with Nature and sense, with the reality of being and consciousness which constitutes its content, and Nature and sense are
morally nothing. In the second consciousness morality exists as
perfect and not as an unrealized 'thought-thing'. But this perfection consists precisely in morality having reality in a consciousness,
as well as afree reality, an existence in general, in being something not empty but full-filled, full of content; i.e. the perfection
of morality is placed in the fact that what has just been characterized as morally nothing is present in it and intrinsic to it.
On one hand it is supposed to have validity simply and solely
as the unreal 'thought-thing' of pure abstraction, and then
again equally to have no validity in that mode; its truth is supposed to consistin its being opposed to reality,and to be entirely
free and empty of it, and then again, to consis t in its being
reality.
63 I. The syncretism ofthese contradictions which is set forth
at length in the moral view of the world, collapses internally,
since the distinction on which it rests, the distinction between
what must be thought and postulated, and yet is at the, same
time not essential, becomes a distinction which no longer exists
even in words. Whatfinally is posited as diverse, both as a nothing and also as a reality, is one and the very same thing, viz.
existence and reality; and what is supposed to be absolute, only
as the beyond of real· being and consciousness, and yet equally
to be absolute only in them, and so as a beyond to be nothingthis Absolute is pure duty, and the knowledge ofduty as essence.
The consciousness which makes this distinction that is no distinction, which asserts that actual existence has no validity, and
at the same time that itis real, that pure morality is both truly
essential, and also devoid of essence---,such a consciousness
expresses in one and the same breath the thoughts which it previously separated, and itself proclaims that it is not in earnest
about this determination and separation of the moments of self
and in-itself or intrinsic being; but that on the contrary, what
it asserts as having absolute being outside of consciousness, it
really keeps enclosed within the self of self-consciousness, and

MORALITY

38 3

that what it asserts to have absolute being in thought, or to be
absolutely intrinsic being, it for that very reason takes to be something that has no truth. Consciousness comes to see that the
placing-apart of these moments is a 'displacing' of them, a dissemblance, and that it would be hypocrisy if, nevertheless, it were
to keep them separate. But as moral pure self-consciousness, it
flees from this disparity between the way it thinks [of these
moments] and its own essential nature, flees from this untruth
which asserts that to be true which it holds to be untrue, flees
from this wi th abhorrence back in to itself. It is a pure conscience
which rejects with scorn such a moral idea of the world; it is
in its own self the simple Spirit that, certain of itself, acts conscientiously regardless ofsuch ideas, and in this immediacy possesses its truth. While, however, this world of dissemblance is
nothing else but the developmen t of moral self-consciousness
in its moments, and hence is its reality, its essential nature, by
retreating into itself, will not become anything different. Its
retreat in to itself means rather th.il t consciousness has realized
that its truth is a pretended truth. It would always have to be
giving out this pretended truth as its truth, for it would have
to eJ(:press and pre§ent itself as an objective idea} but would be
aware tha,t all this is merely a dissemblance. It would therefore
be, in fact, hypocrisy, and the scornful rejection of that dissemblance would be itself ~hefirst expression of hypocrisy.
c. Con:science. The 'beautiful soul', evil and its forgiveness
63 2 • The antinomy of the moral view of the world, viz. that
there is amoral consciousne::;s, and that there is none, or that
the validation of duty lies beyond consciousness, and conversely, takes place in it-these contradications were gathered
up in the idea in which the non..,moral consciousness hasIJ10ral
validity, its contingent knowing and willing are assumed to
have full weight, and happiness is granted to it as an act of
grace. MoraLself-consciousnessdid not accept responsibility for
this self",contradictory idea, but shifted it on to a being other
than itself. But this placing outside of itself what it must think
of as necessary is as much a contradiction as regards form, as
the other was as regards content. Because, however, what
appear as contradictory propositions, which the moral consciousness makes clumsy efforts first to separate and then to

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

reconcile, are intrinsically the same, since pure duty;, viz. as pure
knowing, is nothing else than the self of consciousness, and the
self of consciousness is heing and actuality: and similarly, because
what is supposed to lie beyond actual consciousness is nothing
else than pure thought, and thus is, in fact, the self'--because
this is so, self. . consciousness,Jor us or in itself, retreats into itself,
and is aware that that being is its own self, in which what is
actual is at the same time pure knowing and pure duty. It is
itself in its contingency completely valid in its own sight, and
knows its immediate individuality to be pure knowing and
doing, to be the true reality and harmony.
633. This self of conscience, Spirit that is directly aware of
itself as absolute truth and being, is the third self, We have
reached it as the outcome of the third world of Spirit and we
shall briefly compare· it with the two preceding selves. The
totality or actuality which shows itself to be the truth of the
ethical world is the self of the [legal] person; its existence consists in its being acknowledged by others. Just as this person
is the self that is devoid of substance, so is its existence an
abstract realitytoo. The person counts, and thatsimply as a person: the self is the pointimmediate1yatrest in the element of
its being. That point is not separated off from its universality,
and therefore the two are not actively related to one another :
the universal is in it without any distinction, and is neither the
content of the self, nor is the self fiUed by itself. The second
self is the world of culture which has attained its truth, or it
is Spirit that has recovered itselffrom its dividedness-=-absolute
freedom. In this self, that first, immediate unity of individuality
and universality is sundered; the universal which all the same
remains a purely spiritual entity, the state of being acknowledged or a universal willing and knowing, is object and content
of the selfand its universal reality. But it does not have the form
of an ex is tence free from the self; in this self, therefore, ito btains
no filling and no positive content, no world. Moral self..consciousness does indeed let its universality go free so that it
becomes a nature ofits own, and equallyit holds fast toit within
itself as a superseded moment. It is, however, merely an insincere play ofalternating these two determinations. It is as conscience that it first has, in its selfocertainty, a content for the previously empty duty, as also for the right and the universal will

MORALITY

that were empty of content. And because this self-assurance is
at the same time an immediacy, conscience exists.
634. Moral self..,consciousness having attained its truth, it
therefore abandons, or rather supersedes, the internal division
which gave rise to the dissemblance, the division between the
in-itself and the self, between pure duty qua pure purpose, and
reality qua a Nature and sense opposed to pure purpose. It is,
when thus returned into itself, concrete moral Spirit which, in
the consciousness of pure duty, does not give itself an empty
criterion to be used against actual consciousness; on the contrary, pure duty, as also the Nature opposed to it, are superseded moments. Spirit is, in an immediate unity, a self-actualizing being, and the action is immediately something concretely
moral.
635. Suppose a case of moral action; it is an objective reality
for the knowing consciousness. This, qua conscience, knows it
in an immedi~te, concrete manner; and at the same time it is
only as conscience knows it. Knowing is contingent in so far
as it issomethingotber than the objec.t ; but Spirit that is selfcertain is no 19nger su,qh a contingent knower, and a producer
Qf thougbts divofcedfrom reality. On the contrary, since the
separation of the in-itselfand tbe.selfhas been done away with,
a case of moralac:tion is, in the sense-certainty of knowing,
directly as it is in itself, and it is in itself only in the way that
it is in this [kind ofJ.knowing. Action qua actualization is thus
the pure form of wil1c=-=-the simple conversion of a reality that
merely is into a reality that results from action, the conversion
of the bare mode of objective knowing [Le. knowing an object]
into one of knowing reality as something produced by consciousness. J.ust as sense-certainty is immediately taken up, or rather
converted, into the in",jtself of Spirit, so this conversion, too,
is simple apd unmediated, a transition effected by the pure
Notion withou t alteration of the cont.ent, the (;ontent being determined by the interest of the consciousness knowing it.
Further, conscience does notsplit up the circumstances of the
cas.e into a variety ofduties. It does not behave as a positive universal medium, wherein the many duties would acquire, each for
itself, a fixed substanti;ll nature. If it did, then either no action
could take place .atall, because each concrete case involves an
antithesis in general, and, in a case of morality, a clash of

386

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

duties-and therefore by the very nature of action one side
would be injured, one duty violated: or else, if action did take
place, there would be an actual violation of one of the conflicting duties. Conscience is rather the negative One, or absolute
self, which does away with these various moral substances; it
is simple action in accordance with duty, which fulfills not this
or that duty, but knows and does what is concretely right. It
is, therefore, first of all moral action qua action into which the
previous moral consciousness that did not act has passed. The
concrete shape of the deed may be analysed by the consciousness looking for distinctions into various properties, i.e. here,
into various moral relations; and each of these may either be
asserted as absolutely valid (as it must be if it is supposed to
be duty), or else compared and tested. In the simple moral
action ofconscience , duties are lumped together in such a way
that all these singl~ entities are straightway demolished, and the
sifting of them in the steadfast certainty of conscience to ascertain what our duty is, simply does not take place.
636. Just as Ii tde is there pres en t 'In conscience' tha tfl uctua tinguncertainty of consciousness which now places so-caUed
puremoralityoutsideofitselfinto another, holy being and takes
itselfto he unholy, butthenagainplacesso-called pure mora.lity
within itself, and the connection of the sensuous 'with the moral
in that other being.
637. Itrenounces all these attitudes and dissemblances, connected with the moral view of the world, when it renounces
thatconsciousness which thinks of duty and reality as contradictory. According to this latter view, I actmoraHy when I am
conscious ofperforming only pureduty and nothing else but that;
this means, in fact, when I do not act. But when I really act,
I am conscious of an 'other', of a reality which is already in
existence, and ora reality I wish to produce; I have a specific
purpose and fulfil a specific duty in which there is something
else than the pure duty which alone should be intended. Conscience, on the other hand, is awareness of the fact that, when
the moral consciousness declares pure duty to be the essence of
its action, this pure purpose is a dissemblance of the truth of
the matter; for the fact is that pure duty consists in the empty
abstraction of pure thought, and has its reality and its content
only in a specific reality, in a reality which is the reality of Con-

MORALITY

sciousness itself~ and consciousness not as a mere 'thought-thing'
but as an individual. As for conscience itself) this knows that
it has its truth in the immediate certainty of itself This immediate
concrete self-certainty is the essence [of the action]; looking at
this certainty from the point of view of the antithesis of consciousness, the content of the moral ~ction is the doer's own
immedia te individuality; and the form of that content is just this
self as a pure movemen t, viz. as [the individual's] knowing or
his own conviction.
638. Looking more closely at the unity of the moral consciousness and at the significance of its moments, we see that
it regards itself as the in-itself or essence; but as conscience, it
apprehends its being-for-self or its self. The contradiction of the
moral consciousness resolves itself, i.e. the difference which lies
at its base proves to be none, and it runs away into pure negativity; but this precisely is the self, a simple self which is both
a pure knowing and a knowledge of itself as this individual consciousness. Consequently,- this self constitutes the content of
what was previously the empty essence; for it is actual, a self
which no longer has the significance of being a natu:re alien
to the essence and, with laws of its ow:Q, independent of it. As
the negative, it is the dijJerence within pure essence~ a content)
and one, too, whi(::h is valid in and for itself.
639. Further, this self, qua a pure s.elf-identical knowing, is
the absolute universal, so that just this knowing, as its own knowing, as conviction, is duty. Duty is no longer the universal that
stands over against the self; on the contrary, it is known to have
no validity when thus separated. It is now the law that e~ists
for the sake of the self) not the self that exists for the sake of
the law. Law and duty, however, have for that reason the significance not only of being-for-self but also of intrinsic beinQ; for
this knowing, because it is self-identical, is precisely the in-its~lf.
In consciousness, too, this in-itself separates itself from that immediate unity with being-for.. self; as thus standing over against
the latter it is being, a being-for-another. Duty itself, as dlJ.ty forsaken by the self, is now known to be only a moment; from signifying the absolute essence, it has fallen to the level of mere being,
which is not self~ is not for itself, and is therefore a. being:foranother. But the being-for~another remains an essential moment
just because the self, qua consciousness, constitutes the antithesis

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

ofbeingufor-selfand being-for-another; and now duty is present
in consciousness as something directly actual, is no longer merely
abstract pure consciousness.
640. This being-for-another is, therefore, the substance which
remains in itself or unexplicated, which is distinct from the self.
Conscience has not given up pure duty or the abstract in-itself;
duty is the essential moment of relating itself, qUf!, universality,
to another. Conscience is the common element of the two selfconsciousnesses, and this element is the substance in which the
deed has an enduring reality, the momen t of being recognz'zed and
acknowledged by others. The moral consciousness does not possess
this momen t of recogni tion by others, of pure consciousness which
has a real existence; and consequently does not act, or actualize
anything at all. Its in-itselfis for it either abstract, unreal essence,
or being as a reality which is not spiritual. The existent reality
of conscience, however, is one which is a se/h an existence which
is conscious of itself, the spiritual element of being recognized
and acknowledged. The action is thus only the translation of
its individual content into the objective element, in which it is universal and recognized, and it is just the fact that itis recognized
that makes the deed a reality. The deed is recognized and
thereby made real because the existent reality is directly linked
with conviction or knowledge; Of, in other words, knowing
one~s purpose is directly the element of existence, is universal
recognition. For the essence of the action, duty, consists in conscience's conviction about it; it is just this conviction that'is the
in-itself; it is the implicitly universal self-consciousness, or the state
of being recognized, and hence a reality. What is done with the
conviction of duty is, therefore, at once something that has
stand~ngand"a real existence. There is, then, no more talk of
good intentions coming to nothing, or of the good man faring
badly; on the contrary, the duty that is known to be such is
fulfilled and becomes a reality, just because what is essentially
a duty is the universal for all self-consdousnesses, is that which
is recognized and acknowledged and thus positively is. But,
taken separately and alone, without the content of self, duty
is a heing-for-another, something transparent which has merely
the significance of an essentiality in general, lacking aU content.
6.41. Ifwe look back on the sphere where spiritual reality
first made its appearance, we find that the Notion involved was

MORALITY

38g

that the utterance of individuality is that which is both in and
for itself. Buttheshape which immediately expressed this Notion
was the honest consciousness which busied itself with the abstract
thing itself [Sache selbst]. This 'thing itself' was there a predicate;
but it is in conscience that it is for the first time a subject which
has made explicit all the moments of consciousness within it,
and for which all these moments, substantiality in general,
external existence, and the essential nature of thought, are contained in this certainty of itself. The 'thing itselP has substantiality in general in the ethical sphere, external existence in
culture, the self... knowing essentiality of thought in morality;
and in conscience it is the subject that knows these moments
within it. While the 'honest consciousness' always seizes merely
the empty thing itself, conscience, on the other hand, wins the
thing in its fullness, a fullness given to it by conscience itself.
Conscience is this power because it knows the moments of consciousness as moments, dominating them as their negative
essence.
642. When conscience is considered in relation to the single
determinations of the antithesis manifest in action and its
awareness of the nature of those determinations, its relation to
the actual case in which it has to act is, in the first instance,
that of knower. In so far as this knowing has in it the moment
of universality, conscientious action requires that the actual case
before itshould he viewed unrestrictedly in all its bearings, and
therefore that all the circumstances of the case should be accurately known and taken into consideration. But this knowing,
since it knows the universality as a moment, is at the same time
aware that it does not know all the circumstances, Of, in other
words, that it does not act conscientiously. The genuinely universal and pure relation of knowing would be a relation to SOmething not containing an antithesis, a relation to itself; but action,
in virtue of the antithesis it essentially contains, is related to
a negative of consciousness, to areality possessing intrinsic being.
Contrasted with the simplicity of pure consciousness, with the
absolute other or implicit manifoldness) this reality is a plurality
of circumstances which breaks up and spreads out endlessly in
all directions, backwards into their conditions, sideways into
their connections, forwards in their consequences. The conscientious mind is aware of this nature of the thing and of its

39 0

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

relation to it, and knows that, in the case in which it acts, it
does not possess that full acquaintance with all the attendant
circumstances which is required, and that its pretence of con:
scientiously weighing all the circumstances is vain. However,
this acquaintance with, and weighing of, all the circumstances
are not altogether lacking; but they exist only as a moment, as
something which is only for others; and this incomplete knowledge
is held by the conscientious mind to be sufficient and complete,
because it is its own knowledge.
643. Similarly with the universality of the essence, that is, with
the determination of the content by pure consciousness. Con~
science, when it proceeds to action, enters into relation with
the many aspects of the case. The case breaks up into its various
separate parts and so, too, does the relation of pure consciousness to it, with the result that the manifold nature of the case
becomes a multiplicity of duties. Conscience knows that it has
to choose between them, and to make a decision; for none of
them, in its specific character or in its content, is absolute; only
pure duty is that. But this abstraction [of pure duty] has
attained in its reality the significance of the self-conscious 'I'.
The self-certain Spirit rests, qua conscience, within itself, and
its real universality or its duty lies in its pure conviction of duty,
This pure conviction is, as such, as empty as pure duty, is pure
in the sense that there is nothing in it, no specific content that
is a duty. But action is called for, something must be determined
by the individual, and the self-certain Spiri t in which the Initselfhas attained the significance of the self-conscious 'I', knows
that it has this determination and content in the immediate certainty of itself. This} as a determination and content, is the natural
consciousness, i.e. impulses and inclinations. Conscience does
not recognize the absoluteness of any content, for it is the abso~
lute negativity of everything determinate. It determines from
£ts own self; but the sphere of the self in to which falls the deter~
minateness as such is the so-called sens~-nature; to have a contenttaken from the immediate certainty of itself means that
it has nothing to draw on but sense-nature. Everything that
in previous forms of experience presented itself as good or bad,
as law and right, is something other than the immediate certainty of self; it is a universal which is now a being-for-another.
Or, looked at from another aspect, it is an object which, while

MORALITY

39 1

mediating consciousness with itself, comes between consciousness and its own truth, so that instead of the object being the
immediacy of consciousness, it rather cuts consciousness off
from itself. For conscience, however, self-certainty is the pure,
immediate truth; and this truth is thus its immediate certainty
of self, conceived as content, i.e. this truth is in general the caprice
of the individual, and the contingency of his unconscious
natural being [his sense-nature].
644. This content at the same time counts as a moral essentiality or as duty. For pure duty, as was found when testing laws,
is utterly indifferent to any content and tolerates any content.
Here it has, at the same time, the essential form of being-forself, and this form of individual conviction is nothing else but
consciousness of the em ptiness of pure duty and of the fact that
pure duty is only a moment, that its substantiality is a predicate
which has its subject in the individual, whose caprice gives it
its content and can associate every content with this form and
attach its conscientiousness to the content. An individual increases his property in a certain way; it is everyone's duty to
provide for the support of himself and his family, and no less
to have regard to the possibility of being useful to his fellow men,
and of doing good to thos~ in need. The individual is aware
that thisi$ a dirty, for this content is directly contained in his
certainty of himself; furthermore, he perceives that he fulfils
this duty in this particular case. Others, perhaps, hold this specific way of behaving to be humbug; they hold to other aspects
of the concrete cas.e, he, however, holds firmly to this aspect,
because he is conscious of the increase of property as a pure
duty. Thus, what others call violence and wrongdoing, is the
fulfilment of the individual's duty to maintain his independence
in face of others; what they call cowardice, is the duty of supporting life and the possibility of being useful to others; but
what they ,call courage violates both duties. But cowardipecannot be so ineptas not to know that the preservation of life and
the possibility of being useful to others are duties-so inept as
not to be convinced of the moral obligatoriness of its action, and
not to know that this obligatoriness consists in knowing it to be
such. O.therwise it would be guilty of ineptitude, of being
immoral. Since.moralityliesin the consciousness of having ful~
filled one's duty, this will not be lacking when the action is

39 2

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

called cowardice any more than when it is called courage. The
abstraction called duty, being capable of any content, is also
capable of cowardice. The doer, then, knows what he does to
be a duty, and since he knows this, and the conviction of duty
is the very essence of moral obligation, he is thus recognized
and acknowledged by others. The action is thereby validated
and has an actual existence.
645. It is of no use to object to this freedom, which places
any and every kind of con tent in the universal passive medium
of 'duty' and 'knowing', by maintaning that another content
ought to h~ve been placed in it; for whatever content it be,
it contains the blemish Q[determinateness from which pure knowing
is free, determinateness which pure knowing can disdainfully
reject, or equally can accept. Every content, because it is
determinate, stands on the same level as any other, even if it
does seem to be characterized by the elimination in it of the
elementofparticularity. It may seem that, since, in the actual
case, duty in general is sundered into an antithesis and thereby
into the antithesis of individuality and universality, the duty
whose content is the universal itselfdirectlycontains the nature
of pureduty,and form and content are thus completely in
accord. It might see,m, then, that action for the general good
is 10 be preferred to action for the good ofthe individual; but
this universal duty is simply what already exists as absolute substance, as law and right, and is valid on its own account independently of the individual's knowledge and conviction, not
to mention his own immediate interest. It is, therefore, precisely
against theformofthatduty that morality in general is directed.
But as regards its content, thattoo is a determinate content, in so
far as the general good is opposed to the good of the individual.
Conseq uently, its law is one from which conscience knows itself
to be absolutely free, and it gives itself the authority to add to
and take from, to neglect as well as fulfil it. Then, again, the
above distinctivn between duty to the individual and duty to
the universal is, in accordance with the nature of the antithesis
as such, not something definitely fixed. The truth is rather that
what the individual does for himself also contributes to the
general good; the more he has made provision for himself, not
only is there a greater possibility of his being of service to others,
but his actual existence itself consists only in his being and living

MORALITY

393

in contact with others. His individual enjoyment essentially has
the meaning of putting what is his own at the disposal of others
and of helping them to obtain their enjoyment. Therefore, in
the fulfilment of duty to individuals and so to oneself, the duty
to the universal is also fulfilled. Any weighing and comparing
of duties which might be made here would be tantamount to
calculating the advantage accruing to the universal from an
action. But firstly, the result would be that morality would be
made dependent on the necessary contingency of insight, and
secondly, it is precisely the essence of conscience to have no
truck with this calculating and weighing of duties, and to make
its own decision without reference to any such reasons.
646. In this way, then, conscience acts and preserves itself
in the unity of its essential and actual being, in the unity of pure
thought and individuality: it is the self-assured Spirit which has
its truth within itself, in its knowledge, and therein as knowledge
of duty. It maintains itself therein by the very fact that what
is positive in the action-the content as well as the form of duty
and the knowledge of it-belongs to the self, to the certainty
of itself; but what seeks to confront the self with an essential being
of its own is held to be something not true, something stripped
of its self. subsistenceand only a moment. Consequently, what
counts is not simply knowing in general, but conscience's knowledge of th.e circumstances. It places in duty, as the universal
in..,itselfness, the content which it takes from its natural individuality; for the content is one that is present within itself. This
content, in virtue of the universal medium in which it exists,
becomes the duty which it carries out, and empty pure duty,
just through this action, becomes established as something not
self..,subsistent, as only a moment; this content is the cancelled
emptiness of pure duty, or its fulfilment. But even so, conscience
is free from any content whatever; it absolves itself from any
specific duty w~ich is supposed to have the validity of law. In
the strength of its own self-assurance it possesses the majesty
of absolute autarky, to bind and to loose. This self-determination
is therefore without more ado absolutely in conformity with
duty. Duty is the knowing itself; this simple seHhood, however,
is the in-itself; for the in-itself is pure self-identity, and this is
in this consciousness.
647. This pure knowing is immediately a being-for-another;

394

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

for, as pure self~identity, it is immediacy, or being. But this being
is at the same time the pure universal, the selfhood of all: in
other words, the action is acknowledged and therefore actual.
This being is the element whereby conscience stands directly
in a relation of eq uality with every self-consciousness; and the
meaning of this relation is not an impersonal law, but the self
of conscience.
648. However, in that this right thing which conscience does
is at the same time a being-for-another, it seems that a disparity
attaches to conscience. The duty which it fulfils is a specific content; it is true that this content is the self of consciousness, and
so consciousness's knowledge of itself, its identity with itself. But
once fulfilled, set in the medium of being, this identity is no
longer knowing, no longer this process of differentiation in
which its differences are at the same time immediately superseded; on the contrary, in being, the difference is established
as an enduring difference, and the action is a specific action, not
identical with the element ofeveryone's self·consciousness, and
therefore not necessarily acknowledged. Both sides, the conscience that acts and the universal consciousness that acknowledges this action as duty, are equally free from the specificity
of this action. On account of this freedom, their relationship
in the common medium of their connection is really a relation
of complete disparity} as a result of which the consciousness
which is explicitly aware of the action finds itself in a state of
complete uncertainty about the Spirit which does the action and
is certain of itself. The latter acts, it gives being to a specific
content; others hold to this being as this Spirit's truth, and are
therein certain of this S piri t; it has declared therein what it holds
to be duty. But it is free from any specific duty; it is not present
at that point where others imagine it actually to be; and this
very medium of being, and duty as something possessing intrinsic
being, count for it only as a moment. What, therefore, it places
before them it also 'displaces' again, or rather has straightway
'displaced' or dissembled. For its actual being is for it not this
duty and determinate character ithas put forward, but the actuality which it has in the absolute certainty of itself.
649. Others, therefore, do not know whether this conscience
is morally good or evil, or rather they not only cannot know,
but they must also take it to be evil. For, just as it is free from

MORALITY

395

the specificity of duty, and from duty as possessing an intrinsic
being, so likewise are they. What conscience places before them,
they themselves know how to 'displace' or dissemble; it is some~
thing expressing only the self of another, not their own self: not
only do they know themselves to be free from it, but they must
dispose of it in their own consciousness, nullify it by judging
and explaining it in order to preserve their own self.
650. But the action of conscience is not only this determination
of being which is forsaken by the pure self, What is to be valid,
and to be recognized as duty, is so only through the knowledge
and conviction that it is duty, through the knowledge of oneself
in the deed. If the deed ceases to have this self within it, it ceases
to be that which alone is its essence. Its existence, forsaken by
this consciousness, would be an ordinary reality, and the action
would appear to us to be the fulfilling of one's pleasure and
desire. What ought to be there, is here an essentiality solely by
its being known to be the self-expression of an individuality; and
it is this being known that is acknowledged by others, and which
as such ough t to h<:ive an existence.
65 I. The self enters into existence as self; the self-assur.ed
Spirit exists as such for others. Its immediate action is not that
which has validity and is actual; what is acknowledged is not
the determinate aspect of the action, not its intrinsic being, but
solely the self-knowing selfas such. The elem~ntoflasting being
is the universal self-consciousness; what enters into this element
cannot be the effect of the action: the effect cannot endure in
it, and acq uires no permanence; it is only self-consciousness tha t
is acknowledged and that obtains an actual existence.
652. Here again, then, we see language as the existence of
Spirit. Language is self-consciousness existingfor others, self-consciousness which as such is immediately present, and as this selfconsciousness is universal. It is the self that separates itself from
itself, which as pure '1'= 'I' becomes objective to itself, which
in this objectivity equally preserves itself as this self, just as it
coalesces direc tly with other selves and is their self-consciousness.
It perc.eives itself just as it is perceived by others, and the perceiving is just existence which has become a self.
653. The content which language has here acquired is no
longer the perverted, and perverting and distracted, self of the
world of culture; on the contrary, it is the Spirit that has

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

returned into itself, is certain of itself, and certain in it$elf of
its truth, or of its own recognition [of that truth], and which
is acknowledged as knowing it. The language of the ethical
Spirit is law and simple command, and complaint, which is
more the shedding of a tear about necessity. Moral consciousness, on the other hand, is still dumb, shut up with itself within
its inner life, for there the self does not as yet have an existence:
existence and the self stand as yet only in an externai relation
to each other. Language, however, only emerges as the middle
term, mediating between independent and acknowledged selfconsciousnesses; and the existentselfis immediately universal acknowledgement, an acknowledgement on the part of many, and
in this manifoldness a simple acknowledgement. The content
of the language of conscience is the self that knows itself as essential
bez'ng. This alone is what it declares, and this declaration is the
true actuality of the act, and the validating of the action. Consciousness declares its conviction; it is in this 'conviction alone that
the action is a duty; also it is valid as duty solely through the
conviction being declared. For universal self..consdousness is free
from the specijicaction that merely is; what is valid for that selfconsciousness is not the action as an existence, but the conviction
that it is a duty; and this is made actual in language. To make
thedeed a reality does noimean here translatingitscontentfrom
the form of purpose or being-for..self in to the form of an abstract
reality: it means translating it from the form of immediate
self-certainty, which knows its knowledge or being-for-self to be
essential being, into the form of an assurance that consciousness
is convinced of its duty and, as conscience, knows in its own mind
what duty is. This assurance thus affirms that consciousness is
convinced that its conviction is the essence of the matter.
654. Whether the assurance of acting from a conviction of
dutyis true, whether what is done is actually a duty-these questions or doubts have no rpeaning when addressed to conscience.
To ask whether the assurance is true would presuppose that
the inner intention is different from the one put forward, i.e.
that what the individual self wills , can be separated from duty,
from the will of the universal and pure consciousness; the latter
would be put into words, but the former would be strictly the
true motive of the action. But this distinction between the uniM
versal consciousness and the individualselfisjust what has been

MORALITY

397

superseded, and the supersession of it is conscience. The self's
immediate knowing that is certain of itself is law and duty. Its
intention, through being its own intention, is what is right; -all
that is required is that it should know this, and should state
its conviction that its knowing and willing are right. 'The
declaration of this assurance in itself rids the form of its particularity. I t thereby acknowledges the necessary universality of the self.
In calling itself conscience, it calls itself pure knowledge of itself
and pure abstract willing, i.e. it calls itself a universal knowing
and willing'which r.ecognizes and acknowledges others, is the
same as them-for they are just this pure self-knowing and willing-and which for that reason is als9 recognized and acknowledged by them. In the will of the self that is certain of itself,
in this knowledge that the selfis essential being, lies the essence
of what is right. Therefore, whoever says he acts in such and
such a way from conscience, speaks the truth, for his conscience
is the selfthat knows and wills. But it is essential that he should
say so, for this self must
at the same time the universal self.
It is not universal in the content of the act, for this, on account
ofitsspecifidty, is intrinsically an indifferent affair: it is in the
form of the act that>the universality lies. It is this form which
is to he established as actual: it is the self which as such is actual
in language, which,declares itself to be the truth, and just by
so doing acknowledges all othe'r selves and is acknowledged by
them.
655. Conscience, then, in the majesty of its elevation above
specific law and every content of duty, puts whatever content
it pleases into its knowing and willing. It is the moral genius
which knows the inner voice of what it immediately knows to
bea divine voice; and since, in knowing this, it has an equally
immediate knowledge of existence,it is the divine creative
power which in its Notion possesses the spontaneity of life.
Equally, it is in its own self divine worship, for its action is the
con templation of its own divinity.
656. This solitary divine worship is at the same time essenti~
ally the divine worship ofa community, and the pure inner know~
£r.zg and perceiving ofitse1fadvances to the moment ofconscz'ousness. The contemplation of itself is its objective existence and this
objective element is the declaration of its knowing and willing
as something universal. Through this declaration the self

be

39 8

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

acquires moral validity and the act becomes an effective deed.
The actuality and lasting existence of what it does is universal
self-consciousness; but the declaration of conscience affirms the
certainty of itself to be pure self, and thereby to be a universal
self. On account of this utterance in which the self is expressed
and acknowledged as essentia1 being, the validity of the act is
acknowledged by others. The spirit and substance of their
association are thus the mutual assurance of their conscientiousness, good intentions, the rejoicing over this mutual purity, and
the refreshing of themselves in the glory of knowing and utter ..
ing, of cherishing and fos tering, such an excellen t state of affairs.
In so far as this conscience still distinguishes its abstract consciousness from its self'o.consciousness, it has only a hidden life in
God; it is true that God is immediately present in its mind and
heart, in its self; but what is manifest, its actual consciousness
and the mediating movement of that consciousness, is for it
something other than that hidden inner life and the immediacy
of God's presence. Ids only in the completed form of conscience
that the distinction between its abstract consciousness and its
self-consciousness is eliminated. Conscience knows that the
abstract consciousness is just this self, thisbeing-for..itselfthat is
certainofitself, knows that it is precisely in the immediacy of
the relation of the selfto the in-itself-whichwhen posited outside
the self is an abstract God and hidden from it---....that the dif..
ference is eliminated. For that relation is a mediating one in
which the related terms are not one and the same, but each
is an other for the other, and only in a third term are they one.
The immediate relation, however, means in Jactnothing else but
the unity of the terms. The consciousness that has risen above
the thoughtlessness that still holds these differences~which are
none~to be differences, knows the immediacy of the presence
within it of the absolute Being as the unity of that Being and
its ownself: it thus knows itself as the living in.-itself, and knows
that this knowledge is religion, which as knowledge that has
a perceived or outer existence is the utterance of the community
concerning its own Spirit.
657. Here, then, we see self-consciousness withdrawn into its
innermost being, for which all externality as such has
vanished-withdrawn into the contemplation of the 'I' = 'I', in
which this'!' is the whole of essentiality and existence. It is

MORALITY

399

submerged in this Notion of itself, for it has been driven to the
limit of its extremes, and, moreover, in such a way, that the
moments distinguished whereby it is real, or is still consciousness,
are not only for us these pure extremes; on the contrary, what
it isfor itself, and what is for it intrinsic and what is for it existence,
have evaporated into abstractions which no longer have any
stability ,anys u bs tance, for this consciousness itself; and all that
before was essential being for consciousness has reverted into
these abstractions. Refined into this purity, consciousness exists
in its poorest form, and the poverty which constitutes its sole
possession is itselfa vanishing. This absolute certainty into which
substance has resolved itself is the absolute untruth which collapses internally; it is the absolute self-consciousness in which con ..
sciousness is submerged.
658. Looking at this submergence of consciousness within
itself, we see that the unexplicated substance is, for consciousness,
knowledge as its knowledge.. As consciousness, it is divided into
the antithesis of itself and its object which is, for it, essence;
but it is just this object that is perfectly transparent, is its own
self, and its cOl1sdousness is -only this knowledge of itself, All
life, all spiritual essentiality, has withdrawn into this self and
has lost its difference from the 1 itsel[ The moments of consciousness are, therefore, these extreme abstractions, none of
which endures but each of which loses itself in the other and
prod uces it. It is the fluctuating a tti tude to itselfof the Unhappy
Consciousness; but here this fluctuation takes place explicitly
for consciousness within' itself, and is conscious of being the
Notion ofReason, whereas the Unhappy Consciousness is only
implicitly that Notion. The absolute certainty of itself thus finds
itself, quacons~iousness, changed immediately intna sound that
dies ~way, into an objectification of its being-for ..se1f; but this
created world is its speech, which likewise it has immediately
heard and only the echo of which returns to it. This return,
therefore, does not mean that the selfis in essence and actuality
presen t in its speech;for essence is not for it an it-self or merely
implicit being, but its very sel£: Just as little has consciousness
an outer existence, for the objective aspect does not/get as far as
heing a negative of the actual self, in the same way thal this
self does not attain to an actual existence. It Jacks the power
to externalize itself, the power to make itself into a Thing, and

400

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

to endure [mere] being. It lives in dread of besmirching the
splendour of its inner being by action and an existence; and,
in order to preserve the purity of its heart, it flees from contact
with the actual world, and persists in its self-willed impotence
to renounce its selfwhich is reduced to the extreme of ultimate
abstraction, and to give itselfa substantial existence, or to transform its thought into being and put its trust in the absolute difference [between thought and being]. The hollow object which
it has produced for itself now fills it, therefore, with a sense of
emptiness. Its activity is a yearning which merely loses itself
as consciousness becomes an object devoid of substance, and,
rising above this loss, and falling back on itself, finds itself only
as a lost soul. In this transparent purity of its moments, an unhappy, so-called 'beautiful soul', its light dies away, within it,
and it vanishes like a shapeless vapour that dissolves into thin
alr.

659. This silent fusion of the pithless essentialities of the evaporated life has, however, still to be taken in the other meaning
ofthe actuality ofconscience ,and in the manifestation ofitsmove
ment: conscience has to be considered as acting. The objective
momentinthisconsciousness acquiredabovethedetermination
ofa universal consciousness, The knowledge that knows itself
is, qua this particular self, distinct from other selves; the languageinwhich all reciprocally ac~nowledge each other as actingconscientiously, this universal identity, faUs apart into the
non-identity of individual be in g-fo r".sel f: each consciousness is
just. as much simply reflected out oEits universality into itself.
As a result, the antithesis of individuality to other individuals,
and to the universal, inevitably comes on the scene, and we
have to consider this relationship and its movement. In other
words, this universality and duty have the very oppositesignificanee of the specific individuality that exempts itself from the
un;versal, for which pure duty is only a universality that
appears on the surface, and is turned outwards: duty is only
a rnatter of words, and counts as a being-for-another. Oon,.
science, which in the first instance is only negatively directed
against duty as this given specific duty, knows itself to be free from
it; but since it fills the empty duty with a specific contentfrom
itself, it is positively aware that it, as this particular self, makes
the content. Its pure self, as an empty .knowing, is something
u

MORALITY

devoid of content and determinatio~. The content which it
gives to that knowing is taken from its own self, as this specific
self, is taken from itself as a natural individuality. And, in speaking of the conscientiousness of its action, it may well be aware
of its pure self, but in the purpose of its action, a purpose with
an actual content, it is aware of itself as this particular individual, and is conscious of the antithesis between what it is for
itself and what it is for others, of the antithesis of universality
or duty and its reflection out of universality into itself.
660. While in this way the antithesis, into which conscience
enters when it acts, expresses itself in its inner being, the antithesis is at the same time a disparity on its outer side in the
element of existence, the disparity of its particular individuality
in relation to another individual. Its particularity consists in
the fact that the two moments constituting its consciousness,
theselfand thein-itself, are held to be unequal in value within
it, a dis pari ty in which they are so determined that the certainty
of itself is the essential being in face of the in-itself or the universal, which counts only as a moment. In contrast to this internal determination there thus stands the element of existence
or universal consciousness, for which the essential being is
rather universality, duty; while individuality, on the other
hand, which in contrast to the universal is for itself, counts only
as a superseded moment. For the consciousness which holds
firmly to duty, the first consciousness counts as evil, because of
the disparity between its innerbeingand the universal; and since,
at the same time, this first consciousness declares its action to
be in conformity with itself, to be duty and conscientiousness,
it is held by the universal consciousness to be hypocrisy.
661. The movement of this antithesis is ~n the first instance the
formal production of an identity of what the evil consciousness
is in its OWn self and what it declares itself to be; it must be
made apparent that it is evil, and th.us its existence made to
correspond to its essence; the hypocrisy must be unmasked.
This return of the disparity present in hypocrisy into a correspondence is not already an accomplished fact 'because hypocrisy, as is commonly said, demonstrates its respect for duty and
virtuejusthy making a show of them, and using them as a mask
to hide itself from its own consciousness, no less than from
others; as if in this acknowledgement of the antithesis within

C, (BB.) SPIRIT

itself, identity and correspondence were implied. Only, it is at
the same timejust as much reflected out of this spoken acknow~
ledgement and into itself; and the fact that it uses what is an
essence as a heing-for~another implies rather its own contempt for
that essence, and the exposure to everyone of its own lack of
any substantial being. For what lets itselfbe used as an external
instrument shows itself to he a thing which possesses no importance of its own.
662. Also, this identity is not brought about either by the
one-sided persistence of the evil consciousness in its own attitude, or by the judgement of the universal consciousness. If the
former denies itselfin face of the consciousness of duty, ,and declares that what this asserts to be wickedness, to be absolutely
non-identical with the universal, is an action in accordance
with inner law and conscience, then in this one~sided assurance
of an identity there still remains its non-identity with the other,
since this other does not believe it or acknowledge it. In other
words, since the one~sided persistence in one extreme cancels
itself out, evil would, it is true, thereby confess to being evil,
hut in so doing it would directly abolish itself and cease to be
hypgcrisy, and would not, as such, unmask itself. I tadmits, in
fact, to being eviL by asserting that it acts, in opposition to the
acknowledged uJ:).iversal, according to it~ own inner law and
conscience. For if this Jaw and conscience were not the l~w of
its single individu;.=t.lity and caprice, it would not be something
inner or peculiar to it, but what is universally acknowledged.
Therefore, when anyone says that he is acting according to his
own law a1).d cO.J:).science against others, he is saying, in fact, that
he is wronging them. But actual conscience is not this persistence
in a knowing and willing that opposes itself to the universal;
on the contrary, the universal is the element of its existence,
and its language declares its.action to be an acknowledged duty.
663. Just as little is the persistence of the universal consciousness in its judgement an unmasking and abolition of hypocrisy.
In denouncing hyp.ocrisy as base, vile, and so on, it is appealing
in such judgement to its ownlaw, just as the evil consciousness
appeals to its law. For the former comes forward in opposition
to the latter and thereby as a particular law. I t has, therefore,
no superiority over the other law, rather it legitimizes it. And
this zeal does the very opposite of what it means to do; for it

MORALITY

shows that what it calls true or genuine duty and which ought
to be universally acknowledged, is something not acknowledged;
in so doing it concedes to the other an equal right to befor itself.
664. Thisjudgement has, however, at the same time another
aspect from which it becomes the way to a resolution of the
antithesis confronting it. The consciousness of the universal, in
its relation to the first [evil] consciousness, does not behave as
one that is actual and acts~for the latter is rather the actual
consciousness-but in its antithesis to it, is a consciousness that
is not entangled in the antithesis of individuality and uni ..
versality, which occurs when action is entered upon. It remains
in the universality of thought, behaves as a consciousness thC;lt
apprehends, and its first action is merely one ofjudgement. Now,
through this judgement, it places itself, as we have just
remarked, alongside the first consciousness, and the latter, through
this likeness, comes to see its own self in this other consciousness.
For the consciousness of duty maintains an attitude of passive
apprehension; but it is thereby in con.tradiction with itself as
the absolute will of duty, as a consciousness whose determining
comes solely from itself. It does well to preserve itself in its
purity, for it does not act ; itis the hypocrisy which wants its judging to be taken for an actual deed, and instead of proving its
rectitude by actions, does so by uttering fine sentiments. Its
nature, then, is altogether the same as that which is reproached
with making duty a mere matter of words. In both alike, the
side of reality is distinct from the words uttered: in the onc,
through the selfish purpose of the action, in the other, through
the failure to act at all, although the necessity to act is involved
in the very talk of duty, for duty without deeds is utterly meaningless.
665. Judging, however, is also to he looked at as a positive
act of thought and has a positive content. Through this aspect,
the contradiction present in the apprehending consciousness,
and its identity with the first consciousness, become still more
complete. The consciousness that acts declares its specific action
to be a duty, and the consciousness that judges it cannot deny
this; for duty itself is the form which lacks all content but is
capable of any. In other words, the concrete action which in
its many-sidedness is in its own self diverse, contains the universal aspect-that which is taken as duty-just as much as the

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

particular aspect which constitutes the share and interest of the
individual in the action. Now, the judging consciousness does
not stop short at the former aspect of duty, at the doer's knowledge of it, that this is his duty, and at the fact that the doer
knows it to be his duty, the condition and status of his reality.
On the contrary, it holds to the other aspect, looks at what the
action is in itself, and explains it as resulting from an intention
different from the action itself, and from selfish motives. Just as
every action is capable of being looked at from the point of view
of conformity to duty, so too can it be considered from the point
of view of the particularity [of the doer]; for, qua action, it is
the actuality of the individual. This judging of the action thus
takes it out of its outer existence and reflects it into its inner
aspect, or into the form of its own particularity. If the action
is accompanied by fame, then it knows this inner aspect to be
a desire for fame. If it is altogether in keeping with the station
of the individual, without going beyond this station, and ofsuch
a nature that the individuality does not possess its station as
a character externally attached to it, bu t through its own self
gives filling to this universali ty, there by showing itself capable
ora higher station, then the inner aspect ofthe action is judged
to be ambition, andso on. Since, in the action as such, thedoer
attains toa vision of himseljin objectivity, or to a feeling ofself
in his existence, and thus to enjoyment, the inner aspect is
judged to be an urge to secure his own happiness, even though
this were to consist merely in an inner moral conceit, in the
enjoyment of being conscious of his own superiority andin the
foretaste of a hope offuture happiness. No action can escape
such judgement, for duty for duty's sake, this pure purpose, is
an unreality; it becomes a reality in the deed of an individuality ,and the action is thereby charged with the aspect of particularity. No man is a hero to his valet; not, however, because
the man is not a hero, but because the valet-is a valet, whose
dealings are with the man, not as a hero, but as one who eats,
drinks, and wears clothes, in general, with his individual wants
and fancies. Thus, for the judging consciousness, there is no
action in which it could not oppose to the universa1 aspect of
the ac.tlon, the personal aspect of the individuality, and play
the part of the moral valet towards the agent. 1
lor Leclftres on Philosophy oj World History (H. B. Nisbet's transl. p. 87)·

MORALITY

. 666. The consciousness that judges in this way is itselfbase,
because it divides up the action; producing and holding fast
to the disparity of the action with itself. Further, it is hypocrisy,
because it passes off such judging, not as another manner of
being wicked, but as the correct consciousness of the action,
setting itself up in this unreality and conceit of knowing well
and better above the deeds it discredits, and wanting its, words
without deeds to be taken for a superior kind of reality. By putting itself, then, in this way on a level with the doer on whom
it passes judgement, it is recognized by the latter as the same
as himself. This latter does not merely find himself apprehended
by the other as something alien and disparate from it, but rather
finds that other, according to its own nature and disposition,
identical with himself. Perceiving this identity and giving
utterance to it, he confesses this to the other, and equally expects
that the other, having in fact put himself on the same level,
will also respond in words in which he win give utterance to
thisidentitywith him, and expects that this mutual recognition
will now exist in fact. His confession is not an abasement, a
humiliation, a throwing-away of himself in rela!ion to the
other; for this utterance is not a one-sided affair, which would
establish his disparity with the other: on the contrary, he gives
himself utterance solely on account of his having seen his
identity with the other; he, on his side, gives expression to their
common identity in his confession, and gives utterance to it for
thereason that language is the existence ofSpirit as an immediate
self. He therefore expects that the other will contribute his part
to this exis tenee.
667. But the confession of the one who is wicked, 'I am so',
is not followed by a reciprocal similar confession. This was not
what the judging consciousness meant: quite the contrary. It
repels this community of nature, and is the hard heart that is
jor itself, and which rejects any continuity with the other. As
a result, the situation is reversed. The one who made the confession sees himse1frepulsed, and sees the otherto be in the wrong
when he refuses to let his own inner being come forth into the
outer existence of speech, when the other contrasts the heauty
of his own soul with the penitent's wickedness, yet confronts
the confession of the penitent with his own stiff-necked unrepentant character, mutely keeping himself to himself and

c. (BB.) SPIRIT

refusing to throw himself away for someone else. There is here
expressed in its extreme form the rebellion of the Spirit that
is certain of itself; for it beholds itself, as this simple self-knowledge., in someone else, and, too, in such a way that even the
outer shape of this other is not, as in the case of material wealth,
something without substantial being, is not a Thing; on the contrary, what is held opposed to this other is Thought, simply
knowledge itself, this absolutely fluid continuity of pure knowing
which refuses to put itself into communication with the other
which, in its confession, had ipso facto renounced its separate
being-for-self, and thereby expressly superseded its particularity,
and in so doing posited itself in continuity with the other as
a universal. The other, however, retains with£n itselfand for itself
its uncommunicative being-for-self; and itretains, in face of the
individual who did confess, just the same uncommunicative
being-for-self, although the latter has ahead y thrown this away.
It thereby reveals itself as a consciousness which is forsaken by
and which itself denies Spirit; for it does not kll,oW that Spirit,
in the. absolute certainty qf it~~lf, is lord and master over every
deed andactuali ty, and can cas t them off, and make them as
if they had never happened. Atthe same titne, it does not recognize the contradiction it falls into in not letting the rejection
whichhas taken place in words, be validated as a genuine rejection, while itself has the certainty of its Spirit, notin an actual
deed, but in its inner being, and finds the ouler existence of
this inner being in the utterance of its jl1:dgement. It is thus its
own self which hinders that other's return from the deed into
the spiritual existence of speech and into the identity of Spirit,
and by this hardness of heart produces the disparity which still
exists.
668. Now, in so far as the self-certain Spirit, as a 'beautiful
soul', does not possess the power to renounce the knowledge
of itself which it keeps to itself, it cannot attain to an i~entity
with the consciousness it has repulsed, nor therefore to a vision
of the unity of itself in the other, cannot a'ttain to an objective
existence. Consequently, the identity comes about only negatively, as a heing devoid of Spirit. The 'beautiful sour, lacking
an actual existence, entangled in the contradiction between its
pure self and the necessity of that self to externali:ze i t8eH and
change itselfinto an actual existence, and dwelling in the imme-

MORALITY

diacy of this firmly held antithesis-an immediacy which alone
is the middle term reconciling the antithesis, which has been
intensified to its pure abstraction, and is pure being or empty
nothingness-this 'beautiful soul', then, being conscious of this
contradiction in its unreconciled immediacy, is disordered to
the point of madness, wastes itself in yearning and pines away
in consumption. Thereby it does in fact surrender the being-forself to which it so stubbornly clings; but what it brings forth
is only the non-spiritual unity of [mere] being.
669. The true, i.e. the self-conscious and existent, equalization
of the two sides is necessitated by and already con.tained in the
foregoing. The breaking of the hard heart, and the raising of
it to universality, is the same movement which was expressed
in the consciousness that made confession of itself. The wounds
of the Spirit heal, and leave no scars behind. The deed is not
imperishable; it is taken back by Spirit into itself, and the aspect
of individuality present in it, whether as intention or as an
existent negativity and limitation, straightway vanishes. The
selfthat carries out the action, the formofits act, is only a moment
of the whole, and so likewise is the knowledge, that by its judgementdetermines and establishes the distinction between the individual and universal aspects of the action. The evil consciousness, referred to above, posits this externalization of itself, or
posits itself, as a moment, being enticed into openly confessing
itself by the vision of itself in the other. But just as the former
has to surrender its one.,sided, unacknowledged existence of its
particular being-for-self, so too must this other set aside its onesided, unacknowledged judgement. And just as the former
exhibits the power of Spirit over its actual existenc,e, so does
this other exhibit the power of Spirit over the specific Notion
of itself.
670. The latter, however, renounces the divisive thought,
and the hard~heartedness of the being-for-self which clings to
it, because it has in fact seen itself in the first. This first consciousness which turns its back on its actual existence,and
makes itself into a superseded particular consciousness, thereby
displays itself as in fact a universal. It returns from its external
actual existence back into itselfas essential being, and therein
the universal consciousness thus recognizes itself. The forgive~
ness which it extends to the other is the renunciation of itself,

C. (BB.) SPIRIT

of its unreal essential being which it put on a level with that
other which was a real action, and acknowledges that what
thought characterized as bad, viz. action, is good; or rather
it abandons this dis tinction of the specific thought and its subjectively determined judgement, just as the other abandons its subjective characterization of action. The word of reconciliation is
the objectively existent Spirit, which beholds the pure knowledge
of itself qua universal essence, in its opposite, in the pure knowledge of itself qua absolutely self-contained and exclusive individuality-a'reciprocal recognition which is absolute Spirit.
67 I. It enters into existence only at that point where its pure
knowledge about itself is the antithesis and alternation [of its
dual aspect]. Aware that its pure knowledge is an abstract
essence, absolute Spirit is this conscious duty in absolute antithesis to the knowledge that is conscious of itself, qua absolute
individuality of self, as essence. The former is the pure continuity
of the universal, which is aware that the individuality which
is conscious of itself as essence, is intrinsically a nullity, is evil.
This, however, is the absolute discreteness which is conscious
of itself in its pure oneness as absolute, and of the universal as
something unreal, which exists only for someone else. Bothaspects
are purified into the unity in which there is no longer in them
any existence devoid of self, any negative of consciousness,
w here} on the contrary , duty is the unchanging identicalcharacteT of its self-knowledge, and evil equally has its purpose in its
. being-within-itselj, and its actuality in its utterance. The content
of this utterance is the substance of its enduring existence; it
is the assurance of Spirit's immanent self-certainty. Each of
these two se1f."certain Spirits has no other purpose than its own
pure self, and no other reality and existence than just this pure
self. But yet they are different; and the difference is absolute
because it is set in this element of the pure Notion. It is also
absolute, not only for us, but for the Notions themselves which
stand in this antithesis. For these Notions, though specific in relation to one another, are at the same time in themselves universal, so that they fill out the whole range of the self, and this
self has no other content than this its own determinateness,
which neither goes beyond the self nor is more restricted than
it; for one of them, the absol ute universal, is equally the pure
knowledge of itself, as the other is the absolute discreteness of

MORALITY

individuality, and both are only this pure self-knowledge. Both
determinatenesses are thus pure conscious Notions, whose
determinatenness is itselfimmediately a knowing, or whose relationship and antithesis is the '1'. Consequently, they are these
sheer opposites for one another; it is the completely inner being
which thus confronts its own selfand enters into outer existence.
They constitute pure knowledge which, through this antithesis,
is posited as consciousness. But it is still not yet self-consciousness.
It becomes actually such in the movement of this antithesis.
For this antithesis is rather itself the indiscrete continuity and
identity of'l' = '1'; and each, through the very contradiction ofits
pure universality, which at the same time still strives against
its identity with the other, and cuts itself off from it, explicitly
supersedes itself within its own self. Through this externalization, this knowledge which in its existence is self-discordant
returns i~to the unity of the se.lf. It is the actual' 1', the universal
knowledge ofitselfin its absolute opposite, in the knowledge which
remains internal, and which, on account of the purity Qf its
separated heinc-w#hi.n-self, is· itself completely univ~r~al. The
reconciling Yea, in which the two 'l's let go theiri,lntithetical
ex is ten,ce , is the existence of the ~1' which h 4s expan,dedinto a
duality, and therein remains identical with itself, and, in its
complfteexternalization and opposite, possesses the certainty
of itself: it is God manifested in the midst of those who know
themselves in the form or pure knowledge.

(CC.) RELIGION
VII. RELIGION
672. In the structured forms hitherto considered which are
distinguished in general as Consciousness, Self-consciousness,
Reason, and Spirit, religion, too" as consciousness of absolute
Being as such, has indeed made its appearance, although only
from the standpoint of the consciousness that is conscious of absolute
Being; but absolute Being in and for itself, the self-consciousness
of Spirit, has not appeared in those 'shapes'.
673. Even Cons~iousness, in so far as it is the Understanding,
is consciousness of the supersensible or the inner side of objective
existence. But the sy,persensible, the eternal, or whatever else
it may be caned, is devoid qfself; it i~ orly, to b~gin with, tve
universal, wqieh is a long way yet frqU} bd:Qg Spirit that k,nqws
itself as ,S~irit. Then there w~s the ~df-<::onsdousn~~s that
reached its final 'shape' in the UnbaPP!i Cop~ciousness, that \\Tas
only the pain of tlle Spirit that wrestl~d, but withovt ~ll<::q~ss,
to reach out into qpjectivity. The l.m.ity of the irdivirj.yal s~lf­
consciousness and its changeless essenc~, to w hieh the forwer
attains, remains, therefore, a beyond for self-consciousness. The
immediate existence of Reason which, for us, issued from that
pain, and its peculiar shapes, have no religion, because the selfconsciousness of them knows or seeks itself in the immediate
present.
674. On the other hand, in the ethical world we did see a
religion, namely, the religion of the underworld. It is the belief
in the terrible, unknown night of Fate and in the Eumenides
of the departed spirit: the former is pure negativity in the form
of universality, the latter the same negativity in the form of individuality. Absolute Being is, in the latter form, indeed the
self and present, since other than present the self cannot be. But
the individual self is this individual shade which has separated
from itself the universality which Fate is. True, it is a shade,
a superseded particular self, and thus a universal self; but the
negative significance of the shade has still not changed round

RELIGION

411

into the positive significance of the universal self, and therefore
the superseded self still has, at the same time, the immediate
significance of this particular and essenceless being. But Fate
devoid of self remains the unconscious night which does not
attain to an immanent differentiation, nor to the clarity of selfknowledge.
675. This belief in the nothingness of necessity and in the
underworld becomes belief in Heaven, because the departed
self must unite with its universality, must explicate in this universality what it contains and thus become clear to itself. This
kingdom offaith, howev.er, we saw unfold its content only in the
element of thought without the [concrete] Notion, and for that
reason perish in its fate, viz. in the religion of the Enlightenment. In this religion, the supersensible beyond of the
Understanding is reinstated, but in such a way that self-consciousness remains satisfied in this world; and the supersensible,
empty beyond which is neither to be known nor feared it knows
neither asa·self norasa power.
676. In the religion of morality, thefact that absolute Being
is a positive ·conien t is atlast again recognized; but the con ten t
is bound up with the negativity of the Enlightenment. It is a
being that is at the same time taken back in to the self, in which
it remains shut up, and a differentiated content whose p;:trts are
just ,as immediately negated a,s they are produced. The Fate,
however, which engulfs this contradictory movement is the self
which is conscious of itself as the Fate of what is essentialand

actual.
677. The self-knowing Spirit is., in religion, immediately its
own pureself.. consciousness. Those forms ofit which have been
considered} viz. the true Spirit, the self.. alien~ted Spirit, and
the Spirit that is certain of itself, together constitute Spirit in
its consciousness which, confronting its 'world, does not recognize
itself therein. But in conscience it brings itself, as well as its
objective world in general, into subjection,a,s also its picture ..
thinking and its s.pedfic N otion~,and is now a self~consciousness
that communes with its own self. In this, Spirit conceived as
object, has for itself the significance of being the universal Spirit
that contains within itself all essence and all actuality; yet it
is not in the form offree actuality or the apparent independence
of Nature. True, it has {shape' or the form of being, in that it

412

c.

(CC.) RELIGION

is the object of its consciousness; but because in religion con
sciousness is posited essentially in the determination of self-consciousness, the shape is perfectly transparent to itself; and the
reality it contains is shut up in it and superseded in it in just
the same way as when we speak of 'all reality'; it is universal
reality as thought.
678. Since, then, in religion the determination of the consciousness proper of Spirit does not have the form offree otherness, Spiries existence is distinct from its self-consciousness, and its
reality properfaUs outside ofreligion. There is indeed one Spirit
of both, but its consciousness does not embrace both together,
and religion appears as a part of existence, of conduct and
activity, whose other part is the life lived in its real world. As
we now know that Spirit in its own wor~d and Spirit conscious
of itselfas Spirit, orSpirit in religion,are the same, the perfection ofreHgion consists in the two becoming identical with each
other: not only that religion concerns itself with Spirit's reality
but, conversely, that Spirit, as seW·conscious Spirit, becomes
actual to itself and object of its consciousness. So far as Spirit in
religion pictures itselftoitself,itis'indeed consciousness, and the
reality enclosed within religion is the shape and the guise of
its picture-thinking. But, in this picture-thinking, reaHtydoes
not receive its perfect due, viz; to be not merely a guise but
anindependent freeexistence; and;converse1y,beca use it,lacks
perfection within itselfit is· a specijic shape which does not attain
to what it ought to show forth, viz. Spirit that is conscious of
itself. If its shape is to express Spirit itself, it must be nothing
else than Spirit, and Spirit must appear to itself, or be in actu~
a1'ity, what it is in its essence.' Only by so doing'would that also
be obtained whichinay seem to be the demand for the opposite,
viz. that the ohject of its consciousness have at the same time
the form offree'actuality; but only Spirit that is object to itself
as absolute Spirit is conscious of itself as a free actuality to the
extentthat ilis and remains conscious ofitself therein.
679. When selfmconsdousness and consciousness proper, religion and Spirit in its world', or Spirit's existence, are in the first
instance distinguished from each other, the latter consists in the
totality of Spirit so far as its moments exhibit themselves in
separation, each on its own accollnt. But the moments are con
sciousness, self-consciousness, Reason, and Spirit-Spirit, that is, as
a

D

RELIGION

immediate Spirit, which is not yet consciousness of Spirit. Their
totality, taken together, constitutes Spirit in its mundane existence
generally; Spirit as such contains the previous structur.ed shapes
in universal determinations, in the moments just named. Religion presupposes that these have run their full course and is
their simple totality or absolute self. The course traversed by
these moments is, moreover, in relation to religion, not to be
represented as occurring in Time. Only the totality of Spirit
is in Time, and the 'shapes', which are 'shapes' of the totality
of Spirit, display themselves in a temporal succession; for only
the whole has true actuality and therefore the form of pure freedom in face oran ~other!, a form which expresses itself as Time.
But the moments of the whole, consciousness, self;.consciousness,
Reason, and Spirit, just because they are moments, have no
e:dstencein separation from one anot~er. Just as Spirit was distinguished from its moments, so we have further, in the third
place, to dis tinguish from these momen ts themselves their individual determination. We saw that each of those moments
was differentiated again in its own selfintn a process of its own,
and assumed different 'shapes': as, e.g., in consciousness, sensecertainty and perception were distinct from each other. These
latter'shapes fall apart in Time and belong to a particular totality.
For Spirit descends from its universality to individuality
through determina:tion.The determination, or middle term, is
consciousness, seW·consciousness, and so on. But individuality is
constituted by the shapes assumed by these moments. These,
therefore, exhibit Spirit in its individuality or actuality) and are
distinguished from one another in Time, though in such a way
that the later moment retains within it the preceding one.
'680·. If, therefore, religion is the perfection of Spirit into
which its individual moments--consciousness, self-consciousness, Reason, and Spirit-return and have returned as into
their ground, they together constitute the existent actuality of
the totality of Spirit, which £s only as the differentiating and
self'..returningmovement of these its aspects. The genesis dfreHginn in general is contained in the movement of the universal
moments. But since each of these attributes was exhibited, not
merely as it determines itself in general, but as it is in and for
itself, Le. as it runs its course as a totality within itself, therefore,
what has come to be is not merely the genesis of religion in

C. (CC.) RELIGION

general: those complete processes of the individual aspects at the
same time contain the specificforms of religion itself. The totality
of Spirit, the Spirit of religion, is again the movement away
from its immediacy towards the attainment of the knowledge of
what it is in itself or immediately, the movement in which, finally, the (shape' in which it appears for its consciousness will be
perfectly identical with its essence, and it will behold itself as
it is. In this genesis of religion, Spirit itself therefore assumes
specific 'shapes' which constitute the different moments of this
movement; at the same time, the specific religion has likewise
a specific actual Spirit. Thus, if consciousness, self-consciousness, Reason, and Spirit, belong to self-knowing Spirit in
general) similarly the specific 'shapes' which were specially developed within consciousness, self-consciousness, Reason, and
Spirit, belong to the specific 'shapes' o.f self-knowing Spirit.
From the 'shapes' belonging to each of its moments, the specific
'shape' of religion picks out the one appropriate to it for its
actual Spirit. The one distinctive feature which chara:eterizes
the religion penetrates every aspect of its actual existence and
stamps them with this common character.
681. In this way,the arrangement of the. 'shapes' which have
hitherto appeared differs from the way they~ppeared in their
own order. On this point we shall observe briefly at the start
what is necessary. In the series we considered, eachmqlJlent,
exploring its own depths, formed itself into a totality within its
own peculiar principle; and cognition was the depth, or the
Spirit, wherein the mOIP.ents which have no other subsistence
of their own possessed their substance. But this substance is now
manifest; it is the depth of Spirit that is certain of itself, which
does not allow the principle of each individual moment to
hecome isolated and to. make itself a totality within itself; on
the contrary, gathering and holding together all these moments
within itself, it advances within this total wealth of its actual
Spirit, and al1 its particular moments take anrlreceive in com~
mon in to themselves the like determina teness of the whole. This
self-certain Spirit and its movement is their true actuality q.nd
the being-in-and:for-seif which belongs to each moment. Thus
while the previous single series in its advance marked the retrogressive steps in it by nodes, but continued itself again from
them in a single line, it is now, as it were, broken at these nodes,

RELIGION

4'5

at these universal moments, and falls apart into many lines
which, gathered up into a single bundle, at the same time combine symmetrically so that the similar differences in which each
particular moment took shape within itself meet together.
However, it is self-evident from the whole exposition how this
co-ordination of the general directions here represented is to
be understood; so that it is superfluous to remark that these
differences are to be grasped essentially only as moments of the
development, not as parts. In actual Spirit, they are attributes
of its substance, but in religion, on the other hand, they are
only predicates of the Subject. Similarly, all forms in general
are certainly in themselves or for us contained in Spirit and in
each 'Spirit, but as regards Spirit's actuality, the main point
is solely which determinateness is explicit for it in its consciousness, in which determinateness it has expressed its self, or in
which 'shape' it knows i tsessence.
682. The distinction which was made between actual Spirit
and Spirit that knows itself as Spirit, or between itself, qua conscionsness, and qua self-consciousness, is superseded in the Spirit
that knows itselfin its truth; its consciousness and its self"con~
sdousnessare on the same level. But, as religion here is, to begin
with, immediate, this distinction has not yet returned into Spirit.
What is posited is only the Notion of religion; in this the essence
is self.. consciousness, which is conscious of being all truth and
contains all reality within that truth. This self.. consciousness
has, as consciousness, itself for object. Spirit which, to begin
with, has an immediate knowledge ofits elf is thus to itself Spirit
in the form of immediacy, and the deter'minateness of the form
in which it appears to itself is that of [mere] being. This being,
it is true, isfiUed neither with sensation nor a manifold material,
nor with any other kind of one-sided moments, purposes, and
determinations: it is filled with Spirit and is known by itself
to be all truth and reality. Suchjilling is not identical with its
shape, Spirit qua essence is not identical with its consciousness.
Spirit is actual as absolute Spirit only when it is also for itself
in its truth as it is in its certainty of itself, or when the extremes
into which, asconsciollsness, it parts itselfare explicitly for each
other in the shape of Spirit. The shape which Spirit assumes
as object of its consciousness remains filled by the certainty of
Spirit as by its substance; through this content, the object is

C. (CC.) RELIGION

saved from being degraded to pure objectivity, to the form of
negativity of selfwconsciousness. Spirit's immediate llnitywith
itselfis the basis, or pure consciousness, within which conscious w
ness parts asunder [into the duality of subject and object]. In
this way Spirit, shut up within its pure self~consdousness, does
not exist in religion as the creator of a Nature in general; what
it does create in this movement are its shapes qua Spirits, which
together constitute the completeness of its manifestation. And
this moyement itselfis the genesis ofits complete reality through
its individual aspects, or through its incomplete shapes.
683. The first reality of Spirit is the Notion of religion itself,
or religion as immediate, and therefore Natural Religion. In this,
Spirit knows itself as its object in a natural or immediate shape.
The second reality, however, is necessarily that in which Spirit
knows itself in the shape of a superseded natural existence, or of
the self. This, therefore, -is the Religion of Art; for the shape
raises itself to theform of the self through the creative activity
of consciousness wherehy this beholds irlitsobjectits actor the
self. Finally, the third reality overcomes the . Qne. .sidednessof
thefirsttwo; t4~ s~lfisjust as much an immediacy, as theimme~
diacy is the self. If, in the first reality, Spirit in generalis in
theform of consciousness, and in the second, in that ofself-consciousness, in the thirditis in the form ofthe unity of' both.
It has the shape of heing. .dn... and-for . . it~elf; and when it is thus
conceived as it is in and for. it~elf, this is the Revealed Religion.
But although in this, Spirit has indeed attained its true shape,
yet the shape itself and the picture.. thoughtare still the unvanquished aspee.t from which Spirit must pass over into the
Notion, in order wholly to resolve therein the form of objec. .
tivity, in the Notion which equaUy embraces within itself its
own opposite. It is then that Spirit has grasped the Notion of
itself, just as we now have first grasped it; and its shape or the
element of its existence, being the Notion, is Spirit itself.
A. NATURAL RELIGION

684. The Spirit thatknows Spirit is consciousness of itself and
is present to itself in objective form; it is; and is at the same
time being that isfor itself. It isfor itself, it is the aspect of selfconsciousness, and that too, in contrast to the aspect of its con-

NATURAL RELIGION

sciousness, or of the relating of itself to itself as object. In its consciousness there is antithesis, and in consequence the specific
character of the 'shape' in which it appears to itself and knows
itself. It is solely with this that we are concerned in this
treatment of religion; for we have already considered its unembodied essence, or its pure Notion. But at the same time the
difference of consciousness and self-consciousness falls within
the latter; the 'shape' of religion contains, not the existence of
Spirit as Nature that is free from thought, nor as a thought that
is free from.existence; but it is an existence that is preserved
in thinking, and also something thought that is objectively
present to it. !tis in accordance with the specific character of
this 'shape' in which Spirit knows itself that one religion is distinguished from.another; butwe have at the same time'to note
thattheexposition of this knowledge of itself within the framework of this single specific character does not in fact exhaust
the totality ofan actual religion. The series of different religions
which will come to view, just as much sets forth again only
the different aspects of a single religion, and, moreover, of
every single religion, and the ideas which seem to distinguish
one actual religion from another occur in each one. At the
same time, however, the difference must also be viewed as
a difference of religion. For since Spirit lives in the difference
of its consciousness and its self;'conscionsness, the aim of the
movemen t is to supersede this cardinal distinction and to
give the form of seH-consciousness to the 'shape' tha t is the
object of consciousness. But this difference is not superseded
simply by the fact that the 'shapes' contained by self-con~
sciousness have within them the moment of self, and that God
is thought of as self-consciousness. The self that is thought of is not
the actual.self; in order that the self, like any other more precise
determination of 'shape', may in truth belong to this 'shape',
it must, on the one hand, be posited in the 'shape' by the act
ofsdf..consciousness, and, ontheother hand, the lower determination mustshow itselfto be reduced to a moment of the higher
and to be comprehended by it. For what is thought oj, ceases
to be something [merely] thought of, something alien to the
self's knowledge, only when the selfhas produced it, and therefore beholds the determination of the object as its own, consequentlybeholds itselfin the object. Through this activity, the

O. (00.) RELIGION

lower determination has at the same time vanished; for the act
is the negative that is realized at the expense of something else.
In so far as the lower determination is still present, it has
retreated into an unessential aspect; just as, on the other hand,
where the lower is still dominant but the higher is also present,
the one determinatiDn devoid of self has its place alongside the
other. AccDrdingly, if the various ideas within a particular religion do indeed exhibit the entire movement of its 'shapes', the
character of each idea is determined by the particular unity
of consciousness and self-consciousness [in that religion], i.e. by
the fact thatself.. cDnsciousness embraces within itself the determination of the object Dfconsciousness, by its act has completely
appropriated it and knows it as the essential determination in
face of the other. The truth of the belief in a determination of
the religious Spirit is revealed in the fact that the constitution
of the actual Spirit is similar to that of the 'shape' in which Spirit
beholds itself in the religion-as, e.g., the incarnation of God
which oc.curs in oriental religion has no truth, because the
actual Spirit oCthat religion is without this reconciliation. It
is inappropriate here to return from the totality ,of determina ..
tions to the individ nal ones,andtoshow inwhich'sha pe' within
the totality and its particular religion the others are contained
in their completeness. The higher form being- placed under a
lower has 10stits significance for self·.consciousness, belongs to
it only superficially and to its picture-thought. It is to be Considered in its proper significance only where it is the principle
of this particular religion and is upheld hy its actual Spirit.

a. God as Light
685. Spirit as the essence that is self-consciousness-or the selfconscious Being that is aU truth and knows all reality as its
own self-is, to begin with, only its Notion in contrast to the
actuali tyw hich i t gives i tsdfin themovemen tofitsconsciousness.
And thIS Notion is, as contrasted with the daylight of this
explicit development, the night of its essence ; as contrasted with
the ou ter existence of its moments as independen t shapes, it is
the creative secret of its birth. This secret has its revelation
within itself; for the existence of its moments has its necessity
in this Notion, because this Notion is self-knowing Spirit and

NATURAL RELIGION

therefore has in its essence the moment of being consciousness,
and of presenting itself objectively.-This is the pure'!', which
in its externalization has within itself as universal object the certainty of its own self, or, in other words, this object is for the
'I' the penetration of all thought and all reality.
686. In the immediate, first diremption ofself.. knowing absolute Spirit its ~shape' has the determination which belongs to
immediate consciousness or to sense-certainty. Spirit beholds itself
in the form of being, though not of the non-spiritual being that
is filled with the contingent determinations of sensation, the
being that belongs to sense-certainty; on the contrary ,itis being
that is filled with Spirit. It also includes the form which
appeared in immediate self-consciousness, the form of lord and
master over against the self-consciousness that retreats from its
object. This being which is filled with the Notion of Spirit is,
then, the 'shape of the simple relation of Spirit to itself, or the
'shape' of 'shapelessness'. In virtue of this determination, this
'shape' is the pure, all-embracing and all-pervading essential
light of sunrise, which preserves itself in its formless substantiality. Its otherness is the equally simple negative, darkness. The
movementsQf its own externaHzation, its creations in the unresis ting element of its otherness, are torrents of light; in their
simplicity, they are at the same time the genesis of its beingfor-self and the return from the exis tence [of its momen ts] ,
streams of fire destructive of [all] structured form. Thq
[moment of] difference which it gives itself does, it is true, proliferate unchecked in the substance of existence and shapes itself
to the forms of Nature; yet the essential simplicity of its thought
moves aimlessly about in it without stability or intelligence,
enlarges its bounds to the measureless, and its beauty, heigh. .
tened to splendour, is dissolved in its sublimity.
687. The content developed by this pure being, or the activity
ofits perceiving, is, therefore, an essenceless by.. play in this substance which merely ascends, without descending into its depths
to become a subject and through the self to consolidate its distinct moments. The determinations of this substance are only
attributes which do not attain to self~subsistence, but remain
merely names of the many-named One. This One is clothed
with the manifold powers of existence and with the 'shapes' of
reality as with an adornment that lacks a self; they are merely
J

420

C. (CC.) RELIGION

messengers, having no will of their own, messengers of its might,
visions of its glory, voices in its praise.
688. However, this reeling, unconstrained Life must determine itself as being.for..self and endow its vanishing 'shapes'
with an enduring subsistence. The immediate being in which it
stands in antithesis to its consciousness is itself the negative power
which dissolves its distinctions. It is thus in truth the Self; and
S piri t therefore passes on to know itself in the form of self. Pure
Light disperses its unitary nature into an infinity of forms, and
offers up itself as a sacrifice to being-for-self, so that from its
substance the individual may take an enduring existence for
itself.
b, Plant and animal
689. Self·conscious Spirit that has withdrawn into itselffrom
the shapeless essence, or has raised its immediacy to' self in
general, determines its unitary nature as amanifoldness of
being..for~self,and is the religion of spiritual perception. In this
it falls apart into the numberless multiplicity of weaker and
stronger, richer and poorer Spirits. This pantheism which, to
begin with, is the passive subsistence of these spiritual atoms
develops into a hostile movement within itself. The innocence
of the flower relz'gion, which is merely the self-less idea of self,
gives place to the earnestness ofwarring life, ·to the guilt of animal religions; the passivity and impotence of contemplative in ..
dividuality pass into destructive being-for-self. It is of no use
to have taken from the things of perception the deadness of
abstraction, and tohave raised them to beings of spiritual per~
ception; the ensoulment of this kingdom of Spirits bears this
death within it owing to the determinateness and the negativity
which encroach upon the innocent indifference of plant life,
Through this negativity, the dispersion into the multiplicity of
passive plant forms becomes a hostile movement in which the
hatred which stems from being·for..self is aroused. The actual
self-consciousness of this dispersed Spirit is a host of separate,
antagonistic national Spirits who hate and fight each other to
the death and become conscious of specific forms of animals
as their essence; for they are nothing else than animal spirits,
animal lives which separate themselves off from one another
and are unconscious of their universality.

NATURAL RELIGION

421

690. In this hatred, however, the determinateness of purely
negative being~for-selfconsumes itself, and through this movement of the Notion Spirit enters into another shape; Superseded
being..Jor-selfis theform of the object, a form produced by the self,
or rather is the produced self, the self-consuming self, i.e. the
self that becomes a Thing. The artificer therefore retains the
upper hand over these mutually destructive animal spirits, and
his action is not merely negative, but tranquil and positive.
Spirit's consciousness is thus now the movement which is above
and beyond the immediate in~itself as it is above and beyond
the abstract being-for-self. Since the in~itself is reduced,
through opposition, to being a determinateness, it is no longer
the proper form of absolute Spirit, but a reality which its consciousnessfinds confronting it as an ordinary existent thing, and
which it supersedes; at the same time, this consciousness is not
only this being-for-self which supersedes its object, but it also
produces its own idea, the being-for-self that is put forth in the
form of an object This productive activity, however, is not a
perfect"but a conditioned, activity, the fashioning of a material
already to hand.
c. The' artificer

691. Spirit, therefore, here appears, as an artijicer, and its
action whereby it produces itself as object but without having
yet grasped the thought of itself is an instinctive operation, like
the building of a honeycomb by bees.
692. The first form, because it is immediate, is the abstract
form of the Understanding, and the work is not yet in its own
self filled with Spirit The crystals of pyramids and obelisks,
simple combinations of straight lines with plane surfaces and
equal proportions of parts, in which the incommensurability
of the round is destroyed, these are the works of this artificer
ofrigid form. On account of the merely abstract intelligibleness
ofthe form, the significance of the workis not in the work itself,
is not the spiritual self. Thus either the works receive Spirit into
them only as an alien, departed spirit that has forsaken its Hving
saturation with reality and, being itself dead, takes up its abode
in this lifeless crystal; or they have an external relation to S piri t
as something which is itself there externally and not as Spirit-

422

C, (CC,) RELIGION

they are related to it as to the dawning light, which casts its
significance on them.
693. The division from which the artificer-spirit starts-the
in .. itself which he comes the material it fashions, and the beingfor-self which is the aspect of self-consciousness at work-this
division has become objective to it in its work. Its further efforts
must aim at getting rid of this division of soul and body: to
clothe and give shape to soul in its own self, and to endow body
with soul. The two aspects, in being brought closer to each
other, retain the specific character of Spirit as ideally conceived
and as its enveloping husk; Spirit's unity with itself contains
this antithesis of individuality and universality. Since the work,
in the coming-together of its aspects, comes closer to itself, this
at the same time produces another result, viz. that the work
comes closer to the self-consciousness performing it and that the
latter, in the work, comes to know itself as it is in its truth. But
in this way, the work at first constitutes only the abstract aspect
of the activity of Spirit, which does not yet know the content
of this activity within itself, but in its work, which is a, Thing.
The artificer himself, Spirit in its entirety, has not yet appeared,
but is the still inner, hidden essence which, as an entirety, is
presenT only as divided into active self-consciousness apd the
object it has produced.
694. The surrounding habitation, then, the outc::r reality
which has been raised at first only into the abstract form of the
Understanding, is fashioned by the artificer into a more lifelike
form. For this purpose he employs plant-life, which is no longer
sacred as it was to the earlier~ impotent pantheism; on the contrary, the artificer who grasps himself as the being that is jar
itself, takes that plant life as something to be used and reduces
it to an outer aspect, to a mere ornament. But it is not used
unaltered; for the artificer of the self-conscious form at the same
time destroys the transitoriness inherent in the immediate existence of this life and brings its organic forms nearer to the more
rigid and more universal forms of thought. The organic form
which, left to itself, proliferates unchecked in particularity,
being itself subjugated by the form of thought, in turn raises
these rectilinear flat shapes into a roundness more typical of
the organic form-a blending which becomes the root of free
architecture.

NATURAL RELIGION

695. This dwelling, the aspect of the universal element or inorganic nature of Spirit, now also includes within it a shape
of individuality which brings nearer to actuality the Spirit that
previously was separated from existence, and was external or
internal to it, and thereby makes the work more in harmony
with active self-consciousness. The artificer lays hold first of all
of the form of being-for-self in general, of the animal shape.
That he is no longer conscious of himself immediately in animal
life, he proves by constituting himself the productive power in
relation to It, and knows himself in it as in his work, whereby
the animal shape at the same time becomes superseded and the
hieroglyph of another meaning, of a thought. Consequently,
the shape, too, is no longer solely and entirely used by the artificer, butis blended with the shape of thought, with the human
form. But the work still lacks the shape and outer reality in
which the self exists as self; it still does not ·in its own self proclaim that it includes within it an inner meaning, it lacks
speech, the element in which the meaning filling it is itself
present. Therefore the work, even when it is wholly purged of
the animal.element and wears only the shape of self-consciousness, is stilLthe soundless shape which needs the rays of the rising
sun in order to have sound which, generated by light, is even
then merely noise and not speech, and reveals only an outer,
not the inner, self.
696. Over against this outer shape of the selfstands the other
shape which proclaims its possession of an inner being. Nature,
withdrawing into its essence, deposes its living, self-particularizing, self-entangling manifold existence to the lev·el of an unessential husk, which is the covering for the inner being; and this
inner being is, in the first instance, still simple darkness, the
unmoved, the black, formless stone. [The Black Stone in the
Kaaba at Mecca.]
697. Both representations contain inwardness and outer existcpce-the two moments of Spirit; and both representations
contain the two moments at once in an antithetical relation,
the selfboth as inner and as outer. The two have to be united.
The soul of the statue in human shape does not yet come forth
from the inner being, is not yet speech, the outer existence that
is in its own self inward; and the inner being of multiform existence is still soundless, is not immanently differentiated and is

C. (CC.) RELIGION

still separated from its outer existence to which all differences
belong. The artificer therefore unites the two by blending the
natural and the self-conscious shape, and this ambiguous being
which is a riddle to itself, the conscious wrestling with the nonconscious, the simple inner with the multiform outer, the darkness of thought mating with the clarity ofutterance, these break
out into the language of a profound, hut scarcely intelligible
wisdom.
698. In this work, there is an end of the instinctive effort
which produced the work that, in contrast to self-consciousness,
lacked consciousness;for in it, the activity of the artificer, which
constitutes self-consciousness, comes face to face with an eq ually
self-conscious, self-expressive inner being. In it he has worked
himself up to the point where his consciousness is divided
against itself, where Spirit meets Spirit. In this unity of selfconscious Spirit with itself, in so far as itis the shape and the
object of its consciousness, its blendings with the unconscious
shapes are purged of the immediate shapes of Nature. These
monsters in shape, worci,and deed are dissolved into spiritual
shape. into an outerthathas retreated into itself,andan inner
that utters or expresses itself out·of itself and in its own self;
into thought which begets itself, which preserves its shape in
harmony with itself and is a lucid, intelligible existence. Spirit
is Artist.
B. RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

699. Spirit has raised the shape in which it is present to its
own consciousness into the form of consciousness itself and it
producessuch a shape for itself. The artificer has given up the
synthetic effort to blend the heterogeneous forms of thought and
natural objects; now that the shape has gained thefbfm ofse1f~
conscious activity, he has become a spiritual worker.
700. Ifwe ask, which is the actual Spirit which has the consciousness of its absolute essence in thcreligion of art, we find.
that it is the ethical or the true Spirit. This is not merely theuniversal substance of all individuals; on the contrary, since this
substance has for actual consciousness the shape of consciousness
and it is individualized, it follows that the substance is known
by the individuals as their own essence and their own work,

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF AR T

42 5

It is for them neither the divine, essential Light in whose unity
the being-for-self of self-consciousness is contained only negatively, only transitorily, and in which it beholds the lord and
master of its actual world; nor is it the restless destruction of
hostile peoples, nor their subjection to a caste-system which
gives the semblance of organization of a completed whole, but
in which the universal freedom of the individuals is lacking.
On the contrary, this Spirit is the free nation in which hallowed
custom constitutes the substance of all, whose actuality and existence each and everyone knows to be his own will and deed.
701. The religion of the ethical Spirit is, however, its elevation above its real world, the withdrawal from its truth 'into
the pure knowledge of itself. Since the ethical nation lives in
immediate unity with its substance and lacks the principle of
the pure individuality of self-consciousness, the complete form
of its religion first appears as divorced from its existential shape
[Bestehen]. For the reality of the ethical substance rests partly
on its passive unchangeableness as contrasted with the absolute
movement of self;;:consciousness, and consequently on the fact
that this self;;;constiousness has not yet withdrawn into itself
from its contented acceptance of custom and its firm trust
therein. Partly , too, on its organization into a multiplicity of
rights and duties, as also on its distribution into the sphere~ of
the various classes and their particular activi ties which co-operate to form the whole; and hence on the fact that the individual
is content with the limitation of his existence and has not yet
grasped the unrestricted thought of his free self. But that tranquil immediate trust in the substance turns back into trust in oneself and into the certainty of oneself; and the multiplicity of
rights and duties, like the restricted activity, is the same dialectical moyement of the ethical sphere as the m ul ti plicity of things
and theirspedfic natures~a movement which finds its rest and
stability only in the simplicity of the Spirit that is certain of
itself. The consummation of the ethical sphere iu free self-consciousness, and the fate of the ethical world, are therefore the
individuality that has withdrawn into itself, the absolute levity
of the ethical Spirit which has dissolved within itself all the
firmly established distinctions of its stable existence and the
spheres of its organically ordered world and, being perfectly
sure of itself, has attained to unrestrained joyfulness and the

c. (ce.) RELIGION

freest enjoyment of itself. This simple certainty of Spirit within
itselfhas a twofold meaning: it is a serene, stable existence and
settled truth, and also absolute unrest and the passing-away of
the ethical order. But it changes round into the latter; for the
truth of the ethical Spirit is, in the first instance, still only this
substantial essence and trust in it, in which the self does not
know itself as a free individuality, and which) therefore, in this
inwardness) or in the liberation of the self, perishes. Since, then,
its trust is broken, and the substance of the nation bruised,
Spirit, which hitherto mediated the unstable extremes, has now
stepped forth as an extreme, that of self-consciousness grasping
itself as essence. This is Spirit, inwardly sure of itself, which
mourns over the loss of its world, and now out of the purity
of self creates its own essence which is raised above the real
world.
702. In such an epoch, absolute art makes its appearance.
Prior to this it is an instinctive fashioning of material; submerged in the world of determinate being, it works its way Ollt
of it and into it; it does not possesshs substance in the fre.e ethical sphere, (::tnd therefore does not have the fharacter of free
spiritual activity for the se1fat work. Later on, Spirit transcends
art in order to gain a higher representation of itself, viz. to be
not merely the substance born of the self, but to be, in its representation as object, this s~lj, not only to give birth to itself from
its Notion, but to have its very Notion for its shape, so that the
Notion and the work of art produced know each other as one
and the sam~,
703. The ethical substance having withdrawn from its outer
existence back into its pure self-consciousness, this is the aspect
of the Notion or of the activity with which Spirit brings itself
forth as object. 'This activity is pure form, because the individual, in ethical obedience and service, has worked off every unconscious existence and fixed determination in the same way
that substance itself has become this fluid ess~nce. This form
is the night in which substance was betrayed and made itself
in to Subject. It is aut of this nigh t of pure certainty of self tha t
the ethical Spirit is resurrected as a shape freed from Nature
and its own immediate existence.
704. The concrete existence of the pure Notion into which
Spirit has fled from its body is an individual which Spirit selects

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

to be the vessel of its sorrow. Spirit is present in this individual
as his universal and as the power over him from which he suffer&
violence, as his ~pathos', by giving himself over to which his
self~consciousness loses its freedom. But that positive power of
universality is subdued by the pure self of the individual, the
negative power. This pure activity, conscious of its inalienable
strength, wrestles with the shapeless essence. Becoming its
master, it has made the 'pathos' into its material and given itself
its content, and this unity emerges as a work, universal Spirit
individualized and set before us.
a. The abstract work of art

705. The first work of art, as immediate, is abstract and individual. As for itself, it has to move away from this immediate
and objective mode towards self-consciousness, while self-consciousness, on the other hand, in the cult aims at getting rid
of the distinction by which it distinguishes itself at first from
its Spirit,and by so doing to produce a work of art which is
in its own selfanimate.
706. The first mode in which the artistic spirit keeps its shape
and its active consciousness farthest apart is the immediate
mode, viz. the shape is there or is immediately present simply as
a thing. In this mode, the shape is broken up into the distinction
of individuality, which bears within it the shape of the self, and
of universality, which represents the inorganic essence in
reference to the shape, its environment and habitation. This
shape, through the raising of the whole into the pure Notion,
acquires its pure, spiritually appropriate form. It is neither the
. crystal, the form characteristic of the Understanding, which
houses the dead or is illumined by a soul outside of it, nor is
it that blending of the forms of Nature and of thought which
first emerged from the plant, thoughes activity in this being
stiIJan imitation. On the contrary, the Notion strips off the traces
of root, branches, and leaves still adhering to the forms and
purifies the latter into shapes in which the crystal's straight lines
and flat surfaces are raised into incommensurable ratios, so that
the ensoulment of the organic is taken up into the abstract form
of the Understanding and, at the same time, its essential
nature-incommensurability-is preserved for the Understanding.

4 28

C. (ce.) RELIGION

707. But the indwelling god is the Black Stone drawn forth
from its animal covering and pervaded with the light of con ..
sciousness. The human form strips off the animal shape with
which it was blended; the animal is for the god merely an accim
dental guise; it steps alongside its true shape and no longer has
any worth on its own account, but is reduced to signifying some m
thing else and has sunk to the level of a mere symbol. By this
very fact, the shape of the god in its own self strips off also the
poverty of the natural conditions of animal existence, and hints
at the internal dispositions of animal life melted into its surface
and belonging only to this surface. The essential being of the
god is, however, the unity of the universal existence of Nature
and of self-conscious Spirit which, in its actuality, confronts the
former. At the same time, being in the first instance an indz'vidual
shape, its existence is one of the elements of Nature, just as its
self-conscious actuality is an individual national Spirit. But the
former is, in this unity, that element reflected into Spirit,
Nature transfigured by thought and united with self-conscious
life. The form of the gods has, therefore, its Nature-element
within it as a transcended moment, as a dim memory . The
chaoticheing and confused strife ofthefreelycexisting elements,
the unethical realm of the Titans, is conquered and banished
to the fringes of an actuality that has become transparent to
itself, to the obscure boundaries of the world which finds itself
in [the sphere of] Spirit and is there at peace. These ancient
gods, first-born children of the union of Ligh t with Darkness,
Heaven, Earth, Ocean, Sun, the Earth's blind typhonic Fire,
and so on, are supplanted by shapes which only dimly recall
those Titans) and which are no longer creatures of Nature, but
lucid, ethical Spirits of self~conscious nations.
708. This sim pIe sha pe has th us rid itselfof the unrest of endless individuation, both of its Nature-element which, only qua
universal essence, is ruled by necessity, but in its existence and
activity is open to contingency; and of the nation which, dispersed in to particular spheres of activity and individ ual centres
of self-consciousness, has an existence which is manifold in
meaning and activity. All this individuation has been got rid
of by this simple form and brought together into an individu ..
ality that is at rest. This individuality is, therefore, confronted
by the moment of unrest, it-the essence-is confronted by self-

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

consciousness for which, as the birthplace of that unrest, nothing
remains except to be pure.activity. What belongs to the substance,
the artist gave entirely to his work, but to himself as a particular
indiv~duality he gave in his work no actual existence: he could
impart perfection to his work only by emptying himself of his
particularity, depersonalizing himself and rising to the abstrac~
tion of pure action. In this first immediate production, the
separation of the work from his self~conscious a-ctivity is not yet
restored to their unity. The work by itselfis not, therefore, actu ..
ally an inspired work; it is a whole only together with its genesis.
The common element in a work of art, viz. that it is produced
in consciousness and is made by human hands, is the moment
of the Notion existing qua Notion, which stands in contrast to
the work. And if this Notion, whether in the shape of artist or
spectator, is unselfish enough to declare the work of art to be
in its own self absolutely inspired, and to forget himself as performer or as spectator, then against this we must stick to the
Notion of Spirit which cannot dispense with the moment of
being conscious of itself. This moment, however, stands contrasted with the work because in this initial duality of itself
Spirit gives the two sides their abstract) contrasted characters
of action and of being a Thing, and their return into the unity
from which they proceeded has not yet come about.
709. The artist, then, learns in his work that he did not produce a being like himself. From it, it is true, there comes back
to him a consciousness in the -sense that an admiring crowd
reveres it as the Spirit which is their own essence. But this in~
spiration, since it returns to him his self-consciousness only as
admiration, is rather a confession to the artist that the inspired
work is not on the same level as himself. Since his work comes
back to him simply as joyfulness, he does not find therein the
painful labour of making himselfinto an artist, and ofcreation,
nor the strain and effort of his work. Furthermore, the crowd
may judge the work or bring it offerings, endue it with their
own consciousness in whatever way it may be: if they with their
knowledge set themselves above it, he knows how much more
his aclis than what they understand and say; if they put themselves below it and recognize in it the essence which dominates
them, he knows himself as the master of this heing.
710. The work of art therefore demands· another elemen t of.

C. (CC.) RELIGION

its existence, the god another mode of coming forth than this,
in which, out of the depths of his creative night, he descends
into the opposite, into externality, into the determination of the
Thing which lacks self-consciousness. This higher element is
Language-an outer reality that is immediately self-conscious
existence. Just as the individual s~lf-consciousness is immediately
present in language, so it is also immediately present as a universal infection; the complete separation into independent selves
is at the same time the fluidity and the universally communicated unity of the many selves; language is the soul existing
as soul. The god, therefore, who has language for the element
of his shape is the work of art that is in its own self inspired,
that possesses immediately in its outer existence the pure
activity which, when it existed as a Thing, was in contrast to
it. In other words, self-consciousness, in the objectification of
its essence, abides ~mmediately with itself. Abiding thus with
itselfin its essence, it is pure thought, or the devotion whose inwardness in the hymn has at the same time an outer existence. It
retains within itself the individuaHty of self-consciousness,and
this individuality is at thesame time heard as a universal individuality that is immediately present. Devotion, kindled in the
manifold units of self-consciousness, isconscious~ofitsactas the
act of all alike and as simple being. Spirit, as this universal selfconsciousness of all, has its pure inwardness, no less than the
being-for-others and the being-for-self of the individuals, in a
single unity.
7 L1. This language is distinct from another language of the
god which isnot that of universal self-consciousness. The Oracle,
both of the god of the religions of art and of the preceding religions, is the necessary, firstform of the god's utterance; for the
N(Jtion of the god implies that he is the essence of both Nature
and Spirit, and therefore has not only natural but spiritual existence as well. In so far as this moment is at first 'merely jmplied
in his Notion and not yet realized in religion, the language is,
for the religious self-consciousness, the language of an alien selfconsciousness. The self-consciousness that is still alien to its com..
munity is not yet immediately present in the manner demanded
by its Notion. The self is simple or unitary, and thereby absoI utely universal being7/or-selJ; but the self that is sepal ated from
the self-consciousness of the community is at first only an z'ndivi-

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

43 1

dual self. The content of this its own and individual language
stems fro.m the universal determinateness in which absolute
Spirit in general is posited in its religion. Thus the universal
Spirit of the Sunrise which has not yet particularized its existence utters equally simple and universal statements about the
divine Being, the substantial content of which is sublime in its
sirnple truth, but on account of this universality at the same
time appears trivial to the progressively developing self-consciousness. ,
7 12. The further developed self which rises to become a
being:for-selfis master over the pure 'pathos' of substance, over
the objectivity of the Light of Sunrise, and knows that simplicity
of truth as essenlialbeing which does not have the form of contingent existence through an alien speech, knows it as the sure and
unwritten taU) of the gods, a law that is 'everlasting and no one knows
whence it came',1 Just as the universal truth which was revealed
by the di vin<7 Light has here withdrawninto the inner or nether
world of being, and is thus freed from the form of contingent
existence, 80,9n the other hand, in the religion of art because
tlJe spape of the god has taken onconsdousness and hence individuality in . .gener~J, the utterance peculiar to the god who
is the Spirit of an ethical na.tion is the Orade, which.knows
its particular affairs and what is advantageous concerning
them. The universal truths, however, because they are, known
as that which possesses e$sentia1 being are claimed by conscwus
thQught for itself, and their speech is no longer alien to it hut
is its own. Just as that wise man of 0ld 2 searched in his own
thoughtfor whaLwas good andheautiful, but left it to his 'daeman' to know the petty con tingen t con ten t of wha t he wanted
to know-whether it would be good for him to keep company
with this or that persoll, or good for one of his acquaintances
to go on ajQ4rney,anclsimiiar unimportant things; in the same
way the universaLconsdousness,draws knowledge of the contingent from birds, or tr.ees, or the yeasty earth, the vapour from
which deprives self-consciousness of its self-possession. For the
contingentis something that is not self,..possessed and is alien,
and therefore theethicalconsciousnesslets itselfsetde such matters too, as by a throw of the dice, in an unthinking and .alien
1

Sophocles, Antigone.

2 Socrates.

43 2

C. (CO.) RELIGION

manner. When the individual, by using his understanding,
makes up his mind, and after deliberation chooses what is
advantageous for him, this self-determination is based on the
specific nature of his particular character. This latter is itself
contingent, and therefore knowledge supplied by the understanding as to what is advantageous for the individual is just
such a knowledge as that of the oracles or of the 'lot'; only that
he who questions the oracle or 'loe thereby expresses the ethical
sentiment of indifference to what is contingent, while the
former, on the other hand, treats what is intrinsically contingent as an important concern of his thinking and knowing.
What is higher than both, however, is not only to make
deliberation the Oracle for a contingent action but, in addition,
to know that this deliberate action is itself something contingent
on account of its connection with the particular aspect of the
action and of its advan tageousness.
713. The true self-conscious existence which Spirit receives
in speech which is not the utterance of an alien, and therefore
contingent, not univ~rsal,'self-eonsdousness, is the work of art
we met with before. It stands in contrast to the Thing-like
character of the statue. Whereas this exists at rest, speech is a
vanishing existence;anrl whereas in the statue the'liberated
objectivity lacks an imrnediatesdf{)fitsown;in speech, on the
other hand, objectivity remains too much shut up within the
self, falls shortof attaining a lasting shape and is, like Time, no
longer immedia tel y present in the very momen t of its beitig
present.
714. The movement of the two sides constitutes the Cult:
a movement in which the divine shape in motion in the pure
feeling element of self-consciousness, and the divine shape at
rest in the dement of thinghood, mutually surrender their dis~
tinctivecharacters, and the unity which is the Notion of their
essence achieves an existence. In the Cult, the self gives itself
the consciousness of the divine Being descending to it from its
remoteness, and this divine Being, which formerly was not
actual but only an object over against it, through this act
receives the actuality proper to self-consciousness.
7 15· This Notion of the CuI t is already 1m plicitly contained
and present in the stream of sacred song. This devotion is the
immediate, pure satisfaction of the self by and within itself It

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

433

is the purified soul which, in this purity, is directly only essence
and is one with essence. The soul, because of its abstract character, is not consciousness which distinguishes its object from
itself; it is thus only the night of its existence and the place prepared for its [ outer] shape. The abstract Oult therefore raises
the self into being this pure divine element. The soul perfects
this purification with consciousness. Yet it is still not the self
that has descended into its depths and knows itself as evil; but
it is something that only immediately is, a soul that cleanses its
exterior by washing it, and puts on white robes, while its inward
being·· traverses the imaginatively conceived path of works,
punishments, and rewards, the path of spiritual training in
general, i.e. of ridding itself of its particularity, as a result of
which it reaches the dwellings and the community of the blest.
7 I 6. This Oult is, at first, only a secret fulfilment, Le. a fulfilment only in imagination, not in actuality. It must be an actual
deed, for a deed tha t is nota~tual isself-con tradictory. Consciousness proper thereby raises itself into its pure self~consciousness.
The divine Being has in this the meaning of a free object;
through the actua;ICult, this object returns into the self; and
in so far as it has, in pure consciousness, the meaning of the
pure divine Being dwelling beyond reality, this Being descends
from its universality, through the mediation of the Oult, into
individuality, and thus unites itself with reality.
7 17· The way the two sides enter into the act is determined
as follows: for the self-conscious aspect, so far as it is actual con~
sciousness, the divine Being presents itself as actual Nature; on
the one hand, Nature belongs to consciousness as its possession
and property, and has the value of an existence that has no
being of its own. On the other hand, Natgre is consciousness's
own immediate actuality and individuality, which equally is
regarded as a non~essential being and is stripped of its apparent
independence. But for its pure consciousness, this external
Nature has at the same time the opposite meaning, viz. of being
the implicitly divine Being, for which the self sacrifices its unessential being, just as, co~versely, it sacrifices the unessential
aspect ofN alure to itself. This makes the act a spiritual move~
ment, because it is this twofold process, on the one hand, of
superseding the abstraction of the divine Being (which is how
devotion determines its object) and making it actual, and, on

434

C. (CC.) RELIGION

the other hand, of superseding the actual (which is how the
doer determines the object and himself) and raising it into a
universality.
7 18. The actofthe Cult itselfbegins, therefore, with the pure
surrender of a possession which the owner, apparently without
any profit whatever to himself, pours away or lets rise up in
smoke. In so doing, he renounces before the essence of his pure
consciousness all possession and right of the property and
enjoyment thereof, renounces [his] personality and the return
of his act into himself; and he reflects the act into the universal,
or into the divine Being, rather than into himself. Conversely,
however, the divine BeiQg in its immediacy also perishes in this
act. The animal sacrificed is the symbol of a god; the fruits consumed are the living Ceres and Bacchus themselves. In the
former, die the powers of the upper law which has blood and
actual life, in the latter, the powers of the lower law that pos ..
sesses in bloodless form secret and cunning power. The sacrifice
of the divine substance, in so far as it is an ac.!, belongs to the
self-q:mscJQus aspect; that this aqtual deed bepossihle, the
diyineBeiqg rnu~t~lready have sacrificed itseJfin..principl~. This
itha,s done by giving itseif an [outer] existenqe and has made
itself into an individual animal and into fruit. This renunciation, therefore, which the divine Beh:t,g has already
accomplished inprinciplc, is shown forth hy theselfwhoperforms
the sacrifice as an existent fact and for his own consciousness,
tbus r~placing that immediate actuality of'the divine Being by
the higher aStu~lity, viz. that of himself. For the unity which
has resulted from overcoming the ~il1glene~s and separation of
the two sides is not merely a negative fate, but has a positive
significance. It is only to the abstract being of the underworld
that the saqificial offe;r:ing is wholly surrendered, and thus the
r~ftection of possessions and being-for-self into the universal is
qistinguished from these1fas such. At the same time, however)
tp,is is only a small part, ang. the other act of sacrifice is merely
the destruction of what cannot be used, and is really the preparation of the offering for meal, the feast that cheats the act
out of its negative significance. At that first sacrifice, the person
making the offering reserves the greatest share for his own
enjoyment, and from the latter sacrifice, what is useful, for the
same purpose. This enjoyment is the negative power which puts

a

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

435

an end both to the divine Being and to the singleness, and it
is at the same time the positive actuality in which the objective
existence of the divine Being is transformed into self-conscious
existence, and the self has consciousness of its unity with the
divine Being.
719. For the rest, though this Cult is in fact an act, its meaning yet lies mostly in devotion. What belongs to devotion is not
objectively produced, just as the result, in the enjoyment [of
the feast], is itself robbed of its outer existence. The Cult, therefore, goes further and replaces this defect, in the firstinstance
by giving its devotion an enduring objective existence, since the
Cult is the common task-or the individual task for each and
all to do~w hich prod uces a dwelling and adornmen ts for the
glory of the god. By so doing, in part .the objectivity of the statue
is transcended; for by this dedication of his gifts and labours
the labourer inclines the god to look favourably upon him, and
contemplates his self as belonging to the god. In part, too, this
action is not the individual labour of the artist, this particular
aspect of it being dissolved in universality. But it is not only
theglol"Y of the god that is accomplished, and the blessing of
his favourshedon the laboureronlyideally and in imagination:
the work has' also a meaning the reverse of the first, which was
that of alienating and glorifying something alien. The dwellings and halls of the god are for the use of man, the treasures
preserved therein are his own in case of need; the honour and
glory enjoyed by the god in his adornment are the honour and
glory of the nation, great in soul and inartistic achievement.
At the festival, this people adorns its own dwellings and
garments, no less than the things of the god, with graceful
decorations. In this way, they receive from the grateful god a
return for their gifts and proofs of his favour, in which through
their work they became united with him, not as a hope and
in a future realization, but rather, in witnessing to his glory
and in bringing him gifts, the nation has the immediate
enjoyment of its own wealth and adornment.
b. The living work

of art

720. The nation that approaches its god in the Cult of the
religion of art is the ethical nationthat knows its state and the
actions of the state to be the wil1 and the achievement of its

c. (ce.) RELIGION

own self. This Spirit, confronting the self-conscious nation is,
therefore, not the divine Light which, being devoid of a self,
does not con tain within it the self.. certainty of the individuals,
but is only their universal essence and the lordly power in which
they disappear. The Cult of the religion of this simple, amorphous essence gives back to its votaries, therefore, in general
merely this: that they are the people of their god, who secures
for them only their enduring existence and their substance as
such; not, however, their actual self which, on the contrary,
is rejected. For they reverence their god as the empty Depth, '
not as Spirit. But the Cult of the religion of art, on the other
hand, is without that abstract simplicity of the essence and therefore of its depth. That essence, however, which is immediately
united with the selfis in itselfSpirit and the truth that is a knowing,
though.still not the truth thatisknown, or the truth that knows
itselfin the depths of its nature. Because, then, the essence here
contains a self, its manifestation is well disposed towards consciousness; and, in the Cult, consciousness receives not only the
generalsanction of its enduring existence,hu talso its conscious
existencein the Cult itself;justas~ conversely, the essence does
not have an actuality devoid ofself, in a·rejected people whose
subs tance.merely is acknowledged , bu tin the people whose self
is acknowledged iuits substance.
72 L Self..consciousness, then, comes forth from the Cult
satisfied in its essence, and the god enters in t01 t as into its ha bitation. This habitation is, by itself, the night of Substance or its
, pure-individuality, but no longer the tense individuality of the
artist, an individuality which has not yet reconciled itself with
its essence that is in process of becoming objective; it is the
satisfied night [of substance] which has its 'pathos' within
hand is not in need of anything, because it returns from
intuition, from the objectivity that has been superseded.
This 'pathos' is, by itself, the Being of the risen Sun, but
a Being which has now 18et' within itself, and has its 'setting'
or going-down, i.e.,self-consciGusness-and hence existence and
actuality-within itself. It has here traversed the movement of
its actualization. Coming down from its pure essential nature
and becoming an objective force of Nature and the expressions
of tha.t force, it is an outer existence for the 'other') for the self
by which it is consumed. The silent essence of self-less Nature

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

437

in its fruits attains to that stage where, self.. prepared and
digested, it offers itself to life that has a self-like nature. In its
usefulness as food and drink it reaches its highest perfection;
for in this it is the possibility of a higher existence and comes
into contact with spiritual reality. In its metamorphosis, the
Earth-Spirit has developed, partly into a silently energizing
Substance, partly intoa spiritual fermentation: in the first case
it is the feminine principle of nourishment, in -the other the
masculine principle, the self-impelling force ofself-conscious existence.
722. In this enjoyment, then, is revealed what that divine
risen Light really is; enjoyment is the mystery of its being. For
the mystical is not concealment of a secret, or ignorance, but
consists in the selfknowing itself to be one with the divine Being
and that this, therefore, is revealed. Only the self is manifest to
itself; or what is manifest is so, only in the immediate certainty
of itself. But it is in this immediate certainty that the simple
divine Being has been placed by the Oult; as a thing that can
be used it not only has an existence that is seen, felt, smelt,
tasted, but it is also an object ofdesire, and by being actually
enjoyed becomes one_ with the self and thereby completely
revealed to the self and manifest to it. That which is said to
be manifest to.Reason, to the heart, is in fact still secret, for
it still lacks the actual certainty of immediate existence, both
the certainty of objectivity and the certainty belonging to
enjoyment, a certainty which in religion, however, is not merely
immediate and unthinking, but is at the same time purely the
certainty that is known by the self.
723. What has thus, through the Cult, become manifest to
self-conscious Spirit within itself, is simple essence as themove~
ment, partly out of its dark night of concealment up into consciousness, there to be its silently nourishing substance; butno
less, however, the movement of again losing itselfin the nether
darkness, and lingering above only with a silent maternal
yearning. The moving -impulse is, however, nothing but the
many-named divine Light of the risen Sun and its undisciplined
tumultuous life which, similarly let go from its [merely] abstract
Being, at first enters into the objective existence of the fruit,
and then, surrendering itself to self..consciousness, in it attains
to genuine reality-and now roams about as a crowd offrenzied

C. (CC.) RELIGION

females, the un tamed revelry of Nature in self-conscious
form.
724. But what is disclosed to consciousness is still only absolute [Le. abstract] Spirit, which is this simple essence, not Spirit
as it is in its own self; in other words, it is only immediate Spirit,
the Spirit of Nature. Consequently, its self-conscious life is only
the mystery of bread and wine, of Ceres and of Bacchus, not
of the other, the strictly higher, gods whose individuality includes as an essential momentself:'consciousness as such. Therefore, Spirit has not yet sacrificed itself as self-conscious Spirit to
self-consciousness, and the mystery of bread and wine is not yet
the mystery of flesh and blood.
725. This undisciplined revelry of the god must bring itself
to rest as an object, and the enthusiasm which did not attain
to consciousness must produce a work that confronts it, as in
the previous case the statue confronts the artist; as a work,
moreover, that is equally complete, but not, however, as an intrinsically lifele.ss,but as a living, self. Such a Cult is the festival
whi<,;h man celebrates in his own honour, though not yet
imparting to that Cult the significance of the absolute Being;
for iris essence that is manifest to him at first, not yet Spirit;
notas.something that essentially takes on human form. But this
Cult lays the foundation for this revelation and unfolds its
moments separately. Thus here we have the ahstract moment
of the living corporeality of essence, just as previously we had the
ur;tity of both in an unconscious revelry. Man thus puts himself
in the place of the s ta tue as the shape that has been raised and
fashioned for perfectly free movement, just as the statue is per~
fecdy free repose. Although each individual knows how to play
the part of at least a torch-bearer, one of them comes forward
who is the patterned movement, the smooth elaboration and
fluentenergyofal1 the participants. He is an inspired and living
work of art that match~!S strength with its beauty; and on him
is bestowed, as a reward for his strength, the decoration with
which the statue was honoured, and the honour of being, in
place of the god in stone, the highest bodily representation
among his people of their essence.
726. In both representations which have just come before
us there is present the unity of self-consciousness and spiritual
essence; but they are still not equally balanced against each

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

439

other. In the Bacchic enthusiasm it is the self that is beside itself,
but in corporeal beauty it is spiritual essence. The stupor of
consciousness and its wild stammering utterance in the former
case must be taken up into the clear existence of the latter, and
the non-spiritual clarity of the latter into the inwardne'ss of
the former. The perfect element in which inwardness is just as
external as externality is inward is once again speech; but it
is neither the speech of the Oracle, wholly contingent and individual as regards its content, nor the emotional hymn sung
in praise of the individual god, nor again is it the meaningless
stammer of Bacchic frenzy. On the contrary, it has gained a
lucid and universal content: a content that is lucid, because the
artist has worked his way out of the initial enthusiasm, originating wholly from substance, into a [definite] shape. This shape
is his own existence which, in all its stirrings and impulses, is
permeated and accompanied by self-conscious soul; and the
content is universal, for in this festival which honours man there
vanishes the one-sidedness of the statues which contain only a
national Spirit, a specific character of the divine nature. The
handsome warrior is indeed the glory of his particular nation,
but he is a corporeal individuality in which are swallowed up
the fulness and seriousness of meaning and the inner character
of the Spirit which bears the particular life, the demands, the
needs, and customs of his nation. In this kenosis, this externalization ofitself, into complete corporeality, Spirit has laid aside
the special influences and sympathies of Nature which, as the
Spirit of the nation, it contained shut up within it. Its nation
is, therefore, no longer conscious in this Spirit of its particularity
but rather of having laid this aside, and is conscious of the universality of its human existence.
c. The spiritual work of art
727. The national Spirits which become conscious of their
essence in the shape ofa particular animal coalesce into a single
Spirit. Thus it is that the separate beautiful national Spirits
unite into a single pantheon, the element and habitation of
which is language. The pure intuition of itself as universal
humanity has, in the actuality of the national Spirit, this form:
the national Spirit combines with the others with which it constitutes through Nature a single nation, in a common undertak-

c. {ce.)

RELIGION

ing, and for this task forms a collective nation and therewith
a collective Heaven. This universa1ity to which Spirit in its existence attains, is, however, only this first universality which
first issues from the individuality of the ethical sphere, which
has not yet overcome its immediacy, has not yet formed a single
State out of its peoples. The ethical life of the actual national
Spirit rests partIy on the immediate trust of the individuals in
their nation as a whole, partIy on the direct share which all,
regardless of differences of class, take in the decisions and
actions of the government. In the union which, to begin with,
is not a permanent arrangement but only for the purpose of a
common action, that freedom of participation by each and all
is,for the time being, put on one side. This first alliance is, there ..
fore, more an assembly ofindividuaHties than their domination
by an abstract thought which would rob the indjviduals of their
self-conscious participation in the will and deed of the State.
728 . The assembly of national Spirits constitutes a circle of
shapes which now embraces the whole of Nature ,as we]) as the
whole ethical world. They stand, too, under the supreme com~
mand ofthc one, rather than under his sovereignty. By themselves,
they are the un,iversal substances of what the self-conscious
essence in itselfis and does. This, however, cons ti tutes the power
and, in the first instance, the centre at least with which those
universal beings are concerned, and which at first seems to
merge their affairs only contingently. But it is the return of the
divine Being into self-consciousness that already contains the
reason why self-consciousness forms the centre for those divine
powers and conceals their unity, to begin with, under the form
of a friendly, external connection of the two worlds.
729. The same universality which belongs to this content
attaches necessarily also to the form of consciousness in which
the content appears. It is no longer the actual practice of the
Cult, but a practice that is raised, not yet indeed into the
Notion, but at first into picture-thinking, into the synthetic linking-together of self-conscious and external existence. The
external existence of this picture-thinking, language, is the
earliest language, the Epic as such, which contains the universal
content of the world, universal at least in the sense of completeness, though not indeed as the universality of thought. The
Minstrel is the individual and actual Spirit from whom, as a

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF AR T

44'

subject of this world, it [the world] is produced and by whom
it is borne. His 'pathos' is not the stupefying power of Nature
but Mnemosyne, recollection and a gradually developed inwardness,' the remembrance of essence that formerly was
directly present. He is the organ that vanishes in its content;
what counts is not his own se1fbut his Muse, his universal song.
What, however, is in fact present is the syllogism in which the
extreme of universality, the world of the gods, is linked with
individuality, with the Minstrel, through the middle term of
particularity, The middle term is the nation in its heroes, who
areindividual men like the Minstrel, but presented only in idea,
and are thereby at the same time unz'versal, like the free extreme
of universality, the gods,
730. In this Epic, then, there is in general presented to consciousness what is implicitly accomplished in the Cult, the relation of the divine to the human", The content is an action of the
self-conscious essence. The acting disturbs the tranquillity of the
Substance and excites the essence so that its simple, unitary
nature is divided 4nd opened up into the manifold world of
natl)ral and ethical powers. The action is the violation of the
peaceful earth, the trench which, animated by blood, evokes
the departed spirits and these, thirsting for life, receiveit in the
action of self-consciousness. The business which is the object
of these general exertions has tw.osides: the side of the self, by
which the bysin~$s is accomplished by a totality of actual
nations and the individualities standing at their head; an,d the
side of the univ.ersal, by which it is accomplished by their substanti~l powers. Formerly, however, the relation of the two bore
the character of a synthetic combination of the universal and
theinQlvidual, i.e. of pict~re"'thinking. On this specific qharacter depends th~~ppraisal of this world. The relation of the two
is thus a mingling of them which inconsistently divides and
apportions th~ unity of the action, and superfluously throws the
action over from one side to the other. The universal powers
have the form of individuality and hence the principle of action
in them; w hat they effec t appears, therefore, to proceed en tirely
from them and to be as free an action as that of men. Consequently, both gods and men have done one and the same
thing. The earnestness of those divine powers is a ridiculous
superfluity, since they are in fact the power or strength of the

c. (ce.) RELIGION

individuality performing the action; while the exertions and
la bour of the latter is an equally useless effort, since it is rather
the gods who manage everything. Ephemeral morta]s who are
as nothing are at the same time the mighty self that brings into
subjection the universal Beings, offends the gods, and, in
general, procures for them an actual existence and an interest
in acting. Just as, conversely, these impotent universal Beings
who nourish themselves on the gifts of men and through them
alone get something to do, are the natural substance and the
material of all events, and are equally the ethical matter and
the 'pathos' of action. If their elemental natures are first
brought into actual existence and into an active relationship
by the free self of individuality, they are no less the universal
that withdraws itself from this connection, that remains unrestricted in its own specific character, and through the invincible elasticity of its unity effaces the atomistic singleness of
the doer and his constructions, preserves itselfin its purity and
dissolves everything individ ualin its fluid nature.
73 I • Just as the gods fall into a con tradictoryrelation with
the self.;.Jike nature opposed to them, so too their universality
comes into conflict with their own specific character and its
relationship to others.' They are the eternal, beautiful individuals who, serenein theirown existence, are exempt from transitoriness and the influence of alien powers. But they are at the
sametime specific elements, particular gods, which therefore stand
in relation to others. But that relation to others which, in virtue
ofthe opposition involved in it, is a conflict with them, is a comical self-'forgetfulness of their eternal nature. Determinateness
is rooted in their divine existence and possesses in its limitation
the independence of the whole individuality; through this their
characters at once lose the sharpness of their peculiar disposition and blend together in their ambiguity. One purpose of the
activity--and their activity itse1f~since it is directed against
an 'other', and hence against an invincible divine power, is an
arbitraryshowing-offwhich at once melts away and transforms
the apparent earnestness of the action into a harmless, self-ton ..
fident play, without result or outcome. If, however, in the
nature of their divinity, the negative element or the specific
determinateness of that nature appears merely as the inconsistency of their activity and as the contradiction between purpose

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

443

and result, and if that independent assurance retains the pre~
ponderance over the element of determinateness, then by that
very fact the pure power of the negative confronts it, and, moreover, as the ultimate power over it and against which it can
do nothing. They are the universal, and the positive, over
against the individual self of mortals which cannot hold out
against their might; but the universal self, for that reason,
hovers over them and over this whole world of picture-thinking
to which the entire content belongs, as the irrational void of
Necessity-a mere happening which they must face as beings
without a self and sorrowfully, for these determinate natures cannot find themselves in this purity.
732. This Necessity, however, is the unity ofthe Notion which
brings under control the contradictory substantial being of the
separate moments, a unity in which the inconsistency and arbitrariness of their action is orderly disposed, and the play of their
actions receives its earnestness and worth in the actions themselves.. The contentof the world of pi,ctorial thought freely unfoldsitselfin the middle term on i~ own account, gathering itseJf
rOllnd the individ uality of a hero who, however, in his strength
and beauty feels his life is broken and sorrowfully awaits an
early death. For the individuality th£J.t is in itself firmly established and actual is banished to its e"treme and split into its
moments whicp have not yet found and united thern~elves. The
one inclividua1 moment, the abstract non~actual one, is
Necessity, which shares in the life of the middle term just as
little as does the other, the actUq[ individual, the Minstrel, who
keeps himself outside of it and is lost in his performance. Both
extremes must draw nearer to the content; one of them,
Neqessity, has to fill itself with the content, the other, the language of the Minstrel, must particip£J.te in it; and the content
formerly left to itself must rec.eive within it the certainty and
the fi~ed character of the negative.
733. This higher language, that of Tragedy, gathers closer
together the dispersed momen ts of the inner essential world and
the world of action: the substance of the divine, in accordance
with the nature of the Notion, sunders itself into its shapes, and
their movement is likewise in conformity with the Notion. In
reg;:trd to form, the language ceases to be narrative because it
enters into the content,just as the content ceases to-be one that

444

C. (C C .) R E L J G ION

is imaginatively presented. The hero is himself the speaker, and
the performance displays to the audience-who are also specta ..
tors-self.. conscious human beings who,know their rights and purposes, the power and the will of their specific nature and know
how to assert them. They are artists, who do not express with
unconscious naturalness and naivety the external aspect of their
resolves and enterprises, as happens in the language accompanying ordinary actions in actu,allife; on the contrary, they
give utterance to the inner essence, they prove the rightness of
their action, and the 'pathos' which moves them is soberly
asserted and definitely expressed in its universal individuality,
free from the accidents of circumstance and personal idiosyn ..
crasies. Lastly, these characters exist as actual human beings
who impersonate the heroes and portray them, not in the form
ofanarrativc) but in the actual speech of the actors themselves.
Just as it is essential for the 'statue to be the work of human
hands, so is the a.ctor essential to his mask-not as an external
condition from which artistically considered we must abstract;
or,sofar as we do have to make abstraction from it, we admit
justthis, that Art does not yet contain in it the true and proper
self.
734. The general ground on which the movement of these
shapes produced from the Notion takes place, is the consciousness expressed in the first imaginative language [that of the
Epic] where the content, devoid of a sdf,is left disunited. It
is the commonalty as such whose wisdom finds utterance in the
Chorus of the Elders; in the powerlessness of this chorus the
commonaltyhas its representative, because the common people
themselves constitute merely the positive and passive material
of the individuality of the governfnent confronting it. Lacking
the power of the negative, it is unable to hold together and to
subdue the riches and varied abundance of the divine life, but
lets it all go its own separate ways, and in its reve'rential hymns
it extols each individual moment as an independent goq, first
one and then another. But where it does detect the earnestness
of the Notion in its onward march dashing these figures to
pieces, and comes to see how ill it fares with its venerated gods
who dare to trespass on ground where the Notion holds sway,
then it is not itself the negative power which actively interferes;
on the contrary, it clings to the self-less thought of such power,

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

445

clings to the consciousness of an alien fate and produces the
empty desire for ease and comfort, and .feeble talk of appease
ment. In its fear of the higher powers which are the immediate
instruments of the Substance, fearful of their struggles among
themselves, and fearful of the simple self of Necessity which
crushes them as well as the living beings linked with them; in
its compassion for these living beings which it also knows to
be the same as itself-it is conscious only of a paralysing terror
of this movement, of equally helpless pity, and as the end of
it all, the empty repose of submission to Necessity, whose work
is understood neither as the necessary deed of the character,
nor as the action of the absolute Being within itself.
735. At the level of this spectatorMconsciousness [the
Chorus], the indifferent ground on which the performance
takes place, Spirit does not appear in its scattered multiplicity,
but in the simple diremptiqn of the Notion. Its Substance, thereM
fore, shows itself torn asunder merely into its two extreme
powers. These elementary universal beings are at the same time
self-conscious individualities-heroes, who place their consciousness into one of th~se powers, find in it determinateness of
character and constitute the effective activity and actuality of
these powers. This universal individuation descends again,
as will be remembered, to the immediate reality of existence
and presents itself to a crowd of spectators who have in the
Chorus their counterpart, or rather their own thought express ..
ingitself. '
736. The content and movement of Spirit which here is
object to itself has already been considered as the nature and
realization of the ethical substance. In its religion, it attains to
a consciousness of itself, or exhibits itself to consciousness in its
purer form and its simpler embodiment. If, then, the ethical
substance, in virtue ofits Notion, split itselfas regards its content
into powers which were defined as divine and human law, or
law of the nether and of the upper world-the one the Family,
the other the State power~ the first being the feminine and the
second the masculine character-similarly, now, the previously
multiform circle of gods with its fluctuating characteristics confines itself to these powers which are thereby brought closer to
genuine individuality. For the previous dispersion of the whole
into manifold and abstract forces, which appear hypostatized,
M

C. (CC.) RELIGION

is the dissolution of the Subject, which comprehends them only
as moments within its self, so that individuality is merely the
superficial form of these entities. Conversely, a further distinction of characters than that just named is to be attributed'
to contingent and intrinsically external personality.
737. At the same time, the [ethical] substance is divided with
respect to its form or to knowing. Spirit when acting appears qua
consciousness over against the object to which its activity is
directed and which, consequently, is determined as the negative
of the knower; the doer finds himself thereby in the antithesis
of knowing and not-knowing. He takes his purpose from his
character and knows it as an ethical essentiality ; but on account
of the determinateness of his character he knows only the one
power ofsubstance, the other remaining for him concealed. The
present reality is, therefore, one thing in itself, and another thing
for consciousness; the upper and the nether law come to signify
in this connection the power that knows and reveals itself to
consciousness, and the power that conceals itself and lies in
ambush. The one is the aspect of Light, the god of the Oracle
who, in accordance with its natural moment, has sprung from
the all. . illuminating Sun, knows all and reveals all-Phoebus,
and Zeus who is his father. But the commands of this truthspeaking god and his announcements of what is, are really deceptive. For this knowing is, in its principle, immediately a notknowing, because consciousness, in its action, is in its own self
this antithesis. He! who was able to unlock the riddle of the
Sphinx, and he who- trusted with childlike confidence,2 are,
therefore both sent to destruction through what the god
revealed to them. This priestess through whom the beautiful
god speaks 3 .is in no way differentfronl the equivocating sisters
of Fa te 4 who, by their promises, drive to crime [those who lis ten
to them], and who by the double-tongued character of what
they announced as a certainty deceive him 5 who relied on the
obvious meaning. The consciousness,6 therefore, that is purer
than the latter5 which believes witches, and is more prudent,
1

Oedipus.

20res tes.
a The

Delphic Oracle.
witches in Macbeth.
5 Macbeth.

4 The

BRamlet.

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF ART

447

more solid, and thorough than the former which trusts the pries~
tess and the beautiful god, tarries. with his revenge, even though
the very spirit of his father reveals to him the crime by which
he was murdered, and institutes still other proofs~for the
reason that this revelatory spirit could also be the devil.
738. The grounds of this mistrust are that the knowing consciousness is caught up in the antithesis of the certainty of itself
and objective essence. Ethical rightness, which holds that what
actually is, is in itself nothing when opposed to absolute law,
learns that its knowing is one-sided, its law only a law of its
own character, and that it has seized on only one of the powers
of the substance. The action itself is this inversion of the known
into its opposite, into being') is the changing-round of the rightness based on character and knowing into the rightness of the
very opposite with which the former js bound up in the essential
nature of the Substance-converts it into the Furies [Erinnyes]
who embody the other power and character aroused hito hos ..
tHity. This nether right sits with Zeus on the throne and enjoys
equal honour withthe god who is revealed and known.
, 739. To these three beings, the world of the gods of the
Chorus is restricted by the acting individuality. One of them
is the Substance, the power presiding over the hearth and the
spiri tof family piety) as well as the universal power of state and
government. Since this distinction belongs to the substance as
Such, when it is pictorially represented it is not individualized
in two distinct figures, but has in actuality the two persons of
its characters. On the other hand, the distinction between
knowing and not-knowing falls within each of the self-con..
sciousnesses-and only in abstraction, in the element of universality, is it divided into two individual shapes. For the self
of the hero has an existence only as a whole consciousness and
is therefore essentially the whole of the distinction belonging to
the form; but its substance is determinate and only one side
of the distinguished content belongs to him. Therefore, the two
sides of consciousness which have in actuality no separate individuality peculiar to each receive, when pictorially represented,
each its own particular shape: the one, that of the revelatory
god, the other, that of the Furies who keep themselves concealed. In part, both enjoy equal honour, but again, the shape
assumed by the substance, Zeus, is the necessity of the relation

448

C. (CC.) RELIGION

of the two to each other. The substance is the relation [a] that
the knowing i8for itself, but has its truth in what is simple; [b]
that the distinction through and in which actual consciousness
exists has its basis in that inner being which destroys it; [c] that
the clear conscious assurance of certainty has its confirmation in
forgeifulness.
740. Consciousness disclosed this antithesis through action;
acting in accordance with the knowledge revealed it finds out
that that knowledge is deceptive; and being committed as
regards the content of that knowledge to one of the attributes
of substance, it violated the other and so gave it the right as
against itself. In following the god that knows, it really got hold
of what was not revealed, and pays the penalty of trusting a
know ledge w hose ambiguity , for such is its na ture, also becomes
explicitfor consciousness and a warning to i~. The ravings of
the priestess, the inhuman shape of the witches, the voices of
trees arid birds, ·dreams and so forth, are not the ways in which
truth manifests itself; they are warning signs of deception, of
an absence ofse1f.. possession, of the singularity and contingency
of the knowing. Or ,'in other words, .the opposite power which
is violated by consciousness is presentas express law and valid
right, whether law of the family or of the state; consciousness,
on the other hand, fonowed its own way of knowing and con~
cealed from itself what was openly revealed. The truth, how ..
ever, of the opposing powers of the con ten t [or the know ledge]
and of consciousness is the result that both are equally right,
and therefore in their antithesis, which is brought about by
action, are equally wrong. The action, in being carried out,
demonstrates their unity in the natural downfall of both powers
and both self~conscious characters. The reconciliation of the
opposition with hself is the Lethe of the underworld in death;
or the Lethe of the upper world as absolution, not from guilt
(for consciousness cannot deny its guilt, because it committed
the act) , but from the crime; and also the peaceofmindfoHow. .
ing atonement for the crime. Both are oblivion, the vanishedness of the reality and the action of the powers of substance,
of their individualities, and of the powers of the abstract
thought of good and evil; for none of them by itself is the
essence, which rather is the repose of the whole within itself,
the unmoved unity of Fate, the peaceful existence and con ..

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF AR T

449

sequent inactivity and lack of vitality of family and governmen t, and the eq ual honour and consequent ind ifferen t unreality
of Apollo and the Furies, and the return of their spiritual life
and activity into the unitary heing of Zeus.
741. This Fate completes the depopulation of Heaven, of
that unthinking mingling of individuality and essence~a ming~
ling whereby the action of essence appears as inconsequent,
arbitrary, unworthy of itself; for individuality that is only
superficially attached to essence is unessential. The expulsion
of such shadowy, insubstantial picture-thoughts' which was
demanded by the philosophers ofantiquity thus already begins
in [Greek] Tragedy in general through the fact that the division
of the substance is controlled by the Notion, and consequently
individ uality is essen tial individ uali ty, and the determina tions
are ahsolute characters. The self-consciousness that is represented in Tragedy, knows and acknowledges, therefore, only
one supreme power, and this Zeus only as the power of the state
or of the hearth, and in the antithesis belonging to knowing
[of knower and known}, oulyas the father of the particular that
is takiqgshape in tbeknowing; and . also as the Zeus of the oath
and of the Furies, the Zeus of the universal, of the inner being
dwrllilJ-gin concealment. The further momen ts issuing from the
Notion and dispersed throughout the pictorial representation,
moments which the Chorus allows to hold sway one after the
other~are, on the other hand, not the 'pathos' of the hero; they
sink to theleve1 ofpassions in .the hero, to the level of contingent,
insubst.antial moments which, though praised by the impersonal Cborus) are not capable of constituting the character of
the heroes, nor of being e~pressed and honoured as their essential nature.
74 2 . But also the persons of the divine Being itself, as well
as the character of its substance, coalesce into the simplicity
of what is without consciousness .. This Necessity has, in contrast
to self-consciousness, the characteristic of being the negative
power of all the shapes that appear, a power in which they do
not recognize themselves but, on the contrary, perish. The self
appears merely as assigned to the characters, not as the mediating
factor of the movement. But self-consciousness, the simple certainty of self, is in fact the negative power, the unity of Zeus,
of substantial being and of abstract Necessity; it is the spiritual

C. (CC.) RELIGION

unity into which everything returns. Because actual self·consciousness is still distinguished from the substance and Fate, it
is partly the Chorus, or rather the crowd of spectators, whom
this movement of the divine life fills with fear as being something alien, or in whom this movement, as something close to
them, produces merely the emotion of passive sympathy.
Partly, too, so far as consciousness is involved and belongs to
the characters, this union is an external one, is a hypocrisy,
because the true union, that of the self, Fate, and substance,
is not yet present. The hero who appears before the onlookers
splits up into his mask and the actor, into the person in the
play and the actual self.
743. The self-consciousness of the hero must step forth from
his mask and present itself as knowing itself to be the fate both
of the gods of the chorus and of the absolute powers themselves,
and as beingno longer separated from the chorus, from the universal consciousness.
744. Comedy has, therefore, above all, the aspect that actual
self~consciousness exhibits itself as the fate of the gods. These
elementary Beings arc, as universal moments, not a self and are
notequal. They arc, itis true, endowed with the form ofindivi..
duality, but this is only in imagination and does not really and
truly belong to them; the actuaL self does not have such an
abstractmomentforits substance and content. It, the Subject, is
raised above such a moment, such a single property, and clothed
in th~ mask it proclaims the irony ofsuch a property wanting to
be something on its own account. The pretensions of universal
essentiality are uncovered in the self; it shows itself to be
entangled in an actual existence, and drops the mask just
because it wants to be something genuine. The self, appearing
here in its significance as something actual, plays with the mask
which it once put on in order to act its part; but it as quitkly
breaks out again from this illusory character and stands forth
in its own nakedness and ordinariness, which it shows to he not
distinct from the genuine self, the actor, or from the spectator.
745. This general dissolution of the shapes of the essentiality
as a whole in their individuality becomes in its con ten tmore
petulant and bitter in so far as the content has its mOre serious
and necessary meaning. The divine substance unites within
itself the meaning of natural and ethical essentiality. As regards

RELIGION IN THE FORM OF AR T

45 1

the natural element, actual self-consciDusness shows in the very
fact of employing things Df Nature for its adDrnment, fDr its
dwelling, and also in feasting on its sacrificial offering, that it
is itself the Fate to which the secret is revealed, viz, the truth
abDut the essential independence of Nature. In the mystery Df
bread and wine, it appropriates this independence along with
the meaning of the inner essence; and in Comedy, it is cDnscious
of the irony of this meaning generally. NDw, in so. far as this
meaning contains ethical essentiality, it is partly the nation in
its two aspects of the state, or Demos proper, and the individuality of the Family; partly, hDwever, it is a self-conscious pure
knowing, Dr the rational thinking of the universal. This Demos,
the general mass, which knDws itself as lord and ruJer, and is
also aware Dfbeing the intelligence and insight which demand
respect, IS constrained and befooled thrDugh the particularity
of its actual existence, and exhibits the ludicrous contrast
between its own Dpinion Df itself and its immediate existence,
between its necessity and cDntingency, its universality and its
CDmmDnness, If the principle of its individuality, separated
fro.m the universal, makes itself conspicuous in the proper shape
Df an actual existence and openly usurps and administers the
commDnwealth to which it is a secret detriment, then there is
expDsed mDre immediately th.e contrast between the universa1
as a theory and that with which practice is concerned; there
is exposed the cDmplete eJ,TlancipatiDn of the purpDses of- the
immediate individuality from the universal order, and the contempt Df such an individuality for that order.
746. RatiDnal thinking frees the divine Being from its cDntingent shape and, in antithesis to the unthinking wisdDm Df the
Chorus which produces all sorts Df ethical maxims and gives
currency to' a hDSt of laws and specific cDncepts of duty and
of right; lifts these into the simple Ideas of the Beautiful and
the GODd. The mDvement Dfthis abstraction is the consciousness
of the dialectic contained in these maxims and laws themselves,
and, consequently, the consciDusness of the vanishing Df the
absolute validity previously attaching to them. With the
\vanishing of the contingent character and superficial individuality which imagination lent to the divine Beings, all that is
left to them as regards their natural aspect is the bareness of their
immediate existence; they are clouds, an evanescent mist, like

C. (CC.) RELIGION

those im.aginative representations. The essence of these having
been given the form of thought, they have become the simple
thoughts of the Beautiful and the Good, which tolerate being
filled with any kind of content. The power of dialectic knowledge puts specific laws and maxims of conduct at the mercy
of the pleasure and frivolity of youth which is led astray by it,
and provides weapons for deceiving old age with its fears and
apprehensions and which is restricted to life in its individual
aspect. The pure thoughts of the Beautiful and the Good thus
display a comic spectacle: through their liberation from the
opinion which contains both their specific determinateness as
content and also their absolute determinateness, liberation,
tha t is, from the firm hold of consciousness on these determinatenesses, they become empty, and just for that reason the sport
of mere opinion and the caprice of any chance individuality.
747. Therefore, the Fate which up to this point has lacked
consciousness and consists in an empty repose and oblivion, and
is separated from self-consciousness, this Fate is now united with
self·consciousness. The individual self is the negative power
throughwhkh and in which the gods, as also their moments,
viz. existent Nature and the thoughts of their spedficcharacters, vanish. At the same time, the individual self is not the
enlptiness of this disappearance but, on the contrary, preserves
itself in this very nothingness, abides with itselfand is the sole
actuality. Init, the religion of Art is consurnmated and has completely returned in to itself. Through the fact that it is the individual consciousness in the certainty of itself that exhibits itself
as this absolute power, this latter has lost the form ofsomething
presented to consciousness, something altogether separate from consciousness and alien to it, as were the statue, and also the living
beautiful corporeality, or the content of the Epic and the powers
and persons of Tragedy. This unity, too, 1snot the unconscious
unity of the Cult and the mysteries; on the contrary, the actual
self of the actor coincides with what he impersonates, just as
the spectator is completely at home in the drama performed
before him and sees himself playing in it. What this self·consciousness beholds is that whatever assumes the form ofessentiality over against it, is instead dissolved in it-in its thinking,
its existence, and its action-and is at its mercy. It is the return
ofeverything universal into the certainty of itself which, in COll-

THE REVEALED RELIGION

453

sequence, is this complete loss offear and of essential being on
the part of all that is alien. This self-certainty is a state of
spiritual well-being and of repose therein, such as is not to be
found anywhere outside of this Comedy.
C.

THE REVEALED RELIGION

748. Through the religion of Art, Spirit has advanced from
the form of Substance to assume that of Subject, for it produces its
[outer] shape, thus ,making explicit in it the act, or the selfconsciousness, that merely vanishes in the awful Substance, and
does not apprehend its own self in its trust. This incarnation
of the divine Being starts from the statue which wears only the
outer shape of the Self, the inwardness, the SeWs activity, falling
outside of it. But in the Cult the two sides have become one;
and in the outcome of ~he religion of Art this unity, in its consummation, has even gone right over at the same time to the
extreme of the Self. In Spirit that is completely certain of itself
in the individuality of consciousness, all essentiality is submerged. The proposition that expresses this levity runs: 'The
Selfis absolute Being.' The essence, the Substance, for which
the Self was [only Jan accident, has sunktothe level of a predicate; and in this self-consciausness over against which there is
nothing in the form of essence, Spirit has lost its consciousness.
749. This proposition: 'The Self is absolute Being', belongs
quite obviously to the non-religious, actual [or secular] Spirit;
and we have to remember which shape of that Spirit itis which
expresses it. It will contain the movement, and also the conversion of it, which degrades the Self to the level of a predicate
and elevates Substance to Subject; and in this manner, that
the converse proposition does not in itself or JOT US make Substance into Subject, or, to put the same thing another way, it
does not reinstate Substance in8uch a manner that Spirit's consciousness is led hack to its beginning, to natural religion; on
thv contrary, this conversion is one that is brought about for
and by self-consciousness itself. Since self-consciousness surrenders
itself consciously, it is preserved in its alienation and
remains the Subject of substance, but since it is likewise self~
alienated, it still has the consciousness of the substance; or,
since self-consciousness through its sacrifice brings forth suh-

454-

C. (CC.) RELIGION

stance as Subject, the substance remains self-consciousness's
own Self. In the first of the two alternative propositions, the
substantiality of the Subject merely vanishes, and in the second,
Substance is only a predicate, and both sides are thus present
in each with contrary ineq uality of value. Here, however, the
result achieved is the union and permeation of the two natures
in which both are, with equal value, essential and at the same
time only moments; so that Spirit is simultaneously consciousness
ofi tself as its objective substance, and simple self-consciousness communing with itself.,
750. The religion of Art belongs to the ethical Spirit which
we earlier saw perish in the condition of right or law, i.e. in the
proposition: 'The Self as such, the abstract person, is absol ute
Being.' In the ethical life, the Self is submerged in the Spirit
ofits people, it is the universality that isfilled. Butsimple individuality raises itself out of this content, and its levity refines it into
a 'person', into the abstract universality of rightor law. In this,
the reality of the ethical Spirit islost, and having lost all content,
the Spirits of national individuals are gathered into a single
pantheon, notinto a pantheon of picture-thought whose powerless form lets each Spiritgo its own way, but into the pantheon
of abstract universality, of pure thought, which disembodies
them.andimparts to the spidtless Self, to the individual person,
a being that is in and for itself.
75 I. But this Self has, through its emptiness, let the content
go free, it is only within itself that consciousness is essence; its
own existence, the legal recognition of the person, is the unfilled
abstraction. What it possesses, therefore, is rather only the
thought oLitself; or in other words, in the mode in which it
immediately exists and knows itself as object, it is something
that is not actual. Hence it is only the Stoic independence of
thought, which passes through the dialectic of the Sceptical
consciousness to find its truth in that shape which we have
called the Unhappy Self-consciousness..
752. This self-consciousness knows what the validity of the
abstract person amounts to in reality and equally in pure
thought. I t knows that such validity is rather a complete loss;
it is itself this conscious loss of itself and the alienation of its
knowledge about itself. We see that this Unhappy Conscious ...
ness constitutes the counterpart and the completion of the

THE REVEALED RELIGION

455

comic consciousness that is perfectly happy within itself. Into
the latter, all divine being returns, or it is the complete alienation of substance. The Unhappy Consciousness, on the other
hand, is, conversely, the tragic fate of the certainty of self that
aims to be absolute. It is the consciousness of the loss of all essential being in this certainty of itself, and of the loss even of this
knowledge about itself-the loss of substance as well as of the
Self, it is the grief which expresses itself in the hard saying that
'God is dead'.
753. In the condition of right or law, then, the ethical world
and the religion of that world are submerged and lost in the
comic consciousness, and the Unhappy Consciousness is the
knowledge of this total loss. It has lost both the worth it attached
to its immediate personality and the worth attached to its personality as mediated, as thought. Trust in the eternal laws of the
gods has vanished, and the Oracles, which pronounced on par~
ticular questions, are dumb. The statues are now only stones
from which the livillg soul has flown, just as the hymns are
words from which belief has gone. The tables of the gods provide no spirituaLfood and drink, and in his games and festivals
mall.no.longerrecovers the joyful consciousness of his unity with
the divine. The wQrks of the Muse now lack the power of the
Spirit, for the Spirit bas gained its certaipty of itself from the
crushing oLgodsand men. They hilve become what they are
for us now~beautiful fruit already picked from the tree, which
afrieI,ldly Fate has offered us, as a girl might set the fruit before
us. It cannot give us the actuill life in which they existed, n.ot
the tree thathQre them, not the earth and the elements which
constituted their substance, not the climate which gave them
their peculiar character, nor the cycle of the changing s.easons
that governed the process of their growth. So F,ate does not re~
store their world to us along with the works of antique Art, it
gives not the spring and summer of the ethical life in which
they blossomed and ripened, but only the veiled recollection
of that actual world. Our active enjoyment ofthem is therefore
not an act of divine worship through which our consciousness
might come to its perfect truth ilnci fulfilment; it is an external
activity-the wiping-off of some drops of rain or specks of dust
from these fruits, ,so to speak~one which erects an intricate
scaffolding of the d~ad elements of their outward existence-

C. (CC.) RELIGION

the language, the historical circumstances, etc. in place of the
inner elements of the ethical life which environed, created, and
inspired them. And all this we do, not in order to enter into
their very life but only to possess an idea of them in our imagination. But,just as' the girl who offers us the plucked fruits is more
than the Nature which directly provides them-the Nature
diversified into their conditions and elements, the tree, air,
light, and so on-because she sums all this up in a higher mode,
in the gleam of her self-conscious eye and in the gesture with
which she offers them, so, too, the Spirit of the Fate that presents
us with those works of art is more than the ethical life and the
actual world of that nation, for it is the inwardizing in us of the
Spirit which in them was still [only] outwardly manifested; it
is the Spirit of the .tragic Fate which gathers all those individual gods and attributes of the [divine] substance into one
pantheon, into the Spirit that is itself conscious of itself as
Spirit.
754. AU the conditions for its production are to hand, and
this totality of its conditions constitutes its ~oming~to-be, its
t in principle. 'The Circle of the creaNotion, or the prod uction
tions of Art em braces the forms in which absolute substance
has externalized itself. Absolute substance is in the form of il1dividualityas a Thing, an objectofsensuousconsciousness tha.t
simply is-'-as pure· language, or the coming-to-be of a shape
whose existence does not go olltside of the Self, but is purely
a vanishing object; as immediate unity with the universal selfconsciousness in its inspiration, and as a mediated unity in the
act of the Cult; as a beautiful, self-like corpore'ality;and lastly,
as existence raised into an ideational presentation and the
expansion of this existence into a world which finally collects
itself together into a universality which is at the same time a
pure certainty of itself. These fonns, and on the other side, the
wor1d of the person and of law, the destructive ferocity df the
freed elements of the content, as also the person as thought in
Stoicism, and the unstable restlessness of the Sceptical consciousness, constitute the [audience or] periphery of shapes
which stands impatiently expectant round the birthplace of
Spirit as it becomes self-consciousness [ie. round the manger
a t Bethlehem]. The grief and longing of the Unhappy Self-consciousness which permeates them all is their centre and the com-

on

THE REVEALED RELIGION

4-57

man birth-pang of its emergence-the simplicity of the pure
Notion, which contains those forms as its moments.
755. Spirit has in it the two sides which are presented above
as two converse propositions: one is this, that substance
alienates itself from itself and becomes self-consciousness; the
other is the converse, that self~consciousness alienates itself from
itself and gives itself the nature of a Thing, or makes itself a
universal Self. Both sides have in this way encountered each
other, and through this encounter their true union has come
into being. The externalization [or kenosis] of substance, its
growth into self-consciousness, expresses the transition into the
opposite, the unconscious transition of necessity; in other words,
that substance is in itself self-consciousness. Conversely, the
externalization of se1f-consciousness expresses this, that it is in
itselJ the universal essence, or-since the Self is pure being-forself which in its opposite communes with itself-that it is just
because substance is self-consciousness Jor the Self, that it is
Spirit. Of this Spirit, which has abandoned the form of Substance and enters existence in the shape of self-consciousness,
it may therefore be said-ifwe wish to employ relationships derived from naturalgeneration~that it has an actual mother but
an implicit father. For actuality or self-consciousness., and the init'selfassubstance, are its two moments through whose reciprocal
externalization, each becoming the other, Spirit comes into existence as this their unity.
756. In so far as self-consciousness one-sidedly grasps only
its own externalization, then, even though its object is for it just
as much Being as Self, and it knows all existence to be spiritual
in nature, nevertheless true Spirit has still not yet come to be
explicitly for self-consciousness, inasmuch as being in general,
or Substance, has not equally, on its side, implicitly externalized
itself and hecome se1f-consciousness. For in that case, then, all
existence is spiritual being only from the stanQ-point of consciousness, not in its own self. Spirit is in this way only imagined
into existence; tbis imagining is the visionary dreaming which
insinuatesinto both Nature and history, into the world and into
the mythical ideas of earlier religions, another, esoteric meaning than that which lies on the surface, and in the case of religions, another meaning than the one known in them by the
self-consciousness whose religions' they were. Bu't this meaning

45 8

C. (CC.) RELIGION

is one that is borrowed, a garment which does not cover the
nakedness of the appearance and merits neither belief nor
reverence; it is no more than the dark night and selfNdelusive
rapture of consciousness.
757. If, therefore, this meaning of the objective is not to be
mere imagination, it must possess intrinsic being, must originally
appear in consciousness as stemming from the Notion and must
come forth in its necessity. It is thus that self-knowing Spirit
has arisen for us, viz. through the cognition of the immediate consciousness, or of the consciousness of the object in its immediacy,
through its necessary movement. This Notion which, as imme.
diate, had also the shape of immediacy for its consciousness,
has, in the second place, given itself the shape of implicit self..
consciousness, i.e. by just the same necessity of the Notion by
which being or the immediacy which is the content-less object of
sensuous consciousness, externalizes itself and becomes the 'I'
for consciousness. But the immediate in-itself or the necessity that
simply is, is itself different from the in-itself that thinks, or from
the cognition of necessity-a difference, however, which at the
same time does not He outside of the Notion, for the simple unity
of the Notion is immediate being itself. The Notion is at once a
self-externalization or a coming-to."be of intuitively perceived
necessity, and also in.this necessity is in communion with itself,
knows it and comprehends it. The immediate in-itself of Spirit
that gives itself the shape of self-consciousness means nothing
else than that the actual World-Spirit has attained to this knowledge ofitself; it is then, too, that this knowledge also first enters
its consciousness. How that came about we have already seen.
758. That absolute Spirit has given itself implicitly the shape
of self-consciousness, and therefore has also given it for its consciousness-this now appears as the beliefojthe world that Spirit
is immediately present as a self-conscious Being, i.e. as an actual
man, that the believer ~s immediately certain of Spirit, sees,jeeis,
and hears this divinity. Thus this self-consciousness is not imagination, but is actual in the believer. Consciousness, then, does
not start from its inner life, from thought, and unite within itself
the thought of God with existence; on the contrary, it starts
from an existence that is immediately present and recognizes
God therein. The moment of immediate being is present in the
content of the- Notion in such a way that the religious Spirit,

THE REVEALED RELIGION

459

in the return of all essentiality into consciousness, has become
a simple positive Self,just as the actual Spirit as such in the Unhappy Consciousness was just this simple, self-conscious negativity. The Self of existent Spirit has, as a result, the form of
complete immediacy; it is posited neither as something thought
or imagined, nor as something produced, as is the case with
the immediate Self in natural religion, and also in the religion
of Art; on the contrary, this God is sensuously and directly
beheld as a Self, as an actual individual man; only so is this
God self-consciousness.
759. This incarnation of the divine Being, or the fact that
it essentially and directly has the shape of self-consciousness,
is the simple content of the absolute religion. In this religion
the divine Being is known as Spirit, or this religion is the consciousness of the divine Being that it is Spirit. For Spirit is the
know ledge of oneself in the externaliza tion of oneself; the being
that is the movement of retaining its self-identity in its otherness. This, however, is S,ubstance, in so far as Substance is, in
its accidents, at the same time reflected into itself, not indifferent to thern as to so.mething unessential or present in them
as in an alien element, but in them it is within itself, I.e. in so
far as it is Subject or Self. Consequently, in this religion the
divine Being is revealed. Its being revealed obviously co.nsists
in this, that what it is, is known. But it is known precisely in
its being known as Spirit, as a Being that is essentially a selfconscious Being. For there is something hidden from consciousness
ioits object if the object is for consciousness an 'other' or something alien, and if it do.es not know it as its own self. This co.ncealment ceases when the absolute Being qua Spirit is the object
of co.nsciousness; for then the object has the form of Self in its
relation to consciousness, i.e. co.nsciousness knows itself immediately in the object, or is manifest to its~lf in the object. Con~
sciousness is manifest to. itself only in its own certainty of itself;
its object now is the Self, but the Self is nothing alien; on the
CQntrary, it is the indissoluble unity with itself, the universal that
is immediately such. It is the pure Notion, pure Thought or
being-for-selfwhich is immediately being, and consequently beingfor-an other, and as this being-for-an other is immediately returned
into itself and in communion with itself; it is, therefore, that
which is truly and alone revealed. The Good, the Righteous,

c. (ce.) RELIGION

the Holy, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and so on, are predi
cates of a Subject-··-universal moments which have their support on this point and only are when consciousness withdraws
into thought. As long as it is they that are known, their ground
and essence, the Subject itselfis not yet revealed; and 'similarly,
the determinations of the universal are not this universal itself. The
Subject itself, and consequently this pure universal too, is, however, revealed as Self, for this is just this inner being which is
reflected into itselfand which is immediate1y present and is the
self-certainty of the Self for which it is present. This-to be in
accordance with its Notion that which is revealed-this is, then,
the true shape of Spirit, and this its shape, the Notion, is likewise
alone its essence and its substance. Spirit is known as self-consciousness and to this self-consciousness it is immediately
revealed, for Spirit is this self-consciousness itse1f. The divine
nature is the same as the human, and it is this unity that is
beheld.
760. Here, therefore, consciousness-or the mode in which
essence is for consciousness itself, i.e. its shape-is, in fact, identical with its self-consciousness. This shape is itself a self·consciousness; it is thus at the same time an object in the mode
of immediate being, and this being, likewise immediately, has
the significance of pure Thought, of absolute Being. Theahsolute Being which exists as an actual self-consciousness seems
to have come down from its eternal simplicity, butby thus coming down it has in fact attained for the first time to its own highest
essence. For it is only when the Notion of essence has reached
its simple purity that it is the absolute abstraction which is pure
Thought and hence the pure individuality of Self, just as, on
account of its simplicity, it is also the immediate or being. What
is called sense~consciousness isjust this pure abstraction, it is this
thinking for which being is the immediate. Thus the lowest
is at the same time the highest; the revealed which has come
forth wholly on to the surface is precisely therein the most pro~
found. That the supreme Being is seen, heard, etc. as an imme~
diately present self-consciousness, this therefore is indeed the
consummation of its Notion; and through this consummation
that Being is immediately present qua supreme Being.
76 I. This immediate existence is at the same time not solely
and simply immediate consciousness, but is religious conscious~
u

THE REVEALED RELIGION

ness; the immediacy has inseparably the meaning not only of
a self-consciousness that immediately is, but also of the supreme
Being as an absolute essence in pure thought, or absolute Being.
What we are conscious of in our Notion, viz. that Being is
Essence, is what the religious consciousness is also conscious of.
This unity of Being and Essence, of Thought which is immediately Existence, is both the thought of this religious consciousness, or its mediated knowledge, and equally its immediate knowledge; for this unity of Being and Thought is self-consciousness
and is itself immediately present, or the thought unity has at the
same time this [existential] shape ofwhat it is. Here, therefore,
God is revealed as He is; He is immediately present as He is in
Himself, i.e. He is immediately present as Spirit. God is attainable
in pure speculative knowledge alone and z's only in that knowledge, and is only that knowledge itself, for He is Spirit; and
this speculative knowledge is the knowledge of the revealed'religion. Speculative knowledge knows God as Thought or pure
Essence, and knows this Thought as simple Being and as Existence, and Existence as the negativity of itself, hence as Self, as
the Self that is at the same time this individual, and also the
universal, Self. It is precisely this that the revealed religion
knows, The hopes and expectations of the world up tiB now
had pressed fbrward solely to thjs revelation, to b~hold what
absol ute Being is, and in it to find itself. The joy of beholding
itself in absolute Being enters self;..consciousness and seizes the
whole world; for it is Spirit, it is the simple movement of those
pure moments, which expresses just this: that only when absolute Being is beheld as an immediate·self-consc1ousness is it known
as Spirit.
762. This Notion of Spirit that knows itself as Spirit is itself
the immediate Notion and is not yetdeveloped. Absolute Being
is Spirit, i.e it has appeared, it is revealed; this first revelation
is itself immediate; but the immediacy is equally pure mediation
or thought, and it must therefore exhibit this in its own sphere
as such. Looking at this more closely, Spirit, in the immediacy
of self"consciollsness, is this individual self"consciousness, and so
in an antithesis to the universal self;;;;consciousness. It is an exclusive One or unit which has the still, unresolved form of a sen
suous 'other' for the consciousness for which it is immediately
present. This 'other' does not as yet know Spirit as its own,
a

c.

(CC.) RELIGION

i.e. Spirit as an individual Self is not yet equaUy the universal
Self, the Self of everyone. In other words, the shape has not
as yet the form of the Notion, i.e. of the universal Self, of the
Self that in its immediate actuality is at the same time a superseded Self, viz. Thought, universality, without losing its actuality in this universality. But the proximate form of this universality, the form that is itself immediate, is not yet the form
of thought itself, of the Notion as Notion, but the universality of
reality, the 'allness' or totality of the selves, and the raising of
existence into an ideational form; a~ in every case, and to cite
a specific example, the superseded This of sense is, in the first
place, the Thing of perception, not yet the universal of the Understanding.
763. This individual man, then, which absolute Being has
revealed itself to be, accomplishes in himself as an individual
the movement of sensuous Being. He is the immediately present
God; consequently, his 'being' passes over into 'having been'. Consciousness, for which God is thus sensuously present, ceases to
see (I,!ld to hear Him; it has seen and heard Him; and it is
because it only has seen and heard Iiim that it first becomes
itself spiritual consciousness. Or, in other words, j lIst as formerly
He rose up fQr consciousness as a sensuous existence, now He has
arlsen in the Spirit. For a consciousness that sensuously sees and
hears Him is itself a merely immediate consciousness,whichbas
not overcome the disparity of objectivity, has not taken it back
into pure thought: it knows this objective individual, but not
itself, as Spirit. In the vanishing of the immediate existence
known to be absolute Being the immediacy re.ceives its negative
moment; Spirit remains the immediate Self of actuality, but
as the universal self-consciousness of the I religious] community, a
self-consciousness which reposes in its own substance, just as
in it this Substance is a universal Subject·; not the individual
by himself, but together with the consciousness of the community and what he is for this community, is the complete
whole of the individual as Spirit.
764. Remoteness in time and space is, however, only the imperfect form in which the immediate mode [of existence] is given
amedia~ed or universal character; it is merely dipped superficially in the element of Thought, is preserved in it as a sensuous
mode, and not made one with the nature of Thought itself. It

THE REVEALED RELIGION

is merely raised into the realm of picture-thinking, for this is
the synthetic combination of sensuous immediacy and its uni~
versality or Thought.
765. Thisform ofpicture-thinking constitutes the specific mode
in which Spirit, in this community, becomes aware of itself. This
form is not yet Spirit's self-consciousness that has advanced to
its Notion qua Notion: the mediation is still incomplete. This
combination of Being and Thought is, therefore, defective in
that spiritual Being is still burdened with an unreconciled split
into a Here and a Beyond. The content is the true content, but
all its moments, when placed in the medium of picture-thinking, have the character of being uncomprehended [in terms of
the Notion], of appearing as completely independent sides
which are externally connected with each other. Before the true
content can also receive its true form for consciousness, a higher
formative development of consciousness is necessary; it must
raise its intuition of absolute Substance into the Notion, and
equate its consciousness with its self-consciousness for itself, just
as this has happened for us, or in itself;
766. This content is to be considered as it exists in its consciousness. Absolute Spirit is the content, and is thus in the shape
of its truth. But its truth is to be not merely the Substance or
the in.. itselfof the community, nor merely to step forth out of
this inwardness into the objectivity of picture-thinking, but to
become an actual Self, to reflect itself into itself and to be Subject. This, therefore, is the movement which it accontplishes in
its community, or this is the life of the community. Consequently, what this se1f~revealing Spirit is in andfor itself, is not
elicited by, as it were, unravelling the rich life of Spirit in the
comm.unity and tracing it back to its original strands, to the
ideas, say, of the primitive impetfectcommunity, or even to
the utterances of the actual man himself. This 'tracing~back'
is based on the instinct to get to the Notion; but it confuses
the origin of the Notion as the immediate existence of its first
manifestation with the simplicity of the Notion. What results
from this impoverishment ofSpirit , from gettingrid ofthe idea of
the community, and its action with regard to its idea, is not the
N otlon, bu t rather bare externality and singularity, the historical
mannerofthe manifestationin itsimmediacy and the non-spiritual recollection of a supposed individual figure and ofits past.

C, (CC.) RELIGION

767. Spirit is the content of its consciousness at first in the
form of pure substance, or is the content.of its pure consciousness.
This element of Thought is the movement of descending into
existence or into individuality. The middle term between these
two is their synthetic connection, the consciousness of passing
into oth~rness, or picture-thinking as such. The third moment
is the return from picture-thinking and otherness, or the element of self-consciousness itself. These three moments constitute Spirit; its dissociation in picture-thinking consists in its
existing in a specific or determinate mode; but this determinateness is nothing else than one of its moments. Its complete move;..
ment is therefore this, to diffuse its· nature throughout each of
its moments as in its native element; since each of these spheres
completes itself within itself, this reflection of one sphere into
itself is at the same time the transition into another. Picturethinking constitutes the middle term between pure thought and
self.. consciousness as such, and is only one of the specific or
determina te forms ;at thesame time, however ,as wehave seen,
its character-that of being a synthetic connection~-----is diffused
throughout all these elements and is their common determinateness.
768. The content itselfwhich we have to consider has partly
been met with already as the idea of the ~unhappy' aJ;lo the
'beljeving' consciousness; but in the fonner, itbas the character
of a content produced from consciousness for which Spirit
yearns, and in which Spirit cannot be satiated or find rest,
because it is not yet in itseljits own content, or is not the Substance of it. Inthe 'believing' consciousness, on the other hand,
the content was regarded as the self..less Being of the·· world, .or
as essentially an objective content of picture,.. thinking, of a
picture-thinking thatsimplyfleesfrom reality and conseq uently
is without the certainty ofself-consciousness, which is separated
from it partly by the conceit of knowing and partly by pure
imdght. The consciousness of the community, on the other
hand, possesses the content for its substance, just as the content
is the certainty of the community's own'Spirit.
769. When Spirit is at first conceived of as substance in the
element of pure thought, it is immediately simple and self;.
identical, eterna.l essence, which does not, however, have this
abstract meaning of essence, but the meaning of absolute Spirit.

THE REVEALED RELIGION

Only Spirit is not a 'meaning', is not what is inner, but what
is actual. Therefore simple, eternal essence would be Spirit only
as a form of empty words, if we went no further than the idea
expressed in the phrase 'simple, eternal essence'. But simple
essence, because it is an abstraction, is, in fact, the negative in
its own self and, moreover, the negativity of thought, or negativity as it is in itself in essence; i.e. simple essence is absolute
difference from itself, or its pure othering of itself. As essence it
is only in itself or for us; but since this purity is just abstraction
or negativity, it isfor itself, or is the Self, the Notion. It is thus
objective; and -since picture-thinking interprets and expresses
as a' happening what has just been expressed as the necessity of
the Notion, it is said that the eternal Being begets for itself an
'other'. But in this otherness it has at the same time immediately
returned into itself; for the difference is the difference in itself,
I.e. it is immediately distinguished only from itself and is thus
the unity that has returned into itself.
770. There are thus three distinct moments: essence, beingfor-self which is the otherness of essence and for which essence
is, and being..for-self, or the knowledge of itself in the 'other'.
Essence beholds only its own selfin its being-for-self; in this
externaHzation of itself it stays only with itself: the being-forself that shuts itself out from essence is essence's knowledge of its
own self. It is the word which, When uttered, leaves behind,
externalized and emptied, him who uttered it, but which is as
immediately heard, and only this hearing of its own self is
the eXIstence of the Word. Thus the distinctions made are immediately resolved as soon as they are made, and are made as
soon as they are resolved, and what is true and actualis precisely
this immanent circular move men 1.
771. This immanent movement proclaims the absolute
Being as Spirit. Absolute Being that is not grasped as Spirit is
merely the abstract void, just as Spirit that is not grasped as
this movement is only an empty word. When its moments are
graspedintheir purity, they are the restless Notions which. only
are, in being in themselves their own opposite, and in finding
their rest in the whole. But the picture-thinking of the religious
community is not this speculative thinking; it has the content,
but withoutits necessity, and instead of the form of the Notion
it brings into the realm of pure consciousness the natural rela·

C. (CC.) RELIGION

tionships of father and son. Since this consciousness, even in
its thinking, remains at the level of picture-thinking, absolute
Being is indeed revealed to it, but the moments of this Being,
on account of this [ empirically] synthetic presentation, partly
themselves fall asunder so that they are not related to one
another through their own Notion, and partly this consciousness
retreats from this its pure object, relating itself to it only in
an external manner. The object is revealed to it by something
alien, ap.d it does not recognize itself in this thought of Spirit,
does not recognize the nature of pure self-consciousness. In
so far as the form of picture-thinking and of those relationships
derived from Nature must be transcended, and especially also
the standpoint which takes the moments of the movement
which Spirit is, as isolated immovable Substances or Subjects,
instead of transient moments-the transcending of this standpoint is to be regarded as a compulsion on the part of the
Notion, as we pointed out earlier in connection with another
aspect. Byt since this compulsion is instinctive, self..consciousness.misunderstands its own nature, rejects the content as wen
as the form and, what amounts to the same thing, degrades the
conten t into a historical pictorial idea and to an heirloom
handed down by tradition. In this way, it is only the purely
external element in belief that is retained and as something
therefore that is dead and cannot be known; but the inner ele. .
ment in faith has vanished, because this would be the Notion
that knows itself as Notion.
772. Absolute Spirit as pictured in pure essence is not indeed
abstract pure essence; for abstract essence has sunk to the level
of being merely an element, just because it is only a moment in
[the life of] Spirit. But the representation of Spirit in this element is charged with the same defect of form which essen,ce as
such has. Essence is an abstraction and is therefore the negation
of its simple, unitary nature, is an 'other'; similarly, Spirit in
the element of essence is the form of simple oneness, which therefore is equally essentially an othering of itself. Or, what is the
same thing, the relation of the eternal Being to its being-foro.
selfis the immediately simple one of pure thought. In this simple
beholding of itself in the 'other', the otherness is therefore not
posited as such; it is the difference which, in pure thought, is
immediately no difference; a loving recognition in which the two

THE REVEALED RELIGION

sides, as regards their essence, do not stand in an antithetical
relation to each other. Spirit that is expressed in the element
of pure though tis itself essentially this, to be not merely in this
element, but to be actual Spirit, for in its Notion lies otherness
itself, i.e. the supersession of the pure Notion that is only
thought.
773. The element of pure thought, because it is an abstract
element, is itself rather the 'other' of its simple, unitary nature,
and therefore passes over into the element proper to picturethinking-the element in which the moments of the pure
Notion obtain a substantial existence relatively to one another,
and also are Subjects which do not possess for a third the indifference towards each other of [mere] being but, being reflected into themselves, spontaneously part asunder and also
place themselves over against each other.
774. Thus the merely eternal or abstract Spirit becomes an
'other' to itself, or enters into existence, and directly into immediate existence. Accordingly, it creates a world. This 'creating'
is picture-thinking':s'word for the Notion itself in its absolute
movement; or to express the fact thatthe simple which has been
asserted as absolute, or pure thought,just because it is abstract,
is rather the negative, and hence theself;. opposed or 'other' of
itself; orbeca use, to pu tthesame thingin another form , tha t which
is posited as essence is simple immediacy or heing, but qu.a immediacy or being lacks Self and, therefore, lacking inwardness is
passive, ora being-for-another. Thisheing-for-anotheris at the same
time a world; Spirit, in the determination of being-for-another,
is the inert subsistence of the moments formerly enclosed within
pure thought, is therefore the dissolution of their -simple universalityand the parting asunder ofthem into their own particularity.
775. But the world is not merely this Spirit cast out and dispersed into the fulness [of natural existence] and its external
ordering; for since Spiri t is essentially the simple Self, this Self
is equally presentin the world: it is the existent Spirit, which
is the individual Selfw-hich has consciousness and distinguishes
itself as 'other', or as world, from itself. This individual Self as
at first thus immediately posited, is not yet Spirit for itself; it
does not exist as Spirit; it can be called 'innocent' but hardly
'good'. Before it can in fact be Self and Spirit it must first

468

C. (CC.) RELIGION

become an 'other' to its own self, just as the eternal Being
exhibits itselfas the movement of being self-identical in its otherness. Since this Spirit is determined as at first an immediate
existence, or as dispersed into the multifariousness of its consciousness, its othering of itself is the withdrawal into itself, or
self-centredness, of knowing as such. Immediate existence suddenly turns into thought, or mere sense-consciousness into
consciousness of though t; and , moreover, because the thought
stems from immediacy or is conditioned thought, it is not pure
knowledge, but thought that is charged with otherness and is,
therefore, the self-opposed thought of Good and Evil. Man is
pictorially thought of in this way: that it once happened, without
any necessity, that he lost the form of being at one with himself
through plucking the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of Good
and Evil, and was expelled from the state of innocence, from
Nature which yielded its fruits without toil, and from Paradise,
from th.e garden with its creatures .
776 .., Since this withdrawal into itself or self-centredness of
thee~istent conscioilsnessimmediatelymakes it self-discordant,
Evil appears as theprim~ryexistenceof theinwardly . . turned
consciousness; and because tbe thoughts of Good and Evil are
utterly opposed and this antithesis is not yet resolved, this consciousnc~.s isessentia.lly onlY evil. But at the ~arne time, on
accountpfjllst this an ti thc$.is, there is ·also present the good conscioll~ness opposing it, and their relation to each other. In so
far as immediate e?{istenc(:suddenly changes into Thought, and
the being-within-self is on the one hand itself a thinking, while
on the other hand the morncl1 t of theotheying of essence is more
precisely determined by it,.,. . . .{beca.useofthis double aspect] the
becoming ofEvil can be shifted further hack outof the existent
world even into the primary realm of Thought. I t can therefore
be said that it is the v~ry first-born Son of Light [Lucifer] himself who feU because he withdrew into himself or became selfcentr~d, but that in his place another was at once created. Such
a form of expression as 'fallen' which, like the expression 'Son',
belongs, moreover, to picture-thinking and not to the Notion,
degrades the moments of the Notion to the level of picturethinking or carries picturemthinking over into the realm of
though t. Likewise it makes no difference if we co-ordinate a
multiplicity of other shapes with the simple thought of otherness

THE REVEALED RELIGION

in the eternal Being and transfer the selj-centredness into them.
In fact, this co-ordination must be approved, since by means
ofit this moment of otherness also expresses diversity, as it should;
and, moreover, not as plurality in general, but also as a specific
diversity, so that one part, the Son, is that which is simple and
knows itself to be essential Being, while the other part is the
alienation, the externalization of being-for-self which lives only
to praise that Being; to this part, then, can be assigned the taking back again of the externalized being-for-self and the withdrawal into self of the evil principle. In so far as the otherness
falls into two parts, Spirit might, as regards its moments-if
these are to be counted-be more exactly expressed as a quaternity in unity or, because the quantity itself again falls into
two parts, viz. one part which has remained good and the other
which has become evil, might even be expressed as a five-inone. But to count the moments can be reckoned' as altogether
useless, since in the first place what is differentiated is itselfjust
as much only one thing--viz.the thought of the difference which
is only one thought~s it [the differentiated] is this differentiated element, the second relatively to the first. And, secondly,
itis useless to countbecause the thoughtwhich grasps the Many
in aGne mustbedissolved out of its universality and differentiatedinto more than three or four distinct components; and this
universality appears, in contrast to the absolute determinateness of the abstract unit, the principle of number, as indeterminateness with respect to number as such, so that we could
speak only of numbers in general, i.e. not ofa specific numher
of differences. Here, therefore, it is quite superfluous to think
of numbers and counting at all, Just as in other respects the
mere difference of quantity and amount has no notional significance and makes no difference.
777. Good and Evil were the specific differences yielded by
the thought of Spirit as immediately existent. Since their antithesis has not yet been resolved and they are conceived of as
the essence of thought, each of them having an independent
existence of its own, man is a self lacking any essential being
and is the synthetic ground of their existence and their conflict.
But these universal powers just as much belong to the self, or
the se1f is their actuality. I n accordance with this moment, it
therefore comes to pass that, just as Evil is nothing other than

47 0

c. (ce.) RELIGION

the self-centredness of the natural existence of Spirit, so, conversely, Good enters into actuality and appears as an existent
self-consciousness. That which in the pure thought of Spirit is
in general merely hinted at as the othering of the divine Being,
here comes nearer to its realization for picture-thinking: this
realization consists for picture-thinking in the self-abasement
of the divine Being who renounces his abstract and non-actual
nature. Picture-thinking takes the other aspect, evil, to be a
happening alien to the divine Being; to grasp it in the divine
Being itself as the wrath of God, this demands from picture-thinking, struggling against its limitations, its supreme and most
strenuous effort, an effort which, since it lacks the Notion,
remains frui dess..
778. The alienation of the divine Being is thus made explicit
in its twofold form: the Self of Spirit and its simple thought
are the two moments whose absolute unity is Spirit itself. Its
alienation consists in the moments going apart from one
another and in one of them having an un@q ua] value compared
withthe other. This disparityis therefore twofold, and tworelationships arise whose common moments are those just given.
Inone of them, the divine Being counts as essence, while natural
existence and the Self COl,lnt as the unessential aspect which is
to besupersed¢d. In the other, on the contrary, being-for".self
counts as the essential and the simple, divine Being as unessentiaL Their still empty middle term is existence in general, the
bare community of their two moments.
779. This antithesisis resolved not so much through the conflict hetween the two moments which are pictured as separate
and independent Beings: their very independence implies that
ea<;q of them in its own self, through its Notion, must resolve
itself. The conflict begins where bo.th cease to be these minglings
of thought and of independent existence, and where they confront each other only as thoughts. For then they are, as specific
Notions, only in the relation of an antithesis; as independent,
on the other hand, they have their essentiality outside of their
antithesis. Their movement is, therefore, their own free and
spontaneous movement. As, then, the movement of the two
sides is an intrinsic movement, since it is to be considered in the
sides themselves, it is initiated by that side which is determined
as possessing being-in-itself as contrasted with the other. This

THE REVEALED RELIGION

471

is depicted as a spontaneous act; but the necessity for its externalization lies in the Notion that being-in-itself, which is so determined in the antithesis, has just for that reason no genuine
subsistence. It is, therefore, that side which has not being-forselfbut simple being as its essence that alienates itself from itself,
yields to death, and thereby reconciles absolute essence with
itself. For, in this movement, it manifests itselfas Spirit; abstract
essence is alienated from itself, it has natural existence and selflike actuality; this its otherness, or its sensuous presence, is taken
back again by the second othering and posited as superseded,
as universal. The [absolute] essence has thereby come to be its
own Self in its sensuous presence; the immediate existence of
actuality has ceased to be something alien and external for the
absolute essence, since that existence is superseded, is universal.
This death is, therefore, its resurrection as Spirit.
780. The transcended immediate presence of the self-conscious essence has the form of universal self-consciousness. This
Notion of the transcended individual self that is absolute Being
immediately expresses, therefore, the' establishing of a community which, tarrying hitherto in: the sphere of picture-thinking, now returns into itself as the Self; and in doing this, Spirit
passes over from the second element constituting it, i.e. from
picture-thinking, into the third element, self-consciousness as
such. If we further consider the behaviour of picture-thinking
in its progress, we find first of all the declaration that the divine
Being takes on human nature. Here it is already asserted that
in themselves thetwo are not separate; likewise in the declaration
tha t the divine Being from tke beginning externalizes itself, that
its existence withdraws into itself and becomes self-centred and
evil, implies, though it does not expressly assert, that this evil
existence is not in itself something alien to the divine Being.
Absolute Being would be but an empty name if in truth there
were for it an 'other', if there were a 'fall' from it; on the contrary, the moment of being-within ..self constitutes the essential
moment of the Self of Spirit. That this being-witkin-self and the
actuality which follows from it belong to absolute Being itself,
this which for us is Notion, and in so far as it is Notion, appears
to the picture-thinking consciousness as an incomprehensible
happening; the in-itselfassumes for it the form of indifferent being,
The thought that those moments of absolute Being and of the

472

C. (CC.) RELIGION

self-centred Self which seem to flee from each other are not
separate, also appears in this picture-thinking~for it does possess the true content-but this picture-thought comes later, in
the externalization of the divine Being who is made flesh. The
picture-thought is in this way still immediate, and therefore not
spiritual, i.e. it knows the human form of the divine Being at
first only as a particular, not yet as a universal, form; it becomes spiritual for this consciousness in the movement whereby
this divine Being in human shape sacrifices his immediate
exis tenceagain andreturns to thedivine Being: only when essence
is reflected into itself is it Spirit. In this picture-thought there
is depicted the reconciliation of the divine Being with its 'other'
in general, and specifically with the thought of it-Evil. If
this reconciliation is notionally expressed by saying that it consists in the fact that Evil is in itself the same as Goodness, or
again that the divine Being is the same as Nature in its whole
extent, or that Nature separatedfrom the divine Being is simply
nothing-we must regard this as an unspiritual way of talking
and one that is necessarily bound to give rise to misunderstand ..
ings. If EvH is the same as Goodness, then Evil is just not Evil,
nor Goodness Good: on the contrary, both are suspended
moments-Evil in general is self·centred being-for-self, and
Goodness is what is simple and without a self. When thus
expressed in terms, of their Notion, their unity is a t once eviden t ;
for self"centred being-for-self is simple knowing, and simple
[being] that lacks a Self is eq ually pure self-centred being.. for
self If, therefore, it must be said, that according to this their
Notion, Good and Evil, i.e. in so far as they are not Good and
Evil, are the same, it must also no less emphatically be asserted
that they are not the same, but are utterly different; for simple
being.. for~self, or pure knowing too, is each in its own self
equally pure negativity or absolute difference. The whole is
only complete when the two propositions are made together,
and when the first is asserted and maintained, it must be
countered by clinging to the other with invincible stubbornness.
Since both are equally right, they are both equa-lly wrong, and
the mistake consists in taking such abstract forms as 'the same'
and 'not the same', 'identiti and 'non-identity', to be something true, fixed, and actual, and in resting on them. Neither
the one nor the other has truth; the truth is just their movement

THE REVEALED RELIGION

473

in which simple sameness is an abstraction and hence absolute
difference, but this, as difference in itself, is distinguished from
itself and is therefore selfsameness. This is precisely the case with
the 'selfsameness' of the divine Being and Nature in general,
and human nature in particular: the former is Nature in so far
as it is not essential Being, and the latter is divine according
to its essence. But it is Spirit in which the truth of these two
abstract sides is made explicit, viz. by reducing them to
suspended moments, an explication which cannot be expressed
by the judgement and the lifeless 'is' which forms its copula.
Similarly, Nature is nothing apart from its essence; but this same
'nothing' just as much is; it is an absolute abstraction, and thus
pure thought or being~within~self, and with the moment of its
antithesis to the spiritual unity it is Evil. The difficulty that is
found in these :IN otions sterns solely from clinging to the 'is' and
forgetting the thinking of the Notions in which the moments
j ustas much are as they are not~are only the movement which
is Spirit. his this spiritual unity, or the unity in which the dif~
ferences are pr~sentonlyas moments or as suspended, which
has become explicit for the picture.thinking consciousness in
that reconciliation spoken ofabovc; and since this unity is the
universality of self.consciousness, self.:..consciousness has ceased
to thinkin pictures: the movement has returned into se]f·con·
sciousness.
781. Spirit is thus posited in the third element, in universal
seif.:..consciousness; i(is1ts community. The movement of the com·
munity as self~consciousness that has distinguished itself from
its picture.thoughtis to make explicit what has been implicitly
established. The dead divine Man or human God is in himself
the universalself-"consciousness ; this he has to become explicitly
for this selj-consci()usness.Or, since this self~consciousness constitutes one side of the antithesis in picture·thought, viz. the
side orevil, for which natural existence and individual self·consciousness count as essence-this side which is pictured as independent, not yet as a moment, has on account of its independence to raise ,itself through its own nature to Spirit, i.e. it has
to exhibit in its own self the movement of Spirit.
782. Thisself·consc1ousness is natural Spirit; the self has to
withdraw from this natural existence and retreat into itself,
which would mean, to become euil. But this side is already in

474

C. (CO.) RELIGION

itselfevil; its withdrawal into itself consists, therefore, in convincing itself that natural existence is evil. For the consciousness that
thinks in pictures the world has actually become, and is, evil,
and the propitiation of the absolute Being was a real event;
bpt in self-consciousness as such, what is thus pictured as
happening, as an event, has as regards its form the significance
only of a suspended moment, for the self is the negative and
hence a knowing-a knowing that is a pure act within consciousness itself. This moment of the negative must likewise
express itselfin the content. Thatis to say, since absolute Being
is already reconciled with itself in itself and is a spiritual unity
in which th.e parts of the picture-thought are suspended or are
moments, what is expressed in the content is that each part of
the picture-thought here receives the opposite meaning to what
it had before; each meaning thereby completes itself in the
other, and only.through this self-completion is the content a
spiri tual one; since the determinateness is j us t as much its opposite, unity in otherness, i.e. the spiritual. relationship, is an
accomplished fact: just as the oPPQsite meaning$ were united
previousiyfor us, or in themselves., and even the abstract forms
of'thesame' and 'not the.same', of 'identity' and 'non".identity'
were reduced to moments.
783. If, then, in the picture",thinking consciousness the'inwardizing of natural self-consciousness was the real existence of
evil, that inwardizingin the elementofself..consciousness is the
knowledge of evil as something that is implicit in existence. This
knowledge is, of c9urse, a genesis of evil, but only a genesis of
the thought of evil, and is therefore recognized as the first
moment of reconciliation. For as a withdrawal into itself from
the immediacy of Nalure which is determined as evil, it is a
forsaking of that immediacy and a dying away of sin. It is not
natural existence as such that is forsaken by consciousness, but
natural existence that is at the same time known as evil. The
immediate movement of withdrawal into self is just as much a
mediated movement; it presupposes itself, or is its own ground;
that is to say, the ground of the withdrawal into self is that
Nature has already withdrawn into itself; on account of evil,
man must withdraw into himself; but evil is itself the withqrawal in to self. This firs t movemen t is for that very reason only
immediate, or the simple Notion of that movement, because it

THE REVEALED RELIGION

475

is the same as what its ground is. The movement or othering
has therefore still to appear, but in its own more characteristic
form.
784. Besides this immediacy, therefore, the mediation of the
picture-thought is necessary. The knowledge of Nature as the untrue existence of Spirit, and this immanently developed universality of the Self is in itself the reconciliation of Spirit with
itself. For the self-consciousness that does not think in terms of
the Notion, this in-itself receives the form of something that possesses immediate being and is imaginatively represented. Comprehension is, therefore, for that self-consciousness not a grasping of this Notion which knows superseded natural existence
to be universal and therefore reconciled with itself; but rather
a grasping of the imaginative idea, that by bringing to pass its
own externalization, in its historical incarnation and death, the
divine Being has been reconciled with its [natural] existence.
The grasping of this idea now expresses more definitely what
was previously called the spiritual resurrection in this same context, i.e. the coming into existence of God~s individual self-consciousness as a universal self;,.consciousness, or as the religious
community. The death of the divine Man, as death, is abstract
negativity, the immediate result of the movement which ends
only in natural universality, Death loses this natural meaning
in spiritual self-consciousness, i.e. it comes to be its just stated
Notion; death becomes transfiguredfrom its immediate meaning, viz. the non-being of this particular individual, into the universality of the Spirit who dwells in His community, dies in it
every day, and is daily resurrected.
785. Thus what belongs to the element of picture-thinking, viz.
that absolute Spirit qua individual, or'rather qua particular,
Spirit, presents the nature of Spirit in its [natural] existence,
is here shifted into self-consciousness itself, into knowledge that
preserves itselfin its ,otherness. This self-consciousness therefore
does not actually die, as the particular self-consciousness is
pictured as being actually dead, hutits particularity dies away
inits universality, i.e. in its knowledge, which is essential Being
reconciling itself with itself. The immediately preceding element of picture-thinking is, therefore, here explicitly set aside,
or it has returned into the Self, into its Notion;.what was in
the former merely in the element ofbeing has become a Subject.

C. (CC.) RELIGION

By this very fact, the first element too, pure thinking and the
eternal Spirit therein, is no longer beyond the picturing con~
sciousness or beyond the Self; on the contrary, the return into
itself of the whole is just this, to contain within itself all the
moments. The death of the Mediator as grasped by the Self
is the supersession of his objective existence or his particular
being-for-self: this particular being",for..self has become a u,niversal self-consciousness. On the other side, the unive-rsal has
become self..consciollsness, just because of this, and the pure or
non-actual Spirit of mere thinking has become actual. The death
of the Mediator is the death not only of his natural aspect or
of his particular being-for-self, not only of the already dead husk
stripped of its essential Being, but also of the abstraction of the
divine Being. For the Mediator, in so far as his death has not
yet completed the reconciliation, is the one-sidedness which
takes as essential Being the simple element of thought in contrast
to actuality; this one-sided extreme of the Self does not as yet
have equal worth with essential Being; this it first has as Spirit.
The death of this picture..thought contains, therefore, at the
same time the death of the abstraction of the divine Being which
is not posited as Self. That dea this the painful feeling of the
Unhappy Consciousness that God.HimseLJ is dead. This hard ,saying is the expression of innermost simple self~knowledge, the
return of consciousness into the depths of the night in which
'P ='P, a night which no longer distinguishes or knows anything outside ofit. This feelingis, in fact, the loss of substance
and of its appearance over against consciousness; but it is at
the same time the pure subjectivity of substance j or the pure
certainty of itself which it lacked when it was object, or the immediate, or pure essence. This Knowing is the inbreathing of
the Spirit, whereby Substance becomes Subject, by which its
abstraction .and lifelessness have died, and Substance therefore
has become actual and simple and universal 8elf... conscious~
ness.
786. In this way, therefore, Spirit js self-knowing Spirit; it
knows itself;that which is object for it, is, or its picture~thought
is the true, absolute content; as we saw, it expressed Spirit itself.
Itis atthe same time not merely the content ofself-conscious~
ness, and not merely objectfor it, but it is ,also actual Spirit. This
it is because it runs through the three elements of its nature;

THE REVEALED RELIGION

477

the movement through its own phases constitutes its actuality.
What moves itself, that is Spirit; it is the Subject of the movement and is equally the moving itself, or the substance through
which the Subject moves. The Notion of Spirit which had
emerged for us as we entered the sphere of religion, viz. as the
movement of self.. certain Spirit which forgives evil and in so
doing abandons its own simple unitary nature and rigid unchangeableness;" or as the movement in which what is in an
absolute antithesis recognizes itself as the same as its opposite,
this recognition bursting forth as the affirmative between these
extremes-this Notion is intuitively apprehended by the religious
consciousness to which the absolute Being is revealed, and
which overcomes the difference between its Self and what it
intuitively apprehends; just as it is Subject, so also it is substance, and hence it is itself Spirit just because and in so far
as it is this movement.
787. But the community is not yet perfected in this its selfconsciousness; in general, its content exists for it in the form
of picture-thinking, and the duality in this thinking still attaches
even to the actual spirituality of the community, to its return out
ofi tspicture-thinking ; just as the element of pure thought itself
was burdened withit. The community also does not possess the
consciousness ofw ha tit is; it is spiritualse1f~consciousness which
is not an object toitse1f as this self-consciousness, orw hich does
not unfolditselftoa consciousness of itself; but rather, in so far
as itis· consciousness, it has those picture-thoughts which we
have considered. We see selfmconsciousness "at its last turning-point become inward toitselfand attain to a knowledge of its inwardness; we see it divest itself of its natural existence and
acquire pure negativity. But the positive meaning, viz. that this
negativity or pure inwardness of knowledge is just as much the
self-identical essence-or in other words, that substance has
here succeeded in becoming absolute seW·consciousness-this
is an 'other' for the devotional consciousness. It grasps this
aspect, viz. that the pure inwardization of knowledge is in itself
absolute simplicity or substance, as the picture-thought of
something which is so, not in virtue of its Notion, but as the
deed of an alien satisfaction. In other words, it does not grasp
the fact that this depth of the pure Self is the power by which
the abstract divine Being is drawn down from its abstraction and

C. (ce.) RELIGION

raised to a Self by the power of this pure devotion. The action
of the Selfretains towards it this negative meaning because the
externalization, the kenosis of substance, is taken by the Sel(
to be an action implicit in the nature of substance; the Self
does not grasp and truly comprehend it, or does not find it in
its own action as such. This unity of essence and the Self having
been implicitly achieved, consciousness, too, still has this picturethought of its rec,onciliation, but as a picture-theught. It obtains
satisfaction by externally attaching to its pure negativity the positive meaning of the unity of itself with the essential Being; its
satisfaction thus itself remains burdened with the antithesis of
a beyond. Its own reconciliation therefore enters its conscious~
ness as something distant, as something in the distantfuture, just
as the reconciliation which the other Self achieved appears as
something in the distant past. Just as the individual divine Man
has a father in principle and only an actual mother, so too the
universal divine Man, the community, has for its father its own
doing and knowing, but for its mother, eternal love which it
only feels, but does not behold in its ~onsciousness;is an actual,
imrnediateohject. Its reconciliation, therefore, is in its heart, but
its consciousness is still dividedagainstitself and its actual world
is stiUclisrupted. What enters its consciousness as the in~itself,
or the side ofpure mediation, isa reconciliation thatlies in the
beyond: but what ent~rs it as present, as the side of immedz'acy
and existence, is the world which has still to await iis trausfigura~
tion. The world is indeed implicz'tly reconciled with the divine
Being; aug regar~ing the ~ivine Being it is known, of course,
that it recogniz~s the object as no longer alienated from it but
as identical with it in its love. But for self-consciousness, this
immediate pr~sencestin has not the shape of Spirit. The Spirit
of the community is thus in its immediate consciousness divided
from its religious consciousness, which declares, it is true~ that
in themselves they are not divided, hut this merely implicit unity
isoot realized, or has not yet become an equally absolute being..
for-self.

(DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING
VIII. ABSOLUTE KNOWING
788. The Spirit of the revealed religion has not yet surmounted its consciousness as such, orwhat is the same, its actual
self-consciousness is not the object of its consciousness; Spirit
itselfas a whole, and the self-differentiated moments within it,
fall within the sphere of picture-thinking and in the form of
objectivity. The content of this picture-thinking is absolute
Spirit; and all that now remains to be done is to supersede this
Inere form, or rather, since this belongs to consciousness as such,
its truth must already have yielded itself in the shape of con
sciousness. This surmounting of the object of consciousness is
notto be taken one-sidedly to mean that the object showed itself
as returning into the Self, but is to be taken mOfe specifically
to mean not only that the object as such presented itself to the
Selfas vanishing, butrather that itis the externalization of selfconsciousness that posits the thinghood [or the object] and that
this externalization has not merely a negative but a positive
meaning, a meaning which is not only for us or in itself, but
for self-consciousness itself. The negative of the object, or its
self-supersession, has a positive meaning for self-consciousness,
i.e. self-consciousness knows the nothingness of the object, on
the one hand, because it externalizes its own self~for in this
externalization it posits itself as object, or the object as itself,
in virtue of the indivisible unity of being-jor-selj. On the other
hand, this positing at the same time contains the other moment,
viz. thatseIf-consciousness has equally superseded this externalization and objectivity too, and taken it back into itself so that
it is in communion with itself in its otherness as such. This is
thernovement ofconsciousness, and in that movement consciousness is the totality ofit~ moments. Equally, consciousness must
have related itself to the object in accordance with the totality
of the latter's determinations and have thus grasped it from the
standpoint of each of them. This totality of its determinations
establishes the object as an implkitly spiritual being, and it does
a

C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

truly become a spiritual being for consciousness when each of
its individual determinations is grasped as a determination of
the Self, or through the spiritual relationship to them that was
just mentioned.
789. Thus the object is in partimmediate being or, in general,
a Thing-corresponding to immediate consciousness; in part,
an othering of itself, its relationship or being7for-an-other, and
being7for-itself, i.e. determinateness-corresponding to perception; and in part essence, or in th,e form of a universal-corresponding to the Understanding. It is, as a totality, a syllogism
or the movement of the universal through determination to individuality, as also the reverse movement from individuality
through superseded individuality, or through determination,
to the universal. It is, therefore, in accordance with these three
determinations that consciousness must know the object as
itself. However, this Knowing of which we are speaking is not
Knowing as pure comprehension of the o1:>ject [i.e. in terIJls of
the Notion]; here, this Knowing is to be indicated only in its
process of cOlning~to-be, or in the moments of that aspect of
it which. helongs to consciousne~s as sucr, the moments of the
Notion proper or of pure ){n.owing in theformofshapes.ofcqnsciougness. For this reason theohject does not yet appearincQnsciousness as such as the spiritual essentiality we have just
affirmed it to be; and the relationship of consciousness to it is
not the consideration ofit in this totaJityas such nor inits pure
form as Notion; but it is from one side a shape of consciousness
as such, and from the other side a number of such shapes which
we bring together, in which the totality of the moments of the
object and of the rdation ofconsciousness to it can be indicated
only as resolved into its moments.
790. For thisaspe.ct of the apprehension of the object, Le.
as it exists in the shape of consciousness, we have only to recall
the earlier shapes of consciousness already encountered. Thus;
in regard to the object so far as it is an immediacy, i.e. is an
indifferent being, we saw Observing Reason seeking and finding
itself in this indifferent thing, i.e. we saw it equally conscious
ofits action being external to it, as it was conscious of the object
only as an immediate object. And we saw Observing Reason
at its peak express its specific character in the infinite judgement
that the being qf the' l' is a Thing, and, moreover, a sensuous

ABSOLUTE KNOWING

immediate Thing. When the 'I' is called soul, it is true that it
is also represented as a Thing, but as something invisible, intangible, etc., and therefore in fact not as an immediate being
and not as what is meant by a Thing. That judgement, taken
just as it stands, is non-spiritual pr rather is the non-spiritual
itself. In its Notion, however, it is in fact the most richly spiritual, and this inner significance of what is not yet apparent is what
is expressed in the two other moments to be considered.
791. The Thing is '1'; in point of fact, in this infinite judgement the Thing is superseded; in itselfit is nothing; it has meaning only in the relation, only through the' P and its connection with
it. This moment manifested itself for consciousness in pure insight and enlightenment. Things are simply usiful and to he considered only from the standpoint of utility. The cultivated selfconsciousness which has traversed the world of self-alienated
Spirit has, through its self-alienation, produced the Thing as
its own self; therefore, it still retains its own self iIi it and knows
that the Thing lacks self-subsistence, that it is essentially only
abeing-for-an-other; Of, to give complete expression to the relationship,i.e" to what alone constitutes the nature of the object
here, the Thing counts for it as something that exists on its own
acpou'!i; it d~clares sense-certainty to be absolute truth, but this
being:for-seif is itself declared to be a moment that merely
vanishes and passes over into its opposite, into a being that is
at the disposal of an 'other'.
79~. However, at this stage, knowledge of the Thing is still
not complete; it must be known not only from the standpoint
of the immediacy of being and of determinateness, bu t also as
essence or innl1rveing, as Self. This occurs in moral self-consciousness.
This is aware that its knowledge is a knowledge of what is absolutely essential, it knows that being is simply and solely pure willing and kQowing; it is nothing else but this willing and knowing; anything else has only unessential being, i.e. not intrinsic
being, only its empty husk. In the same measure that moral
self~consciousness lets determinate being go free from the Self, so
too, in its conception of the world it takes it back again into
itself. Finally, as conscience, it is no longer this continual
al ternationof exis tence being placed in the Self, and vice versa;
it knows that its existence as such is this pure certainty of itself.
The objective element into which it puts itself forth, when

C. (DD.) ABSOL UTE KNOWING

it acts, IS nothing other than the Self's pure knowledge of
itself.
793. These are the moments of which the reconcipation of
Spirit with its own consciousness proper is composed; by themselves they are single and sepClrate, and it is solely their spiritual
unity that constitutes the power of this reconciliation. The last
of these moments is, however, necessarily this unity itself and,
as is evident, it binds them all into itself. The Spirit that, in
its, existence, is certain of itself, has for the element of existence
nothing else but this knowledge of itself; when it declares that
what it does it does out of a conviction of duty, this utterance
is the validating of its action. Action is the first implicit sundering
ofthesimpleunity of theN otion and the return ou t ofthis dividedness. This first movement changes round into the second, since
this element of recognition posits itself, as simple knowledge of
duty, in antithesis to the distinction and dichotomy that lie in
action as such and so constitute"a stubborn actuality confronting action. But in forgiveness, we saw how this obstinacy surrenders and renounces itself. Here, therefore, actuality as well
as immediate existence has for self-consciousness no other significance than that of being a pure knowing; similarly,
as determinate existence or as relation, what is self;,,;opposed
is a knowing, partly of this purely individual Self' partly of
knowledge as universal. In this is posited at the same time
that the third moment, the universality or essence, counts only as
knowledge for each of the ,two sides that stand over against
each other; and finally these latter equally resolve the empty
antithesis still remaining and are the knowledge of '1'='1';
this individual Self which is immediately a pure knowing or a
universal.
794. This reconciliation of consciousness with self-consciousness thus shows itself as broughtabout from two sides; on one
side, in the religious Spirit, and on the other side, in consciousness itself as such. The difference between them is that in the
former this reconciliation is in the form of being-in-itself or
implicit being, and in the latter in the explicit form of beingJor-self. In our consideration of them they at first fall apart. In
the other in which the shapes of consciousness came before us,
consciousness reached the individual moments of those shapes
and their unification long before ever religion gave its object

ABSOLUTE KNOWING

the shape ofactual self-consciousness. The unification of the two
sides has not yet been exhibited; it is this that closes the series
of the shapes of Spirit, for in it Spirit attains to a knowledge
ofitselfnot only as it is in itselfor as possessing an absolute content,
nor only as it is10r itself as a form devoid of content, or as the
aspect of self-consciousness, but as it is both in essence and in actuality, or in andforitself.
795. This unification has, however, already occurred in principle and that, too, in religion, in the return of picture-thinking
into self-consciousness, but not according to the proper form,
for the religious aspect is the aspect of the in-itself which stands
over against the movement of self-consciousness. Consequently,
the unification belongs to this other aspect which, in the contrast of the two sides, is the aspect of reflection into self, and
therefore the one that contains both its own self and its opposite.,
and not only implicitly or in a universal sense, but explicitly or
in a developed atld differentiated way. The content, as well as
the other aspect of self-conscious Spirit so far as it is the
other aspect, has been exhibited and is before us in its completeness; the unification that is still lacking is the simple unity
of the Notion. The Notion, too, is itself already present on the
sideofsdf-consciousness. But as it has come before us thus far,
it/has to be a particular shape of consciousness like all the other
moments. It is, therefore, that aspect of the shape of self-assured
Spirit that abides within its Notion and was calledthe ~beautiful
sour. The 'beautiful soul" is its own knowledge of itself in its
pure) transparent unity-the self-consciousness tha t knows this
pure knowledge of pure inwardness as Spirit. It is not only the
intuition of the Divine but the Divine's intuition of itself. Since
this Notion holds itself firmly opposed to its realiza.tion, it is
the one~sided shape which we saw va~ish into thin air, but also
positively externalize itself and move otlward. Through this
realization, this objectless self-consciousness ceases to cling to
the determinateness of the Notion as against its fulfilment; its self~
consciousness gains the form of universality and what remains
to itis its true Notion, or the Notion that has attained its realization; it is the Notion in its truth, viz. in unity with its externalization; it is the knowing of pure knowledge, not as an abstract
essence such as duty is, but of knowledge as an essential being
which is this know]edge, this pure self-consciousness which is,

C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

therefore, at the same time a genuine object, for the Notion is
the Self that is for itself.
796. This Notion fulfilled itself on one side in the self~assured
Spirit that acted, and on the other, in religion: in religion it won
for consciousness the absolute content as content or, in the form
of picture-thinkz'ng, the form of otherness for consciousness; on
the other hand, in the prior shape the form is that of the Self
itself, for it contains the self;.assured Spirit that acts; the Self
accomplishes the life of absolute Spirit. This shape is, as we have
seen, that simple Notion which, however, surrenders its eternal
essence, it is there [in the real world], or it acts. The self-sundering
or stepping-forth into existence stems from the purity of the
Notion, for this is absolute abstraction or negativity. Similarly,
the Notion gets the element of its actuality or the being it con~
tainsin pure knowledge itself, for this is simple immediacy, which
is as much being and existence as it is essence; the former, negative thought, the latter, positive thought itself. Finally, this existence, both as existence and as duty, isjust as much the reflectedness into self out of pure knowledge--or the s tate of evil.
This withdrawal into itself constitutes the antithesis of the Notion,
andis thus the emergence of the pure knowledge ofthe essence,
the knowing that does not act and is not actuaL Butthis emergence
in the antithesis is participation in it; the purc'knowledge of
essence has in principle renounced its simple unity, for it is the
self-sundering, or the negativity which the Notion is; so far as
this self·s undering is the process of becoming for itself, it is evil;
so far as it is the in-itself, it remains good. Now, what at first
happens in principle is at the same time explicitly for conscious..
ness, and is thus double: it is both for consciousness and also is
its being..Jor-self or its very own act. The same thing that is
already posited in principle now therefore repeats itself as consciousness'-s knowledge ofit and conscious act. Each in relation
to the other lets go of the independent determinateness with
which it comes forth against it.· This letting-go is the same
renunciation of the one~sidedness of the Notion that in itself
constituted the beginning; but it is now its own act ofrenunciation, Just as the Notion which it renounces is its own Notion.
That in-itself [I.e. the immediacy] of the beginning is in truth,
as negativity, no less mediated; what it is in truth, it now also
makes explicit, and the negative is, as determinateness of each both

ABSOLUTE KNOWING

485

for the other and in itself, self-suspending. One of the two parts
of the antithesis is the disparity between the Notion's being
within itself in its individuality, and universality; the other, the
disparity between its abstract universality and the Self. The
former dies to its being-for ..self, disowns itself, makes confession;
the latter renounces the obstinacy of its abstract universality,
and in so doing dies to its lifeless Self and to its unmoved universality; the former has thus completed itself through the
momen t of universali ty which is essence, and the la ttel' through
the universality which is Self. Through this movement of action,
Spirit has come on the scene as a pure universality of knowing,
which is self-consciousness, as self-consciousness that is the
simple unity of knowing. I t is only through action that Spirit
is in such a way that it is really there, that is, when it raises its
existence into Thought and thereby into an absolute antithesis,
and returns out of this antithesis, in and through the antithesis
itself.
797. Thus, what in religion was content or a form for presentingan other, is here the Self's own act; the Notion requires the
content to be the Self's own act. For this Notion is, as we see,
the knowledge of the Self's act within itself as all essentiality
and all existence, the knowledge of this subject as substance
and of the substance as this knowledge of its act. Our own act
here has been simply to gather together the separate moments,
each of which in principle exhibits the life of Spirit in its entirety., and also to stick to the Notion in the form of the Notion,
the content of which would already have yielded itself in those
moments and in the form of a shape of consciousness.
798. This last shape of Spirit~theSpirit which at the same
time gives its complete and true content the form of the Se1f
and thereby realizes its Notion as remaining in its Notion in
this realization-this is absolute knowing; it is Spirit that knows
itself in the shape of Spirit, or a comprehensive knowing [in terms
of the N odon J. Truth is not only in itself completely identical
with certainty, but it also has the shape of self-certainty) or it
is in its existence in the form of self-knowledge. Truth is the
content, which in religion is still not identical with its certainty.
But this identity is now a fact, in that the content has received
the shape of the Self. As a result) that which is the very essence,
viz. the No.tion, has become the element of existence, or has

c.

(DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

become theform ofobjectivity for consciousness. Spirit, manifesting
or appearing in consciousness in this element, or what is the same
thing, produced in it by consciousness, is Science.
799. The nature, moments and movement of this knowing
have, then, shown themselves to be such that this knowing is a
pure being-for-selfof self-consciousness; it is'!, , tha t is this and no
other'!', and which is no less immediately a mediated or superseded universal 'I'. It has a content which it differentiates from itself;
for it is pure negativity or the dividing of itself, it is consciousness.
This content is, in its difference, itself the 'I', for it is the movement of superseding itself, or the same pure negativity that the
'I' is. In it, as differentiated, the'!' is reflected into itself; it
is only when the'!' communes with itself in its otherness that
the content is comprehended [i.e. in terms of the Notion]. Stated
more specifically, this content is nothing else than the very
movement just spoken of; for the contends Spirit that traverses
its own self and does sofor itself as Spirit by the fact that it has
the 'shape' of the Notion in its objectivity.
800. But as regards the existence of this Notion, Science does
not appear in Time and in the actual world before Spirit has
attained to this consciousness about itself. As Spirit thatknows
what it is, it does not exist before, and nowhere at all, till after
the completion of its work of compelling its imperfect 'shape'
to procure for its consciousness the 'shape' of its essence, and
in this way to equate its se(fconsciousness with its consciousness.
Spirit thatis in and foritselfand differentiated into its moments
is a knowing that islor itself, a comprehension in general that, as
such, substance has not yet reached, i.e. substance is not in
its own self an absolute knowing.
801. Now, in actuality, the substance that knows exists
earlier than its form or its Notion-determined 'shape'. For substance is the as yet undeveloped in~itself) or the Ground and
Notion in its still unmoved simpllcity, and therefore the inwardness or the Selfof the Spirit that does not yet exist. What is there,
exists as the still undeveloped simple and immediate, or as the
object of the picture-thinking consciousness in genera!. Cognition,
because it is the spiritual consciousness for which what is in itself
only is, in so far as it is a being for the Self and a being of the
Selfor Notion, has for this reason at first only a meagre object,
in conlrast with which substance and the consciousness of this

ABSOLUTE KNOWING

substance are richer. The disclosure or revelation which sub~
stance has in this consciousness is in fact concealment, for substance is still self~less being and what is disclosed to it is only the
certainty of itselC At first, therefore, only the abstract moments
of su bstance belong to self-consciousness; but since these, as
pure movements, spontaneously impel themselves onward, selfconsciousness enriches itself till it has wrested from consciousness the entire substance and has absorbed into itself the entire
structure of the essentialities of substance. And, since this negative attitude to objectivity isjust as much positive, it is a positing, it has produced them out of itself, and in so doing has at
the same time restored them for consciousness. In the Notion
tha t knows itself as Notion, the moments thus a ppear earlier than
thefilled [orfuljillulJ whole whose coming-to-be is the movement
of those moments. In consciousness, on the other hand, the whole,
though uncomprehended, is prior to the moments. Tinle is the
Notion itself that is there and which presents itself to consciousness as empty intuition; for this reason, Spirit ne(:essarily
appears in Time, and it appears in Time just so long as it has
not grasped its pure Notion, i.e. has not annulled Time. It is
the outer, intuited pure Self which is not grasped by the Self, the
merely intuited Notion; when thisJatter grasps itself it sets aside
its Time",torm, comprehends this intuiting, and is a comprehended and comprehending intuiting. Time, therefore, appears
as the destiny and necessity of Spirit that is not yet complete
within itself, the necessity to enrich the share which self-consciousness has in consciousness, to set in motion the immediacy
oj the in",itselj, which is the form in which substance is present
in consciousness; or conversely, to realize and reveal what is
at first only inward (the in"itse1fbeing taken as what is inward),
i.e. to vindicate it for Spirit's certainty of itself.
802. For tbis reqson it must be said that nothing is known
that is not in experience, or, as it is also expressed, th4t is not
felt to be true, not given as an inwardly revealed eternal verity, as
something sacred thatis believed, or whatever other expressions
have been used. For experience is just this, that the contentwhich is Spirit~is in itself substance, and therefore an obJect
of consciousness. But this substance which is Spirit is the process
in which Spirit becomes what it isinitsclj; and it is only as this
pro~ess ofreftecting itselfinto itself that it is in itself truly Spirit.

C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

I t is in itself the movement which is cognition-the transforming of that in-itselfinto that which islor itself, of Substance into
Subject, of the object of consciousness into an object of self-consciousness, i.e. into an object that is just as much superseded,
or into the Notion. The movement is the circle that returns into
itself, the circle that presupposes its beginning and reaches it
only at the end. Hence, so far as Spirit is necessarily this
immanent differentiatitm, its intuited whole appears' over
against its simple self-consciousness, and since, then, the former
is what is differentiated, it is differentiated into its intuited pure
Notion, into Time and into the content or into the in-itself. Substance is charged, as Subject, with the at first only inward necessity of setting forth within itselfwhat it is in itself, of exhibiting
itself as Spirit. Only when the objective presentation is complete
is it at the same time the reflection of substance or the process
in which substance becomes Self. Consequently, until Spirit has
completed itself in itself, until it has completed itself as worldSpirit, it c~nnot reach its consummation as self-conscious Spirit.
Therefore, the content of religion proclaims earlier in time
than does Science, what Spirit is, but only Science is its true
knowledge of itself.
803. The movement of carrying forward the form of its self.
knowledge is the labour which itaccomplishes as actual History, The religious community, so far as.it is at first the substance of absolute Spirit, is the uncultivated consciousness
whose existence is all the harsher and more barbarous the
deeper its inner Spirit is, and the deeper its Spirit is, the harder
the task that its torpid Self has with its essence, with the alien
content ot Its consciousness. Not until consciousness has given
up hope of overcomingthat alienation 'in an external, Le. alien,
manner does it turn to itself, because the overcoming of that
alienation is the return into self.:.consciousness; not until then
does it turn to its own present world and discover it as its property, thus taking the first step towards coming down out of the
intellectual world, or rather towards quickening the abstract element of that world with the actual Self. Through Observation
it finds, on the one hand, existence in the shape of Thought
and comprehends it, and, conversely, in its thinking it comprehends existence. When, to begin with, it has thus expressed the
immediate unity of Thought and Being, the unity of abstract

ABSOLUTE KNOWING

essence and the Self, abstractly; and when it has expressed the'
primal Light in a purer form, viz. as unity of extension and
being-for extension is the simple unity which more nearly
resembles pure thought than light does-and in so doing has
revived in thougJ-tt the Substance of the Orient, Spirit at once
recoils in horror from the abstract unity, from this self-less substantiality, and against it affirms individuality. But only after
it has externalized this individuality in the sphere of culture,
thereby giving it an existence, and establishing it throughout
the whole of existence-only after Spirit has arrived at the
thought of utility, and in its absolute freedom has grasped existence as its will, only then does it turn the thought of its inmost
dep~hs outwards and enunciate essence as 'I' = 'I'. But this 'I' =
'I' is the movement which reflects itselfinto itself; for since this
identity, being absolute negativity, is absolute difference, the
self..identity of the 'I' stands over against this pure difference
which, as pure and at the same time objective to the self-knowing Self, has . to bee;xpressed as Time. So that, just as previously
essenc.e was declared to bethe unity of Thought and Extension,
it would now have to be grasped as the unity of Thought and
Time. But the difference left to itself, unresting and unhalting
Time, collapses rather within itself; it is the objective repose
of extension, while extension is pure identity with itself, the 'I'.
In other words, the 'I' is not merely the Self, but the identity
ofthe Self with itself; but this identity is complete artd immediate
oneness with Self, or this Subject is just as much Substance. Substance, just by itself, would be intuition devoid of content, or
the intuition of a content which l as determinate, would be only
accidental and would lack necessity. Substance would pass for
the Absolute only in so far as it was thought or intuited as absolute un.ity; and all content would, as regards its diversity, have
to fall outside of it into Reflection; and Reflection does not pertain to Substance, because Substance would not be Subject,
would not be grasped as reflecting on itself and reflecting itself
into itself, would not be grasped as Spirit. If a content were
to be spoken of anyway, it would, on the one hand, only be
spoken ofin order to cas tit in to the empty abyss of the Absol ute,
and on the other, it would be a content picked up in external
fashion from sense-perception. Knowledge would seem to have
come by things, by wha t is different from itself, and by the dif-

49 0

C. (DO.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

ference of a variety of things, without comprehending how and
whence they came.
804. Spirit, however, has shown itself to us to be neither
merely the withdrawal of self-consciousness into its pure inwardness, nor the mere submergence of self-consciousness into
substance, and the non-being of its [moment of] difference; but
Spirit is this movement of the Self which empties itself of itself
and sinks itselfinto its substance, and also, as Subject, has gone
out of that substance into itself, making the substance into an
object and a content at the same time as it cancels this difference
between objectivity and content. That first reflection out of
immediacy is the Subject's differentiation of itself from its substance, or the Notion's separation ofit:$e1ffrom itself, the withdrawal into itself and the becoming of the pure 'I'. Since this
difference is the pure act of 'I' = 'I', the Notion is the necessity
and the uprising of existence, which has substance for its essence
and subsists on its own account. But this subsistence of existence
onits own account is the Notion posited indeterminateness and
is thus also its immanent movement~ that of going down into the
simple substance, which is Subject only as this negativity and
movement. The'!, has neither to ding to itself in the form of
self-consciousness as against the form of substantiality and objectivity, as if it were afraid of theexternalization of itself: the
power of Spirit lies rather in remaining the selfsame Spirit
in its externalization and, as that which is both in itself and
for itself, in making its being-for-self no less merely a
moment than its in-itself; nor is Spirit a tertium quid that casts
the differences back into the abyss of the Absolute and declares
that therein they are all the same; on the contrary, knowing
is this seeming inactivity which merely contemplates how what
is differentiated spontaneously moves in its own self and returns
in to its unity.
805. In this knowing, then, Spirit has concluded the movement in which it has shaped itself, in so far as this shaping was
burdened with the difference of consciousness [i.e. of the latter
from its object], a difference now overcome. Spirit has won the
pure element of its existence, the Notion. The content, in accordance with the freedom of its being, is the self-alienating Self,
or the immediate unity of self-knowledge. The pure movement
of this alienation, considered in connection with the content,

ABSOLUTE KNOWING

constitutes the necessity of the content. The distinct content, as
determinate, is in relation, is not 'in itself; it is its own restless
process of superseding itself, or negativity; therefore, negativity
or diversity, like free being, is also the Self; and in this selflikeformin which existence is immediately thought, the content
is the Notion. Spirit, therefore, having won the Notion, displays
its existence and movement in this ether of its life and is Science.
In this, the moments of its movement no longer exhibit themselves as specific shapes oj consciousness, but-since consciousness's
difference has returned into the Self-as specific Notions and as
their organic self-grounded movement. Whereas in the phenomenology of Spirit each moment is the difference of knowledge
and Truth, and is the movement in which that difference is
cancelled, Science on the other hand does not con tain this dif.
ference and the cancelling of it. On the contrary, since the
momenthas the form of the Notion, it unites the objective form
of Truth and of the knowing Self in an immediate unity. The
moment does not appear as this movement of passing back and
forth, from consciousness or picture-thinking into self-consciousness"and conversely: on the contrary, its pure shape,
freed from its appear~nce in consciousness, the pure Notion and
its onward movement, depends solely on its pure determinateness.
Conversely, to each abstract moment of Science corresponds
a shape of manifest Spirit as such. Just as Spirit in its existence
is not richer than Science, so too it is not poorer either in content. To know the pure Notions of Science in this form of shapes
of consciousness constitutes the side of their reality, in accordance with which their essence, the Notion, which is posited in
them in its simple mediation as thinking, breaks asunder the
moments of this mediation and exhibits itself in accordance
with the inner antithesis.
806. S.cience contains within itself this necessity of externalizing the form of the Notion, and it contains the passage of
the Notion into consciousness. For the self-knowing Spirit, just
because itgraspsits Notion, is the immediateidentity with itself
which, in its difference, is the certainty oj immediacy, or sense-consciousness-the beginning from which we started. This release
of itself from the form of its Self is the supreme freedom and
assurance of its self-knowledge.
807. Yet this externalization is still incomplete; it expresses

49 2

C. (DD.) ABSOLUTE KNOWING

the connection of its self~certainty with the object which, just
because it is thus connected, has not yet won its complete free~
dom. Theself.. knowing Spirit knows not only itself but also the
negative of itself, or its limit: to know one's limit is to know
how to sacrifice oneself. This sacrifice is the externalization in
which Spirit displays the process of its becoming Spirit in the
form ofjree contingent happening, intuiting its pure Self as Time
outside of it, and equally its Being as Space. This last becoming
of Spirit, Nature, is its living immediate Becoming; Nature, the
externalized Spirit, is in its existence nothing but this eternal
externaHzation of its continuing existence and the movement
which reinstates the Subject.
808. But the other side of its Becoming, History, is a conscious,
selfmmediating process-Spirit emptied out into Time; but this
externalization, this kenosis, is equally an externalization of
itself; the negative is the negative of itself. This Becoming
presents aslow~moving succession of Spirits, a gallery of images,
each of which , endowed with all the riches of Spirit, moves thus
slowly Just because the Self has to penetrate and digest this
en tire wealth of its substance. As its fulfilment consists in per~
fectlyknowing what it is, in knowing its substance, this knowing
is its'withdrawal into itseifin which it abandons its outer existence
and gives its existential shape over to recollection. Thus
a bs orb ed. in itself, it is sunk in the nigh t of its seW-consciousness;
but in that night its vanished outer existence is preserved, and
this transformed existence-the former one, but now reborn of
the Spirit's knowledge-is the new existence, a new world and
a new shape of Spirit. In the immediacy of this new existence
the Spirit has to start·afresh to bring itself to maturity as if,
for it, all tha t preceded were lost and it had learned nothing
from the experience of the earlier Spirits. But recollection, the
inwatdizing, or that experience, has preserved it and is the inner
being, and in fact the higher form of the substance. So
although this Spirit starts afresh and apparently from its own
resources to bring itself to maturity, it is none the less on a higher
level that it starts. The realm of Spirits which is formed ih this
wa y in the outer world consti tu tes a succession in Time in which
one Spirit relieved another of its charge and each took over the
empire of the world from its predecessor. Their goal is the
revelation of the depth of Spirit, and this is the absolute Notion.

ABSOLUTE KNOWING

493

This revelation is, therefore, the raising-up of its depth, or its

extension, the negativity of this withdrawn'!', a negativity which
is its externalization or its substance j and this revelation is also
the Notion's Time, in that this externalization is in its own self
externalized, and just as it is in its extension, so it is equally
in its depth, in the Self. The goal, Absolute Knowing, or Spirit
that knows itself as Spirit, has for its path the recollection ot
the Spirits as they are in themselves and as they accomplish
the organization of their realm. Their preservation, regarded
from the side of their free existence appearing in the form of con
tingency) is His tory; bu t regarded from the side of their [philom
sophically] comprehended organization, it is the Science of
Knowing in the sphere of appearance :1 the two together, comprehended History, form alike the inwardizing and the Calvary
of absolute Spirit, the actuality, truth, and certainty of his
throne, without which he would be lifeless and alone. Only
M

from the chalice of this realm of spirits
foams forth for Him his own infinitude. 2
1

Phenomenology.
of Schiller's Die Freundschaft, ad fin.

1I Adaptation

ANALYSIS OF THE TEXT
PREFACE
I. It is impossible to begin a philosophical work with a clear statement of the kind of view it40pes to establish, or of its relation to what
others have written. For philosophy aims at a universality which will
embrace and sum up particulars, and cannot be expressed till those
particulars have been gone through, and have yielded up the universality in question. It cannot be anatomized in advance, without
seeing how its parts function in the whole.
2. To state the relation of a philosophical work to others is also
misleading, in that it suggests that previous works were fa.1se,and have
now been Gancelled out in truth. But philosophical systems do not
replace (aJsel1oog by truth: they represent the ever clearer developmeQt of truth, which is as much pre§ent in earlier forms as in later,
and which is only complete in a total development wbich includes
all earlier stages.
3. A stl!t(;)ment of philosophical aims and results is only legitimate
if it is s(;).en· as being initial and superficial, and is not regarded as
reveaIiQ~ tl1e essenc(;) of the matter in han.d, For this essence is not
exhau~tedpy aims, but by the w~y in which they are carried out.
I t is not concerned with mere results, but with the manner in which
they emerge. 'To state results without saying how one arrives at them
is to present tbe corpse of a system, wbereasmerely to differentiate
a system from others is to remain resolutely on its fringes.
4. General principles and points of view belong only to the begin-.
nings of the life of thought. Once one's mind has become deeply
immerseq ~n its subject-matter, they will be relegated to §urface-talk.
5. Philosqphical truth can only exist in the form ora fully-workedout scientific systern. Philosophy mustsbow up the inner necessity that
drives knowledge towards Science, and it mustitselfembody this drive
when the appropriate moment arrives.
6. The trlJe shape of trl,lth is conceptual and notional. This can
at present only be asserted as a counter to views like those of Jacobi
(StudiesinSpinpza, 1779) ,Novalis, Schlegel, etc., which maic,edirect, unreasoning intuidon (Anschauung) and feeling and central in philcsophy, and the very being of the Absolute itself.
7. These latter views arise from the disillusioned desire to return
to the peace and security of unquestioning faith which philosophical
thinking has rudely shattered. They demand a suppression of thought-

ANALYSIS

distinctions, not their further clarification. They aim at edification
and enthusiasm rather than cool insight.
B: Such views are an attempt to return to the heaven-directed gaze
of earlier eras of though t, which has been succeeded by a gaze directed
only to empirical detail, which now stultifies and starves the Spirit.
9. True Science cannot, however, be sa tisfied to see all detail vanish
in an insubstantial, edifying mist.
10. The complacency which spurns as finite the exactly defined
concepts and necessary connections of Science, is not above but below
the level of Science. Its would-be profundities are empty, its sweeping
assertions superficial, its prophetic pronouncements arbitrary and
superficial.
1 I. Our own time is obviously ripe for a major intellectual and
spiritual advance. This has been 'in the womb' for a long time, and
is now about to achieve birth. Its birth-pangs are felt in a widespread
sense of disillusion and frivolity, and in the vague foreboding of something unknown at hand.
12. A new scientific spirit is at first only present in general, notional
germ. It is the product of an extensive; laborious transformation of
previous cultunil forms, and their resumption into a new simplicity.
It must, to be fully actual, redevelop these forms out of thissirnple
unity.
13. Science, in its new, notional form, asyet ill worked out and
ill connected with the rich detail of past thinking~seems to be the
obscure possession of an esoteric sect. To be generally intelligible and
exoteric, it must connect all this past detail with its new position. To
understand is to make familiar material one's own by incorporating
it in a new scientific structure.
14. When Science first emerges, it has on the one hand a tendency
to stress simple intuitive rationality and a relation to what is divine,
btlt also on the other hand to develop this insight into an organized
wealth of detail The second tendency rna y be held in check by the
first, but continues with justificatIon to demand satisfaction.
15. The tendency towards detail may try to~atisfy itself by merely
running through familiarly organized material, adding to this much
that is extraordinary and curious, and then mechanically applying
the same 'absolute idea' to all such detail without the least modification to suit special cases. Th~s is a monotonous formalism, applicable
only to ready-made differences.
16. The false absolutism just sketched fails to develop difference
and detail out of itself, but thinks it has done its task when it has said
of anything specific that it is not to be found in the Absolute, since
there we have only the Absolute's identity with self. Such an Absolute
is the night in which every cow is black. As opposed to such a false

PREFACE, §§8-22

497

absolutism, it will be helpful to give a sketch of a true one. (Aimed
at Schelling, but obviously applying to others as well.)
17. In my view, which the full exposition of my system alone can
justify, the true Absolute must not merely be thought of as a Sub~
stance, i.e. something immediately there, whether this be a knower
or something known. It must be thought of as a Subject. We think
in terms of Substance if we think in terms of undifferentiated universality, whether this be that of what merely is, or of what merely
thinks, or of what (it la Schelling) combines both in a single
intellectual intuition.
18. True Substance is a being that truly is Subject, i.e. which only is
itself in so far as it alienates itself from itself, and is then able to posit
itself in and through what is thus alien. I t cannot exist as a simple,
positive starting-point, but only as part of a self-departing, self-returning movement, which both negates itself in indifferent, external
otherness, and then reasserts itself as the negation of aU such otherness.
19. The life and seW.knowledge of the Absolute may well be described as that of the divine Love disporting itselfwith itself, but such
an image readily becomes insipid, or sinks into edification, since it
f11ils to emphasize theseriousness, the anguish, and the patient effort
involved in thus negating the negation. The essence of the Absolute
cannot be separatedfrom its execution, norits form from the full content of its carrying-out.
20. The true Absolute can only be seen as the whole of a self-realizing act or process, and is also the result or outcome of such an act
or process. What is present at its beginning can only be emptily universal, and can only achieve specific content through connection with
what appears to be other than itself, but what can then be seen to
be not really other.
21. There is a horror of mediate connection which stems from a
misunderstandingoftherole of mediation in absolute knowledge. For
mediation is merely 'the self-negation, and the negation of this negation, involved in the self-identification of the Subject. The Subject
only becomes an immediate unity through the denial of its mediate
connection with something else. Reflection, or the going from one
thing to another, should not be abhorred: it is essential to the return
tose1f which annuls it.
.
22. What has been said amounts to saying that Reason is purposive
activity. Exterpal purpose has rightly been banished from natural
philosophy, but not so the self.. moving purposiveness which is indistinguishable from subjectivity. For in purpose the result or outcome
is one with its moving cause, which in departing from self realizes
self, and in which even the process of departing from self is a fulfilment
of self.

ANALYSIS

23. Philosophical sentences, e.g. God is the moral order of the
world, illustrate the nature of the Absolute. For while they appear
to have fixed subjects to which predicates accrue externally, these subjects merely anticipate what is to be predicated of them, and only
acquire concrete significance when the predication is completed.
Predications analytically anticipated in the meaning of their subjects
make predication quite vacuous.
24. Philosophical knowledge is essentially systematic, and a philo~
sophical first principle therefore at once refutes itself by being merely
a first princi:ple. Being merely universal, merely initial, its further de~
velopment is in a sense ks own refutation, the clear exhibition of its
merely initial character.
25. That philosophical truth is necessarily systematic, that Substance must be Subject, can be expressed by saying that the Absolute
is essentially Spirit, both in and for itself. It is at first only in and
for itself to philosophical reflection, and is then spiritual Substance,
or Spiri tin itself. It must become in itself/or itself, must come to know
Spirit, and itselfasSpirit, i.e. must become its own object both immediately and reflectively, Spirit thus fully self-conscious is Science; i.e,
Spirit fully Qonstituted for itself in its own element.
.
Q6.. To know itse1fand be at home with itselfinwhat is absolutely
other than itself,is the true 'Aether' of Science. But for the ordinary
consciousness, which always opposes itself to its objects, life in such
an Aether seems topsy-turvy and unreal. The thinking spirit must
gradually accustom itself to such topsy-turvy unreality,
27. The genesis of Science is the theme of the Phenomenology of
Spirit. This genesis starts from Spirit immediate or spiritless Spirit,
i.e. from the consciousness of sense,and must tread a long road before
it can become true Science, can give birth to its true concept or element. Such a genesis will not be a fancied illumination of the road
to science" nor yet an actual founding of science, nor yet a pistol-shot
of illumination aiming straight at absolute knowledge.
28. The task of proceeding from the uncultured to the knowing
mind is really performed by the universal individual, i.e. self-conscious Spirit as such. The particular individual is merely a one-sided,
partial expression of this Spirit, an expression in which one trait is
emphatic and the rest underscored. The particular individual must,
how~ver, run through and repossess itself of all the phases of the universal individ\lal's past development. They will now be seen as part
of the environing scene, not req uiTing the deep research that was previously demanded.
29. It is impossible to state the scientific outcome of aU this cultural
development without running through it patiently stage by stage.
Each stage on the route has been necessary, and has incarnated the

PREFACE, §§23-36

499

sense of the whole movement in one of its special phases. But such
a running-through is eased and abbreviated by the reduction of past
stages to explicit thoughts from being merely implicit existences.
30. Past stages have lost the immediacy of existence, but this loss
of existence is only a first negation which still retains the immediacy
of the mere presentation, the idea that is familiar, and has as such
been set aside. This first negation must itself be negated, and the familiar idea brought back into the purview of the thinking self.
31. What is merely familiar is not as such properly known. To build
upon fammar concepts of subjectivity, objectivity, God, Nature, etc.,
without allowing these ideas to develop, is and remains irremediably
superficial.
32. The analysis of an idea is the removal ofits familiarity, its reduction to elements that are the true possessions of the thinking self.
In such reduction the idea itself changes and renders itself unreal.
The force which effects analysis-is that of the Understanding, the most
remarkable and absolute of powers, the power of the thinking self
and also of death. I t is above all marvellous that this thinking self
should be able to isolate, and to look at apart, what can only exist
as an aspect or!moment' in a living whole. Thinking Spirit can, how·
ever, only grasp such a whole by first tearing it into parts, each of
which it must look at separately for a while, before putting them back
in the whole. The thinking self must destroy an immediate, existent
unity in order to arrive at a unity which includes mediation, and is
in fac t media tion itself.
, 33. Ancient thought differs from ours in that it built directly on
the natural consciousness, and reached out to the universal from it,
whereas our thought finds the universal lying ready to hand, in hard,
fixed form, which it then has to revitalize and restore to fluidity. So
vitalized, fixed ideas become self-moving notions, spiritual essentialities.
34. Such a movement of pure essentialities is Science as such, whose
con ten t is nothing but their necessary expansion into an organic
whole. The notion of Science does not arise out ofcontingent philosophizing on these or those themes, relations or common ideas, nor from
logical manipulations of these or those definite thoughts, but from
the rounding",itself.,.out of the self-moving concept into cosmic completeness.
35. The exposition to be given in the present work is therefore the
first part of Science, in that Spirit's first existence is merely the beginning in which it has not yet returned to self. Existential immediacy
distinguishes this part of the system. This leads us on to comment on
certain fixed ideas which occur in this context.
36. Consciousness, the immediate existence of Spirit, always em-

500

ANALYSIS

braces two opposed factors: the element of knowledge and that of
objectivity, Together these constit~te the experience of Spirit, and
th ere is no thing in the 0 bjec ti ve Subs tance given in experience but wha t
falls within such experience. Spirit, however, itself underlies the objec~
tivity which at first confron ts it as alien, and which is then repossessed
and seen as its own.
37. The disparity between the self and the objective Substance is
the void which inspires their movement towards one 'another. The
ancients rightly made the void a principle of motion. The disparity
between self and object is at once an inadequacy of the selfin under~
standing the object, and an inadequacy of the object to itself. When
the object is fully itself, i.e. fully revealed, the subject-object distinction vanishes and Phenomenology yields place to Logic.
38. There is a temptation to think that, since the standpoint of
Phenomenology is superseded as false in the standpoint of Logic, it
would have been better to have dispensed with it, and have gone
straight to Logic. This argues a false view of truth and of its relation
to what is false.
39. Falsehood is not simply the slag or dross which must be rejected
to arrive at truth: itis the unshaped metal which must be reshaped
and refined into truth, and which is necessarily present in the final
shape of such truth.
40. The philosophical dogmatist thinks we can pro:!ounce defini~
tively on a philosophical issue as we can pronounce on the date of
Caesar's birth or on the equality of the square on a triangle'S hypoten use to the two sq uares on its other two sides.
41. The truths of history, to the extent that they are contingent,
and concern particular existents, are indeed naked matters of fact,
which nothing renders necessary. Even here, however, there are
grounds for and against, so that error becomes part of truth.
42. Mathematical truths are not thought ,to be known unless
proved true. Their demonstrations are not, however, kept as parts
of what they prove, but are only our subjective means towards knowing the latter. In philosophy, however, consequences always form part
of the essence made manifest in them, which returns to itself in such
expressions.
43. Mathematical insights, employing constructions and proofs,
have to that extent always something false about them. We depart
from the triangle in incorporating its parts into other figures) and we
only come back to it in the end.
44. Mathematical knowledge is defective in that lines of proof and
constructions have to be blindly tried out till we hit on one that leads
to the desired conclusion. They are not consequences of the notional
content of the theorem to be established.

PREFACE, §§37-50

501

45. Mathematics may plume itself on its self-evidence, but this selfevidence rests on the poverty of its aim and the defectivenes~ of its
material, in which philosophy should be ashamed to follow it. Mathematics only seeks to establish quantitative relations which belong exclusively to the surface ofthings . I ts rna terials are space and the unit, an
empty, lifeless, repetitive element, set forth in fixed, dead propositions,
linked together only by equational identities, and never progressing
through opposition to some qualitatively different outcome. The incommensurability of the different dimensions, which for mathematics
constitutes a problem, is a luminous necessity to the philosopher.
46. Mathematics is wholly unsuccessful in its treatment of time,
which it does not see as standing in a relation of necessary opposition
and complementarity to space. Its proofs of the equalization of
moments in the lever, and of the relations of time and space in gravitation, are pitifully empirical. Time with its essential, living self-differentiatiQn, is the very Notion present in actual existence. The
notionless quantities and equations of mathematics are unable to
capture its essence.
47. Philosophy does not move in the inert, abstract, unreal medium
of mathematics, but in an actual, living progression of distinct
notional phases, some of which negate what went before, and are
themselves negated in what follows, but are all necessary steps in the
progression, and are recalled in its final conclusion. Philosophical
truth is like a Bacchanalian riot where the drunken participants fall
down as they try to stand up, but it is also like the enlaced final sleep
in which all have collapsed on to the floor.
48. The method of philosophy must be set forth by Logic, and is
in fact Logic itself. It is not the .method of rna thema tics, with its definitions, axioms} theorems, proofs, grounds pro and contra etc., which
deals externally with its materials, and does not seek to develop their
inner content. Mathematical methods are suited to their abstract
materials, and to the fixed identities of concrete sensuous things,
which do not change as we consider them.
49. But if phHosophysteers clear of the loose methods of ordinary
argument and the exact methods of mathematics , it must nottherefore
let itself sink back into prophetic divinations and enthusiasms which
are not scientific at aU.
50. Kant has brough t back in to philosophy the dialectical triplicity
which is the essential form of Science. But neither he nor his successors
have been able to give it life. They have treated it as an inert schema,
and have applied it to the most heterogeneous materials, sometimes
grossly empirical, sometimes categorial and notional. Such applications are as void of deep sense as are the category-headings ot ordinary
chatter.

502

ANALYSIS

51. Such unthinking application of the same schema to quite different materials is a pure formalism, though it may call itself a construction. I t makes use throughou t of a wild series of analogical iden tifications. The Understanding is linked to electricity, the animal to
nitrogen, andso on, There is an appearance of conceptual connection
where none is really present. The procedure resembles that of a poor
painter who depicts everything in two colours, or, worse still, in one.
52. It is, however, only because dialectical triplicity is felt to be
the essential form of Science that it is thus devitalized and abused.
53. True Science is nothing but the self-development of the Notion,
which first confronts its own.simple universality with a specific, objective other, then takes back the sense of that other into its own simplicity, thereby becoming more determinate. The schematizing
Understanding merely catalogues and tables the stages of such selfdevelopment, without knowing what they amount to, nor the principle of their growth.
.
54. Every qualitative nuance of being has its own abstracted selfidentity, which is one with the abstract self-identity of a distinct
thought. This self-identical, qualitative nuance necessarily brings
about its own dissolution, and becomes a mere moment in a wider
whole. But this dissolution is notbroughtabout by some alien process
of reflection , but is cunningly contrived by theobjectivecontent itself,
which to preserve itself must move beyond itself. Th~ thought that
s.ees this does not progress bya retreat into subjectivity, but by
immersing itself in its objeces own development.
55. The abstractive Understanding is not only an aspect of selfconscious subjectivity, but also ofexisten.t being. Existence means distinctionin quali ty: this is the Understanding of exis tenee, wha t Anax~
agoras called its Nous, and what later thinkers raised to the status
of an Eidos or Idea or sort. But such a self·identical, distinct sort involves its own dissolution: it may seem to be destroyed by alien violence) but is in fact destroyed by the negation, the reference to
another, which it bears within itself. In such becoming the Understanding-aspect of being passes over into its Reason.
56. The being of anything is one with its Notion, and this Notion
is at once the necessity of its rhythmic development and the speculative concept which enables us to know it. It is not necessary to apply
speculative categories to what concretely is, since the latter already
embodies such categories in itself.
57. The scientific method ofspeculative philosophy will show itself
to be at once determined by the contents it studies and by its own
inherent rhythms. Ifit is described as we havejust described it, resistance will be aroused from the standpoint both of sound common sense
and of mystical insight. This is the standard response to what seems an

PREFACE, §§51-65

50 3

alien dogma: men prefer to be revolutionary in their own time and
manner.
58. To think in pure Notions, e.g. self-identity, being-in-itself,
being-for-~elf, is tiresome and difficult, both to the thought that prefers
to think in pictures, in which what is universal is not clearly
abstracted, and to merely argumentative thought, which does not immerse itself in its thought-content at all, but satisfies its vanity by
pronouncing upon it rather than by allowing it to develop.
59. Argumentative thinking delights in refuting a conceptual content and reducing it to nothing. Such negative reflection is as vain
and empty as the content it refutes. It is quite different from the constructive negation which always has a positive outcome.
60. Argumentative thinking connects the content it thinks of with
its own self as judging Subject. The determina tion of subject by predicate seems to it to be its own free doing. But the thought which
achieves grasp ofits subject only does so when its round of predication
is complete. It discovers its subject only in being forced to enlarge
its predications, and not in its original reference. But picture-thought,
concerned only with points of reference and with what is accidental,
resents having to revise its content as it goes along. The revision of
the logical subject, however, means the emergence of the thinking
Subject, which finds itself in developing the content of the logical subject through various predications, and not in some arbitrary
reference"point of which arbitrary predications are made. (Paragraph
very difficult owing to identification-in-distinction of the conscious
with the logico-grammatical subject.)
6 I. The conflict we have here is that of the superficial view of the
proposition of judgement, which treats it as an t;xternal connection
of independently significant elements, and of the speculative view
which sees it as the self-development, through complementary dif·
ferences, of a single significant content.
62. It is hard for an argumentative thinker to realize that, until
he has decided what has to be said ofa given logical subject, e.g. God
in his relation to being, he is not truly concerning himself with subject
of reference nor with any subject at aU.
63. From this springs the objection to philosophical statements that
they have to be read over many times before they can be understood.
A comfortable enlargement of a familiar subject by the mere addi1ion
of predicates has ceased to be possible.
64. To mix argumentative thinking with speculative dialectic can
never succeed, since the fixed points of reference necessary for the
former are lacking in the latter.
65. Speculative dialectic does not merely dispense with the fixed
distinctions of argumentative thought in some high flight of insight.

ANALYSIS

It shows them breaking down as it reflects on the intrinsic sense of
propositions.
66. Speculative dialectic must itselfbe expounded in propositions,
and this might seem to expose it to the same objections as argumentative thought, and to open the way to a critique of speculation. But
the propositional form is a mere shell in speculation, since its predications are not meant to be externally added to an already fixed subject
of reference, For this reason names like 'God' with a conventionally
fixed content are best avoided in philosophy.
67. I t is not thought necessary to have a preliminary training
before one philosophizes: ordinary information, skills, methods are
thought sufficient. But since nothing can be taken for granted until
tested by philosophy, philosophy involves its own skills and standards
which have to be learnt and practised.
68. Thought incapable of considering abstract propositions or their
mutual relations should not be confused with tolerance and freedom
of mind, much less with inspired genius. Inexact, undisciplined thinking has all the defects of poetry without its merits.
69. To be a naturalist or a common-sense philosopher is to revert
to trivialities thadt require~ no philosopher to utter. Such trivialities
always lead on to antinomies which are neither sophistical nor
visionary. To refuse to engage in justifications and analyses is to abdicate human rationality.
70. To rely on common sense supplemented by a little qoeading of
philosophical prefaces and reviews is an easy road to Science. Science,
however, requires that truth should be won by the labour of the
Notion developing itself in its own medium.
7I. ,Tho ugh there have been many who value PIa to for his Ii terary
myths, there have been times when his Parmenides has been seen to
be the supreme work of art of the ancient dialectic, and the positive
expression of the divine life. There have been times, too, when the
philosophy of Aristotle was valued for its speculative depth. We may
hope that our system will penetrate public attention, since it has had
to wait till its time was ripe and its public in existence. This public
does not consist of the soi-disant representatives of public opinion.
7'2. In our age the universal aspect of Spirit has been strengthened,
while its individual expressions are less significant. In such an age
theindividual must forget his individuality and must do what he can,
while less should also be demanded of him by society.

INTRODUCTION, §§66-78

50 5

INTRODUCTION
73. It is a natural idea that before engaging in philosophical inquiry one should first examine the instrument or medium of such
knowledge (Locke, Kant). Perhaps it is a good or a bad instrument,
perhaps no good at all for knowledge of what absolutely is, since it
modifies or distorts its object. It is quite vain, however, to try to eliminate the refracting and transforming powers of the instrument and
so arrive at the intrinsic notion of the thing. For if what absolutely
is cannot be reached by our faculty of knowledge, with all its refracting
and transforming power, there is no sense in supposing that it can
be reached by dispensing with or discounting the work of this faculty
and the course it has to take. Remove the way truth affects us and
nothing at all remains.
74. But ifwe doubttheability ofknowledge to reach what absolutely
is, why not doubt thedoubt and soon? It may be pointed out, further,
thatthe notion of knowledge as a medium or instrument which stands
in an external relation to what absolutely is, which is quite separate
from it, is a wholly questionable notion which makes knowledge impossible from the start~ In our fear of error we are excluding the possibility afknowledge.
75. That we might have knowledge of a sort, e.g. of phenomena,
but not of what absolutely is, is a wholly obscure notion to which
no one has managed to give any clear meaning. (Even knowledge
of Schein or Erscheinung, Hegel is later to insist, is knowledge of how
things really appear to be or manifestly are~)
76. All these confused conceptions which make knowledge inherentlyimpossible must be dismissed: the actual development of
knowledge itselfsets them aside. But knowledge in its first appearance
is itselfmerely apparent and so defective. Science cannotmerely claim
to be better than such apparent knowledge, for this is to put itself
on the level of the latter, and to rely on its mere existence. Nor can
it appeal to its own rudimentary presence in apparent knowledge, for
this is not, in apparent knowledge, specially distinctive. We must
accordingly say what apparent knowledge really is.
77. Apparent knowledge in all its varied forms is the path taken
by the natural consciousness till it reaches true knowledge. Along this
path Soul becomes pu:r:ified into Spirit: by a complete experience of
itself it comes to know what it in itself is.
78. In philosophy fundamental beliefs a:r:e always being shaken and
are not restored in the same form as in the case of ordinary doubt.
We are not merely trained thinkers who are now trying to think for
themselves: we are people who for the first time are really learning

ANALYSIS

how to think, for whom the results of all training are in question.
Philosophical scepticism is radical and not piecemeal.
79. But in philosophy scepticism does not merely doubt: it always
arrives at a determinate positive result, a position whose positive truth
involves, and is involved by, the negation of the position just considered before. Purely negative scepticism is a delusive form of consciousness which is passed on the way.
80. The goal of knowledge is a situation where there is no longer
an apparent element to be discounted and transcended, but where
Notion and object are mutually adequate. Consciousness by its very
nature presses on to this goal, though it sometimes retreats in terror
from this endless ~elf-transcendence, and affects to regard all positions of thought as vain and empty, or as good in their own kind,
thereby increasing its own vain self-importance.
8 I. To progress in self-criticism it seems that there must be a criterion
which knowledge can apply to itself. But knowledge does not seem
to possess any such criterion wherewith it can test itself.
8g. Knowledge is always given as correlated with an independent,
self- existent, objective somethi l1 g, the truth. This truth may be for consciousness, but it also is what it is in itself.
83. This independent, self-existenttruthmust, however, itself be
a truth for consciousness, and this seems tp make consciQusnessits own
criterion, and to point to anotherself-existent truth with which the first
truth can be compared, and so on.
84. In reality, however, both the self-existent truth and the knowleQge of it fall within consciousness. Or otherwise put, the opject as
it intrinsically is, its essence, on tJ:le one hand, and the object as an
object for consciousness or a Notion, on the other, both fall within
consciousness, and the latter has to be made to conform to theformer.
Or if we identify Notion and essence} and the object is what this is
for us, then we have to see if the object conforms to the Notion. Both
these process(,!s are the same ami in them consciousness only applies
its own criterion to hself. (This paragraph seems pure subjective idealism-con,sciousness in tes ting its ideas, its immanen t con ten ts, merely
confronts them with other ideas, other immanent contents. But it can
also be interpreted as saying that what objects 'in themselves' arc is
always more or less adequately there in and for consciousness, and
in knowledge it has merely to replace an inadequate by a more
adequate revelation.)
85. Consciousness itself tes ts itself and compares itself with its own
object: we, the philosophical observers, can only observe it at work.
Consciousness itself constantly changes its view of the object. What
the object was intrinsically [an sich] becomes merely what it is for
consciousness, and a new Ansich develops. We rna y say tha t conscious-

I . SENSE-CERTAINTY, §§79----92

ness is adjusting itself to the reality of being, but it is more correct
to say that the reality of being is adjusting itself to consciousness. In
this adjustment the criterion applied by consciousness is itself being
tested and transformed.
86. For consciousness to negate what at first seemed absolutely
objective, and for it to regard this absolute truth as a mere truthfor-consciousness, is for consciousness to have lived through an experience [Eifahrung] i.n the phenomenological sense, which always involves self~transcendence.
87. The progress of consciousness can be progress for consciousness;
it can also be a progress for the phenomenological observer who is
considering and commenting on consciousness. The phenomenological observer sees the links of negation and the resultant positiveness
which springs from negation in the successive phases ofconsciousness ,
whereas for consciousness itselfeach step involves a surprising transition to a totally new object. The deep dialectic seen by the phenomenological observer goes on behind the back of consciousness itself.
88. Science includes in its content the road to Science, the account
of its own essential experience.
8g. The shapes of consciousness are not fully conscious of themselves as shapes of consciousness, nor of their place in a continuous
conscious history, until the end of the road is reached.

L SENSE-OER TAINTY
go. The knowledge from which our phenomenological investigation starts is absolutely immediate knowledge, which is also knowledge ofwhat immediately is, of what just is there. What just is there
must simply betaken in, registered, we must not try to grasp it notionally, nor add anything to what it lays before us.
91. This sort of knowledge appears to be inexhaustibly rich inconteDt and also in extent. What it lays before us seems to be infinitely
divisible and to stretch away infinitely in time and space. It also
appears to be the truest knowledge we can possess, since it omits no
detail of the object. But this kind of knowledge also shows itself up
(to the phenomenological observer) as tire poorest and most abstract
possible: it merely acknowledges the heing of the object. The consciousness which is aware of what to us merely is there, is likewise
denuded of content: it does no thinking work, it connects nothing
with nothing, it simply registers. It is just I, this consciousness, confronting this immediate content.
92. When scrutinized, however, sense-consciousness reveals itself
asJess purelyimmediate than it at first seemed. It involves two typical

508

ANALYSIS

factors, an indefinite registered content and an indefinite registering
self, and theseconsti tu te a necessary form or structure. There is a regis"
tering self only because there is an immediate content to register, and
there is a registered content only because there is a self to register it.
We are dealing with a general pattern of experience, not merely with
a singular fact of existence. (A tendency to self-correction is inherent
in consciousness and this distinguishes its subjectivity from its objectivity. )
93. Not only does sense-certainty embody this subject-object pattern, it also involves a claim, something gesetzt, posited, that one factor
is more true and essential than the other. The object comes before it
as the True, the essential, that which is there whether there is knowledge or not. Knowledge, con trariwise, is given as secondary I unessen ..
tial: it presupposes, depends on, is mediated by the object, which is
truly immediate and does not presuppose or depend on it. (Realism
is thus not an imposed theory bu t part and parcel of ourmos t elementary experiences. Weare dealing wi th something whose deeper na ture
will come out as we examine it, but is not exhaustively and finally
given.)
94. Sense .. certain tyseems, however, to involve an inheren t conflict.
Its object as.given in it does not match what that obJectis given out
as being. This· content is not introduced by a reflective observer, but
is part and parcel ofsense-certainty itself. (I t is because sense-certainty
feels itself not to be the rich thing it on the surface claims to be, that
it tries to make out, to perceive, what it has before it.)
95. The immediate 'This' ofsense~certainty involves the two con~
ne<;ted forms of the 'Now' and the 'Here'. Ifwe try to pin the 'Now'
down bygivingi tdefinitc'conten t, thatcontent is quite inconstant. Wha t
nowobtains is night, but (a little Jater) what now obtains is not night,
but noon. (Since what is, always changes its appearance, we never
get at it: it is the complete thing which underlies changing appearances.)
96. The now ofsense-certainty reveals itself as inherently universal,
i.e. itcannotbeidentified with anyone definite state of things, though
it can alsoindifferently>he anyone such state·or another.·· (Universals
obey a different logicfrom their instances. Notonly the characters of
what is are universals, bud 18 generalform is itselfuniversal, i.e. the concrete reality behind changing appearances.)
97. In the use of demonstrative words there is a conflict between
what we really say and what we mean to say (our Meinung, was wir
meinen). We mean to express what is ultimately individual, but this
is inexpressible: all we succeed in expressing is what is universaL
g8. The demonstrative 'Here' behaves exactly like the demonstrative 'Now', and always changes its application. It is therefore a case

I. SENSE. CERTAINTY, §§93-I 10

of pure universality. We cannot pin down the individual position qua
individual, only individuality in general.
99. The universality of pure being which has revealed itself as the
essence of sensewcertainty involves abstraction, but it is not, as it
seemed to be, real abstractionfrom rich contents, but abstraction from
the mere meaning or claim to have rich contents. (Individuality on
Hegel's view is a mere moment of living, concrete universality.)
roo. Since the object of sense-certainty is not the definite contentful
thingit claimed to be, the phenomenological emphasis shifts to the Subject. My experience becomes the rich, colourful thing. What I mean
is important because it stems from me [Meinen and meinJ. (Like
Descartes, Hegel shifts to the individual Subject as that of which we
are certain.)
101. But in the flux of experience the me which experiences always
has different successive contents to its experience, and cannot therefore be identified with such contents. The me ofthe moment may mean
to be definite in content, but it cannot express this definiteness. It
is in a sense as much a plurality as a single me.
102. Theme alsostandsessentiaHyopposed to other mes and cannot
say how this me differs from another. Each man is, as an experient,
everyman. (The individual as such cannot be understood or
deduced.)
103. We now move to a position where not the mere object, nor
the mere subject; is the rich, contentful thing, but the whole structured'
subject...-object situation.
104-7. The whole structured subject. -objectsituation is asessentially fluctuating as the mere subject or object considered before. The
wholly definite time-situation we try to pin down at once becomes
a matter of the past: the only present that can survive is a universal
present which remains what it is despite variation of content, and
which has subordinate presents within it. From the many 'Nows'
which arise and pass away we come to a 'Now' which always is, no
matter how long a happening may be. This is of course a universaL
(The. substantial, the permanent is the Universal not the particular.)
108. The wholly definite 'Here', the poin t, cannot be seized. Every
real 'Here' breaks up into 'Heres', or points to 'Heres' beyond itself.
But in aU these 'Heres' the universal 'Here' persists. (We cannot get
parts, but strictly speaking only the whole of Reality, and the whole
of Reality is a universal present in aU its so-called parts.)
109. Sense .. certainty never grasps definite particulars but always
deludes itself into thinking that it does. In the Mysteries bread and
wine are consumed to show the nullity of the solid things of sense,
and hungry animals reveal the same mystical wisdom.
110. Language, being divine and rational, frustrates the attempt

5 10

ANALYSIS

of sense-certainty to grasp surd particulars: it only expresses universals. The truth of sense-certainty is taking-for-true, i.e. perception.
(The dialectic is much influenced by arguments in Plato~s Theaetetus,
where the impossibility of reconciling knowledge with radical subjectobjectfluxis maintained~ and the unchanging universal ideas are shown
to be necessary. Wittgenstein would regard Hegel's treatment as resting on a misunderstanding of demonstratives, which are unique linguistic instruments, and neither name nor describe.)

II. PERCEPTION
I I I. Immediate certainty's true object is the universal, but it wants
to deal with the immediate 'This'. Perception acknowledges the universal, the general pattern, to be its object, but it does not yet see
this to be the essential element in its object: it is we, the phenomenological observers, who see this to be the essential element and the
necessary outcome of what has gone before. ,For perception itself, the
essen tialelementisagainthe 0 bject, as in thesense-certainty. The object
is the essential, constant, independent element, while perception is
givenas unessential, variable, dependent. Perception does notseethat
subject and object are equally the unessential forms in which a universal pattern is cast.
112. The object can, however, only be a universal pattern in so.
far as it unites many distinct elements, i.e. properties, in its pattern.'
The perceptual object is really given with the interior richness which
the objectofsense.is only taken to have. (Universality is meaningless
without specificity.)
I 13. The thing of perception is sense..,given, but its sensuousness
is universal, i.e. appears in the form of a property. Sense is aufgehohen
(destroyed yet preserved) in the perceptual thing. But the universality
of perception necessarily dirempts itself into a number of mutually
exclusive properties which at the same time it brings together. Its
structure involves an inherent conflict. From one point of view it is
an absolute unity, that ofaspace-time region, which brings the properties indifferently together, so that where the one is the other is also,
while from another point of view it breaks up into the many distinct
properties, each oLwhich can be considered in and for itself.
I 14. The more loose 'Also' of a medium points, however, to some
more absolute kind of unity which excludes otherness rigidly from
itself. This absolute unity can be attributed to the several properties,
or it can be attributed to the thing as such. We have the alternatives,
it would seem, ofha ving either a bundle of properties or a metaphysical peg to hang them on or both. (Very uncertain of interpretation.)

II. PERCEPTION,

§§III-121

115. The perceived Thing represents a difficult compromise of (a)
a set of properties loosely together and supplementing each other in
the Thing; (b) the Thing as the space-time location or medium in
which the properties are brought together; (c) the properties treated
as pure universals having a status outside of the particular Thing.
1 16. The dialectic now takes a new turn. The perceptual object
being this curious mixture ofinterna~ togetherness and apartness, the
subject regards it as essentially constant and selfsame. All departures
from Sichselbstgleichheit are attributed to the subject, are its illusions,
and are not to be found in the object.
I 17. Consciousness now becomes aware of the contradictions in the
object which only we, the phenomenological observers, have seen in
it. The object first presents itself as a pure unity, but the properties
are all universal and could exist outside of it. The unity of the object
is therefore my confusion or mistake, and the object is really only an
association of universals . But in such a loose association the properties
are not effectively brought together so as to exclude one another = the
object is therefore again a pure unity, and the properties mere sides
of it. Butthe properties are often mutually indifferent, so that the
object's unity again vanishes. The properties now become so wholly
qetached that tbey noloJ'lger contrast with anything, and no longer
are properties. We are back at the blank being of sense-certainty.
I 18. Consciousne~s now repeats the whole circle somewhat differeJ;ldy. It becomes conscious of the essential untruth of all perception, and attributes this untruth to itself, being at thesame time made
aware of its power to correct perception and arrive at the naked reali ty
behind perception, which corrected picture it again recognizes as its
own.
119. The doctrine of primary and secondary qualities is now developed. The object itself is conceived as profoundly simple, but it
is perceived with a variety of properties because it affects various
bodily organs, eye, ear, etc. The conscious Ego now becomes the common medium in which all the Thing's sense-aspects are brought
together.
120. By a new shift in the dialectic it is made plain that, iEthe Thing
is conceived as absolutely One, it will be no longer possible to distinguish it from other things: all will be wholly blank unities and so indistinguishable. A Thing mustbe whatitis only by having its own properties, those proper and peculiar to itself. Since each of these properties
has its own separate being, the Thing again becomes a loose association of properties: it is A and also Band also C, etc.
I 2J. Consciousness now, instead of attributing the plurality of the
Thing's properties to itself, and making the thing intrinsically One,
makes the Thing intrinsically an assemblage of properties, of free

ANALYSIS

'matters'-the physics of Hegel's day spoke of electrical, calorific,
chromatic matters-while the object's unity is a sort of fiction for
which consciousness alone is responsible.
122. Consciousness now gets tired of attributing such diverse errors
to itself, and simply recognizes that the Thing itself (as reflected into
itself) has this diversity of opposing aspects in it. It at one moment
shows itselfas a profound unity,at another moment as a loose assemblage of properties.
123. Consciousness no longer attributes the object's oscillation
between profound unity and dirempted multiplicity to consciousness,
but to the object. But a new device occurs to it. The object is put
forth as profoundly One, while its diversity of aspects are due to its
relations, not with consciousness, but with other objects, which as it
were call forth different responses from it.
124. It seems absurd, however, that Things without intrinsic differences should be coaxed into showing difference by their mere relations with other Things without intrinsic difference. We are therefore
forced to postulate an internal distinctiveness (Unterschied] which is
essential to the object, and an external diversity [Verschiedenheit] from
otherobjects, which is an unessential conseq uence of this. I t is because
Things are intrinsically distinctive that they are also extrinsically
diverse.
125. We are, however, unable to distinguish this internal distinctiveness from the external diversity. The Thing's absolute characterseems the same as its relatedness to other Things and viee versa.
126. Same point restated. The Thing's absolute self-relation,
which negates all otherness, also shows itselfup as being no more than
thoroughgoing relation to others.
127. Same point. The extrinsic which is none the less quite necessary is really intrinsic.
128. We cannot draw subtle distinctions between 'the object as it
intr:insically is' and 'the object as it is in relation to other Things'.
The former is the latter and the latter the former~ we have a distinction without a difference (i.e. a merely meant, intended, verbal
distinction) .
129. The Thing is therefore essentially overcome as it was previously overcome on its sensuous side. The latter revealed itself as pure
universality, but asa universality infected ~ith several conflicts: that
of the universal and the individual, that of the unity of the properties
in the Thing and their isolation as 'free matters', that ofbeing intrinsically this or that and that of being something only in relation to other
Things. The nature of the Thing is therefore 'simply the nature of the
Understanding which constitutes it, and in which all these tensions
are always present.

III. FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING, §§122-135

513

130. The sophistry of perception tries to save itself by a device of
aspects and 'in so fars'. I t talks of the perceived object in so far as
it is one object, in so far as it is many properties, in so far as it has
self-existence, in so far as it is related to other things, etc. This sort
of device must be abandoned. It is the pure universality of the Begrijf,
of the Notion, which emerges, which involves in inseparable union
the universal, the specific and the singular, the separate and the inter~
related.
131. Perceptual understanding is dominated by the empty abstractions of individuality and universality, of the essential and the unessential, etc. I tdespises philosophy for concerning itself with Gedankendinge, but in effect deals with nothing else itself, and merely oscillates from one crude abstract thought to another. If it could realize
that it is dealing with thoughts, concepts, it would be their master,
and shape them as it wills, but it imagines .that it is dealing with real
matters, substances, etc. In its vain wanderings the perceptual understanding fails to arrive at the truth of things though it plainly reveals
its own untru th.

III. FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING
132. The Thing of perception has passed away into a universal
which is unconditioned since it includes what is specific and individual
in itself, and is not merely an essence. set over against the unessential.
Consciousness has implicitly grasped the notional character of its
object, but, not having itself become purely notional,fails to recognize
itself in the object before it, which is still treated as an object, alien
to itself.
l33. The object of consciousness is consciousness's own notional
object, but the consciousness tifthis notional character, its Fursichsein,
is lacking. Hence it comes before consciousness as freely active in independence of consciousness; consciousness merely watches it in action.
It is we, the phenomenological observers, who must transform the
object for consciousness till consciousness can see and grasp itself in
the opject.
134. Consciousness has thoroughly identified its object's being.. forselfand its being-far-another. This is not merely the objecfs form but
its content as well: it is the sort of object tha t in being for itself is for
another, and vice versa. And this unity of the two aspects is all that
the object has become.
135. None the less, since the aspects are identified, they are also
distinguished, and consciousness therefore has before it the contrast
ofa number oflooselyarrayed elements, on the one hand, and a pro-

ANALYSIS

found unity on the other. But these aspects are no longer given as
rival views which merely oust one another, but each is given as essentially and necessarily passing over into the other.
136. The process of Force is precisely the process in which dispersed, independent elements come out from a unity in which they
were lost, and again lose themselves in this unity. The dispersed elements are the expression or manifestation of Force, while Force
proper, or Force unexpressed, is the unity out of which these manifestations issue. For thought the distinctions may have no substance,
but the thought has to be carried out in the stuff of perception, and
for perception Force unmanifest is obviously different from Force
manifest. The two forms of Force are always vanishing into each other,
for Force exists in so far as they keep up this mutual vanishing.
137. Though it is Force itself which by its nature passes from its
unexpressed to its expressed form, ~hese forms appear to be mutually
external. Not only is this so, but the passage from one to the other
necessarily appears as an external incitation or solicitation. Something external to the unmanifest Force provokes it to manifest itself,
and something external to the manifest Force provokes it to retreat
into unmanifest latency. This external solicitation is only in appearance external, and is really an inseparable aspect of the Force itself.
138. A Force is thus seen as essentially breaking up, dirempting
itselfinto two Forces;,one thatis solicited to express itself (or withdraw
itself from expression) and the other which solicits it to do just this.
On examination, however, the spliciting Force is itself solicited into
soliciting by the Force it solicits, and hence both Forces solicit and
are solicited by one another.
139. These two Forces solicit and are solicited by one another, each
appearing in relation to the other as medium in which properties are
distinguished, and as a merely latent power. Each may be said to work
upon the other, or to be worked on by it, because that other is not
really distinct from its own self.
140. The difference of the two Forces or aspects of Force is both
a difference in content (medium of properties and latent power) and
form {soliciting and solicited). The distinction ofform is given as intrinsic, while that of content exists merely for the observer. But in
the actual process of Force both these differences are eliminated. The
active solicitor turns into the passive object of solicitation and vice
versa. For the phenomenological observer, too, the notional unity, of
the two extremes is evident: the solicitor is also the solicited, and the
realized content is also the latent form and vice versa.
I4I. Each aspect of Force is a reality on its own, but its being consists essentially in a movement towards, a vanishing into the other
aspect. Its being consists in a Gesetztsein, a positedness or being posited

III. FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING, §§136-150

515

by the other aspect. There is nothing fixed and substantial in either
aspect by itself: the Notion of both is found in their essential unity.
The true being of Force is not the reality it seems to gain or lose by
being expressed or unexpressed, but the universal, the thought, which
is present in both these states.
142. Force therefore appears in two guises, as a substantial entity
active in the world of phenomena, and as a pure Notion behind or
beneath phenomena. The latter is the truer view.
143. Consciousness now sees itself as penetrating beneath the surface show [Schein] of things, with its perpetual vanishing of factors
and forces, to a true background of which the surface show is the
appearance [Erscheinung]. In the surface play of Forces everything
negates and cancels everything, but the true background is wholly
positive. This whole background consists essentially of pure Notions
which are part ofthe Subject's innermost self-consciousness. The Subjectdoes not, however, as yet realize their subjective, notional character, and sees them as an hiner essential depth in the objects themselves.
144. The Understanding therefore at this stage conceives ofa true,
supersensible, permanent world, a Jenseits which lies essentially
beyond the Diesseits q(this vanishing world ofappearances. This world
is a world of notionalcon tents inadequC:itely conceived as alien to the
mind.
145. The conscious sphere of appearances is the middle term
through which the Understanding penetrates inferentially to the inner, essential nature of things.
146. The inner, essential nature of things is readily conceive~ as
a mere void, a region in which nothing positive can be known. (Kant's
thing-in-itself.) Even subjective fancies are better than notions so
wholly void of content.
147. But the inner,essential is essentially the truth of appearance,
the truth in w hichimmediate sense-certainty and perception are overcome, notionally transformed. It stands in a negative, but not merely
negative, relation to the world of appearance.
148. Since Force and its expression are through and through dialectical, the soliciting being also the solicited, and the medium of properties also the latent force, the Understanding is driven beyond the
play of Forces to the principle present in them all. This is no other
than the law which governs all the manifestatiops of one Force:
149. A law is an abiding image of restless appearances, a pripciple
which, in governing change and revealed in change, is itselfunchanging. The supersensible world is a tranquil kingdom of laws:
150. The kingdom oflaws has an ever varying actual existence in
the world under ever varying circumstances. It tends to be thought
of in an ever more abstract way and so becomes refined into the mere

ANALYSIS

empty form of law as such. Hegel thinks that the law of universal
gravitation has this empty chanicter: it merely says that everything
has a law-determined relation to everything else. This is important
only as setting bounds to chance and sensuous independence.
15 I. Hegel ~hinks that beyond specific laws is the bare conception
oflaw, which transcends specific laws and even law as such. It reduces
all distinctions of content and form which occur in laws into an abso~
lute unity, a pure necessity.
152. The duplicity of Force and expression reappears in the case
oflaws. Laws have both an explicit specification in which all the differences to which they apply have a distinct expression: they also
occur as pure universalities in which all such specification is somehow
absorbed and nullified. Simple electricity, e.g., is the absolute unity
behind positive and negative electricity and the laws connecting
them, simple gravity is the absolute unity behind the factors of mass,
distance, velocity, etc., and the laws connecting them. Wherever there
are laws there isa deep underlying unity expressed in them, ,and every
deep unity expresses itself in characteristic laws,
153. In the common representation of the deep nature behind laws,
a law is readily thought of as a mere by-product of the relation of
the factors present inthe law, e.g. motion is an accidental relation
between the independent variables of distance and time, etc. This is
a deeply wrong way of conceiving the matter. Motion is in reality
the whole which distance and time alike presuppose, and in which
alone they make sense, and so on in other similar cases, e.g. gravitation. There can be no laws except where there is a common deeper
nature behind the laws.
154. The Understanding is now tempted,to regard the deeper unity
behind the law as somethingthat we postulate and ,which is not properlyto be attributed to the thing. The nature behind the law is merely
the law otherwise expressed. The process of tau tologiza tion, ofreduc~
ing the same to the same, is whatwe call 'explanation'. Various electrical phenomena arise in a law-governed manner because Electricity
is their common ground.
155. We are, however, brought to realize that the distinction
between the law and the unitary nature behind the law cannot be
regarded as merely a distinction thatwe draw. The thing itself involves
the distinction which has therefore a position in the supersensible
background ofthings.
156. The very nature of the intelligible world is thus to draw distinctions which turn out to beno distinctions. It is the selfsame which
repels itself from itself, and this element repelled is in consequence
attracted to what has repelled it, foritisthe same 'at bottom'. (Passage
illustrates the essential peculiarities of Hegelian logic.)

Ill. FORCE AND THE UNDERSTANDING, §§ '5'-162

517

157. Hegel now passes to the difficult conception that, in addition
to the first intelligible world which is a tranquil kingdom onaws, there

must also be a second intelligible world which embodies all the distinctions and exclusions which we find in the phenomenal world.
There must not only, to use Platonic language, be single Ideas of
essences multiply instantiated, there must also be Ideas of Instances
qua Instances, and of Instantiation as such. This second intelligible
world will be the inverse of the first one.
158. The inversion is now rather fancifully worked out by Hegel
in the statement that what is sweet in the first intelligible world is
sour in the second, what is a north pole in the first is a south pole
in the second, what is revenge here is punishment there, what is
honoured here is dishonoured there, what is a disgrace here is a saving
grace there, and so on. The inversions of the Sermon on the Mount
are used to illuminate the inversions of physical explanation.
159. On examination, however, the inverted world shows itself to
be indistinguishable from the sense-world of which it purports (at a
second remove) to be the essence. Everything in the sense-world is there
only with a nuance of difference that really amounts to nothing. It
is quite as one-sided in its way as the sense-world and the first intelligible world are one-sided. All it em bodies is in fact presen t in the
tensions and oppositions of the actual sense-world, where there is a
real north pole lying side by side with the real south pole, and so on.
160. We progress to a true view of the relation of essential. nature
to outward manifestation if we see both the profound opposition of
the two, which must not be ignored, and the fact that each factor
is the opposite of its opposite, and so includes the whole opposition
and its opposite in itself. The supersensible world, in particular, in
being the inverse of the sensible world, includes the sensible world
in itself. (Cf. Plotinus: Everything that is yonder is also here.) Such
a distinction within a profound identity is called by Hegel 'infinity',
since the thing is not bounded by an opposite alien and external to
itself.
161. 'Infinity' means that we have (a) a unitary nature, e.g.
motion, electricity, which direm pts itselfin to (b) a number of distinct,
interconnected factors, space, time, positive electricity, negative dectricityetc. which none the less (c) show themselves as overcome, cancelled in their common unity. They are inseparable aspects of the
common unity in question.
162. There is no problem in the seW-diremption of an absolute
unity. It can only be an absolute unity if it also dirempts itself and
is itselfin such diremption. If it merely stood opposed to diremption,
it would not be the absol u te uni ty, but be itselfdirempted from something else.

ANALYSIS

163. The truth of all these convolutions lies in the self-conscious
Understanding which is in all this merely discovering itself and its
varied aspects and internal tensions. (This need not be interpreted
in a purely subjective manner. The Understanding has not manufactured the natural world. But both are sides of the Absolute Idea
whose function it is to realize itself in self-conscious Spirit.)
164. The Understanding does not, however, realize that all these
dissolving distinctions are merely the internal manreuvres of its own
self-consciousness; only we, the phenomenological observers, realize
this.
165. The two extremes of the Understanding gazing into the inner
world of essence, and this inner realm itself, are now merged together.
The curtain of appearance is drawn aside, and the Ego, qua expression
of the Absolute Idea, will come to see only itself beyond. But for it
to realize that it is seeing itself, it must itself go behind the curtain,
and to do this requires several prior steps and stages.

IV. THE TRUTH OF SELF·-CERTAINTY
J 66. So far certainty has always been outward,.turned. It has
affirmed the truth of something other than itself. But this reference
to sheer otherness has shown itself up as empty and untrue, and a
certainty has arisen which measures up to its tru th: certainty is certain
of certainty, and consciousness has its own truth in consciousness. A
residual distinction remains, out it is also a distinction overruled: a
distinction between a concept as an act or cognitive motion, and the
tranquil content which is itself, or between the concept as the mere
self-being of the objectand the object as there-for-another. The conscious Ego is both the related subject-object terms and the relation
between them: it has an Other which it overreaches and sees as itself.
167. In the new state of self-consciousness the features of the previous other-consciousness are summed up and preserved, but only as
insubstantial, vanishing phases. There must be a trace in it of the immediate separate being of the sense-given world, which is, however,
given as a mere appearance, and devoid of genuine substance. Selfconsciousness feels the unity of this seeming other world with itself
in the form ofa desire to abolish this seeming otherness and to discover
itselfin this alien content. (The nature of Desire: to abolish the otherness of the Other.)
r68. To desire in the subject, there corresponds in the object life,
which, like desire, seeks to achieve infinity and to be itself (without
knowing itself) in its other. The living object has implicitly the same

IV. THE TR UTH OF

SELF~CER TAINTY,

§§ 164- 1 75

5 19

self~transcendentcompleteness which is explicitly realized in self-consciousness.
169. The essence of life is infinity as the supersession o~ all distinctions, tranquilly seated at the centre of axial rotation, the moving
essence of time congealed into spatial solidity. All distinctions in the
living organism pass away in flux, but must have a momen tary solidity
and separateness in order to pass away in this manner. Fluidity, pure
movement, is the essence of the living.
170. The independent members of the living organism have their
limited self-existence which, however, is nothing but their relation to
the total flux of living, and which itself in its truth is nothing beyond
a constant diremption into independent shapes. The unity of life is
constantly dirempted, because only as dirempted can it continue to
be a unity. Shapes pass away and are superseded by other shapes,
because their real Substance is the flux which is constantly being
dirempted in them.
171. As fluidity, life always involves a gamut ofindependent forms,
each asserting itself against the others, and against the whole flux
itself. Either can be regarded as the Ansich, the inner self oflife, while
the other is merely the other side of this. Life constantly consumes
and dissolves its solid structures, and therefore has general dissolution
as its constant essence, but agaip it regenerates such structures out
of such consumption and dissolution, and therefore has articulate
diremption as its constant essence. This turning and twisting is the
essence of life: life indeed is absolute turning and twisting. It is an
ever developing; ever dissolving whole which, in development and
dissolution, simply maintains its being.
172. Life proceeds from immediate unity through articulation and
proces~ back to a like unity, which, however) being repeated, is a
generic unity. The constant simple genus which is maintained in life
points to consciousness, for which alone<such a genus exists qua genus.
173. Self-consciousness which contemplates genera, and which is
itself purely generic, is atfirstawareofitse1fas a pure Ego, an extreme
abstraction which will however, enrich and differentiate itself.
174. The pure Ego is the simple universal which seeks (at this stage)
to assert itself by abolishing the articulate forms which stand or seem
to stand opposed to it. It is essentially desire, need.
175. The object which the pure Ego of self-consciousness seeks
essentially to abolish is, however, essential to its being as an abolishing
activity, and is therefore always regenerated as much as abolished.
Self-consciousness can therefore only achieve satisfaction in so far as
the object abolishes itself, shows itself to self-consciousness as really
being self-consciousness. Self-consciousness can only achieve satisfactiop in another self~consciousness.

520

ANALYSIS

176. The manner in which the living organism abolishes articulate
otherness and in which ordinary desire does so, are merely undeveloped versions of the abolition of otherness which occurs in the mutual
recognition of two self-conscious persons,
177. Only in a self·consciousness. for a self-consciousness do we have
a true, accomplished case of self-consciousness, where the object of
consciousness is also its subject. Animal desire is only universal substance pursuing universal substance: here s.ubject pursues and also
finds subject. We have now risen to the level of Spirit, the I which
is a We, and the We which is an 1. We have moved from the coloured
show of th.is-world ~ense, and the empty notional nigh t of U nders tanding, into the spiritual daylight of what is completely present. (Hegel
holds that the understanding >of other minds, far from being more
obscure than the understanding of things, is the model and paradigm
in terms of which intercourse with things can assume a limited clarity.
In all intercourse with things we are striving towards the complete
penetration and] ucidity of social intercourse,)
LORDSHIP AND BONDAGE

178. Self.,consQjousness exists in and for itself inasmuch, and only
inasmuch, as it exists in and for itself for another,i.e. inasmuch as
it is acknozyledged. It is therefore essenti~l1yone only in duplication,
andr~veals itself in a number of traits which have to be kept firmly
apart,andyet reveal themselves as alw<:tYs melting into one another,
and dissoJying this a partnes8.
179. Self..consciousness lives outside of itself in> another self-consciousness, in which it at once loses and also finds itself,
180. Self-consciousness is intrinsically set to eliminate this alien
selfhood, bl;lt, in being so set, it is both set to eliminate the other in
order to achieve its own se1f..certain ty, and also to elimina te itself in
the process, since it is itself that other.
IS]. Thisdualeliminationinvolves, however, a return to self, since
what is eliminated is its own other-being, while it at the same time
permits the other to be other,since it removes its own being from the
other,
182. The process just outlined in 178-81 is not, however, carried
out solely by one> consciousness on the other, but by both consciousnesses on each other. It can only be successfully carried out by
either consciou:sness because it sees the other doing to it just what it
does to the other: each in fact demands that the other should treat
it just as it treats the other.
183. Each consciousness then acts on itself as much as it acts on
the other, and what it does is as much done by the other to it, as
by it to the other consciousness.

IV. T"HE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY, §§I76-1g0

521

184. Separate consciousnesses re-enact at a higher level the action
of mutually soliciting forces which, in soliciting each other, in effect
only put themselves forth. Each uses the other as the means by which
it achieves self~consciousness. To mutual solicitation mutual recognition here corresponds, as well as the recognition of mutual recognition.
185. The recognition of self in its other at first presents itself in a
one-sided form in which only the one side does the recognizing, and
the other side is merely recogn"ized.
186. Self-consciousness is at first simple being-for-self which is
attached to. an immediate individuality which excludes all others from
itself. Self at firs t cDnfronts self, not as an infinite negation of the negation making all its own, but as a simple case of natural being facing
another such case, both deeply absorbed in the business ofliving. Each
is conscious only of its own being, and so has no true certainty of
itself, since the being of the self is essentially a socially acknowledged
being.
187. Self-consciousness must, however, express itself as the negation of all mere objectivity and particularity. This initially takes the
form of desiring the death of the other at the risk of its own life. Selfconsciousness fillst be willing to sacrifice everything concrete for its
own infinite self-respect and the similar respect of all others. A lifeand-death struggle therefore ensues between the two rival self. . conscio.usnesses.
188. For both members to die in the life-and-death struggle would
not, however) resolve the tension between them. (Nor would the death
of one of them do it.) Death certainly eliminates all opposition,
but only for others, or in a 'dead' manner. Death does not preserve
the struggle that it eliminates in and for the parties in question.
For preservation, it is essential that the parties in question should
live.
18g. The demotion of another self-consciousness so that it does not
reaUycornpete with my self-consciousness, now takes the new form Df
making it thing-like. and dependen t, the self-consciousness ofa bonds ..
man as o.pposed to. that of a lord. That the two self-consciousnesses
are at bottom the same becomes deeply veiled.
190.. The self-consciousness of the lord is essentially related to the
being of the mere things he uses and uses up, and these he enjoys
through the bondsman's self-consciousness. The bondsman prepares
and arranges things for the enjoyment of the lord. The self-consciousness of the lord is likewise essentially related to the self-consciousness
of the bondsman through the various punitive} constraining, and rewarding instruments which keep the bondsman in thrall. The bondsman working on things does not completely overcome their thingness,

52 2

ANALYSIS

since they do not become what he wishes them to be, or not for himself. It is the lord who reaps the enjoyment from the bondsman's
labours.
19I. We thus achieve an essentially unbalanced relationship in
which the bondsman altogether gives up his being-for-self in favour
of the lord. The lord uses him as an instrument to master the thing
for his own (the lord's) purposes, and not for the'bondsman's, and
the bondsman acquiesces in the situation, and becomes in fact part
and parcel of the total objective situation. This means, however, that
the lord cannot get the reciprocal recognition that his self-consciousness demands from a consciousness so degraded and distorted. What
the lord sees in the bondsman, or what the bondsman sees in the lord,
is not what either sees in himself.
192. The lord therefore paradoxically depends for his lordship on
the bondsman's self-consciousness, and entirely fails of the fully realized independence of status which his self-consciousness demands.
193. The truth of independent self-consciousness is therefore to be
found rather in the bondsman's self-consciousness than in the lord's.
Each is therefore the inverse of what it immediately and superficially
is given as being.
194. The bondsman in his boundless quaking respect for the lord
becomes shaken out of his narrow seW·identifications and self':interest
and rises to the absolute negativity, the disinterested all-embracingness of true self-consciousness. He becomes the ideal which he contemplates in his lord.
195. The bondsman has the further advantage that in working on
the object he as it were preserves his labour, makes the outward thing
his own and puts himself into it, whereas the lord's dealings with the
object end in vanishing enjoyments. The bondsman overcomes the
otherness and mere existence of material thinghood more thoroughly
than the lord, and so achieves a more genuine self-consciousness.
196. The bondsman in overcoming the mere existence of material
thinghoodalsorises above the q uakingfearwhich was his first reaction
to absolute otherness as embodied in the lord. Then he achieved selfconsciousness in opposition to such otherness, now he achieves a selfconsciousness not opposed to otherness, but which discovers itself in
otherness. In shaping the thing creatively, he becomes aware of his
own boundless originality. Hegel thinks that the discipline of service
and obedience is essential toseif-consciousness: mere mastery ofthings
alone would not yield it. Only the discipline of service enables the
conscious being to master himself, i.e. his finite, contingent, natural
self. Without this discipline formative ability would degenerate into
a narrow cleverness placed at the service of personal self-wilL (Hegel
suggests that a period of subjection to others is essential to the highest

IV. THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY,

§§lgl-202

523

magisterial rationality. Not to have undergone such discipline results
in a triviali;z;ation of self-consciousness which never rises above petty
finite interests. It would seem that the permissive bringing-up of children is implicitly condemned, and that 'imperialism' and 'colonialism'
at certain stages of development are given a justification.)
FREEDOM OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

197. In the servile self-consciousness we have the moments of pure,
universal being-for-self projected on to the lord, and its own implicit
self-existence projected on to the particular contentual things it elaborates. These moments are not united in the servile consciousness,
but for us, the observers, they are identical~ and we are therefore
brought to think ofan essentially infinite, free, thinking self-consciousness which preserves its selfsameness in the various purely conceptual
contents tha.titenvisages. At first, however, its content is not unfolded
nor set in motion, and it appears as merely the unfettered universality
of thought.
198. The form of self-consciousness now before us can be identified
with that historical Stoicism which makes of consciousness a purely
thinking essence to which nothing can be of moment except to the
extent that it puts its own thinkingheinginto it.
199. In this form ofself-consciousness all de~ailed content of consciousness, natural existences, feelings, desires, aims (whether out own
or other people 1s) becomes unessential; only the pure conscious
thought that we put into them counts. The Stoic self",consciousness
is indifferent to the master-slave distinction: whether on the throne
of the world like Marcus Aurelius, or in the slave's chains of Epictetus,
it withdraws into the solitary sovereignty, the pure universality of
thought. Such a withdrawal is characteristic ofa period in which high
culture goes with universal fear and bondage.
200, The pure Ego of Stoicism~ though not devoid of content, is
inward-turned whatever its content, and hastherefQre an abstract indifference to natural being which it leaves to take its own course. The
freedom of such Stoicism is not, therefore, a living, contentful freedom, but the mere idea of such freedom, drawn away from life and
things into itself. This means that unless content is externally given
to this consciousness, it cannot by itself determine the True and the
Good. It has no criterion other than the wholly empty, abstract one
of the reasonable, a notion as tedious as it is superficially elevated.
201. The Stoic consciousness may negate particular content, but
it altogether fails to negate this negation, i.e. to appropriate such content to itself. The specificity of its contents still falls outside of its thinking essence.
202. Scepticism carries into realization what Stoicism merely

ANALYSIS

notionally thinks. It explicitly negates the rich determinate content
of life and action. All tasks and all desires become for it vanishing
quantities.
203. Scepticism carries to the limit the dialectic which has been
sapping Sense-certainty, Perceptual acquaintance, Understanding,
and the master-serf relationship, a dialectic which has steadily eliminated determinateness from OUf thinking and left us with empty scientific abstractions from the last of which we now withdraw OUf credence.
204. Scepticism does not regretfully see the solid world of reality
going up in the flames, nor even its own perception of that world, it
does not even repine at the sacrifice of its professional sophistries
which have framed the bonfire. In seeing all this vanish, it has become
confirmed in the consciousness of its own freedom from conviction,
in the simple negativity of its own thinking.
20f,. This sceptical freedom from determinate conviction is also,
however, a giddy whirl of disorderly , ever dissolving, ever reinstated,
personal beliefs. The sceptic in fact confesses that, as a finite, contingent, empirical person, he is everlastingly subject to many definite,
unjustifiable convictions. Hehas to continue with the businessofordinary living, acting and speaking. HeosciHates continually between
the high detachmentofuniversal scepticism and a ·weher of unreasonable heliefs. Even his pure scepticism is a thesis for which doubtful
arguments are adduced, and he must in practice rely on the deliverancesof the senses and the conven dons of morali ty. The sceptical
selfMconsciousnessisin fact deeply self-contradictory, and its reasonings and counter-reasonings are like the arguments of children concerned to contradict one another and always to have the last word.
206. Scepticism is self-contradictory but unaware orits innerselfa
contradiction. Its 'truth' is a consciousness which makes self-contradiction its explicit, principle, which is always conscious of itself
both as selfsame, unchangeable, and free, and as confused, variable,
and distorted. In it both the magisterial and the servile elements are
present in uneasy unity. This new emergentconsclousness is called
the Unhappy Consciousness.
'207. This Unhappy Consciousness essentially moves towards the
accomplished goal of Spirit, which involves the vision of one selfgcon ..
sciousness in another. For the Unhappy Consciousness, however, this
goal is remote and impliciu its two sides are always being forced
together in unity, only to fall painfully apart.
20B. The Unhappy Consciousness separates its unchangeableness
from its variability, and regards the former as exclusively essential,
the latter as wholly unessential. Being an unhappy, divided consciousness, it identifies itself with the unessential, changeable element, but

IV. THE TRUTH OF SELF-CERTAINTY, §§203-217

525

it cannot help having the unchangeable element as its true essence.
I t is therefore in the paradoxical position of having its true essence
outside of itself, and for ever trying to be what, from another point
of view, it essentially is.
209. The Unhappy Consciousness cannot unite itself with its unchangeable essence without importing changeableness into that
essence and so starting a fresh cycle of struggle and misery.
210. In this movement various identifications and separations of
unchangeable essence and variable non-essence occur, which suggest
the triune Persons of Christian theology. There is a consciousness,
suggestive of the infinitely transcendent Father, which rejects the variable non-essence from the unchangeable essence. There is also a consciousness, suggestive of the Son, which accepts something in the
realm of unessential variability as an embodiment, an outer shape
of the unchangeable essence. There is also a consciousness of the Spirit
as reconciling the eternal essence with the changeable non-essence
in a deeply joyful manner.
2] L These identifications and separations are for us part and
parcel ofthe unchangeable essence itself,which is notdirempted as the
Unhappy Consciousness sees it. But for the Unhappy Consciousness
itself they are merely appearances which it attributes to the unchangeable consciousness, and whic~ are all hopelessly beyond itself.
212""']3. For the Unhappy Consciousness, having thus turned' a
necessary relationship into a contingentcoincidence, forgets its own
relationto the Unchangeable, and only considers its relation to the
remote pastspecificationofthe eternal essence. It is with this remote
past specification (the historic Christ) that it must become united.
214. The unessential consciousness strives to unite itself to its
embodied Transcendent in threefold fashion: (a) asa pure consciousness; (b) as an individual with wants and work to perform; (c) as
conscious ofits being-for-self.
2 15. As r.egards (a) the embodied Transcendent seems to the pure
consciousness to be posited as it is for itself. But its transcendence
means that its present revelation is necessarily imperfect, and refers
a perfect revelation to the distant future.
216. The Unhappy Consciousness is itself the bridge between the
unchangeable and the changeable consciousness. But it does not as
yet see itself as such a bridge.
2. 17. I ts relation to the Unchangeable is therefore not one of
explicit thought [Denken] but of implicit thought or devotion [Andacht]. It thinks of its Unchangeable musically, or by way of clouds
ofincense, as a saving union of pure thought with individuality which
lies for ever beyond itself, and which it can only yearn towards. Its
feeling essence lies for ever outside the notional essence it adores, and

ANALYSIS

it can only lay hold of its unessential externals. Only the grave of the
divinity can be penetrated: the divinity itself eludes it. Only by giving
up the search for the ideal in the actual world (our non-Hegelian use
of 'actual') can it hope to find it.
2 I 8. The Unhappy Consciousness's relation to its embodied Transcendent appears further as its own self-feeling connected with its
desires and the work it performs. This desire and this work do not,
however, give its existence positive meaning, make it confident of
itself, enable it to enjoy the Transcendent. All that they bring to light
are the Unhappy Consciousness's infinite remoteness and separation
from its ideal.
219. What the Unhappy Consciousness works upon is given as ha ving two sides like the Consciousness itself. In one of them it belongs
to the Unchangeable, in another to the realm of variability.
2QO. For the Unhappy Consciousness its abilities are not really its
own, nothing whose exercise can give it personal satisfaction; all are
gratuitous gifts from the Unchangeable.
221. The activities of the Unhappy Oonsciousness ,are given as
being as much products of the Unchangeable's free grace as are the
passive re.actionsofthe things it works upon.
222. The Unhappy Consciousness only feels one with the Unchangeable when it adopts an attitude <:>fboundlessgratitudetowards
it. But even this attitude separates it from the Unchangeable, and
confirms iliD its unhappy distance.
223--4. Oonsciousnessmust, however, return to itselfout of its feeling and its work, and in this return it is conscious of itself as simply
nought and null in the sight of its Transcendent.
225. The Unhappy Consciousness affirms its nullity by discovering
'sin', alienation from the Unchangeable, in its most trivial activities,
and in brooding continually on its own sinfulness.
226. But in its sinfulness it is always necessarily directed to the Un~
changeable, and would not otherwise feel itself as sinful.
227. Its relation to the Unchangeable is therefore necessarily mediated for it by a third {priestly) consciousness which brings it into harmony with its ideal.
228. The Unhappy Oonsciousness surrenders all the fruits of its
personal work and enjoyment, and accepts the direction of this
mediating priestly consciousness in all things.
229. Only by the complete sacrifice of all decisions and understanding to this mediating consciousness can the UnhappyOonsciousness achieve union with the Unchangeable.
230. It is the absolving act of the intermediary consciousness that
must release the Unhappy Consciousness from its sinful schism, establish its oneness with the Unchangeable. This absolution still has a

V THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§218-233 527

tinge of unhappy externality but it is in principle a consciousness of
the universal, positive, rational mind overcoming and superseding the
alienated personal one. Implicitly, though not fully, it has now the
consciousness of being, in all its particularity, inherently and essenti~
ally absolute, of being all reality.
(Hegel's three exemplary states of Stoicism, Scepticism, and the
Unhappy Consciousness need not be given the philosophical or religious content that he gives them. One might~ for instance, illustrate
them by (a) the empty self-satisfaction of a mechanist who believes
that all organic and psychic action can be mechanistically explained,
without attempting to, show how this is possible; (b) the equally empty
self-satisfaction of a theoretical mechanist who also believes that it
will never be actually possible to give an adequate explanation of
organic and psychic action in mechanistic terms, or who thinks that
a non;mechanistic explanation is equally feasible; (c) the tormented
state of one who believes that a mechanistic explanation of life and
consciousness is possible but despairs of ever finding it, who always
dre,ams (Andacht) of an unattainable mechanistic explanation, who
always treats non-mechanistic explanations asa pis aller for mechan~
istic ones (Freud), and who drags in the priestly scientist to validate
his philosophical and moral opinions.)

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON
23 I. Consciousness in the experience of absolution has risen to the
realization that the individual consciousness is implicitly one with the
Absolute Essence which is, however, still placed essentially beyond
it&elf, In this realization self~consciousness has been projected into the
world of objects, into the realm of being, and it has also identified
itself with the universal. It has become the middle term in a syllogism
which reconciles the individual with the unchangeable universal, and
which thereby sees itself as all truth.
232. Hitherto (in Stoicism, etc.) consciousness has adopted a
purely negative attitude to the world and to its own actuality in it,
and has sought to save its pure essence from both. Now, as Reason
sure of itself, it tranquilly sees all reality, objective and subjective,
as no other than itself. I thas achieved the position of idealism. Having
done away with graves and abolished abolitions, it sees the world as
its own new actual world, as its own truth and presence, which it
wishes to see maintained in being and not vanish away.
233. Reason is consciousness's certainty of being all reality: this
is the essential Notion of idealism. For Reason, the Ego's object is
neitheremptily general nor one object among others: it is an Ego which

ANALYSIS

excludes anything taken as other than itself. It can, however, only
be all reality for and in itself, in so far as it shows itself to be such,
and this it'has done in the dialectical development from sense-certainty to the Unhappy Consciousness. Only in the light of this history,
this experience, is the liq uidation of other-being and the pure certainty of Reason intelligible. For the reasonable consciousness this certainty is a fact, but it is not an explicitly formulated or comprehended
fact.
234. An idealism which merely asserts this certainty (All the world
is my idea) without going through the relevant dialectical preparation
can neither explain nor understand itself. Its certainty always stands
over against other certainties that the dialectical journey abolishes.
The certainty of my rational ego always stands over against the certainty of something else existing alongside myself. The dialectical
preparation establishes idealism as the only truth, but only in a
general, abstract form which will have to be given concreteness. in
various actual sorts of confrontation.
235. The rational consciousness here considered is merely the category, i,e. the wholly general, formal certainty that what is, is for
thought, and wha tis forthough t, is;se1f:...consciousness and being are
given as being one and the same essence. It'isa mereconf'Usion when
another being-in-itself (the Kantian noumenon) is postulated as being
beyond being-for-thought. The categorial consciousness in question
must, however, be such as intrinsically to, specify itself ina number
of distinct categories, forming a complete system (as in the Logic): to
derive these categories fromanexternalsource, e.g. the forms ofjudgement, is a· disgrace to philosophy.
236. The categoriaLcertalnty in question not only specifies itself
in a system ofcategories bu t.also includes in itselfa pure or schematic
reference to individuals ; though individual things are no part of the
categoriaLframework, individual thinghood is part of it.
237. Consciousness essentially moves around among its various
moments, seeing the universal from the angle of the species and vice
versa. Consciousness is this perambulation and what it sees on this
course.
238-9. The first simple form of the idealistic consciousness is the
consciousness that all I deal with is mine, my own idea. Such an
empty appropriation leaves all detailed content to experience and
foreign intervention. It passes to and from its empty proclamation
of ownership to foreign material, and in fact oscillates like the consciousness of scepticism. It has no power to generate specific content
in and by itseJf, and thereby condemns itself to the perpetual phenomenalism of Kantianism. Such an Idealism is self~contradictory
because abstract. It says Reason is all reality but does not show it

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§234-246 529

concretely at work in the world: it req uires a further carrying out
to be a true idealism.
OBSERVING REASON

240. The consciousness for which what is, is its own, now turns to
sense-certainty, perception, etc., not to deal with something merely
other, but in the certainty of being that other. Formerly it happened
tonotice and experience much, now it actively determines what it shall
observe and experience. I t seeks in the world only its rational) con~
ceptual self, its own infinitude.
241. At first it merely divines its presence in the world, but proceeds
thereupon to take possession of its inheritance, to plant the ensign
of its sovereignty on every height and depth. There must be no dif~
ferentiation of the real in which it does not discover itself, and its idea
of itself must develop as it proceeds in such discovery.
242. The observant consciousness professes to be finding out the
essence of things, not of itself: while it is Reason, it does not dearly
know itself to be Reason. To do so it must plumb its own depths, see
itself as through and through conceptual, notional. I t can then, in
transformingthe sl!perfici::tl, sensuous being of things into Notions,
recognize itself in such Notions.
243,. Observation is concerned with Nature, with Spirit, and with
the relation between them. These three must be studied in turn.
OBSER VATION OF NATURE

244. The unthinking consciousness treats observation and experience as the source of truth, butJorgets that the object of observation
is as important as the mere act of seeing, hearing, etc., and that not
every perceived content counts as observed, e.g. that this penknife
is next to this snuff..,hox. What is observed must be more than a mere
particular: it must instantiate a universal. "
2t5. The universal of observation at first merely stays the same:
its movement is a mere recurrence of selfsameness. The Understanding must try to bt:jngdifference into this selfsameness through description, a procedure never short of material. But it encounters a Gheck
when it begins to wonder whether it is not describipg something
merely accidental, unworthy of description and lacking in generic
meaning.
246. Observation and description are now urged by an obscure 'instinct ofreason' to distinguish between the essential and the accidental
characters of objects, and to make of the former, not merely marks
through which we distinguish them, but marks through which they
distinguish themselves. This is successfully done in zoology, where
claws, teeth, etc. are the very organs through which specific being

53 0

ANALYSIS

is sustained, less successfully in botany, and still less successfully in
the case of inorganic substances, whose description changes in
changed circumstances.
247. The difficulties of border-line vagueness and confusion are endemic to the interrelations of species and threaten to reduce observation to unthinking description.
248. An instinct ofReason, however, drives the 0 bserving consciousness to look for a law governing the transitions between specific descriptions.
249. The observing consciousness sees such laws as sensuously
present in the particulars it observes, which would, however, make
them merely contingent and not genuine laws at all. A universal of
Reason will, however, retain its notional universality even if it descends into the being of sensuous thinghood. Those thinkers (e.g.
Fichte) are wrong, who make laws merely patterns to which things
ought to conform.
250. The observing consciousness does not take a law to be a universal of Reason, but sees in it something external and foreign. But
it denies this foreignness when it refuses,e.g., to identify gravitation
with the actual falling behaviour orall bodies} Itls content to observe
bodies falling in a large number of cases, and to infer analogically
that this must happen in others. What is inferred remains probable,
and never becomes an observed fact. It is only when falling is made
part of the Notion of a heavy body i~ its relation to the earth that
a law enters the field of the observable.
251. Since a law is a Notion implicit, an instinct of Reason seeks
to purify it into a Notion explicit. It sets up ex·periments which eliminate the irrelevant and highlight the essential. While seeming to sink
deeperintosensuous particularity, such experiments really cut off the
Notion from the latter. We soon arrive at free-standing 'matters' , e.g.
positive and negative electricity, which are neither bodies nor properties of bodies.
252. A 'matter', e.g. heat or calorie, is not an existent thing, but
. an existent universal or instance of notional being. An instinct of
Reason rightly draws us to such 'matters', since laws, being general
and non-sensuous, necessarily connect universals, things, not sensuous, though given in what js sensuous, and incorporeally present
in bodies.
253. The truth of the observable is accordingly something present
in sensuous being, but also free to move about in it, and in all change
preserving its notional simplicity. What is implicit in such a Notion
then renders itself explicit in a new sort of object, whose observation
constitutes a new sort of observation.
254. An object explicitly embodying the Notion's shifting sim-

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§247-262 53 1

plicity is an organic object. Such an object embodies an absolute fluidity in which all external relations vanish. Inorganic objects depend
on other objects to bring out and to complete what they are, and get
lost in their ramifying relations towards such objects. But organic
objects, despite their openness to external influence, are not essentially
related to what is external and in all relations preserVe their unity
and simplicity.
255. An instinct of Reason seeks to discover laws connecting
features in the organism with features in the inorganic environment,
thereby reducing the externality and contingency in which such
features stand to one another. Such laws do not, however, explain
the richness of organic being, and never pass beyond talk of 'great
influences' to exceptionless necessities. Their teleological explanations
remain external, and are therefore the very antithesis of laws.
256. The observing consciousness never goes beyond external
teleology to the true teleology of organic nature, which is Nature's
embodiment ofthe Notion. In true teleology we do not have one factor
passively produced by another, but a single nature realizing itself and
sustaining its own reality.
257. Teleological processes may seem to be provoked by indifferent, external circumstances, which therefore seem to have
explanatory priority. In reality, however, the circumstances make no
difference to the outcome, ofwhich the true ground is the End itself.
This End feels itself in the final satisfaction.
258. The relation of the teleological organism to external circumstance is analogous to the relation of self.·consciousness to external
reality. As the hungry animal assimilates its food, so self"'consciOllsness
understands external objectivity, and makes it its own. But since it
first does so instinctively, its satisfaction seems doubled: it is felt by
itself, but is also referred to a sort of blind understanding in the object.
259. An organism conceals the relation of its manifest actions to
their immanent aim, and so seems to have been constructed by an
outside intelligence. Just so Reason conceals the inner necessity of
its own proceedings, andJocates it in the objects that it is studying.
In both cases there is a distinction which is really no distinction: teleology is in the organism, and Reason in the thing studied.
260. The individual performances of an organism in furtherance
of its own maintenance and that of its species are not observed. to
have a necessary relation to these purposes, though they in fact
have it.
261. The self-differentiating unity oforganic teleology is not observationally, but notionally, grasped. 0 bserva tion therefore converts
it into the interplay of distinct factors which suits its thought-style.
262. The organism therefore appears to observation to have an in-

53 2

ANALYSIS

ner, teleological core and an outer, actual crust, the latter being the
expression of the former. The Notion here expires in a picture.
263. Neither inner purpose, nor outer expression, nor their unity
of essence, are more than formally distinct: we do not have a con:
nection between genuinely distinct terms. Observation recognizes this
in talking oCa mere expression.
264. Observational picture-thought must none the less externalize
its formal distinction of outer and inner.
265. Observation finds internal teleology in the unresting fluidity
of the soul, while its outer actuality is found in the quiescent, external
organism. It conceives of the relations between these two factors in
three basic organic properties, at once essences and patterns of interaction. These are the sensibility, irritability, and reproduction only
fully found among animals.
266. Sensibility is simply the organism's reference of all to itself,
its taking of all into its own fluidity, while irritability is its answering
reaction to what invades it, a reaction which affects what is external
as much as itself. Reproduction, finally, is the organism's main tenance
of its own pattern in the constant renewal of parts by the individual
and in the generation ofever new individuals. AU three functions stem
from the organism'S concern with itselfas its own sole End.
267. The ,outwardly actual form ofsensibility is the nervous system,
that of irritability the muscular system, that of reproduction the
viscera.
268. There are peculiar organic laws connecting our three functions, both as regards external structure and fluid, inner character.
The latter also has its external side.
269. The laws connecting the outer and inner aspects of the organism elude observation, not because the latter is short-sighted, but
because such laws lack all truth.
270. Sensibility is not a function confined to the nervous system
nor separable from reactivity or irritability. The latter is inseparable
from.sensibility, and both enter into organic self-maintenance or reproduction. Hence laws connecting such factors must be spurious.
27 I. Sensibility, etc. are qualitatively distinct aspects. Wh'en made
into the terms of an empirical law, they are credited with quantitative
differences, and are said to vary inversely or directly. It is as if one
made a law of the tautology that a hole increases as its filling
diminishes, or as more and more stuff is removed from it.
272. Such laws have nothing to do with sensibility and irritability,
but are mere cases of a logical truism.
273. Since reproduction is not opposed to either sensibility or irrit~
ability there is even less reason to look for a law connecting it with
either.

v.

THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§26g-28S 533

274. The laws in question are really tautologies, which have been
given a false appearance of actual existence. Their outward shapes
do not really differ from their inward presence.
275. Organic functions studied as observable existences obey no
governing laws, but range over every chance magnitude, e.g. the X's
greatly prefer this sort offood to that, they have this or that number
of offspring so many times a year, etc.
276. There are no clear relations between vague functions like sensibility, etc. and the structured systems revealed by anatomy, which
are much more numerous than the functions in question. Anatomy
reveals only dead structures, never their living use.
277. The various functions distinguished in organic being cannot
be regarded as distinct existents externally related. They are pervasive
aspects of one life-process.
278. There is therefore no place for laws in the treatment of organisms: they cannot be broken into separate determinations united by
bonds which determine each differently. Organic being is always dissolving all separate determinations.
279. When the Understanding discovers laws connecting existent
aspects of Nature, it is itself the connecting factor among those sides:
it does not as yet see them as' part of the object. But in the observation
of life the interconnection ofaspects is itself objective. We no longer
have the merely existent aspects between which a law could be found
to hold.
280. If we seek to consider organic existence in and for itself, it
loses all precise character, and becomes almost indefinitely variable.
The necessity of the Notion vanishes altogether.
281. The observational consciousness, while rising above mere
Understanding in its trealmen t oflife , always relapses into the manner
of the Understanding, treating aspects as fixed determinations, and
relating them quantitatively in what it would like to consider as laws.
282. The observational consciousness tries to rise above perceived,
sensuous differences by using germanized Latin names for potencies
and faculties, to which varying degrees are then attributed. It does
not thereby genuinely rise above the senses,
283. We have now to consider the organism's outer aspects.
284. The organism externalizes itself into structures essentially
"related to the inorganic environment-the object opposed to its beingfor-self-but in ways not capable of being brought under strict laws.
285. The actual organism is at once turned towards the being-initself of the object and also towards its own being-for-self. In the latter
respect it is free, self-determining, and indifferent to the definite
shapes it assumes: it is a stream which does not care what mills it
drives. This inner side of the actual organism can be expressed only

534

ANALYSIS

in the non-sensuous determinateness of number: sensuous qualities,
the life-style of the organism, are the outer aspect of such number.
286. The inner side of the actual organism has therefore itself an,
inner and an outer aspect, the former the restless variability of the
essentially abstract, the latter the non-sensuous determinateness of
number, in which all movement and relation to the sensuous have
been eliminated.
287. Such an abstract treatment of the organism, however, reduces
it to the inorganic, which has its essence outside of itself in the self..
conscious thinker. We must treat the organism in its own concrete
sphere.
288. Specific gravity is, in the concrete, the internal aspect of the inorganic thing, expressible in terms of numerical measures, revealed
by com paring observa tions, and underlying the thing's colour, hardness, and other sensuous properties.
289. Specific gravity is not, however, self-differentiating, and so
not involved in process except quantitatively. It is therefore only contingently connected with the multitude of properties that it underlies.
In this respect it falls short of cohesion, which involves differences of
stateandconseq uent transitions from one sta te to another. Cohesion,
however, only abstractly achievesself."differentiation in the imperfect
form of changes in specific gravity: degree of specific gravity is not
systematically connected with degree of cohesion.
290, The many other properties of inorganic bodies have nonecessary connection with their specific. gravity or cohesion, and can only
be classified in numerical terms, ie. unessentially. We cannot discover
general quantitative principles underlying the various types of property, whether severally or as a whole.
291. The relation of inner to outer is, however, quite different in
the case of organisms. In the inorganic what is internal is a definite
numerical measure, quite indifferent to sensuous manifestations, but
the organism contains a principle of sensuous differentiation within
itse1t~ Its internality takes the form of a natural genus or kind which
has the power to determine itselfin various alternative ways1 whereas
the internality of specific gravity has one definite property corresponding to each of its degrees.
292. The universality of the genus is inherently such as to reveal
itself in alternative individual ways. But between the universal and
the individual the determinate universal or species necessarily has its
place. When a process from the universal to the individual via the
species takes place we have a case of consciousness: in an inorganic
being it does not occur as a process but only as an outcome. In this
outcome the universal is represented by a series of numbers over which
the individual freely varies. Only ifan individual could transcend the

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TR UTH OF REASON, §§286-3 0 c} 535

limits of such individuality, could he achieve consciousness. (Being
conscious is only logically different from being a case of a species or
genus: in a case of consciousness universality moves through specificity
towards individuality, in unconscious individuality there is no
detached universality, and no movement towards individuality, only
the sort of fusion which might have been the outcome of such a movement.)
293. Generic universality, differentiated specificity, and individual
singularity are the three syllogistic terms which, by their inter. .
relations, explain organic and inorganic being. (Hegel's dynamic Platonism.)
294. The pure genus specifies itself into a set of sorts systematically
ordered by quantitative differences. But the individuation of these
species is determined in part by the universal individual, the Earth,
which contingently determines just where, and to what extent, particular species will be individually instantiated.
295. In the case of self-conscious man the specific forms of consciousness cons titu te an ordered line of development, a necessaryspiritual history. Organic nature has no such history: it falls straight from
pure universality into the brute singularity of existence.
296. Organic Nature only actualizes such of its specific forms as
. the individuality of Earth permits.
297. Observing Reason dealing with organic Nature can therefore
never rise above mere opinions, which at best predicate 'great influences', and never achieve the necessity of laws.
OBSERV A TION OF sELF-OONgCIO USNESS IN ITS PURITY AND IN
ITS

RELATION

TO

EXTERNAL

ACTUALITY:

LOGIOAL

AND

PSYCHOLOGICAL LAWS

298. The observation of inorganic Nature finds the Notion split
into a plurality of things which are nowhere bent back into simplicity
or unity. Organic Nature involves such a simplicity, which does not,
however, distinguish its moments clearly. Only in self.-consciousness
is singularity held apart from universality, yet absolutely held fast in
the latter.
299. The 'Laws of Thought' are the first discoveries of observa tiona I consciousness turned inward on itself. They are formal
expressions of the relations between aspects of the Notion. Being
formal, they are not set over against the content which would give
them truth and reality, but their form none the less includes an intrinsic reference to such content.
300. The 'Laws of Thought' are given to observational consciousness as a set of existent contents which it merely finds there. As so
conceived, they are not so much empty forms as unformed materials,

ANALYSIS

whose role in thought is not as yet determined. This role will be
studied in our speculative system.
301. The observational consciousness d?cs not closely connect the
'Laws of Thoughf with the action of consciousness of real materials.
I t therefore fails to identify the principles immanent in thinking with
the same principles used to overcome the otherness of the materials
thinking deals with.
302. The varying reactions of consciousness to what it sees as a
merely other, found reality are the theme of a new set of laws, those
of psychology. These laws concern the effort of consciousness to
accommodate' its individuality to the ways of objective things, but
also to accommodate objective things to its own needs and passions,
and thereby to sacrifice its detached universality. The former, 'cognitive' laws merely give reality the universality of consciousness,
whereas the latter, 'practical' laws show us reality modified to suit
the personal self, and that perhaps in a criminal or revolutionizing
manner.
gog. Observational psychology never gets past regarding mental
faculties, dispositions, etc. as a rag-bag ofdisconnecteciitems wonderfully churning about in a single container.
304. InJreatingall these items separately, or as united only in the
actual individual, it fails to notice the overarching universality of
Spirit. Its pronouncements regarding differences in intelligence,
propensities, etc., are for that reason even Jess valuable than
enumerations of the contingent differences of mosses, insects, etc.
g05. The laws looked for by observation involve some specific
individual, on the one hand, and the environing natural and social
circumstances, on the other, both of which are conceived as given
particulars.
306. But such an endeavour forgets that the individual, having the
universal in him, can freely take up different stances towards circumstances and influences, and that he reflects as if in an inner gallery
thesamegeneralarrayofcircumstances thatplay upon him in the world.
307. What the world is for the individ ual depends on his own active
or passive response to it. Hence no clear meaning can be given to
the psychological necessity that the world imposes on him.
30B. Since environing world and responding individual cannot be
neatly separated, there can be no laws connecting one with the other.
OBSERVATION OF TIiE RELATION OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS TO
ITS IMMEDIATE ACTUALITY: PHYSIOGNOMY AND
PliRENOLOGY

309. Since the environing worJd has been. made part of self-conscious individuality, observation must now make the latter its object.

V. THE CE"RTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§301-320 537
310. In such individuality the existent body is the individuality's
being-in-self, just as its activity is its being-for-self. The body cannot,
however, be merely external to the individual's activity, but must in
some manner express its determining character.
31 I. The law-governed relation of individuality to environment
has now been transferred into the expressive relation ofa man's bodily
shape to his consciousness and movement. We have now to elucidate
this 'expressive' relation.
312. An expression at once goes beyond what it expresses by fulfilling and completing it, but it also falls short of it, by lending itself
to distortion by circumstances, by an individual's clumsiness, or by
his inten tion to deceive. We must therefore look for some more reliable
sign of an individual's inwardness than the use of his bodily organs.
3 I 3. Such a sign must be neither an organ nor an action, but some
quiescent feature of bodily structure, arbitrarily and contingently
related to some inward individual peculiarity.
314. The would-be science of physiognomy wants to make such
a contingent relation into a law connecting inner with outer, and
claims in this to be superior to astrology and palmistry which merely
connect one externaLthing with another.
31\5. Palmistry can ,however, claim to use the hand, in which, after
the tongue, a man's individuality is above all manifest, as the in-itself
of a man, on which his fate and fortune depend.
316. Though the condition ora man's organs of speech, manipulation, etc. is in a sense external to his inward disposition, yet it is less
external than the actions its brings about, and is in fact the middle
term from which these follow as conclusions.
3 I 7. This middle term covers not only what is done by the organ
mainly involved, but by other expressive movements and stances
which reveal the individual's inwardness to himself and others.
3 18. Expressive movements differ from deeds, and can be used to
test the seriousness of the latter. But they too are contingently related
to the inwardness of which they are the sign, and can, like a mask,
be laid aside and replaced.
319. 'Observation identifies what is inner with a man's intentions
rather than his actions; the latter are fOT it the inessential expressions
oftheformer. It then looks for something observable which will correspond to these inward intentions.
320. Physiognomy does not differ in principle from the unscientific
gaugingofa man's character from the way he looks and acts. It makes
little difference that it speaks in terms of capacities and propensities,
and does not merely call someone a murderer ora thief. The individual's in exh a us tible na ture cannot be set forth in terms of such ca pacities and propensities.

53 8

ANALYSIS

321. The 'laws' which such a science enunciates are based on personal associations and opinions, like the housewife's 'law' that it
always rains when the washing is out to dry.
322. Whenever deeds conflict with physiognomic expressions, they
answer the questions raised by such expressions. What we do stamps
us as murderers, heroes, etc. Deeds can of course go awry or fail of
their purpose, but where they are on target, and persist uncorrected,
they are not mere signs but the thing itself.
323. Physiognomy improves psychology by substituting for the.
provocative environment the individual's own expressive movements.
Physiognomy must now be improved by substituting for such movements something fixed, thing-like, and immobile.
324. Since both inward and outward have their own being-in-self,
their relation to each other mllst now take the form of an external
causal action.
325. The inward conceived as self.. related, yet active in, and not
indifferent to, its outgoing manifestations, must have an actual
existent Qrgan, not merely instrumental, which is active in such manifestations.
326. The heart, the liver,etc. are frequently conceived as the active
centres and sourcesofcert~inmanifestations. They are not, however,
first sources, but rather half."way stations.
327. The brain and spinal cord (minus the nerves) represent the
organis.m's pure self-consciousness, not as such outgoing, but at rest
in itself, a fluid pool in which disturbances die away. The diversity
of bodily movements having their source in this consciousness must,
however, be represen ted inthis 6 uid pool, which must accordingly
he articulated into zones or regions.
328. In the head, the being-for-selfofthe organism appropriately
comes to a head, and that in two extreme forms, the caput vivens or
brain, and the ,caput mortuum or skull. The skull is the being-for-self
ofthe organism made in toa fixed, inert thing. The spinal cord merely
conducts action to and from the head, and there are other channels
for this as well.
329. Since brain and skull are both expressions of the organism's
being-for-self, there is necessarily an accommodation of the shape of
the one to thatoftheother, which we mayor may not like to conceive
in terms of ca usal action of either on the other, or beth on one another.
330. There is no intelligible connection between the strength or
weakness of spiritual faculties and the bulging or contracted size of
regions of the skull.
33 I. For observation the brain only counts as the existent form of
self.. conscious individuality, while the skull-bones count as its existence-for-another or as a mere thing.

V. THE CERTA1NTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§3 21 -342 539

332. The many-sidedness of Spirit necessarily expresses itself in a
geography of skull-regions of differing significance.
333. Skull~bones do not express mental states in the way changes
of countenance do, nor are they even signs of such mental states. They
reduce all reference to self to the purest immediacy.
334. Vaguely localized feelings in the head could possibly show
what skull-regions corresponded to what psychic tendencies, e.g. murderous, poetic, thieving, etc. Such diagnoses would, however, be quite
ambiguous and indefinite.
335. The propensities and capacities of the mind have to be pared
down to a few ossified differences to be arbitrarily correlated with
the bumps and hollows of the skull. In such correlations a collection
of mental dry bones is correlated with an equally dry physical collection.
336. Anything in a man's disposition can be correlated with a
bump or hollow on his skull, even, as in the case of a cuckold, with
a bump or hollow on someone else's skull. Such conceptions are pictorial, without genuine notional possibility.
337. If an individual does not behave as his bumps and hollows
suggest, one can always attribute such deviations to his e:x:ercise of
free will. Bumps and hollows are only thefoundation for empty possibilities. They never justify definite predictions.
338. Such subterfuges make the skull-bones a sign of everything
or nothing.
339. Self-consciousness cannot be made to depend on bone-formations,.since Kuch inert existences are everything of which self;..consciousness is the negation. A man might prove the absurdity of such
a reduction by simply smashiQg in someon.e's skull,
340. Observation finds it harder to see through such' a gross
absurdity as mind-skull identity as to see through much less flagrant
abs.urdities. But the limit of the absurd is here reached, and Reason
must do an about-turn in the 9pposite direction.
341. Retracing our path, we see how we moved from observing
inorganic Nature to postulating non~sensible laws behind it: this pure
universality, conflated with existent, sensible objectivity, became a
new object, the organism. SU<.:h existent, sensible objectivity could
not, however, be a true expression of such universality, which accordingly became a detached, purposive universality, Le. self-consciousness as an observed object.
342. Self-consciousness as an observed object at first specified itself
in the 'Laws of Thought' , treated as existent contingencies. These differentiations) fused into a unit, became the individual self-consciousness, which necessarily contained and related an outward-turned
aspect of will and action to an inward-turned self-conscious aspect,

ANALYSIS

540

of which it was the sign. These two aspects were externally and contingently related.
343. Recognizing the relation ofinner and outer to be contingent,
observation ceased to look for an organ, a symbol of Spirit, and pinned
down its external immediacy in a dead Thing. The reality of Spirit
was thereby made into a thing, and inert being given the significance
of Spirit. To treat Spirit as a merely existent, objective thing is certainly to make it into something like a bone.
344. This result had a twofold sense. On the one hand it completed
the previous self-extrusion of self-consciousness which we saw in the
Unhappy Consciousness, its self-projection into a mere object, which,
though embodying a categoriaI unity stemming from its own conscious selfuood, was seen as having a rationality that self-consciousness
could have rather than he. Such merely had rationality was typical of
the observer: he saw his Reason out there in the Thing. Such selfprojection of Reason could.not, however, be sustained. Self-consciousness necessarily fehits gaze reverting from the rationalized object to
its own rational activity. (In this difficult paragraph the orderinguniversalitywhich can lead a detached life as the self;,consdous Ego is seen
stretching out towards a specifiei ty and individuality which seemS to lie
beyond itself,andinrelation to which it'appearsas a set of objective
categories. From this self-separation it comes to the realization that
this ord eringuniversality , ca tegoriali y projec ted intoobj ects, is the same
as the ordering universality at work in its own conscious efforts;)
345. On the other hand, our outcome is simply the identification
of seW-consciousness with a sensible, objective thing. Self.;.consciousness only hecomes real in a bone. (Self-consciousness, in other words,
despite its systematic elusiveness, ml.Jst have a foothold somewhere
in the crust of material thinghood.)
346. What emerges from the observational experience is that the
pure universality of the Notion is the ordering principle of the Thing,
that thinghood and Notion are the same. This cannot be understood
as long as we treat Notion and Thing as independent, self;.subslstent
realities, and do not see the former as self-dirempted in the latter,
and so constituting an infinite judgement. ('The Notion is no Thing'
is an infinite j udgemen t which, in opposingNotion to Thing, makes
their whole being consist in their mutual relevance.) As long as we
look on them as sundered, their opposition remains gross and crass:
it is like the union of urination and orgasm in a single organ.
THE

ACTUALIZATION

OF

RATIONAL

SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

THROUGH ITS OWN ACTIVlTY

347. The true significance of self-consciousness's self-recogni tion In
the external, observed thing, is its self-recognition in another self-cl,bn-

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§343-357 541

sciousness, which, though a duplicate of itself, has the surface
separateness from itself characteristic of a thing 'out there'.
348. Observational Reason ca tegorized the observed thing in ways
corresponding to its own development from sense~certainty, through
perception, to Understanding. It went, that is, from description
through classification to lawlike explanation. Reason must now reca~
pitulate its further developmen t from individualistic self~assertion and
conflict to the ethical self~c<;>nsciousness which unites all self~cong
sciousnesses. (This recapitulation. is to take place within the social
medium on1y implicit in Master and SJave etc., and remote and alien
in the Roman and medieval worlds.)
349. The stage of self."consciousness towards which we are now
moving is, essentially ethical, governed by unwritten laws and social
customs, a framework within which the individual lives and moves,
and from which he does not think to disassociate himself.
350. The members of an organized social whole not only resemble
the differentiated modes of a single substance; they are also more
or less conscious of their common membership, of the sacrifice of their
indiviclllal, toa generic identity.
35!. Theindividual.incul organized social whole works for himself
in ways pr~ctised and sanctioned by all, and performedJor others
as much as for himself. His most independent efi'ortsare sanctioned
and approved for all, and entail a thoroughgoing reciprocity in his
Tela tion to others.
352. The cu~.toms of an organized society have both the opacity
of external thinghoodt:!.nd the transparent self-identity of self~cong
sciollsness. O.nerealizes oneself mQst perfectly by being the perfect
embocUmeJ)t of on,e's commtmity's social norms.
353. To live as a mere individual in an organized social whole is
not, however, to he explicitly conscious of one's identity with it. One
may either have forgotten it in a mere taking for granted, or may
not as yet have fully acbieved it.
354. The immediacyofethicallife is riot critical ofestablished laws
and customs. Much less do.es it.consciously alignitselfwith them, and
assert their absolute standing.
355. When sdf-consciousindividuality arises, the bond of trust
which 1in~s it with the .. social unity is destroyed. The individual
opposes himself to social laws and customs.
356. The self.. conscious individual, withdrawing from the social
medium, seeks to make his own Jl?ark in the world through his practical efforts. He seeks to fulfil himself, to achieve personal happiness.
357. The fulfilment which the individual at this stage pursues is
the fulfilment of his own immediate will and natural impulses, not
the welfare of society. This individua1istic pursuit of satisfaction may

54~

ANALYSIS

either precede or follow the full development of the ethical consciousness. In the former case, crude impulses are subordinated to the ethicaltife of custom, in the latter case there is a conscious abandonment
of the life of mere impulse, and an advance to the acceptance of an
ethic made to fit the individual's own inward sense of morality. Since
the individualism most rampant in our own day is of the latter sort,
it is this that we shall now consider.
358. Self-consciousness, which has risen to the Notion of Spirit,
now seeks to realize itself in an individual's mind or person.
359. Self-consciousness, pledged to individual self-realization,
necessarily negates the self-realization of other individuals, and seeks
to impose on all the negation ofaH ends but its own. This universally
imposed self-realization assume~ three forms : the undisciplined pursuit of pleasure, the undisciplined law of the heart, and the more disciplined cult of virtue. These lead ultimate1y to the one-pointed self..
dedication to the matter or task on hand.
PLEASURE AND NEOESSITY

360. Self-consciousness sees the existent, objective thing that confronts·it·as implicitly itself. It seeks tomakewhatis implicit explicit,
and to reshape the objective thing to <satisfy its individual self. All
thehigherintellectual and ethical ends of the community are spurned
and set aside.
36 I. I t expresses its individuality in il1Jmediate, active living, cullingclelights where it finds them, rather than creating them for itself.
I t makes no use of laws and general principles.
362. It does not seek to transform existence practically, but to
savour its surface. Its enjoyment centres principally on another selfconsciousness, anembodimentofrational categories and laws, which
it does not, however, treat as such, but as made for its own gratification, thereby destroying tp.e other's rationality.
363. Pleasure taken in another's person for one's own gratification
is essentially self-destroying. TheTational categories essential to personalityare bypassed,and there 1S therefore nothing to hold one to
an individual object. There is therefore, a blind necessity driving one
on to seek ever new objects in unending self-frustration. This necessity
is nothing but the expression of the sheeremptin~ss of what is merely
individual.
364. The pursuit of one's own satisfaction therefore passes over
frpmsheer individualism to an absolute universalism'in which aU individuality is shattered.
365. What is now pursued by the individual assumes the form of
a necessity, a law, which he cannotunderstand, but to which he must
unconditionally submit.

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§358-377 543

366. To surrender to a law is, however, to remove its alien character. It will become the individuals' own law.
THE LAW OF THE HEART AND THE FRENZY OF SELF-CONCEIT

367. The individual's satisfaction seen in the form of a law becomes
the law of the individual's own heart.
368. The individual must see whether his true essence lies in such
a law of the heart.
369. The law of the heart necessarily opposes itself to the law of
this world, under which the individual and humanity live oppressed.
To the individual the positive, worldly law is something actual and
found, whereas we phenomenologists see it as the shadow cast by the
law of the heart.
370. The heart-ruled individual necessarily sees his undisciplined
personal dictates as pleasing to all, and himself as noble in carrying
them out.
S7 I. Oppressed humanity does notseem to the heart-ruled individual to be aware of its oppression by this,"world ordinances, or of its
nQbility in trall:~gressing them. This d~ference to external authority
mgst b~ brokef:l:90wn. It is merely accidental if authority and the
heart agree.
372. To tbe extent that the law of the heart becomes an actual
oq:linance" thehearbruled individual must cease to find satisfaction
in it. It is no longer the Jaw of his heart, but something alien and
actual, against which his heart must rehel. ToJulfil the heart's law
is therefore also to frustrate it.
373. Whatever the individual chooses to do will, through such
choice, conform to the law of his heart. But not every individuafs
heart will concur with the chosen course; Other individuals will condemn what a man's heart dictates, and will therefore become horrible
in his sigh t.
374. The individual who erects the dictates of his heart into aJaw
for aU Gomes tQseethat the actual law fQr aU is not alien and dead,
but a genuine law for all hearts, even though the individual failed
to realize this.
375. The heart-rYled individual therefore becomes a living contradiction, and re(;Qgnizes as a universaUy,valid order one that he,
as an individual, (loes not wish to recognize.
376. To be thus torn between the recognition of a universally
in~tituted, and a personally chosen law,Ls to be -self-alienated or insane.
377. The heart thus torn madly fulminates against the priests and
d~spots who have imposed their alien laws on humanity. But since

544

ANALYSIS

it itself wishes to be just such a priest and despot, it comes to see itself
as being as perverse and perverting as these are.
378. It comes to see that a universal law is itself perverted if it is
merely seen as a law of all hearts, as satisfying everyone's selfish individuality.
379. A law for all hearts necessarily becomes a law that all individuals fight over, a way of the world that never achieves a stable,
agreed form.
.
380. But to such a fluctuating way the ideal of a fixed, agreed way
of life necessarily opposes itself: the ideal of virtue as opposed to the
way of this wo~ld.
VIRTUE AND THE WA Y OF THE WORLD

381. Both virtue and the way of the world involve a compromise
between disinterested universality and individuality. Only, jn virtue,
individuality sacrifices itself to standards that it has itself set up,
whereas, in the way of the' world, disinterested universality is realized
through the interaction and attrition of individuals.
382. The way of the world is the disinterested order which arises
out of the interested actions of countless individuals. Though condemned from the emptily universal standpoint of virtue, it is really
what virtue seeks to compass. It is not, however, a blind drift, but
one that consciousness can understand and accept, even though
it springs from the mad self;.assertion ofindividuals. (Hegel extends
the principles of laissez-faire economics to all human andsodal
action.)
38g. Virtue, however, attempts to reverse the way of the world,
and to arrive at a disinterested order through individual effort.
384. Virtue makes its direct aim, what the way of the world
achieves by indirection. The aim. of virtue is a poor abstraction from
what is actually achieved by the way of the world.
385. From the standpoint of virtue there are gifts and powers, of
whkh there is a right and noble use, but which are abused and perverted by the wayoflhe world.
386. But these gifts and powers are precisely the substantive content to which virtue and ,vice add an insubstantial nuance of difference. One cannot transform the vicious into the virtuous without
damaging such content. Hence the whole fight between virtue and
vice becomes a mock combat.
387. The way of the world, having no sacred cause to defend,
always achieves great richness of content, while virtue, with its special
preferences, remains always in jeopardy.
388. Virtue cannot overcome the way of the world by making a

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§378-396 545

cunning use of the latent good in it. For the way of the world vigilantly
fences off such interference. This latent good is either something
that virtue dare not interfere with, or is as lacking in reality as are
the gifts and powers that can be used in its service. It is no more
than an imagined higher consciousness behind the actual natures of
men.
389. Virtue is overcome by the way of the world, since virtue aims
absurdly at abolishing the individuality which is the very principle
of actuali ty. The ideal of disin teres ted virtue is ei ther an empty word,
or it must achieve actuality by accepting actual men and their interests.
390. Virtue, therefore, as 0pposed to the way of the world, is an
emptily rhetorical, unconstructive form of edification, which may
minister to men's vanity, but is ultimately boring. It is not like the
virtue of antiq uity which accepted ethical existence, and only sought
to improve it.
39'J. When boredom sets in, men drop an ideal of virtue which
uproots the individuality and interest essential to practical realization.
392. The way of the world is by the same movement brought to
vanish. Self-interest ishetter than it thinks it is: in realizing itself,
it realizes Ends that are universal.
393. The universaL End of.self-conscious life cannot be separated
from the private, personal acts and ends of individuals.

INPIVIDUALITY WHICH TAJ(ES ITSELF TO BE REAL IN AND FOR
ITSELF

394. Self..consciousness has now ceased to oppose universal gifts
and powers to the individual employment of them. It is subjectively
certainof itselfin and through its individual acts, which are its obJective truth: alternatively, its acts provide the subjective certainty of
which its aims are the objective truth. It has become, in active form,
the categorial consciousness of Kantianism, in which consciousness
ofse1famounts to consciousness oflaw..governed objectivity, and vice
versa.
395. Self-consciousness no longer observes an apparently independent reality nor takes up practical attitudes towards it. This reality
and its responses toit are transparently distinguished in its own practical activity, which is the genus under which its actions fall.
396. All that seW·consciousness now aims at is to display itself in
the daylight of actual existence; turning an act merely intended into
one actually performed.

ANALYSIS
~HE

SPIRITUAL ANIMAL KINGDOM AND DECEIT, OR
THE 'MATTER IN .HAND~ ITSELF

397. Real individuality is at first definite and simple, but with no
specific content to differentiate its universality. It is the pure thought
of a category~ rather than its actual application.
398. Such real individuality involves an original given nature with
definite qualitative limitations, which do not, however, limit the free
action of consciousness.
399. All that the individual does springs from this original given
nature, which it would not wish to transgress. But its negativity is
not a passive being thus and thus and nothing else, but an active imposition of its whole character on what lies arOl,md it.
400. Action involves a subjective object or end, opposed to what
is given as actual, then an instrumental transition in which the end
achieves the full form of reality, and lastly a realized end which exists
apart from the subject and his ends. In such action, the end, the original nature, the original situation, the means, the transition, and the
resultant reality, are all only moments in a transparent identity.
4QL Original nature, whether considered as special aptitude,
talent, or character, is thefirstaspectofalLaction. This original nature
is as much reflected in the external situation, which seems to evoke
and shape a man's . aims, as in those aims themselves. It is, moreover,
only in action, in given circumstances, that consciousness becomes
aware of its aims: its aims, as formed in thought, are merely movements towards action, and only become fully definite in action. The
circumstances which evoke action, and the means used in it, are likewise parts of action, and the individual's inner nature is also a sort
of means to it. None of the features distinguishable in action is really
independent: all count as moments in a single conscious performance.
402. The universal character of a man's active nature can, however, be distinguished from a single, specific performance, and can
be compared in respect of such characters as inventiveness, persistence~ range, etc.
.,
403~4. A man~s actions cannot be judged as good or bad except
in a wqolly external, comparative manner. Whatever a man does,
corresponds to his active nature, and is to that extent neither good nor
bad, and neither to be admired nor lamented.
405. The productofa man's action makes explicit what lay in the
man's nature, and makes this explicit fo.r the universal consciousness.
In this product circumstances, aims, means, procedures are aU dissolved, and have become part of an actuality foreign to the agent,
and open to all individuals. But it represents what is transitory, rather
than what is permanent, in the individual concerned in it.

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§397-4 1 5 547

406. Consciousness in such work experiences the gulf between
doing and being. Being precedes doing as the original nature behind
action, and being succeeds doing as the work which results from
action. It is in its work that consciousness achieves full reality, and
gets rid of its emptiness.
407. The elements involved in work--original nature, aim, performance, and result~will, however, at times fall apart, thus contradicting their essential unity. The aim may not express the original
nature, nor issue in an appropriate performance, nor yield the desired
result.
408. This element of contingent failure in work is itself contingent.
The different aspects of action hang together in their Notion, even
if they at times fall apart in reality.
409. When a work vanishes, its contingent success or failure also
vanishes. What persists in self-consciousness is the attempted performance in which doing and being, intention and execution, are united.
It is irrelevant that reality sometimes fails to fulfil a work's intention.
When a work is conceived as indifferent to contingent failure it
becomes a task as such or 'matter in hand' itself.
410. The 'matter in hand' is the unit, the 'thing', of practical life.
It combines aim with execution, circumstances and means with result.
In it self'7consciousness becomes real in a single p~rformance,
411. The 'matter in hand' unites subjective individuality with
objectivity, and puts self-consciousness before itself in the role of a
substance. The 'matter in hand' has end, means, procedure and result
as its dependent modes or moments: it is the genus which they all
specify. But it remains abstra<::tively universal, rather than truly a subject, since it do~s not generate such dependent moments.
.
412. Honesty of consciousness demands that the 'matter in hand'
should expre&s the agent's best ende~vours, no matter what the circumstances or outcome may be. Whatever happens, he will have
coped well with the 'matter in hand'.
413. If the agent has not realized his aim, he has at least tried to
reali~e it, ~nd in so doing has dealt effectively with the !matter in
hang'. He has dealt with it, eve;fl ifothers bring his work to nought,
or ifhe can in fact do nothing about things. He has dealt with it even
if he has merely approved of something, or taken an interest in it.
414. These emphases on the hopest coping with the 'matter in
hand' shift their ground from case to case. Sometimes a mere aim
suffices, sometimes an act which fails of effect. All attempt to turn
an ineffective or bad performance into one that is successful.
415. The honest agent i's not as honest as he seems. Being concerned only with his own performance, or with some 'matter in hand', or
with some reality, he is not really in earnest about achieving something.

ANALYSIS

416. The honest performer necessarily moves towards being a
deceiver. For what others see him doing never fully embodies what
he means to do, and so admits of differing interpretations, from which
he may derive advantage.
417. A man appears in his actions to be disinterestedly realizing
some 'matter in hand', but may disappoint others by showing that
he only cares for this task if done by himself and not by them. Such
disappointment, however, shows their own concern to be with their
own performance and not with the 'matter in hand'. And if they magnanimously leave each man to do his own tasks, they still interfere
with these through comments and criticisms. They care, not for the
'matter in hand', but for their own pronouncements upon it. And
those who say that they care nothing for what others do or say, contradict this by submitting their work to the daylight of publicity.
41 B. A 'task in hand' is essentially such that all feel themselves
entitled to share in it, and to make it their own, whether directly or
indirectly. Its being a 'matter in hand' does not mean that it is not
interesting to individuals : it is disinterestedly pursued only because
it is interesting to everyone. The 'matter in hand' therefore becomes
the category or ca,tegorical impera.tive, the sort of being demanded
by self-consciousness. (Hegel here shows how the practical egoism,
in which a man undertakes something to give himself something to
do, necessarily expands into universal moral egoism, where the task
is set by Everyman for Everyman.)
REASON AS LAWGIVER

4 I 9. Self-consciousness has now ceased to be the consciousness of
a particular individual, and has become a consciousness shared by
all individuals, and conceived by all as thus shared. Being thus categorial, it'is at once the form and the matter of self~consci()usness.
420. SeW-consciousness now identifies itselfwith the absolute 'matter in hand', the task which is of self-consciousness's essence, and
wh.ich it neither can nor will question. This task is theabsol ute ethical
taskor substance, and its consciousness the/ethical consciousness .. But
it differentiates itself into a number of distinct tasks or prescriptions.
421. Nojustification can be given or sought for these absolute ethical imperatives, the pure deliverances of self-consciousness.
422. The imperatives inq uestion are immediately given as the deliverances of sound reason, and such soundness must he immediately
and unquestioningly accepted.
423. But just as the immediate deliverances of sense-certai~ty
become articulate in perception, so the deliverances of moral sense
become articulate in various well-known precepts.
424. 'Everyone ought to speak the truth.' This rule has to be quali~

V. THE CERTAINTY AND TRUTH OF REASON, §§4 1 6-436 549

fiedin many ways, e.g. ifhe believes or knows it to be true. An imperative so qualified loses all definite force.
425. 'Love thy neighbour as thyself.' This rule says, if it says anything, that we should try to do what is for the good of others, a Notion
a t once involved in immense obscurity.
426. It becomes clear that the most we can demand of an ethical
precept is not that it should have definite content, but that it should
be free from internal contradiction.
427. All that the ethical consciousness can therefore prescribe, as
our task itself, is that we should do whatever we usually do.
428. All that it can warn us against is self-contradiction in ethical
use and wont. It therefore becomes only the critic of existing or proposed ethical laws.
REASON AS TESTING LAWS

429. Self-consciousness now applies to ethical precepts the sort of
criticism which we as phenomenologists applied to them. But these
precepts are no longer taken to be the authoritative deliverances of
self-consciousness, and they are only critici2:ed in regard to self-consistency.
430. Such criticism is, however, nugatory,.since.any and every COlltent can be made formally self",consistent, e.g. neither the institution
nor the non-institution of private property need he formally inconsistent.And both.involve conflicts when we descend to the level
ohpecific fulings, e.g. that each should recdve as much as he needs.
43 I. Private property and communism are alike free from contradiction if treated as simple abstractions: in the cqncrete both involve infinite contradictions. It is ridiculous to think that the mere
absence of contradiction, so useless in theory, could provide guidance
in practice.
432. Precepts and criticis.ms of precepts are alike vanishing
moments in the ethical consciousness, whose substantial content they
never succeed in providing.
433. These moments enter into 0llr consc:iousness of the ethical
task, and are aspects of the honest endeavour to gain clarity and insight into what we should dQ.
434. But there is in fact no validity in the definite laws they prescribe nor in their arbitrary criticisms of the same.
435. Tbe spiritual essence or substance of a l.ivingcommunity gives
alltl'le validity that can be given to such one-sided precepts and criti.
cisms.
436. Ethical law is implicit in communal living. It is not grounded
on arbitrary individual decrees, which can simply be disregarded. It
is what all men in the community accept as their standard, and that

55 0

ANALYSIS

without question, and what they do not in any way see as foreign
or alien.
437. True ethicallaw is the unwritten, inerrant, unalterable divine
law spoken of in the Antigone. It is not anything that an individual
can hope either to criticize or to justify, and certainly not in terms
of mere self-consistency.

VI. SPIRIT

438. Reason becomes Spirit when it achieves the full consciousness
of itself as being all reality. In the previous stage of Observing Reason
it merely found itselfin an existent object. From this it rose to a stage
in which it no longer .passively perceived itself in an object, but
imposed itself more actively on the world, a stage as one-sided as the
previous one. Finally, it rose to an as yet abstract identification of
itself with reality in the vocational dedication of itself to the 'task
itself', or in the arbitrary institution of moral canons, or in the personal pronouncement upon such canons.
439. The essence of Spirit has already been recognized as the ethical substance, the customs and laws of a society. Spitit,however, is
the ethical actuality which, when it confronts itself in objective social
form, has lost all sense of strangeness in what it has before it. The
ethical substance ef custom and law is the foundation and source -of
everyone's action and the aim towards which it tends :it is the COmmon work which men's co-operative efforts seek to bring about. The
ethical substance is as it were the infiniteself.dispensing benevolence
on which every individual draws, Ids of the essence of this substance
to come to life in distinct individuals and to act through and in them.
440. Spirit is the absolutely real being of which all previous forms
ofconsciousness have represented falsely isolated abstractions, which
the dialectical development has shown them to be. In the previous
stages ofobservational and active Reason, Spirit has rather had Reason
than been Reason: it has imposed itself as a category on material not
intrinsically categorized. When Spirit sees itself and its world as being
Reason it becomes ethical substance actualized.
441. Spirit in its immediacy is theethicallifeofa people, ofindividuality at one with a social world. But it must advance to the full
consciousness of what it immediately is through many complex stages,
stages realized in a total social world and not merely in a separate
individual consciousness.
442-3. The living ethical world is Spirit in its truth, its abstract
seW.knowledge being the formal generality of law. But it dirempts
itselfon the one hand into the hard reality of a world of culture, and

VI. SPIRIT, §§437-449

55 1

on the other hand into the inner reali ty of a world of fai th and ins1gh t.
The conflict between these two modes of experience is resolved in
Spirit-sure-of-itself, i.e. in morality. Out of all these attitudes the
actual self-consciousness of absolute Spirit will make its appearance.
THE TRUE SPIRIT. THE ETHICAL ORDER

444. Spirit is a consciousness which intrinsically separates its
moments, whether in its substance or in its consciousness. In its con~
sciousness the individual moral act and the accomplished work are
separated from the general moral substance or essence: the term
which serves as middle term between them is the individual conscious
agent.
445. The ethical substance, i.e. the system of laws and customs,
itself reflects the distinction between the individual action or agent,
on the one hand, and the moral substance or essence, on the other.
It splits up in.to a human and a divine law. The individual harried
by these contradictory laws both knows and does not know the wrongness of his acts, and is tragically destroyed in the conflict. Through
such tragic instances, individuals learn to advance beyond blind
obedience to law and custom. They achieve the ability to make can ..
scientious decisions to obey or disobey.
TBE ETHICAL WORLD

446. Spirit is essentially se1f-diremptive, But just as bare being
dirempts itselfinto the Thing with its many properties, so the ethical
life dirempts itselfinto a web of ethical relations. And just as the many
properties of the Thing concentrate themselves into the contrast
between individuality and universality, so too do ethical laws resolve
themselves into individual and universal laws.
447. The ethical substance,as individual reality, is the com·
monalty which realizes itse1fin a plurality of existent consciousnesses
in an of which it is consciously reflected, but which also underlies them
as substance and contains them in itself. As actual substance it is
a people, as actual consciousness the citizens of that people. Such a
people is not anything unreal: it exists and prevails.
448. This Spirit can be called the human law since itisa completely
self-conscious actuality. I tis pres~nt as the known law and as the pre~
vailing custom. I t shows itself in the assurance of individuals generany, and of the government in particular. It has a daylightswaYl and
lets individuals go freely about their business.
449. The ethical substance reveals itse1fl however, in another law,
the Divine Law, which springs from the immediate l simple essence
of the ethical, and is opposed to the fully conscious dimension of
action, and extends down to the inner essence of individuals.

55 2

ANALYSIS

450. The Divine Law has its own self-consciousness, the immediate
consciousness of self-in-other, in a natural ethical community, the
Family. The Family is that elementary, unconscious ethical being
which is opposed to, and yet is also presupposed by, the conscious
ethical being of the people and their devotion to common ends.
451. In the Family natural relations carry universal ethical meanings. The individual in the Family is primarily related to the Family
as a whole, and not by ties of love and sentiment to its particular
members. The Family, further, is not concerned to promote the wellbeing of its individual members, nor to offer them protection. It is
concerned with individuality raised out of the unrest and change of
life into the universality of death, i.e. the Family exists to promote
the cult of the dead.
452. The individuality by dying achieves peace and universality
through a merely natural process. As regards its timing it is only accidentally connected with the services he performs to the community,
even though dying is in a sense the supreme service to the community
that a man can perform., in furnishing the Family with its ancestral
pantheon, its household Lares. In order, however, that the individual's taking up into universality may be effective, it must be helped
out by a conscious act on the part of the Family members. This act
may indifferently be regarded as the saving of the deceased individual
from destruction, or as the conscious effecting of that destruction, so
that the individual becomes a thi,ngof the past, a universal meaning.
The FamUy resists the corruption of worms and of chemical agencies
by substituting their own conscious work in its place, by'consigning
the dead indiviqualsolemnly to the imperishable elementary individual, the earth. It thereby also makes the dead person an imperishable
presiding part of the Family.
453. All living relations to the individual Family members, while
yetin the realm of actuality , are mattersofthe human law. The Divine
Law only concerns individuals no longer actual who have become
universal meanings still efficacious in a people's and a Family's life.
454. Therearein bothJaws differences and gradations. In discussing these we shall see them in active operation, enjoying their own
self-consciousness and also interacting with one another.
455. The human law has its Iivingseat in the government in which
it alto assumes individual form. The government is the actual Spirit
which reflects on itself, and is the self of the whole ethical substance.
It may accord a limited independence to the families under its sway,
but is always ready to subordinate them to the whole. It may likewise
accord a limited independence to individuals promoting their own
gain and enjoyment, but it has to prevent such individua1 interests
from becoming overriding. From time to time it must foster wars to

553

prevent individual life from becoming a mere case of natural being,
and ceasing to serve the freedom and power of the social whole. The
daylight, human law, however, always bases its authority on the
deeper authority of the subterranean Divine Law.
456. The Divine Law governs three different family-relationships,
that of husband to wife, of parents to children, and of siblings to one
another. The husband~wife relation is a case of immediate selfrecognition in another consciousness which has also a mainly natural
character: its reality lies outside of itself, in the children, in which.
it passes away.
457. A relationship unmixed with transience or inequality of status
is that of brother and sister. In them identity of blood has come to
tranquillity and equilibrium. As sister, a woman has the highest intimations of ethical essence, not yet brought out into actuality or full
consciousness: she manifests internal feeling and the divinity that is
raised above the actual. As daughter, a woman must see her parents
pass away with resigned tenderness,as mother and wife there is some"
thing natural and replaceable about her, and her unequal relation
to her husband, in which she has duties where he mainly has
pleasures,means thatshe cannot fully be aware of herself in another.
In brother and sister there are none of the inequalities due to desire
nor any possibility ofreplacement: the loss of a brother is irreparable
to a sister , and her duty to him is the highest.
458. The brother represents the family-spirit at its most individ1;lal
and therefore turned outwards towards a wider universality. The
brother leaves the immediate, elemental, negative ethical life of the
Family to achieve a self-conscious, actual ethical life.
459. The brother passes from the suzerainty of the ,divine to that
ofthe human law; thesisterorwife remains the guardian ofthe Divine
Law. They have each a different natural vocation,a sequel of the
vocation considered above in .the ~task itselC, a vocation which has
its outer expression in the distinction of sex.
460. The humaQ and ethical orders require one allother. The
human law has its roots in the divine order, whereas the Divine Law
is only actual in the daylight realm of existence and activity.
461. The ,ethical system in its two branches fulfils all the imperfect
categories that haye led up to it. It is rational in that it unites selfconsciousness and objectivity. It observes itself in the customs which
surround it. It has pleasure in the family life and necessity in the wider
social order. It has the law of the heart at its root which is also the
law of all hearts. It exhibits virtue and the devotion to the 'task itself'.
I t provides the criterion by which all detailed projects and acts are
tested.
462 . The ethical whole is a tranquil equilibrium of parts in which

554

ANALYSIS

each finds its satisfaction in this equilibrium with the whole. Justice
is the agency which restores this equilibrium whenever it is disturbed
by individuals or classes. The communal spirit avenges itself on
wrongs done to its members, wrongs which have the mechanical
character of the merely natural, by equally natural expedients of
revenge.
463. Universal self"conscious Spirit is chiefly manifest in the man,
unconscious individualized Spirit in the woman: both serve as middle
terms in what amounts to the same syllogism uniting the divine with
the human law.
ETHICAL ACTION

464. In the opposition of the two laws we have not yet considered
the role of the individual and his deed. It is the individual's deed
which brings the two laws into conflict. A dreadful fate {Schicksal)
here enters the scene and makes action come out on one side or the
other.
465. The individual's self.,.alignment with one law does not, however, involve internal debate and arbitrary choice, only immediate,
unhesitant,dutifulself..commitroent. There is no quarrel ofduty with
passion, much le$sany ridiculous seeming conflict of duty with duty.
I t is one's sex, Hegel suggests, which decides which law one wiHobey.
46.6. In self.. consciousness the two laws are explicit, not merely
implicit as in ordinary ethical life. The individual's' character commits
him to one law. The other seems to him only an unrigh teous actuality
or a case of human obstinacy or perversity.
467. The ethical consciousness cannot (like the consciousness that
preceded it) draw any distinction between an objective order and
its own subjective order: it cannot doubt that the law it obeys has
absolute authority. Nor is there any taint ofindividuality left over
that can deflect it from the path of duty. It cannot conceive that
its duty could be other than what it knows it to be.
468. None the less the ethical consciousness cannot divest itself of
allegiance to both laws, and so cannot escape guilt when it opts for
the one as opposed to the other. Only an inert, unconscious stone can
avoid incurring guilt. The guilt is, however, not ind~vidual, but coHee..
tive. It is the guilt of a whoJe class or sex.
469. The law violated by an individual's act necessarily demands
vindication, even though its voice was not at the time heard by the
violator. Action brings the unconscious into the daylight, and forces
consciousness to bow to its offended majesty.
470. The ethical consciousness is mos t truly guil ty when it wi ttingly
rejects the behests of one law and holds them to be violent and wrong.

555

Its action denies the demand for real fulfilment which is part of the
law, and so involves real guilt.
47 I. The individual cannot survive the tragic conflict in him of
the two laws, neither of which he can repudiate. He cannot merely
have a sentiment (Gesinnung) for the one. His whole being is consumed
in pathos, which is part of his character as an ethical being.
472. In the fateful conflict of two laws in different individuals both
individuals undergo destruction. Each is guilty in the face of the law
he has violated. It is in the equal subordination of both sides that
absolute right is first carried out,
473. A young man leaves the unconscious natural medium of ethicalHfe to become ruler of the community and administer the human
law. But the natural character of his origins may show itself in a
duplicity of existence, e.g. Eteocles and Polynices. The community
is bound to honour the one who actually possesses power, and to dis~
honour the mere claimant to state power who takes up arms against
the community. This dishonour involves deprivation of burial rights.
474. The family-spirit, backed by the Divine Law, and with its
roots in the underworld waters of forgetfulness, is.affronted by these
hUD}an arrangements. The dead m~n fincis instruments of vengeance
by which the representatiyes of the hurqan law are in their turn destroyed.
475. The battle oflaws, with its inherent path{)s, is carried on by
hmnan agents, which gives it an air of contingency. The atomistic
family has to be liquidated in the continuity of communal life, but
the latter continues to have its roots in the former. Womankind, that
eternal source of irony, reduces to ridicule the grave deliberations of
the state elders, and asserts the daims of youth. The communal spirit
then takes its revenge on feminine anarchy by impressing youth into
war, In war the ethical s.ubstance asserts its negt;ttivity, its freedom
from all existent arrangemen.ts. But since victory depends on fortune
and strength, this sort of ethical community breaks down, and is
superseded by a soulless, universal ethical community, based on limitless individualism.
476. The·destruction of the ethical world of custom lies in its mere
naturalness, its immediacy. This immediacy breaks down because it
tries to combine the unconsc::ious peace of nature with the self-conscious, unresting peace of Spirit. An ethical system of this natural sort
is inevitably restricted, and gets superseded by another similar system.
Spiritual communal life necessarily detaches itself from such tribalism, and erects itself into a formally universal 'open society' (term
not used by Hegel) dispersed among a vast horde of separate individuals.

556

ANALYSIS
LEGAL STATUS

477. The universality into which the ethical substance has now de·
veloped is the soulless commonalty which has ceased to be the selfconscious substance of its members. These latter alone, in their atomistic multiplicity, are real and substantial. All are equal and all count
as persons. The abstract individuality of the dead person in the tribal
state has become the abstract'!' of self-consciousness, the spirit of the
new community.
478. Individual personality is now the acknowledged substantial
principle. But it is an abstract principle instantiated in disjoined selves
which lack a common substance. (Use of concept of Sprodigkeit, brittleness, diremptiveness, non.. cohesion.)
479. The world of abstract atomic persons carries out in reality
what in Stoicism isa mere abstraction. The abstract right of the individual person depends merely on his being a person, not on any superior
inner richness or power.
480. The world ofright-endowed persons develops dialectical1y as
does Stoicism. Since it gives no content to personality and personal
right,ithas to ,relate itto senseJess; external things. Persons become
property-owners, and sotrivialandcontemptible, and their rights are
all rights to property. (Stress on property in Roman law.)
48 I. Since empty individuality is the guiding principle of therigh tstate, itnaturally incarnatesitselfin an arbitratilyselected individual,
anemperoror living god, whose universal ownership can only express
itself in monstrous excess.
482. Sinee legal personality is devoid of content, the abstract individuality that incarnates its principle is such as to destroy it and
also itself.
483. In legal personality the person is meant to be absolutely essential, but its abstraction makes it completely unessential, the prey of
unlimited caprice. The absolute unessentiality of the individual
becomes the heart of a new phase of experience) that 6f the selfestranged person in a world of 'culture'.
S,ELF~ALIENATED

SPIRIT. CULTURE

484. The-ethical substance has, in the state of mere right, put its
ethical being outside of itself. As an abstract individual, it confronts
the world ordered by law and custom as something alien, from which
it feels estranged. The world is its own world, but not seen as its own
world, and accordingly becomes objectively different. Ruined is the
atomistic assertion of personal rights, it acquiesces in a social order
which seems deeply foreign.
485. The ethical substance then opposes to the real ethical order,

VI. SPIRIT, §§477-492

557

which seems deeply alien, a pure, essential order representative of its
inward thoughts and ideals. The real order is this-world and strange,
the essential order is an other-world in which it would feel at home.
486. The ethical Spirit thereby comes to inhabit two worlds, an
actual world of'culture' and civilization, and an unreal world, posited
by faith, and more truly in harmony with itself. But just as the divine
and human laws vanish in the atomistic legal person, so do both
worlds vanish in the pure insight of the Enlightenment, with its un ..
knowable god at one pole and its pure utility at the other. This pure
insight refines itself into the nullity of revolutionary freedom, from
which it must return to repossess itself of its alienated content in the
new phase of morality.
THE WORLD OF SELF-ALIENATED SPIRIT
487. Spirit now lives in two worlds, one of self-alienation a.nd
the other offaith, where, however, in fleeing,from the former world,
it is involved in another form of the same self-alienation. The prin ..
ciple of the former world, not being a ware of its Notion, has the false
limitation of being .opposed to faith.
TRE

R~ALM

OF ENLIGHTENMENT

488. The world weare ab.outtoconsideris one in which conscious ..
ness externalizes itself, which accordingly seeJ:'nsstrange to it, and
which it has to master. Only by mastering,the world can tlelfDcon ..
sciousness have the universality which is its validity and its reality.
This universality involves conformity to general patterns, and is not
to be confused with the merely formal universality of the realm of
right.
489. In the world we are about to consider the individual counts
and is real on account ofhis Bildung, his culture. He is actual, powerful
only to the extent that he is cultivated. His natural being and
endowment in all its forms is utterly unimportant: only as cultivated
are they better or worse.
490 • The cultured individual exercises his ability and talents in a
cultured world. In 'making his mark in the world' he in effect helps
to make the woddin which he makes his mark, though he isnotcon~
scious of doing so.
49 1 • In the world each man has a place and an opening for his
talents, and this place goes with seemingly fixed judgements of good
and bad. Since he is part of the world, such judgements always stand
over against other seemingly just as definite judgem~nts. ,
.
49 2 . As Nature dirempts itselfinto the elements of AIr, Water, FIre,

55 8

ANALYSIS

and Earth so the social milieu direm pts itself in to (1) a spirit of overall uniformity, (2) a spiri t of individ ual diversifica tion, and (3) a spirit
which embodies both aspects and unites them in its self-consciousness.
There is nothing here analogous to the element offate which embodies
the conflicts of family and state: self-consciousness embodies both.
493. The spirit of uniformity in a society comes before the pure
and detached consciousness on the one hand, and the involved actual
consciousness on the other, as the good element in that society, whereas
the spirit of divergent individualism comes before them as the had element.
494. The good element in the society, considered as a reality, is
the state power in which all individual endeavours are integrated,
while the bad element is represented by the riches aimed at by their
personal, self~aggrandizing efforts. But the quest for wealth is in
reality as much for the good of the whole as the state power, and both
are the same at bottom.
495. Self-consciousness sees its substance, content, and End in two
spiritual powers. Its being-in-self is the state power, its being-for-self
rkhes.Self-consciousnessnecessarily judges thesetwo powers, and sees
the former.as good,apd the latter as bad. But because both involve
their opposites, this judgement can always be reversed.
496. What things intrinsically are is what self-consciousness finds
them to be, and so the prima facie judgements of self-consciousness
wW.necessarHy be reversed on deeper reflection.
497. Thi§ reversal makes the state power be an oppressive, in terfering, evil thing in which self-consciousness fails to recognize itself,
whereas riches becomes a good thing to it, which only harms certain
individuals accidentally.
498. This reversed judgement is, however, itself reversible on still
deeper reflection. State power is seen as realizing the ~nduring good
of individuals and organizing their activities, whereas riches only
ministers to their vanishing enjoyments.
499. Self-consciousness now judges its own judgements, finding
goodness in judgements which recognize themselves in state power
or riches, badness in judgements which regard either as bad.
500. If a man judges state power in a good manner, he takes up
a noble-minded attitude towards it, and becomes intent on political
and sodal service, If he judges riches aright, he is grateful towards
it and the dispensers of it.
501. To judge badly of either of these powers is to adopt a baseminded attitude, ORe which secretly rebels against all rulers and uses,
while it despises wealth.
502. Both these Judgements are immediate and one-sided: they are
not brought together in consciousness as they are for us philosophers.

VI. SPIRIT, §§493-515

559

But this immediacy generates a demand for a reasoned, syllogistic
demonstration by way of a middle term which will suffice to bring
them together.
503. The noble-minded consciousness, positively disposed towards
state power and negatively to its own selfish purposes, achieves the
heroism of service.
504. The heroism of service endows consciousness with self-respect
and exacts respect from others. But it also is the real, ultimate source
of state power.
505. At first self-consciousness only gives the state power an impersonal legislative status, not an individual one. The haughty vassal
retains his individuality and offers advice, counsel to the state
powers.
506. The relation of the haughty vassal to the state power is ostensiblynoble and loyal, even unto death, but is none the less always
ready secretly to conspire against the state for personal ends.
507. A true self-surrender to the state power gives the latter its own
individual will, makes it a monarch.
508. In all cases of self-alienation language plays an operative
role. Through language the individual makes himself universal and
impersonal, and transcends his immediate, changing self. (Of. the
'divine' universality of language in sense-certainty.)
509. Spiritisessentiallysuch as to be one in and throughseparatcd
sides, each of which treats the other as an object excluded from itself.
As such it will itself express itself as an existent object (i.e. a monarch)
distinct from its many sides.
510. The 'universal best' is a poor expression of the profound unity
underlying the various 'sides' in asocicty. An individual, monarchical
will is a better, truer expression.
5 I I. The noble-minded consciousness now develops a language of
flattery to reconcile itself with the supreme monarchical will. The
monarch becomes unlimited and absolute, and is spoken of by his
proper name. The monarch identifies himself with the state power
(L'etat c'est moi).
512. Theilattery of the subjects really creates the monarchical selfconsciousness. But th~ nobility in practising flattery retains its inner
conscious independence, and turns the monarch into a mere dispenser
of wealth.
5 I 3· The noble-minded consciousness, through its unscrupulous
use of flattery, becomes indistinguishable from the base consciousness.
5 I 4. For the base self-consciousness the monar{,:h becomes a fount
of wealth for which he becomes boundlessly grateful.
5 15· Wealth represents individual satisfaction but not the satisfac-

ANALYSIS

tion ofa definite individual. It is a form of intrinsic being [Ansichsein]
in which being~for~self is negated.
5 I 6. In the pursuit of wealth the noble~minded individual comes
under the sway of an alien power.
517. In the pursuit of wealth an individual's personaJity becomes
enslaved to the chance personality of another. What he personally
is becomes utterly impersonal, a commodity like others to be bought
and sold. Feeling tha t every thing essen tial is reduced to un essen tiali ty ,
the individual becomes profoundly rebellious.
518. The self, seeing itseJfthus superseded and rejected, supersedes
this supersession and rejects this rejection. It is consciously for itself
in and through them.
5 I g. In its inner independence the self rises above the distinction
of the noble- and base-minded; both become a single attitude. Wealth
in being universally dispensed gives self",conscious independence and
freedom of choice to all, but these are exercised at the expense of
others. An arrogance of wealth arises which generates unbounded
resentment.
520. Self-consciousness uses a language of noble.flattery in dealing
with state power: it employs a language ofignoble flattery in dealing
with wealth. But the language which truly expresses its Zerrissenheit,
its torn state, is one whi(jh makes diremption its essence, which in
all its judgements unites terms in an utterly irre1evant,external
fashion. Its only reason for dealing with things together is that they
ha ve nothing to do with each other.
52 I. The absolute, universal inversion ofreaHty and thought, their
mutual estrangement, is thefinaJ product of culture. Everything
becomes void of substance and confounded with its opposite. All
values become transvalued. Spirit in this phase of culture speaks a
language of utter disintegration, which> takes the novel form of
wit.
522. Wit runs the whole gamut of the serious and the silly! the
trivial and the profound, the lofty and the infamous, with complete
lack of taste and shame (see Diderot's Nephew qf Rameau).
523. Plain sense and sound morality can teach this disintegrated
brilliance nothing that it does not know. It can merely utter some
of the syllables the latter weaves into its piebald discourse. In conceding that the bad and good are mixed in life, it merely substitutes dull
platitude for witty brilliance.
524. The disintegrated consciousness can be noble and edifying but
this is for it only one note among others. To ask it to forsake its disintegration is merely , from its own point of view, to preach a new
eccentricity, that of Diogenes in his tub.
525- The disintegrated consciousness is, however, on the way to

VI. S PI Rl T, §§ 516-536

transcending its disintegration. It sees the vanity of treating all things
as vain, and so becomes serious.
526. Wit really emancipates the disintegrated consciousness from
finite material aims and gives it true spiritual freedom. In knowing
itselfas disintegrated it also rises above this, and achieves a truly positive self-consciousness.
FAITH AND PURE INSIGHT

527. Beyond the alienated world of culture seems to stand the unreal world of pure insight or thought. Consciousness does not, however, recognize that it is its own thought that occupies the transcendental medium, but rather fills it with Vorstellungen, picture-thoughts.
The world beyond is a religious picture-world, unreal but conceived
as real.
528. Religious faith, with its simple affirmation of a real beyond,
is distinct from the religious phases considered before, i.e. the
anguished squirmings of the Unhappy Consciousness, or the familycentred cult of the dead.
52 9. Since consciousness in religious belief flees the world, it continues to carry something which represents the worldly consciousness
in itself. This accompanying voice is that of the never resting critical
negativity which has emerged out of the realm of culture, and which
destroys all positivity and a.ll objectivity. :This negative consciousness
is without definite content of its own, but it fastens itself on the pictorial content of religious belief and devours the latter.
530. Both faith and pure insight representconsclol,lsnessreturning
to itself from the dispersed world of culture. Each presents three sides
for examination: (a) what it is in and for itself; (b) how it stands-to
reality; (c) how it stands to its sister mode of transcendence.
,?3I. For faith its absolute object is a pictorial reflection of the real
world with the historical character of ,that real world.
532, In its relation to the real world, the object of faith articulates
itself into the Absolute Father, the self-offering Son, and the Holy
Spirit in which it returns to its original simplicity.
533. Since the Son and Holy Spiritbring the transcendent religious
object into relation with reality, they also bring the believing selfconsciousness into relation with the transcendent.
534. The spirit of religious faith lives in the world of culture, but
tdes to rise above its vanity to the transcendent religious object. It
practises acts of devotion which bring it no near"erto its goal which
it locates in a remote region of time and space.
535. For pure insight the Notion or concept alone has reality.
536. It seeks to overthrow every type of independence other than
that of se1f.. consciousness.

ANALYSIS

537. In its first appearance the Notion of pure insight is not fully
realized. It refers everything to the future, in the form of an aim to
be realized. All is to be giv,en a rational reduction which will be valid
for everyone. Differences between individuals do not count~ they are
differences ,of degree, not of kind. Pure insight is something that all
can exercise and possess.
ENLIGHTENMENT

538-40. Pure insight is essentially opposed to religious faith. It is
also opposed to the real world and !Jghts against its impure intentions
and perverted" insights.
THE STRUOGLE OF ENLIGHTENMENT WITH SUPERSTITION

541. Enlightenment unites all the destructive, negative poses of
consciousness in one. I t is the same as religious fai th, but seems utterly
opposed to it, since it denies all the pictorial content of religious faith.
What content it has, it borrows from religious faith, and causes it all
to disappear.
542. To enlightenment religious faith is, in the main mass of the
people, unconscious error and superstition. But it also a ttribu tes a self~
consciousness to this error in the person of deceiving priests and
despots.
543. Enlightenment appeals to theinsight latent in all to free themselves from the impostures of religion.
544. Enlightenment is essentially ambivalent in its relation to the
na'ive consciousness,which it-sees as a ready prey to imposture, yet
capable of achieving insight.
545. Enlightenment thinks that it will win its way to men's minds
without a painful struggle, and by a simple infection. One fine day
the false idols of religion will simply lie Hat on the floor before it. (The
Nephew of Rameau.)
546. But it also engages in various noisy combats with religious
superstition.
547. Pure insight gives a false reality to the superstition that confronts it, and pretends that it'is something that it has to defeat.
548. The ,'other' of pure insight can only be pure insight: it can
only condemn what it is, since beyond itself nothing is admitted to
have substance. But it maintains itselfby confusedly finding an other
in the objects of religion (another form of itself for us, but not for
it) which it condemns as irrational lies leading to bad purposes.
549. The object of religion is rightly declared by enlightenment
to be a product of the religious man's thought, but it is wrongly supposed that this means that this object is a mere fabrication. The religious man's trust in God is a recognition of the identity of God with

V I. SPI RIT, §§ 537-558

his own rational being. The worship of the religious community is
likewise something in which God comes to be as the spirit of that community, and does not remain blandly beyond It.
550. For the religious consciousness talk of priestly deception, etc.
is absurd, since its object corresponds to the inmost nature of consciousness. The lie lies rather in enligh tenment which makes the object
of religion something entirely different from what it essentially is.
There can in fact be no delusion regarding the inmost reality in which
consciousness finds the direct certainty of itself.
55 I. Pure insight misin terprets the various aspects of religious
belief, i.e. its view of the absolute essence, the grounds of this belief,
and the nature of its service to this essence.
552. Pure insight wrongly supposes that religious belief adores a
sensuous object, a lump of wood or stone, a wafer made of paste, etc.
553. But religious beliefis not really oriented towl;l.rds a temporal,
sensuous thing. It goes beyond this towards a thought-object which
alone is self-existent.
554. Pure insight regards religion as basing itself on contingent,
historical matters offact, whose evidence is inferior to thatofthe newspapers, and which has passed through many distorting media, e.g.
inadequate translations. The' religious consciousness, however, bases
itself solely on internal grounds of certainty. Only when corrupted
by enlightenment does it look for historical support.
555. Religious acts reaUyconsistin cancellingthe individual's particularity, which makes them appear senseless, without definiteobjective, to pure insigh t.
556. To pure insight the religious consciousness is foolish when it
seeks union with its ideal by foregoing natural enjoyments, etc. For
pure insight the religious consciousness is likewise foolish in rising
above isolatedindividualismand renouncing private property. To the
charge offoolishness it adds the further charge of moral wrongness}
thereby making finite ends the sole ends of action, and being untrue
even to its own transcendence of these.
557. The Tole of enlightenment is to make religious faith aware of
what "it intrinsically is. What, however, is the positive truth which
enlightenment opposes to religious superstition? It removes from
absolute being aU sensuous properties, and so turns it into a mere
vacuum to which no predicate can be attributed.
558. Over against absolute reality stands the individual, whose primary awareness is sense-certainty} which has become the absolute
truth through the destruction of all sense-transcending forms of consciousness. Sense-experience is supposed to involve certainty as to the
reality of the sensitive person and of other things external to himself,
all of which exis t absolutely.

ANALYSIS

559-60. Enlightenment can indifferently place featureless intrinsic
being beyond sensible things or in them. It can further comhine these
two ways of regarding sensible things in which they come to have
their whole being in their usefulness for other finite things beyond
themselves. Reason is th,e function which prevents immoderate selfassertion and makes everything continue to be truly useful to everything else.
56 I. The mutual serviceableness of all things is for pure insight a
reflection of their derivation from the absolute essence, which is itself
the supremely useful, profitable thing.
562. Faith finds the positive outcome of enlightenment abominable, its empty absolute, its goodness present in everything, its summing-up of religion in utility. It sees in enlightenment nothing but
self-confessed banali ty .
563. Faith has a divine right against enlightenment by which it
feels itselfutterly wronged. The enlightenment too has a divine right
against faith, based on the self-consciousness which it expresses, and
which is such as to absorb its OPPQsite.
564. Enlightenment does not attack faith with principles peculiar
to itself but with those that faith itself.acknowledges. It merely
reminds faith of certain sides of itself which in certain situations it
tends to forget. What it brings before faith is as much an essential
part of it as the aspects that itopposes.
.
565. Jnregarding faith as its sheer opposite, enlightenment fails
torecognizeits own self. It does not see that the thought it condemns
in faith is its own. Against faith insight is the power of the Notion,
relating distinct moments toone another and bringing out their contradiction. It has right against faith because faith contains both contradictory elements in itself.
566. If faith errs in making its object something alien, quite
beyond its own devotional activities, insight reminds it of its error
in stressing that its object is its own creation. But insight errs in
making the object of faith a contingent fiction. I t also itself
believesin an unattainable, unsearchable Absolute, and is therefore
on a level with faith, which combines the cognate with the unsearchable.
567. Both faith and insight wrongly isolate the sensuous from the
notional, the former in looking at both this>world and its other-world
in incompatible ways which it fails to combine, the latter in seeing
this world as abandoned by Spirit and playing no part in the essential
process of Reason.
568. As regards the ground of knowledge, faith acknowledges that
its knowledge of the Absolute involves an element of the contingent,
but forgets this in its face~to-face confrontation with the absolute

V I. S P I R IT. §§ 559-57 B

essence. Enlightenment, however, remembers only the former and
forget~ the latter.
569. Enlightenment regards the sacrifice of property and en~
joyment by faith as wrong and inexpedient. Faith, however, recog~
nizes, the merely symbolic character of such sacrifices.
570. Enligh ten men t sees it as absurd to sacrifice a particular, concrete source of pleasure (e.g. by fasting) if one's aim is to be rid of
sensual desire altogether.
57 I. But enlightenment is here wrongly abstract in seeing the
essential element in mere intention or thought, and not in the carrying-out of the latter in the instinctive realm.
572. Enlightenment has irresistible power over faith since it brings
into play moments present in faith itself. It seems to destroy the
beautiful unity of trust and immediate certainty, to sully spirituality
with sensuousness; to disturb calm certainty with- the idle play of
understanding and self-will. But in reality enlightenment enables
faith to overcome its split-mindedness, its dreaming life among
notionless thoughts, on the one hand, and its waking life among the
realities of sense, on the other.
573. The effect ofcnlightenment is to empty faith of its imagina
tivecontent, and to turn itinto a pure yearning for an empty beyond.
Its object is the same as the empty Absolute of enlightenment, except
that it is not satisfied with this object, whereas enlightenment is
satisfied. But enlightenment's satisfactiqn is, even as such, merely partial, as is shown in its further turning towards this-world utility.
a

TUE TRUTH OF ENLIGHTENMENT

574. Pure insight in its ultimate development frames an object to
fit itself, pure thought in the form of a Thing, an Absolute without
determinations, in which all distinctions are without a difference. This
empty Absolute is the same as the object to which faith sank back
when disillusioned of sense-content by enlightenment. The selfalienated N odon does not, however, see the iden tity of these two Absolutes with each other, and with the self-consciousness which draws
these distinctions.
575-8. The fightwith faith reproduces itself within enlightenment
in the form ofa dual Absolute, on the one hand, the pure predicateless
supreme being or first cause, and, on the other hand, an Absolute
which especially involves the negation of all sensuous quality, and
so becomes invisible, intangible, etc., underlying matter. Both are
essentially, the same concept, different only in their starting-point.
What the one regards as horror, and the other despises as folly, are
altogether the same. Thought is being, the copula is here a separation
as well as a connection, so that thought becomes opposed to its own

566

ANALYSIS

shadow, matter. But matter as purely negative is indistinguishable
from thought. The Cartesian Cogito ergo sum establishes the overriding
identity which enligh tenment fails to perceive.
.
579. The universal present in the contracted forms of God and matter is an eternal abstract oscillation within self or the pure thought
of self. The oscillation within self is the simple Notion of utility.
580. Utility is a bad word to faith, sentiment, and speculation, but
it expresses the ultimate truth of enlightenment----endless restless
oscillation from one thing to another. Pure insight is the existent
Notion whose being-in-self is not abiding being, but a perpetual
being-for-another.
581. Summary. The world of culture ends in the consciousness of
its own emptiness and vanity: self~consciousness retreats into self, passing into the two forms of faith and anti-faith (or enlightenment).
Faith's imaginative pictures perish in the onslaught of pure insight,
which circles between the two empty poles of the supreme being
(negative) and matter (positive). Craving the reality which these
abstractions exclude, self-consciousness turns to the real world it has
forsaken and finds its own reflection in the universal usefulness of
everything to everything. The three worlqstraversed by Spirit are
therefore (~) the dispersed world of culture in all its rich specificity
and its hidden basic ,genus; (b) the genus behind this world seen as
faith and insight; (c) the reconcilia tion of the genus with the specjfic
forms in utility, In utility the ratiol1al universt;J.l is united wi th the
individual and his satisfaction, and heaven is brought down to earth.
ABSOLUTE FREEDOM: AND TERROR

s8g. Consciousness has seen its very Notion in tl,tility, which is,

however, still envisaged as a predicate of the object of consciousness
or as End of its pursuit, and not as its veritable beil1g-for·self. There
is, J:lOwever, an implicit withdrawal from objectivity in the Notion
of the useful, and when this withdrawal hecomes more explicit we
have as a new form of consciotl,sness-absolute freedom,
583. In utility all that intrinsically matters in objects is their use
for some self, i.e. their use for a subject inherently universal which
sees itself in the superficially alien being of the objects it uses. When
the seeming distinction of supject, object, and interaction hetween
them is overcome, absolute self-kl1owledge results.
584. Spirit knowing itself in all its uses is absolute freedom, which
sees nothing sensuous or supersensuous beyond itself. The world is
its will, and this will is a general will, the will which is a real will
and not capable of being mediated by a representative. This general
will is the true will, the self·conscious essence of any and every person,
so that each does what all do and vice versa (Rousseau).

Vl. SPI RI T, §§ 579-592

585. This general will pu ts itself on the throne of the world withou t
resistance. Since self-consciousness is the principle behind all separately organized social 'masses', all these masses collapse into the unitary will which expresses self-consciousness. What gave the self-thinking Notion existence was its diremption into separated sodal masses:
when the thinking Notion becomes its own explicit object, all such
masses go. Each individual consciousness rises above the accidents of
its class and place, and desires only to perform the work of the whole.
All differences of rank and function are annihilated.
586. Utility as a predicate of a real object vanishes when self-consciousness is its own only object. In this phase of experience there is
no room for the distinction between the individual and the general
will. The P.tre supreme is reduced to a gaseous phantasm floating above
the wrecked world of culture and faith.
587. In the new fusion of individual with social will, the individual
can do nothing but enact laws and public resolutions and decrees.
588. Consciousness thus exalted and universal in aim can achieve
nothing positive, either legislatively or executively. Its absolute negativity excludes ~ differentiation into groups having different state
functions (legislature, executive, judiciary) or into the variously
aligned gr01,lPS in the world of culture. Being committed only to do
the work of the whole, the individual can do nothing at all.
S8g. But all deeds, however universal their source, are necessarily
the deeds of definite individuals, and not of everyone. Only purely
negative, destructive work can therefore be the· common work of
wholly free consciousnesses.
590. Self-consciousness, beingself."consciousness, cannot avoid the
differentiation which self-consciousness involves. If it abolishes aU
groups, it still k:eeps the distinction between the inflexible universal
and thedirempted individual atoms. The only relation between these
two extremes can be one of pure negation: the universal will must
seek the death of its individuaLinstances, and this in the most brutal
and direct and senseless way.
591. The government is necessarily individual, since only so can
it will anything definite. But an individual structure necessarily
departs from its own ideal of being the universal will, and becomes
the will ora factionwhich may readily be replaced by another faction.
It cannot escape the guilt of violating its own principles. Such guilt,
being devoid ofany objective'principle, is indistinguishablefrom mere
suspicion, and its only fit punishment is simple annihilation.
592. In the work of destruction absolute freedom discovers what
it is. Implicitly it is the abstract self-consciousness which uproots all
distinctions within itself. The terror of death is the intuition of the
negative essence, quivering between its empty absolute poles (God

568

ANALYSIS

and Matter). The universal will pursuing nothing becomes the elimination of self-thinking self-consciousness.
593. The absolute negativity cannot help generating class- and
position-differences within itself which it ruthlessly keeps in their
place by sheer terror.
594. From this reign of terror Spirit is unable to return to the concreteness of the realms of culture and faith. It is universal will which
in its ultimate abstractness has nothing positive left in it. The unfulfilled negativity of the self, with its senseless pursuit of death, is,
however, such as to swing over into absolute positivity in so far as
the individual becomes, not something to be destroyed by the universal will, but to be taken up into it as pure knowledge and pure
will, the Kantian formal a priori.
595. Absolute freedom has as its positive outcome a purely formal
moral will, universal as much as individual. The Kantian Categorical
Imperative is the other side of revolutionary destruction.
SPIRIT CERTAIN OF ITSELF. MORALITY

596. We have advanced to a position where the individual person,
at first ,alienated from its own 'concept' in the worlds ofculture , faith,
and enlightenment, and swamped by that universal meaning inthe
stage of revolutionary freedom', has achieved unity with its own inherent universality.
597. The individual's relation to his own spiritual universality is
both immediate and mediate. His immediate in that the individual
simply knows his duty and does it. But it is mediate inthatthe individualdoes not do his duty as an unreflecting member of the total ethical
substance, nor as an alien prescription of an external authority, hut
in that he understands and sees why "he should do as he should do.
This deep rational understanding abolishes all otherness, and
becomes the whole being of the ethical world.
598. At the rnorallevelonly what is known and present to the COnscious agent makes any sense or has any reality. The world as an unknown external set of facts of Nature has been transformed into the
world as a known spring-board for action.
THE MORAL ViEW OF THE WORLD

599. Self-consciousness in this phase makes duty the absolute substance and essence, which is also its own substance and essence, and
which cannot assume the form of anything alien. To this substance
an other-being must stand opposed, a Nature morally meaningless,
governed by laws that have nothing to do with morality.
600. A moral outlook develops in which the intrinsic being and
self-consciousness of morality stands in a relation ofstark indifference

VI. SPI RIT; §§593-604

56 9

to the intrinsic being and self-consciousness of Nature. The moral and
natural orders are for it given as mutually independent and irrelevant.
From another point of view, however, only duty counts, the natural
order being dependent and unessential. The moral life develops the
conflict of these two points of view.
601. From the former point of view, the moral consciousness is
satisfi~d by the mere performance of duty: the natural setting merely
provides the occasion for this performance, and it mayor may not
reward the performance with complete success and happiness. From
the latter point of view, which is not purely moral, it is a matter of
complaint and regret that the natural order so often fails to match
the demands of duty and the requirements of justice.
602. The moral consciousness cannot satisfy itself in the fulfilment
of an impersonal, universal purpose: it necessarily demands also that
the individual person be satisfied. Nature, it is felt, must come into
line with morality, and reward the moral individual with personal
satisfaction. From the strictly moral poin tof view , Nature has no true
self to oppose to the demands ofmoraHty, and its conformity to these
demands is accordingly postulated. This postulation goes beyond
present actualities, but is not a contingent, personal demand. It is
a necessary demand·of Reason.
603. Therooral consciousness not merely demands Nature as something completely external and alien in whichi t operates, but as something also present in itself in the form of contingent, sensuous urges
and tendencies directed to specific and individual ends. These urges
and tendencies constitute an internal opposition to the purposes of
the pure will. The moral consciousness remains one consciousness,
however ,and in virtue ofthis unity is obliged to terminate the conflict
between its pure self and its contingent, sensuous urges: its essence
lies in ending such a conflict. But the conflict cannot be ended by
uprooting the sensuous urges, since they are the real element in
morality. I troust accordingly be ended by making the urges conform
to moral req uiremen ts. This harmony ofurge with morality isa postulated harmony, not as beforeinthe nature of things, but as a harmony
consciousness must itself bring about in an endless moral progress.
The harmon y itself is placed at infinity, sinceifitcameabou t it would
terminate morality. It is not really what we want to achieve, though
it must be absolutely carried out: it is a task that must be carried
out without ever ceasing to bea task. Infinity is a good place for such
contradictory accommodations.
604. OUf first postulate was that of an inherent harmony of
morali ty with external Nature, our second that of a self-conscious harmony of morality with internal nature or sensuous impulse. These
two harmonies are brought together in the actual movement of action,

57 0

ANALYSIS

and each appears required by the other. We have a harmony both
inherent and for consciousness.
605. The moral consciousness has to function in relation to an actuality that presents many distinct 'cases': in relation to these it breaks
up into a variety of laws and duties presupposing different objective
and subjective situations. These laws of detail have not the sacrosanctness of morality as such, and have to be referred to another consciousness than the one that prescribes the moral ideal as such.
606. There are therefore two moral consciousnesses, one prescribing a law of duty indifferent to special content, and the other particularizing this law into special rules. This.second moral consciousness
also has the task of harmonizing morality with happiness. What we
here necessarily have is the conceptof a moral world-ruler who pluralizes duty and connects it with happiness.
607. In actual conduct, however, the agent is always an individual
concerned to achieve a result in the real world. He refers the unpluralized law of duty to another conSCIousness, that of a sacred lawgiver.
(This is a strain of the dialectic opposed to 606.)
608. Themoralagent, since he places the pure law of duty heyond
himselfina perfect lawgiver, necessarily thinks of himself as imperfect
in knowledge and will, and a victim to the contingent and the sensuous. He is unworthy to receive happiness and can receive it only
through the operation of Grace.
60g. The Notion oCa full conformity to duty is necessarily postu1ated by the imperfect moral agent, and he thinks ofsuch a perfection
as meting out desert according to merit.
610. The moral consciousness locates its moral ideal in another
being , pardy as a mere representation in its own mind, pardy as some;,
thing which in its, perfection would transcend morality.
61 I. The moral consciousness does not see its own Notion in the
divine lawgiver, nor does it recognize itself as the conceptwhkh links
aU these opposed moments with one another. It operates with picturethoughts rather than pure Notions. Its object is treated as something
merely existent which irrupts upon it in~ picture.,presentation.
612.. The moral consciousness also sees its own intrinsic Notion in
a quasi-temporal perspective as an original state of perfection to
regain which is the aim of the world.
613. The result of these transcendent projections is that the moral
consciousness is one ofinfinite imperfection. There is for it no moral
actuality.
614. The accomplished moral actuality is for it merely something
'beyond'.
615. Both the imperfect individual and the perfection it aims at
thus become mere presentations, each valid only from the point of

V I. SPI RI T, §§60S---622

57 1

view of the other. The complete moral self-consciousness is and is not,
since it exists only in idea. There is and can be no transcendent moral
perfection, but an ideal of a moral transcendence is treated as if it
were such a perfection.
MORAL DUPL1CITY

616. In the moral view of the world consciousness consciously produces its object, i.e. the realm of duty. This it does even ifi! attributes
some aspects of its ideal to a transcendent, divine self-consciousness.
617. The moral view of the world now develops its basic contradiction in several directions. It constantly regards one side of its being
as a mere mask for the other, while the latter in its turn merely masks
the former. It is, moreover, profoundly conscious of its shifting
duplicity and pretence, and its basic lack of seriousness.
618. This masking can be studied in the postulated harmony of
morality and Nature. This is not given as actual now, but as to be
actualized through moral action. But in so far as it is brought about
and the result enjoyed by the agent, there ceases to be the transcen~
dently postulated harmony, and the postulation thereofis therefore
shown up as insincere. We only postulate the ultimate harmony to
inspire presen taction.
619. If our postulation of ultimate harmony is insincere, our immersion in action must be sincere. But the End of action is not the
individual act but the total betterment of the world, to which the
act makes only a negligible contribution. But to place the End in
world-betterment is also insincere, since the performance of duty is
the essence of action and the onlyreaUyworthwhile thing inthe world.
But again the performance ef duty essentially relates to the world of
Nature: moral laws must become laws of Nature.
620. If, however, the highest good is taken to be a Nature which
conforms to morality, morality itself vanishes from this good, since
it presupposes a non-conforming Nature. Moral action, being -the
absolute purpose, seems to look to the elimination of moral action.
621. Morality presumes that morality and reality are in harmony,
but not seriously, since it proceeds to bring them into harmony. But
it is not serious in doing this, since its action is a mere means to the
highest good. But it is not serious with this good, since it involves the
des truction of moral action.
622. Morality posits its End as freedom of the pure will from the
misleading power of sensuous impulses and tendencies. But in doing
so it cuts its connection with reality, since impulses and tendencies
alone relate us to reality. It therefore postulates a mere conformity
of these impulses 'to morality. But morality cannot prescribe a direction to the impulses, which alone can give a definite content and direc-

57 2

ANALYSIS

tion to morality. We have therefore to make the harmony ofimpulses
and morality an idea of Reason located in the infinite distance. But
this again is not serious, since it would involve the elimination of
morality in the struggle with the impulses and contingent desires. The
non-seriousness is shown in the introduction of the Notion of infinity.
623. It would seem that a state of moral progress is the true moral
goal. But progress towards a condition where morality ceases would
be moral decay rather than progress. The Notion of an increase or
decrease in -morality is, moreover, inadmissible. Either one acts dutifully or one violates duty (Stoicism).
624. Since morality is always incomplete, happiness can never be
deserved, only granted by grace. Hence happiness is an independent
End having nothing to do with morality.
625. Since morality is always incomplete, it is a mere expression
of envy when people complain that the wicked flourish while the good
suffer. There are no good and no wicked, and happiness should simply
be as widely spread as possible.
626. Pure morality inheres only in a divine legislator, who pluralizes duty. But nothing can pluralize duty if our moral insight does
not do so. Noteven a holy being can sanctify what is not intrinsically
holy. Nor can an arbitrary being be holy.
627. The perfection of moral insight has to be located in a divine
legislator untroubled by sensuous impulses.
628. Butcin sucha beingthemoralstruggle would vanishand hence
aU genuine moral goodness.
6Qg. In Godallthecontradictions ofmorality come to a head. The
moral consciousness has to abandon God and retreat into itself.
630' The whole valid morality of God is a mere thing of thought
and therefore without moral validity. Itis opposed to reality and yet
ought to be real.
63 I. Consciousness, aware of its deep insincerity in all these positions, flees to its own inwardness and takes up the position of pure
consc~ence, indifferent to all these transcendent questions.
CON SCI ~ NeE. THE 'B E AUT IF U L ~ 0 U L '. EVIL .A N D ITS
FORGIVENESS

632. The antinomy of the moral world-view has given us duty
located in the beyond but also demanded down here. It has solved
moral con tradictions by displacing them into some other, transcendent self-consciousness. Now, however, the moral se1f..,consciousness has reabsorbed this transcendent being into itself, and recognizes
itself as absolutely valid in its contingency. Its immediate particular
existenceis the true reality and harmony.
'
633. Theselfofconscience is to be contrasted with its predecessors:

573

(a) the self of the legal person whose existence consists in being acknowledged by others; (b) the absolutely free self which is the endproduct of the realm of culture; {c) the moral self involved in the
oscillating displacements of universality and individuality. In conscience we for the first time give con tent tC5the empty pattern of duty,
right, and the pure will, and lend it authentic existence,
634. Conscience heals the various breaches across which moral displacement has woven its dialectic, the breach between what is intrinsic and what is a matter of myself, between the pure End and
the opposed factors of Nature and sensibility. Conscience is morality
become complete, which never submits its decisions to the empty
arbitrament of some general standard.
635. For conscience [Gewissen] the intrinsically right is what it is
inwardly sure of [gewiss]. Itconve,rts the given case before it into some
thing which consciousness itself has produced.! t does not dirempt
the case before Hinto a variety of pre.. existent duties between which
it must decide: it alone can determine its duty in the concrete, makin.g
short work of conflicting .prima fa,de claims.
636. Conscience doeoS J:lot consider itself as impure in relation to
a transcen.dentmorality,nor does it refer the pluralization of the pure
prhlciples of duty~oatranscendent cOQsciol,lsness.
637. It abandons alL positions which contrast du~y with reality. It
recQgnizes d.utyasponc;:rete action, not as J,L pure a bstractionencapsulaled ipwhat isnoJ.Quty. It is immediately certain pf itself) this c.ertaiPty being its.owIl conviction regarding its oWJ;lself, and not mea,nt
to bold for othc:iX person~.
638. Themor~Jconsciousness only grasps the underlying essence
of the moral, wh,~reas in conscience itjsself..c.onscious. Conscience
d.oes not oppose tohseJfan alien Naturesupject to independent laws.
As absol ute neg~tivity itc;:an identify itselfwith, and so confer validity
.on; a finite content.
639. Conscience gives universal validity to the actions of the individual self. This validity is derivatively a validity for others, who recognize its validity for the self in question.
640. Anyone's conscientious action is recognized as absolutely
right by the whole c;:oJ;IlIDunity of conscientious persons. Suchuni~
versalrecognitiopis ~otfound in theworalrealm, where the rightness
of acts is always in dQul).t. In the realm .of conscience absolute conviction of righ tne~sis absol ute rightness. At this level there can be
no question of good intentions which have gone astray or of misfortunes which attend upon the good. What the individual thinks is
admitted as right fQr that individual by all.
641. At the threshold of the sphere of 'Spirit' we were concerned
with the 'honest consciousness' absorbed in the 'cause itself', which
a

574

ANALYSIS

was a predicate of the subject rather than the subject itself. In conscience the 'task' or 'cause itself' is the subject. It includes in itself
the aspect of social substantiality derived from the ethical sphere, the
aspect of external authorization derived from the sphere of culture,
and the self-knowing essentiality of morality. In conscience the subject
sees all these moments in and as himself, and seeing them as his
moments, he has power and sovereignty over them all.
642. Conscience tries in some measure to consider the circumstances and consequences of action in all their detail. But it also knows
and is not dismayed by the fact that these circumstances and consequences ramifyinfinitely in all directions, and that it is wholly futile
to attempt to take account of them all in one's action. It is for others
to pursue the investigation of circumstances ever further: conscience
must act on its own incomplete knowledge which, because it is its
own, is sufficient and complete.
643. Conscience has to consider all the prima facie duties WhICh
come up in concrete cases, but none of them has authority for it. It
must determine which is overriding. In doing so its own naturalness,
its impulses and inclinations, must playa part. Only this can break
through the circle ofinauthentic prescriptions derived from others.
Conscience must exercise itsarbitrament,andthismustrest ultimately
on .its own impulsive and emotional make-up.
644. It is thearbi tramentof the individual subject which alone
determines the content of duty in given cases. Other individuals might
regard this determinationas ,a fraud, since they consider other aspects
of the matter. An action that seems violently unjust to others
may he an act of justifiedself~assertion to the person concerned, an
action that others see as cowardly may be a prudent conservation of
oneself and one's usefulness to the man in question. Since morality
consists merely in the consciousness of having done one's duty,
any content can be moral and must be recognized as such by
others.
645. It is no good saying thatthe con~ent ofconscience should have
been otherwise. I ts essence is arbitrariness. One cannot say that it
should have been directed to the general rather than the individual
good, for the general good only has definite meaning if one brings in
the social laws which override individual conviction, and these conscience will not admit. And any act the individual does for his own
good can be plausihlydefended as for the good of alL The balancing
of goods against gopdsis moreover something that conscience by its
essence cuts short.
646. Conscience is Spirit sure of itself, fully possessed and apprised
ofits duty. Anything which exists an sich is demoted toa mere moment:
it is only in so far as it knows of it that it counts. Conscience has no

VI. SPIRIT, §§642-6S8

575

content: it must decide whether to obey or disobey any law. It has
the power to bind or loose.
647. Conscientious acts exist as such for others. They are acknowledged as conscientious by other conscientious persons, and are P1,lt
on a level with their conscientious acts.
648. There is, however, always some doubt whether other con~
sciences will endorse the determinations of the individual conscience.
Conscience therefore oscillateshope1essly between self-doubt derived
fropt the reactions of others and its own self-certainty.
649. Conscientious.people, trusting the integrity of their own consciences, cannot help impugning the soi-disant conscientious deliverances of others, and thinking that they are products of morally
bad consciences.
650. Only if an act is truly conscientious must it be acknowledged
as morally right by all: otherwise it counts as a mere expression of
personal preference.
651. Only a man's consciousness of situations, notthe real result
of his acts, is morally relevant and acknowledged as such by others.
65~L Language is the medium in which Spirit or social subjectivity
exists. Through lallguage one p.ersonalEgo recognizes the Ego-status
of another personal Ego, and so transcends it;sseparate individuality.
653. In moral discourse the moral consciousness loses itsrlumbness
and becomes universaJ. One man utters his conviction of duty which
is understOQd as such by others. "Nothing counts except that others
are assured that the man himself is assured of doing his duty.
65:4. The conscientious agent cannot admit ques tions as to whether
orl)ot he is acting from a true sense oLduty, since he admits no distinctions of absolute duty from theindividuaPs conscious determination of it. If a man says he is acting conscientiously, he is.
f)55. Cons.c:ienceinits sublime majesty can put what content it wills
into its kpowingand its willing. Itis the moral genius which knows
the voice of its inner intuition to be divine. Itis likewise the creativity
that can make any action to be right. To follow conscience is to practise a religion of self-worship.
656. This lonely religion is also communal, and holds for all who
speak the language of conscience and are conscientiously pure in purpose.
657. This sort of pure conscientiousness is wholly empty. One is
assured of always being right without regard to what one is right
about. Consciousness, the relation of mind to something objective, has
vanished into empty self-consciousness, and what we have is really
the untruth of the moral consciousness rather than its truth.
658. What emerges out ofthis emptying of morality is the Iheautiful
soul', which is too fine to commit itself to anything. It lacks force to

ANALYSIS

externalize itself and endure existence. It does not want to stain the
radiance of its pure conscientiousness by deciding to do anything particular. It keeps its heart pure by fleeing from contact with actuality
and preserving its impotence. Its activity consists in yearning, and it
is like a shapeless vapour fading into nothingness.
659. Con.~cience has yet to be considered as acting. It gives empty
universal duty a determinate content drawn from its own self, and
from that self as a natural individuality.
660. Self-certainty is the primary fact for conscience: the universal
Ansich takes a second place. For the universal consciousness represented by other people the absolute certainty of conscience is essentially evil and hypocritical.
66 I. The universal moral consciousness represented by 'the others'
tries to unmask the hypocrisy of the individual conscience. It tries
to show that the universal, impersonal language of morality is both
used by the conscientious person, and also serves to disguise his personal contempt for that universality.
662. There is an inherent incompatibility between the impersonal
universality ofc.onscious utterances and the claim to obey one's own
private standards. To be impersonal about confessedly personal standards is to abuse others.
663. But when the impersonal moralist condemns private conscientiousness as hypocritical, base, etc., he merely sets uponearbitrary personal standard against another. He in fact legitimizes the
conscience he attacks by taking issue with it.
664- Thejudgementofuniversal morality is unwilling to enter the
arena ofaction, and remains snug within the universality ofthought.
It thereby itselfexhibits hypocrisy, since it wishes its impeccable
judgements to do duty for hazardous deeds.
665. Thejudgementofuniversalmorality is itself a mode of action,
and its main concern is to denigrate men's conscientious acts by
explaining them byin teres ted motives like ambition, desireforhappiness, moralvanity, etc. No act can escape judgement in such denigratory terms: no hero can be a hero to his valet,hecause the latter is
a valet.
666. The exalted consciousness whichjudges the active individual
can itself be convicted of hypocrisy. It is afraid to act, and it passes
off its cowardice as a wonderful piece of insight. The man of action
sees his judge correctly as but another agent, and humbly confesses
his imperfections to him.
667. Butthis confession of moral inadeq uacyis hot met by a similar
confession on his judge's part: the judge remains stiff-necked and
hard"hearted. Such a retention of uncommunica dng being-for-self in
theface of the other's renunciation of the same, denies the very nature

VII. RELIGION, §§659---677

577

of Spirit, which is master and lord over every deed and reality, and
can make any of them as if it had never been.
668. The 'heautifulsoul' represents no accommodation of the clash
here considered. It simply passes away in yearning. It does not insist
on its own being~for~self) and merely sinks down to unassertive, soul~
less being.
669. The true accommodation of the two sides just mentioned
occurs when the moralist drops his attitude of stiff~necked judgement
and matches the confession of inadequacy of the practical man.
670. The recognition of himself, the moralist, in the erring practi~
cal agent involves an act of reconciliation and forgiveness which
simply is Absolute Spirit showing itself between the two antagonists.
671. The Notion of pure duty and tainted individual practice are
two sides of the same Notion in seeming opposition. They are the 'I =
I' where the Ego knows itself in its absolute other, another Ego. This
is the first full appearance of God, the object of religion, on the pheno~
menological stage.

VJI. RELIGION
67~. ]jitherto in Consciousn~s, Self-consciousness, Reason, and
Spirit therehllve been manifold consciousnesses of the Absolute. The
Absolute Being has not, however, been aware of itself in them.
673. The supersensible inner essence postulated by the scientific
understanding was the Absolute, but certainly not a case of Spirit
aware oLSpirit. The Unhappy Consciousness yearned towards the
Absolute, but did not tecognizethe Absolute as itself. Reason missed
the Absolute because it found itself in what was immediately before
itself.
674. In the religion of the. ethical order fate was an impersonal factor distinct from aU se1ves-----,,--they could not recognize themselves in
it. The spirits of the dead,on the other hand, may have putoffimmediat~ particularity~ but had not yet achieved true universality.
675. The religion of the Enlightenment had an empty Absolute
quite beyond the wholly satisfactory present. It emphatically failed
to see itself in its Etre suprenu.
676. The religion of morality and conscience involved an awareness of the inner universal self, but as having all differentiation and
all actuality outside of itself.
677. In religion Spirit is seif-consciol,ls, as it is not in the phases
outlined above. I tsees itself objectively as a universal Spirit compre~
hendingall essence and all actuality. It may have an objective natural
shape, but this is also wholly transparent.

ANALYSIS

678. Religion does not, however, com pletely unify the actual world
with the self of which it is conscious, but seems to have only a partial
connection with that world, to be clothed by worldly forms as an Quter
garmen t. I t does not yet see those worldly forms, in all their independent actuality, as simply Spirit itself.
679. Religion presupposes all the previous 'shapes' of Consciousness, Self-consciopsness, Reason, and Spirit. But though it contains
them an in unity, and not successively, yet, as individually realized
in the world, it must realize them in succession.
680. The stages which lead up to religion recur in religion as specifically religious phases, out ofwhich religion in its fullest realization
arises.
68 I. In religion the principles of the pre-relig,ious stages no longer
occur in isolation. We do not have a set ofliriear advances punctuated
by nodes, but each node sums up all the advances which occur at
other nodes and so is the centre of a radiating system. We have always,
i.e., the whole progression, but with one phase emphatic.
682-3. In developed religion consciousness is self-consciousness,
but not so at less developed stages. There Spirit first contemplates
itself in an immediate natural form, into which it then puts its own
creative life, i.e. the Art-Religion of Greece. In Revealed Religion,
finally, Spirit is itselfgiven to itself, but only in a form suitable to
picture-thought. From this it must rise to aself;;.consciousness in the
pure medium of thought.
NATURAL RELIGION

684. Religion is existence embraced in thought, or thought which
is there for itself. Only in the'specific way in which this pattern is
realized does one religion differ from another. All are phases in the
development of religion as such. In this development picture-thinking
is steadily reduced. In all stages of religious development there are
rudiments or residues ofwhat is present at other stages, e.g. the unity
of universality wi th individualityfully realized in a Christian incarnation is rudimentarily prefigured in the incarnations of other religions.
But though all religions contain all sides ofreligion, we must not confuse rudiments or residues with the full expressions. Only when Spirit
is at a certain stage does the religious presentation of that stage have
full truth.
THE GOD OF LIGHT (PERSIA)

685. Spirit at first has the consciousness of itself as being all truth
and all reality in the form of a mere concept, a dark night of essence
opposed to its daylight forms, a creative secret of birth. This secret
must be externalized, seen in and through all daylight forms.

VII. RELIGION, §§678-6g5

579

686. In its first immediate diremption, absolute Spirit appears to
itselfin the manner ofsense-certainty. It appears as a being pervaded
by Spirit, but Spirit in the form oflordship or mastery, the immediate
as opposed to the inwardly withdrawn form ofself-conscious ness. Its
shape is in fact shapelessness, the all-embracing light of the morning,
which shows itselfin the forms of Nature, but continues to play uncommittedly over them.
687. This life of uncommitted surface-play never truly returns to
self, nor makes its manifestations truly its own: these latter are merely
its attributes, its myriad names, its selfless surface-ornaments.
688. This incoherent life must rise to self-consciousness and give
firm subsistence to its vanishing forms. It must come to know itself
as itself. Firm subsistence must be dissolved in the gamut of forms
it lays before the individual.
PLANT AND ANIMAL (INDIA)

689. Religion goes on from seeing itself in the immediacies of sensecertainty to perceiving itself in a variety of independent forms, first
blameless and vegetable, then vicious and animal. These animal spirits
become locked in a combat unto death with one another.
690. Out of the self-cancelling attrition of the various animal
spidts, Spirit sees itself in a new guise, that of an artificer behind
objects. Spirit does not as yet see itself in the material it works upon:
this material is already determinate and pre-existent and Spirit
merely works upon it.
THE ARTIFICER (EGYPT)

691. Spirit now appears as an artificer, which puts itself into its
product, without knowing that it is itself that it is thus producing.
It works instinctively like a bee building its cells.
69 2 . The first products ofSpirit are products ofthe Understanding,
obelisks, etc. in which the straight predominates and the round is
shunned. Spirit imprisoned in these forms is as it were dead, external
to itself, not presen ted as Spirit.
693. Spirit now moves to a better representation of itself in which
soul is clothed by body and not merely working on it ah extra. At the
same time it sees this union externally, and so remains hidden from
itself.
694. Spirit takes plant forms and stylizes their freedom into the
straight and the round, the severe universals of thought and the
elements of free architecture.
695. Spirit mirrors its own individuality in animal forms, which
are, however, also hieroglyphs of.thought and not given as endowed
with language. Even when they rise to the human shape they are still

580

ANALYSIS

inarticulate and require the breath of morning to draw from them
a tone, not a significant word. ('As morning from the lips of Memuon
drew rivers of melodies~.)
696. The artificer himself lingers darkly in the background: when
he does represent himself it is in the shapelessness of a black stone.
697. The artificer, conscious of the conflict between his withdrawn
self and the outer product, expresses this conflict in a sphinx, halfanimal and half-human, articulate hut only in wise riddles.
698. S piri t now brings itselfexplici tly in to the produc tit crea tes, and
becomes an artist instead of an artificer. It creates a product in which
its own self-consciousness is manifest.
THE RELIGION OF ART (GREECE)

699. Spirit puts itself into a shape which is that of self-conscious
Spirit: it no longer goes in for incongruous mixtures of the natural
and the thinking.
700. The religion ofArt is closely connected withthe ethical Spirit.
Not a blind adoration of mastering light, nor an attrition of warring
castes, inspires it, but the life of a free people whose customs are also
the will of all.
70 I. In the ethical stage, however, Spirit has not as yet retreated
inwardly from its contented acceptance of its position ina society
where all have different duties. It must come to detaeh itself from
this happy life of custom., and must come to mourn over the loss of
happiness and security, before it can rise to true art.
702. Absolute art is a product of the break-up of merely customary
society. Previous art was merely instinctive, not a product of free
Spirit.
703. Spirit as artist banishes all that is colourful and substantial
from its expression. I t wan ts only to express itself, the fathomless nigh t
ofself-consciousness in which the ethics oCcustom is betrayed (Geth~
semane). All that it is interested in is form alone. {White marble
conception of Greek art due to their loss of colour.)
70.4. Spirit as artis t chooses an individual subJect~matter, and there
is pathos in such a choice. The universality of Spirit is do.minated
by the exigencies of the individ~al, hut these in their turn dominate
unformed matter. In the end we have Spirit presented in breathing
individuality and sensuous presence.
THE ABSTRACT WORK OF ART

705. The first work of art is abstractly individual, because immediate. It must move away from such individualized art towards selfconsciousness, which, in the religious cult, overcomes the otherness
of its religious object.

V] L RELIGION, §§6g6-714

581

706. The artistic product (the statue of the god) stands out as an
individual on the universal background that surrounds it and houses
it. It has a form which avoids the straight lines of the Understanda
ing and the incongruous imitative mixture of straight and curved
derived from vegetable shapes (in Egyptian art). It rejoic~s in the
incommensurability of the straight line and the curve, and uses
both.
707. The typical form produced by the art-religion is an idealized
human form whose semblance of animal functions stops at the form's
surface. Such an idealized human form unites natural existence with
self-conscious Spirit. It may contain residues of old untamed forcesthe Titans, etc.-but aU is dominated by a spirit which is also that
of a free, self.,conscious people.
708. The restless variety of actual individuals is brought to peace
in the idealized individuality of the sculptured god. In this, however,
the artist expresses none of his own tortured individuality. But the
work of the artist or the onlooker is as essential to the aestheticsituation' as the mere art-object
709. The artist's creative efforts are inadequately shown forth in
the art-object. When others admire his creation and eveD kneel before
it, the artist recognizes his superiority to it and to them.
7 I o. Self-conscious Spirit therefore seeks a more adequate artistic
expression than the mere art-object. This it finds in language, which
is simply self-conscious existence in its immediacy, where production
is one with product. The hymn is the essential art-form into which
spirit puts its self-consciousness, and it is a self-consciousness shared
by all who join in the singing.
71 I. We ,may, however, observe that oracular utterance is an even
more primitive religious expression of Spirit than the hymn. Spirit
has in it, however, not risen to universal self-consciousness, and so
takes the oracular sayings to spring from an a.lien self~consciousness.
Oracles tend to match the stage of spiritual evolution achieved, e.g.
in the ancienteast they utter sublime generalities which seem trivial
to developed consciousnesses.
712. In the religion of Art universal truths are not proclaimed in
oracular fashion, butarediscovered by each man's reflection. Oracles
utter the contingencies, whether of fact or practice, that cannot be
effectively discovered. (Socrates' daemon only told him trivial matters, leaving him to think out the great generalizations.)
7 I 3. After the digression of 7 I I. and 7 I 2., the hymn is contrasted
with the statue, the latter being extruded from the self and reposefully
'out there', while the hymn forms part of the life of the self and has
the vanishing character of that life.
7 I 4. In the religious cult the god loses his immobile 'out-thereness),

ANALYSIS

and the worshippers cease to be humble suppliants before their gods.
The god comes down from his pedestal and the worshippers actively
commune with him.
7 I 5. The abstract cult makes the soul into the temple of the
divinity, not merely someone striking attitudes before a divinity which
he contemplates from without. The Greeks were not, however, sufficiently conscious of their remoteness from divinity, their sinfulness,
and thought a change into white garments and a few penances could
purify them.
7 I 6. The religious cult involves an actual rite and cannot be carried
ou t on the plane of mere thought. In this rite the divine essence comes
down into actuality and becomes one with the self.
7 I 7. In the cult natural objects, bread and wine, are given a divine
meaning and a divine meaning is given concreteness and actuality.
718. The cult begins with the sacrifice of objects which, represent
a man's own personality and possession. But the god also makes a
sacrifice, firstly in creating the sacrificial object, and secondly in entering the sacrificer as he eats the sacrificial elements.
7 J9· A cult is most fully and abidingly realized in the construction
of a great temple, which is not only a dwelling for the divinity and
its treasures but for the use and enjoyment of the citizens.
THE LIVIN.G WORK OF ART

720. In the art-religion the self",consciollsness of the individual is
one with that of the national Spirit, not, as in the light-religion, wholly
subordinate and lost in the latter.
72 I. Self-consciousness in the art-religion does not involve the
strain of the artist, his dark struggle for expression. His self-consCiousness is not the dark, but the peaceful night, the night after sunset,
not before dawn. The fruits of Nature have been quietly consumed
and appropriated by self-consciousness.
722. In the various religious mysteries of Demeter and Dionysus
bread and wine mediate a full communion and revelation of Spirit
to Spirit.
723. In these mysteries the absolute Spirit unites with the self-consciousness of his worshippers, or the self-consciousness of the latter is
lost in the absolute Spirit.
724. The Absolute in these mysteries is not, however, completely
revealed. The mystery of the bread and wine is not the mystery of
flesh and blood.
'
72 5. At this level the Absolute as artist seeks a more adeq uate living
embodiment, not merely 'out there' and unmoving like the sculptured
god. This it finds in the athlete's matchless body displaying his powers
at one or other of the great athletic festivals.

VII. REL1GION, §§715-735

726. In the mysteries and the athletic games self-consciousness has
been made one with the absolute essence, but not in a balanced manner. In Bacchic revels the self has been rapt ou t of its body, in athletic
beauty spirit has become corporealized. In language alone can there
be a perfect balance of interior and exterior. This balanced language
is not the charged speech of l"l:ymns and oracles, but the luminous
language of literature, open to all the members of a contemporary
culture.
THE SPIRITUAL WORK OF ART

727. Language unites the various distinct national spirits into a
single pantheon, in which, however, there is considerable looseness
and independence, not subjected to an overriding unity.
728. The gods preside over all Nature and society: their chief is
merely primus inter pares. They represent various aspects and powers
of self-consciousness. Their essential unity is masked by an external
camaraderie.
729. In the epic' these various sides ofself-consciousness engage in
a dialecticwhich takes the form ofa pictorial narrative. The minstrel
is thereal power which unites the whole picture, bringing all together
through the might of his muse. Though not present in the narrative
.
he projects himself into the qeroes who occur in it.
730. The various aspects of self-consciousness appear in the epic
as separate individuals andJorces (including the dead), all sPlJrred
into activity bysomeone's cle.ed. Gods and men repeat each other's
work, the divine participants being redundant individuals instead of
active universals.
731. The gods thus individualized quarrel with one another in a
comic fashion. All that presides over them and over men is the unintelligible power of necessity.
732. Necessity really represents the power of the Notion operating
through all these seemingly independent realities. I t lurks in the background jl)St like the min~tre1. Both must, however, be brought into
the picture.
733. This is. what happens in tragedy where Janguage ceases to be
narrative and where self-conscious human beings are the.spokesmen,
behind whose mask actual actors are present.
734. The general commentary of the epic reappears in the discourse of the chorus of elders. These never reveal profound reflection.
or reaction> but practise only general observations, vague wishes, and
feeble comfort. Before necessity they are blindly resigned and show
only ineffective horror and pity.
735. In tragedy individuals are raised to heroic universality, while

ANALYSIS

a vaguer commentatorial universality surrounds them in the chorus
and spectators.
736. The divine forces in tragedy muster about the two poles of
the ethical order, the feminine, family pole, on the one hand, and
the masculine, governmental pole on the other.
737. The heroic agents in tragedy live divided between knowledge
and ignorance. Even the powers of light which give them knowledge
deceive them with ambiguous utterances which they completely trust.
(Hamlet and Macbeth are more cautious.)
738. There are in tragedy two standards of right, the daylight standard~ of Apollo and the underworld standards of the Furies.
739. Zeus is presented as the ultimate reconciler and .unity of the
two standards.
740. Both forces are equally right and wrong, and their struggle
ends in the death of the individual concerned, or his absolution from
guilt. Both then vanish in the calm balance of the ethical order.
741. Even in tragedy Zeus tends to predominate over the separate
ethical powers, which become demoted to passions in the individual,
not impersonal principles which pathetically crush him.
742. Zeus and necessity become more and more the central figures
in tragedy, on whom the chorus looks with terrified awe as on something quite alien.
743. The self-consciousness oftheherqes isgraduaUy passing beyond
their supposed limitations ofvision and becoming deeply critical.
744. In comedy the actor doffs his mask, and the individual self;.
consciousness reduces everything to mockery, even the solemn pro~
ceedings of the gods.
745. In comedy the common man asserts himself in his revolutionary disrespect for everything. But he also makes a mock of his
own self-assertion.
746. The dialectic of the Sophists and Socrates is a continuation
of the dissolving irony of comedy. For conventional opinions and prescriptions it substitutes cloudy notions of goodness and beauty.
747- The truth ofcomedy is that all the great big essential fixtures
that stand over against self-consciousness are really products of, and
at the mercy of, self~consciousness. The individual knows himself in
his individuality as the Absolute.
REVEALED RELIGION

748. The religion of art has made the great step of making its Absolute a Subject·instead of a Substance. It has expressed itself in forms
(that ofthestatue) emblematic ofself~consciousness, and in the comic
consciousness it has reached a pitch where all, including itsdf, is at
the mercy of the individual self-consciousness.

VII. RELIGION, §§736-756

749. Spirit has inverted the view of the self as a mere apanage of
the absolute essence to making the latter, in the comic consciousness,
a mere apanage of the former. It now inverts that inversion but without returning to the original priority of mere Substance set over
against self-consciousness. Since it consciously gives priority to the absolute essence, the absolute essence continues to be itself, i.e. self-consciousness, ofwhichitjs in another form conscious. We have therefore
two coequal sides of se}f'::',consciousness instead of situations in which
one of these sides takes precegence over the other.
750. The art-religion and the comic consciousness are the spirit of
a time in which the ethical spirit is being eroded, and pure individual.
ism is beginnin,g to run riot. This is a period of abstract right like
that of the early Roman Empire, when religion has l<:>st its meaning
and a man lives un ~o himself alone.
751. Abstract right is, however, an empty abstraction, and soon
passes over ipto yearning for a new Absolute. The Roman Empire,
the seat of Stoic strellgth of mind, becomes a prey to the Unhappy
Consciousness.
752. What is to the comic cons~iousness a vast joke is to the Unh~ppyCqnsciousness~ vast ptisery.lts .own abstractself.. consciousness
is i:l mlser~ble ref1,lge, and it cries with Luther (not yet born) that
'God is dead'.
753. Tpe ynhappy Cop~~iouslless has lost all reaSOn for respecting
it~el(, \\lheth~r as le~~J peXsOP. or as a rational thinking beirg.
the
religi~~s a-pd artis!ic e?Cpr~ssions of its culture-st~t1,les, dtes, etc.~
h~yepecome deeply me~ni~gless, ~sthey are formoc:lern scholars who
study them in a merely ext~rna~,lifeless way, and build up pictorial
vie\Vs qf their b~ck.ground. Really., however, our reinterpretation of
an,tiS\uity is more important thall antiquity itself, ifwe wHl but trllly
remem ber and interiorize it [Erinnern]. Image of the maiden and the
fruits.
754. All tl;1e sp~ritu~l attitudes engendered in the classical world,
fr0!11 the sculptural to the. M0icaland the scePtic~l, can he pictured
as in Wait about the true birthplace of self-consciousness, half in hope
ang half in, despair.
755. SpiriLqt~Y b~ th9~S;ht of (~) as Substance gqing out of itself
ang becomipg self..coIlscio1J~l)ess; (p) as se1f-con,scio 1,lsnesS goillg out
of itself and making itself Sllbstance. Spirit, we mays~y, l;1~s a real
mother, se~f-consc~oUsJ1ess, and a merely dispositional father, Substance.
756. Spirit is at first one-sided1y conscious of itself as (b). As such
it fantastically imposes subjective interpretations on nature, history,
and past religions, interpretations that are really not warranted. (The
cults of Isis,Mithras, etc.)

An

586

ANALYSIS

757. But Spirit must be aware of (a) as much as of (b), i.e. it must
see what immediately is before it taking on the lineaments of Spirit.
This will happen at a certain stage in world·history when Spirit sees
itself in the objective necessity of external things.
758. At a certain favourable moment in history the belief arises
(note stress on beliefrather than event) that absolute Spirit has taken
on actual, sensuous form. God is taken to e~ist before the yearning,
conscious mind, and not to be merely a projection of it. And God
is believed to exist as an individual self-consciousness.
759. God's being made man is the simple content of absolute religion. Spirit is knowledge of self in self-abandonment, and absolute
religion knows God as Spirit. Absolute religion is revealed religion
because in it God is revealed, and revealed as essentially se1f·con·
scious. We do not achieve absolut~ religion as long as the object of
religion is other than the Subject, is thought of merely as the abso·
lutely good, creator of heaven and earth, etc. God must know God
in religion ~ he must know himselfin the religious person.
760. To be conscious ofhimselfin a finite, sen~uous, human indIvidual does not represent a descent for God but the consummation of
his essence. For God is not me~ely an abstract being, r~m?te from
concrete sensuous instantiation: he is only fully and compl~tely himself in an instance.
761. Revealed rel~~ion is one with sp~culativeknowJ~??e: both
attain to the knowledge of the universal as essentially intQe~ndiviq u~l.
This is the message for which all previo~sages were thir~ting.
762. The individuation of the absolut~ essence is~ however,
pictur~d as achieved only in one case (lesu~), not equally in all, i.e.
it is not truly a universal, notional self-consciousness which is eyeryone's equally. Men are conceived as a lotof perceptible indivicil,lals,
not as a single concept.
763. But the single exemplification of the absolute essence must die
in time in order to become something in which all men can share.
If Christ does not go, the Holy Ghost cannot come to the worshippi~g
community.
764. The passing of Christ's life iqto the remote past merely
pictures its translation to the plane of universal meanings.
765. The religious conscioqsness think~ tbe truth in piC:*1Jres which
give a fa]se independence to the various'sides of what it. believes in.
These pictures have to be given a notional reinterpretation.
766. The religious consciousness goes astray when it substitutes for
its own rich life the brooding upon a historical figure and particular
events in the past.
767. Spirit is essentially a process which starts from pure tho~ght
(logic) ,goes on into otherness and pictorial presentation (Nature)} and

VlI. RELIGION, §§757-778

returns from Nature to completeself-consdousness (Spirit proper). It
is also essentially the synthetic connection of these three phases.
768. In the unhappy and believing consciousnesses there was a partial self-co,llsciousness of Spirit. Spirit, however, mistakenly referred
itself to a sphere beyond the conscious subject.
769. Spirit conceived in the element of pure thought is meaningless
unless it also becomes manifest in something other than its pure self
and returns to itself out of such otherness.
770. God is there manifes t firstly as the Essence (the Father),
secondly as the Being-for-self for whom the Essence is (the Logos or
Word which made the realm of Nature), and thirdly as the ,Beingfor..,selfwhich knows itself in the other (the Spirit or principle of selfconsciousness) .
77 I. Pictorial religion turns the necessary relations of essential
moments within the Absolute into external generative relations of
paternity and sonship.
772. The relation of the Absolute's moments in the pure thought
of the Absol u te is a relation of pure love in which the sides we distinguish are not really distinct. But it is of the essence of Spirit not to
be a mere thing of thought, but to be concrete and actual.
773. Since the element of purt thought is abstract,··.it necessarily
passes over into thcrealm of intuitive picture-thought, i.e. the realm
of Nature. There one has a plurality of substantial things and a
plurality of thinking subjects.
774. This passing over into the world of intuitive picture-thought
is what is pictorially called 'creation'. The absolute universality
requires instantiation to be what it is, and ids this logical requirement
which is misleadingly pictured as a temporal requirement.
775. Spirit not only instan tia tes itself in objec ts but also in subjects.
These are at first not conscious of themselves as spiritual, and hence
are innocent rather than good. Their first ·se1f-consciousness is as
capable of evil as of good. This first self-consciousness is pictorially
misrepresen ted as a historical 'fall'.
776. Evil is the first actual expression- of the dirempted self-consciousness, but it is the one that self-consciousness as it deepens must
more and more repudiate. Pictorially, therefore, it is referred back
to an infinitely remote date, to the fall from heaven of Lucifer, son
of the morning. The angelic hosts enter the picture as a valuable
pluralization of thebeing-for-se1f of the Word. Ifwe add them to the
Trinity we get aqua ternity ~ and if we add the fallen angels we get
a quinity. Counting in theology is, however, a bad practice. (Note
Hegel's incorporation of Evil into the Absolute.)
777-8. Pictorial religious thought tends to extrude evil from God
exceptinso far as, with great difficulty, it credits God with a wrathful

588

ANALYSIS

side. The activity of God. can be nothing but a bringing-together of
the dirernpted world with his simple essence, each of which is onesided without the other.
779. Pictorial religion treats the redemption of the aliena ted world
as an act of arbitrary free will. But in reality the absolute essence
would be abstract and unreal ifit did not exercise itselfredemptively,
ifit did not en ter the sphere of alienation and overcome the alienation.
This it does by living and then dying, accepting the burden of sensuous
instantiation and rising above it to pure universality.
780. That God becomes alienated from himself in angelic and
human evil does not mean that such evil really lies outside of God.
To be distant from God is to be distantly God : nothing can lie outside
of the Absolute Being. The self-centred ness, the Insichgehen, which is
the root of evil, is an essential moment in the life of the Absolute.
This religion recognizes in making God redeem the alienated, selfcentred beings. Evil is in a deep sense the same being. . for-self as absolute good, yet, in a dee-per sense, it is not the same, since in fully
developed being..for-se1f evil will beset aside and overcome. The
true selfishness will drive out the untrue. It is above all mistaken in
this sphere to speak in terms of fixed identity and diversity, and to
fant9recogni~ethe dialecticaLmovemen t which makes everything
tUfP intosomethipg else. NatlJreisand is notGod,and GodisGod
onlypy departipg from himself in Nature, and returning to himself
in Spirit.
781. Spirit is mostessentiaUy itself in the religious community
where the Divine Man or Human God is transformed into the
members' universal, inward, chastening self-consciousness.
782. Evil lies not so much in an abuse of natural existence as in
the very conception ofitas other than, remote from, Spirit. It is only
for picture-thought that Nature is at first good, then fallen. In the
Absolute there is no such history ofphases) only moments which entail
one another,
783. Evil is nothing but the going-into-self out of the immediacy
of nature and is accordingly the first step in the direction of good.
To be evil one must be conscious of the norms one rebels against,
and will ultimately obey. There is no element of chance in the goingintouselfwhich leads to evil: ids the essential movement ofself-con..
sciousness,
784. Instead of seeing the redemption of the alienated world as ,inherently necessary th~·reHg10us consciousness sees it as due to a special
event, God's incarnation and death. But it also realizes that death
to be a resurrection, the universal life of Spirit among the individuals
in a religious community.
785. What is really meant by the passion and resurrection is the

VIII. ABSOLUTE KNOWING, §§779-792

elimination of pictorial particularity and its supersession by the life
of thought. An existent entity has become a Subject, a universal selfconsciousness. The mere idea of self-consciousness has likewise become
a concrete reality. God as a picture must die in order that God as
a thought may live, ODe with every man's deepest self-consciousness.
786. Spirit is the mover, the moved, and the motion. It is its nature
to forgive and pardon evil, to reconcile it with itself. But the religious
community sees this aU in pictures.
787. The religious consciousness never fully identifies itself with the
object of its devotion, hut at best pictures itself as coming together
with tha t object at an indefinitely future date. The religious community
has an actual father (its own action and knowledge) but a merely
felt mother, eternal love which will one day unite it with God.

VIII. ABSOLUTE KNOWING
788. In revealedre1igionse1f-consdousness is aware of itself in pictorial objective form, not as yet as self-consciousness. It mp§t cancel
this form and become aware of itself in all the forms it has hitherto
taken up. They mustnot merely be forms ofself.;co~sciousness form,
the phenomenological observers, butfor se1f-consciousnesshself.b
must see howithasexternalized itselfin various objects, and in seeing
~l)is, also cancelled the externalizatibn; I tmust see all its objective
forms as itself.
789. Theobjectofreligionis atfitst an immediate existence (given
in sensation)) a determinate e~istence (given in perception), and a
notion 'given as behind the immediate (to the scientific lJnderstanding). Consciousness must nOw grope forward to an unders~anding of
objects in the form of self. But it does so by gradual stages, and
dirempts itselfinto a number of distinct mental postures in which
separate sides of the object are gradually brought together.
790. Consciousness assuming the form of obsetvationreaches the
point of seeing itself, the Ego, ·as an external thing given to senseperception, the bones of the skull.
79 I. This view of the Ego as sensuous externality is, however, also
the view of external things as nothing butthe Ego. The full development of this realization arises at the stage of enlightenment or pure
insight, when things are considered solely from the point of view of
their utility to the subject.
792. A further spiritualization of objective thinghoodo.ccurs in the
moral self~consciousness, where the Ego's seW.certainty extends to the
whole of essential being, everything else being a mere husk. As the

59 0

ANALYSIS

oscillation of moral duplicity vanishes, all objec6ve ends are absorbed
in a man's own conscientiousness.
793. Spirit certain of itself in its objective existence takes as the
element of its existence nothing but the knowledge of self. That what
it does is in accord with its ideas of duty makes them its duty. There
is still, however, an opposition between pure duty and the external
worl.d and what men in it do. But with the act of forgiving another,
this last opposition vanishes, and in all human action the Ego only
encounters the Ego.
794. In religion this knowledge of Ego by Ego becomes explicit
(in the Incarnation). Ego is known both in and for itself (and by
itself).
795. In religion, however, the identification of Ego with Ego is still
only achieved in the medium of picture-thought. A less pictorial
identification was achieved in the case of the beautiful soul, whose
pure inwardness really amounts, not merely to an intuition of the
Divine, but to the Divine intuiting itself. Only the opposition to realization makes this last form defective. We must progress to a knowledge ofself, not as a floating universal, but in its particular externalizatioD.
79p. This knowl~dge.mu$t som<:ihow unite the religious consciousn~ss)withjtspictQriaJotherness.,and tber:r)()r~Lspidt, which i5simply
the self in.actJo.nf~cing the two possibilities·qf the~viL~nd the good.
ThF.xeligiousspiritand the moral spiritrrntst bQthaban.don their rigid
djstillFtion frorn. on~al)other. Theh;:J,rd",ed·ge.d, abstract,out-thereness
of religion, its presentative character, must blend with the personal
inwardnesspfthemoral spirit. They must infa,ct hoth lose themselves
in anew spirit.
797. In this new spirit t!le content of r~ligion must become the
actior, ofthes~lf, must be seen by the self as expressing phases of its
own interior drama.
7911 We now r<:iach comprehending knowJedge (hegreijendes
Wissen) , or time andknpwledge in the form of self. Spirit has redu,ced
aU its objective.materials to pure conc~pts which ar~mere1y specifications.of its own c9nc~ptl.Jalactivity, Purely conceptual knowledge of
knowledge in the form of self is Wissenschaft, Systematic Science.
799. What we llQwhave, th~refore, isa pyre knowledge of self, even
of this individuaLself, which is also the kn.owJedgeof all the moments
of cont<:int which s<;Jf distinguishes from self, and in comprehending
brings back into self.
800. Systen:tatic Science only appears when Spirit has achieved a
purely conceptualself."consciousness andean reduce all objectivity to
Notions, and so see itself in them.
801. Consciousness must go through a long process of first enrich-

VIII. ABSOL UTE KNOWING, §§ 793--808

59 1

ing its object, poor and abstract in its first appearance, and then
appropriating and conceptually reabsorbing all that it has thus
enriched. The pure Notion presupposes all these stages that lead up
to it, but consciousness embraces them all in implicit non-notional
form. Time is the Notion itself when presented to consciousness as
an empty intuition, and Spirit appears to itself in time till it achieves
full notional grasp and thereby abolishes time. Time is the destiny
and the necessity of the as yet not perfected Spirit, i.e. until it has
overcome the externality of objective Substance.
802. Everything we know must come before us in a living phase
of experience (Erfahrung). The substantial, the solidly out there, must
slowly be transmuted into the notional, the subjective. Time simply
is the form of this self-realizing process. Until Spirit reaches the end
of the requisite temporal process it cannot achieve complete self-consciousness.
803. The final conceptualization and reduction to self of all objectivity began when the religious world-view of the Middle Ages made
way for the post-Renaissance philosophers. These ran through an
observational phase in Cartesianism, a unified, oriental, religion-oflight phase in Spinozism, an individualistic, monadistic form in Leibniz. Everything became further subjectivized in the utility of the
Enlightenment and in the pure rational, noumenal will of Kant. The
subjectivization became more absolute in the Ego .. positing-the-Ego
of Fichte, and the dependent construction of both time and space.
This leads on to the imperfectly carried out subjectivization of the
substantial natural world in Schelling, the natural being externally
and imperfectly integrated with the Ego in one Absolute.
804. The Ego must not, however, be afraid of the substantial world
of 0 bjective Nature: this is its foil and therefore itself. The power of
Spirit lies in remaining one with itself while it externalizes itself in
Nature, and that without paring down the elaborate distinction of
na tural being. It m us t understand Nature in all its variety as necessary
to itself.
805. Spirit is all the phases of content in which it externalizes itself,
and the process of leading these phases back to a full consciousness
of self. It unfolds its existence and develops its processes in the pure
ether of its life and is Systematic Science. In Systematic Science the
distinction between subjective knowledge and objective truth is eliminated: each phase always has both aspects.
806-7. Systematic Science cannot, however, remain a pure conceptual development: it must step out of itself and see Spirit developed
in space and time and in na ture.
808. It must then study Spirit returning to itself in time, i.e. In
the long procession of historical cultures and individuals.

INDEX
Absolute, 9, I r, 12, 4-6f.
acknowledgement, see recognition
age and youth, 288
almsgiving, 339
analogy, 152
analysis, 18
Anaxagoras, 34
angels, 419f.
Antigone, 261, 284
appearance and surface show, 87
apperception, 144
argumentation (raisonnement), 3Sf.
Aris.tophanes, 4-51, 452
Aristotle, 12, 44
artist, 429
asceticism, 135f., 339
astrology, I 88
Aurelius, Marcus, 523
autarky, 393
Bacchanalian revel, 27
Bacchus, 65, 4-34, 43 8
'beautiful soul', 383f.
beauty and the Understanding, 19
Bethlehem, 4-56
beyond, the, 87f.
brain, 196, 2 I 0
bread and wine, mystery of, 438,451
brother and sister, 274f.
Brownianism, 3on.
category, 142f., 208f., 236, 25~, 260, 263
Ceres, tis, 434, 43 8
character, 239, 280, 285
chorus (Greek), 444f.
Christ, 525
cohesion, I 73
comedy, 450f.
common sense philosophy, 42
conscience, 383ff., 392ft'., 4) I, 4 81
contradiction, 99
creation, 467
crime, 182, 282
·cult, 432f., 43Sf.

custom, 212, 214
daimon (of Socrates), 43 1
daughter, 274death, 270f., 30B, 360
Democritus, 21
demos, 451
Descartes, 352
devotion, 13 1, 430, 433
dialectic, I 24
Diderot, 318n., 3320.
Diogenea, 319
disposition, 204
dissemblance, 374ff.
dogmatism, 23, 33
duty, 279f., 365 f., 370f., 376, 383f., 402,
408 , 482
earnestness, 375f., 380
Earth, the, 178, 300
ecstasy, 5, 44
edification, Sf.
Eidos, Idea, -34electricity, 92f., 153
elements, universal, 155, 300
Eleusinian mysteries, 65
empiricism, 144
Enlightenment, the, 328ff.
enthusiasm, 44n.
eovironment,infiuence of, 155, J 79
epic poetry, 44' f., 507f.
Epictetus, 523
Erinyes, 277, 447
esoteric and exoteric, 7
espece, 298
Eteocles, 285
Euclid,24
Eumenides, 4 10, 474
experience, 55f.
experiment, 152f.
explanation, 94, 101
faction, 360
Fall, the, 468, 471

594

INDEX

falsehood, falsity, 2, 22f.
familiar, the (not cognitively understood), 18
family, 268f.
Fate, 446, 448, 455f.
Faust,218n.
feeling, appeal to, 43
festival (Greek), 437f.
Fichte, 31 n.
flattery, 3 10 , 315
forgiveness, 407
formalism, 9, 30
Furies, 447, 449 f.

mathematical knowledge, 24ff.
matter, 154,351,361
'matters', 153
mediation, I If.
mediator, 136, 13B, 476
method, philosophical, 28, 52
minstrel, Hoff.
monarch, 3 I I
motion, law of, 93f.
mystery and the mystical, 437

genus and species, 176fT.
good and evil, 472f.
grace, 371
gravity, specific, 172ft'.

naIvety of Nature, 210
necessity, 217,219
negativity, 51
Notion (Begrifj) , 20, 53,
485,490
Noils, 34
number, 17 2 , 174

Hamlet, 20 I, 446n.
handwriting, 189
hero, 404
history, 488 , 492
husband and wife, 273
hypocrisy, 401, 405

Oedipus, 446n.
oracles, 430f., 446
Orestes, 446n ..
organism, 154ft'.
Origen, 348
'ought' and 'is', 151

idealism, 33, 142fT.
'in-itself' and 'tor-itself', 17
incarnation, 459, 475
innocence, 467
interest, 240, 243, 248
intuition, 10, 63, 489

palmistry, 188
parents and children, 273
Pannenides, 44
'pathos', 284, 285
Penates, 274, 287
Phoebus, 446
phrenolo~y, 18,5ff.
physiognomy, 185fT.
Plato, 44, 196
pleasure, 2 I 7ff.
Polynices, 28Sf.
priesthood, 330
probability and truth, 152
property, 257
prop~sitional form, 3Bff.
psychology, 182
purpose and purposiveness, See teleology

justice, 277
Kant, 29
kenosis, 457, 465
labour, I r8, 213
ladder to standpoint of Science, 14
language, 66, 308fT., 395fT.
Lavater, 193n.
Laws of Thought, I BofT.
Lethe, 2 8 7, 44B, 474
Leucippus, 2 I
Lichtenberg, 19 1, 193
Logic is speculative philosophy, 22, 28
Logos (the Word), 465
love, 255, 466 (, 47 B
Lucifer, 468
Macbeth, 446n.
madness, 225
marriage, 273

104,

quality, 33, 34quantity, see mathem<j.tics

raisonnement, see argumentation
recogn~tion, J J Iff.
revelation, 461
sacrifice, I 37ff.
Schiller, 493n.
self-will, 119, 121

344, 35 6 ,

INDEX
show, surface. 87
skull, 197
Socrates, 43 I
Solon, 188f.
sophistry, 124. 26.
soul, 160
space, 93, 106
specific gravity, 172ff.
Sphinx, 446
state power, 301 ff.
subject and predicate, 37fr.
subject and substance, 10
syllogism, 177
synsomaties, 153
talent, 239f.
teleology, l56fr.
Thing, thinghood, 69ff.
time, 27, 93, 106, 47 6
tragedy, 443ff.
triadic form, 29
Trinity, 325
truth and falsity, 2, 22ff.

truth and probability, 152
truth and system, 3, 13
Unchangeable, the, 127ft'.
Understanding, the, 18
Unhappy Consciousness, I 58ff.
utility, 343, 353 fT.
valet, moral, 404vanity, 319f.
vassal, 307
virtue, 228fr.
virtue, ancient, 234
war, 288f.
'way of the world', 227ff.
wealth, 30 I fr.
Winterl, 153n.
wit, 317
wrath (of God), 470
Zeus, 446fr.

595

PHILOSOPHY

" Hegel 's Phenomenology was written, so the story goes, on the eve of
Napoleon 's destruction of the Holy Roman Empire and at the beg inning of the German 'Wars of Liberation .' The book itself is no less
dramatic or revolutionary. It is Hegel's grandest experiment, changing our vision of the world and the very nature of the philosophical
enterprise.
" In the rig htfully famous Preface, Hegel lays out the principles that
define the rest of hi s work and so much ph ilosophy to follow. In the
Introduction, he briefly summarizes the argument that comp letes
Kant's philosophical revolution, rendering skepticism a dead issue
and id eali sm an inspiring ca ll to change and self-real ization. In 'Consciousness,' he anticipates some of the most radical insights of contemporary epistemology, defending Kant and Fichte and moving beyond them to the work of the later Wittgenstein. In 'Self-Consciousness,' he provides a model of self and self-identity wh ich begins a new
era in philosophy, inspiring Marx and Sartre and so many others. And
as he develops his symphony of ' Reason,' Hegel puts into harmony ethics and autonomy, ancient philosophy and tragedy, Byronic Romanticism, German poetry, the Enlightenment, the French Revolution, the
concept of virtue, the hi story of religion (including an ambiguous
defense and cr itique of modern Christianity), the beginnings of a new
philosophy of science and Kant's moral philosophy. All are tied together with the dazzling if sometim es bewildering leaps in logic that
have come to be known as 'Hegel's dialectic.'
" No one can read this book without feeling that he or she is encounterin g not onl y an imp ortant historical document but a living
example of the finest powers of the philosophical im ag ination."
Robert C. Solomon, Professor of Ph ilosophy.
University of Texas, Austin
Based on J. Hoffmeister's German text, this new English translation is the
work of A. V. Miller, who has also translated Hegel' s Science of Logic and
Philosophy of Nature. The vo lum e contain s an introductory essay and paragraph-by-paragrap h ana lysis by Professor J. N. Findlay of Boston University,
whose earlier work includes Meinong 's Theory of Objects and Values and Hegel:
A Re-examination.

ISBN 978-0-19-824597-1

Oxford Paperbacks

U.S. $19.95

