GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL
The Science of Logic

The purpose of the Cambridge Hegel Translations is to offer translations of the best modern German editions of Hegel’s work in a
uniform format suitable for Hegel scholars, together with philosophical introductions and full editorial apparatus.
This new translation of The Science of Logic by G. W. F. Hegel (also
known as his Greater Logic) includes Book One (revised 1832), Book
Two (1813) of Volume One, and Volume Two (1816). Recent research
has given us a detailed picture of the process that led Hegel to his
final conception of the System of Philosophy and of the place of the
Logic within it. We now understand how and why Hegel distanced
himself from Schelling, how radical this break with his early mentor
was, and to what extent it entailed a return (but with a difference)
to Fichte and Kant. In the introduction to the volume, George di
Giovanni presents in synoptic form the results of recent scholarship
on the subject, and, while recognizing the fault lines in Hegel’s System
that allow opposite interpretations, argues that the Logic marks the
end of classical metaphysics. The translation is accompanied by a full
apparatus of historical and explanatory notes.
g e or g e di gio va n n i is Professor of Philosophy at McGill University, Montreal. His previous publications include Freedom and Religion in Kant and his Immediate Successors: The Vocation of Humankind,
1774–1800 (Cambridge, 2005), Between Kant and Hegel: Texts in the
Development of Post-Kantian Idealism (2000), and The Cambridge
Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant, Vol VI: Religion and Rational
Theology (Cambridge, 1996).

CA M B R I DG E HE G E L T RA N S LA TI O N S
General editor: Michael Baur

Heidelberg Writings: Journal Publications
Edited and translated by Brady Bowman and Allen Speight
The Science of Logic
Edited and translated by George di Giovanni

GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH
HEGEL
The Science of Logic
translated and edited by
GEORGE DI GIOVANNI
McGill University

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore,
São Paulo, Delhi, Dubai, Tokyo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521832557
© George di Giovanni 2010
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the
provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part
may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published in print format 2010
ISBN-13

978-0-511-78978-6

eBook (NetLibrary)

ISBN-13

978-0-521-83255-7

Hardback

Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

IN MEMORIAM
HENRY SILTON HARRIS
late fellow of the Royal Canadian Academy of the Humanities
scholar, philosopher, humanist, mentor, friend
m’insegnavate come l’uom s’etterna:
e quant’io l’abbia in grado mentr’io vivo
convien che ne la mia lingua si scerna.
Inferno XV, 85–87

Contents

Acknowledgments
List of abbreviations
Introduction
Translator’s note

page viii
ix
xi
lxiii
1

the science of logic
volume one
the objective logic

7
7
11

Preface to the first edition
Preface to the second edition

Introduction

23

book one: the doctrine of being

45

book two: the doctrine of essence

337

volume two
the science of subjective logic or the doctrine of
the concept

507

Appendix: Hegel’s Logic in its revised and unrevised parts
Bibliography
Index

754
757
777

vii

Acknowledgments

I wish to thank John Burbidge, Marina Bykova, David Carlson, and Angelica Nuzzo, all of whom read an earlier draft of my introductory essay and
made invaluable suggestions and occasional corrections. To David Carlson
I owe special thanks for having saved me from some egregious errors. I
am grateful to Cinzia Ferrini for having alerted me to the significance
of otherwise unobtrusive changes in the 1832 edition of Hegel’s text, and
must also acknowledge the debt that I owe to Antonio Moretto’s studies
on Hegel and the mathematics of the infinite. These studies have provided
important historical background for Hegel’s discussion of calculus that I
would have otherwise missed. I thank Michael Baur, the editor of the series,
for many suggestions and corrections. How much indebted I am to the
scholarly labours of the late H. S. Harris should be evident from my notes.
This translation is dedicated to his memory.
I wish to thank Anna Ezekiel, McGill doctoral student, for her muchneeded help in shaping an unwieldy script into presentable form and
for her truly heroic bibliographical work. Most of all, I thank Dr. Pierre
Chetelat, at one time doctoral student at McGill and my research assistant
for the past three years, for the care with which he read over the text
of the translation at various stages of production and made numerous
suggestions for improving style. Together with Anna, he also contributed
to the composition of many of the notes. He is solely responsible for the
Index. I consider myself fortunate to have had such capable collaborators.
I am of course responsible for any errors.
The research associated with this work was made possible by a grant from
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (Grant
Code: G206217) and further subsidized by the Fonds de recherche sur la
société et la culture (Quebec). Meiner Verlag graciously gave permission to
enter in the margins the pagination of their critical edition.
george di giovanni
viii

Abbreviations

A – /B – = Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, cited according to
the pagination of the 1781 and 1782 editions (A and B).
AK = Immanuel Kant. Gesammelte Schriften, ed. Royal Prussian Academy
of the Sciences (Berlin: Reimer, 1902–), cited by volume and page
number.
GA = J. G. Fichte – Gesamtausgabe der bayerischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, ed. R. Lauth and H. Gliwitzky (Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt: Fromann-Holzboog, 1962–2005), cited by series number
in Roman numerals, volume number, pagination, and when
appropriate line number.
GW = G. W. F. Hegel: Gesammelte Werke, Deutsche
Forschungsgemainschaft (Hamburg: Meiner, 1968–), cited by
volume, page, and when appropriate line number.
Miller = Hegel’s Science of Logic, trans. A. V Miller (London: Allen &
Unwin, 1969).
Moni/Cesa = G. W. F. Hegel: Scienza della Logica, Vols. I and II, trans.
Arturo Moni (1924–25); revised, Claudio Cesa (Roma-Bari: Laterza,
2001).
Guyer/Wood = Critique of Pure Reason, trans. and ed. Paul Guyer and
Allen Wood (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).

ix

Introduction

prologue
Writing an introduction to a translation of Hegel’s Logic is an even more
formidable task than the translation itself. There are serious issues that
immediately confront the author, and it will not be amiss to indicate them
at the start, and also to declare how I have chosen to settle them. First,
there is the issue of defining the task that an introduction should perform.
An introduction cannot be a step-by-step guide for the neophyte across
the intricacies of the Logic. Fortunately, it need not be. There are already
guides of this kind available, some classic, others more recent, all good in
their different ways.1 An introduction may be a general statement about
the project of the Logic, its place in Hegel’s System, and the key concepts
that govern the progression of the categories. But general statements of this
kind, while of no use to those already in the know, do little in the way of
indicating why the Logic is at least an interesting, and as I believe also still
significant, philosophical product. It is not clear, in other words, whether
such statements do any work at all. They certainly do nothing to motivate
a reading of the Logic and may even simply reinforce well-established prejudices. For this reason, I have decided in this introduction to focus on the
Logic’s problematic nature as such. My claim is that the Logic is to be read as
still in line with Kant’s Transcendental Logic, though without being “transcendental” in Kant’s sense. But once this determination is made, another
issue immediately arises. Of course, however philosophically important the
Logic might still be, the fact remains that it is a dated document. Why
1

For instance, in chronological order: G. R. G. Mure, An Introduction to Hegel (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1940) and A Study of Hegel’s Logic (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1950); John Burbidge, Hegel’s
Logic: Fragments of a Commentary (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1981); Clark Butler,
Hegel’s Logic: Between Dialectic and History (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1996); John
Burbidge, The Logic of Hegel: An Introduction (Peterborough, Ont.: Broadview, 2006); David Gray
Carlson, A Commentary to Hegel’s Science of Logic (Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2007).

xi

xii

Introduction

Hegel should ever have wanted to attempt it needs historical explanation.
And this I have done with as much detail as space allowed. But the problem
is that the moment one departs from a purely historical account and takes
a definite stand on the nature of the Logic, one is immediately faced with
a host of conflicting interpretations, both classic and recent, and, while
one cannot enter in an introduction into an extended polemical debate
with them, to ignore them would smack of dogmatism. I have tried to
negotiate my way out of this dilemma by bringing out the fault lines in the
Logic along which different and even contradictory readings are possible.
I neither ignore nor dismiss these readings, even though I perforce refer
to them globally. For the classic and more metaphysical of them there was
no problem singling out J. M. E. McTaggart as the representative figure.
But the state of the recent, in spirit more “hermeneutic” readings is still
much too fluid for singling out any representative figure. Hence, although
I shall mention the occasional name in footnotes, I shall refer to these more
recent developments only in general, without emblematic representation.
Between these two extremes, a host of more qualified readings are available
in the literature. I hope that, by motivating a study of the Logic, I also
motivate a study of all this literature.
Nothing is simple about Hegel’s Logic, not even the history of its production. As we shall see, the text that we have represents a work in progress.
Hegel did not live to carry out the revision that he had planned for the
whole work but accomplished it only in part. There are good exegetical
reasons, therefore, for comparing the revised with the corresponding unrevised parts of the text, and also for asking what changes Hegel might have
brought to the parts never revised if he had lived to complete the revision.
But considerations of this kind demand an already close acquaintance with
the text or at least an immediate close perusal of it, and for this reason,
with two exceptions which will come up in due time, I relegate them to an
appendix.
the publication of the logic
Hegel’s interest in the science of logic dates at least as far back as 1801
when he moved to Jena to assist Schelling, hoping to establish himself in
an academic career.2 There, starting from the 1801/02 winter term, Hegel
offered a course on Logic and Metaphysics every year, with the exception
2

Hegel assisted Schelling in producing the Kritisches Journal der Philosophie, in which he also published
his first essays. These essays are collected in GW 4.

Introduction

xiii

of the 1805/06 winter term, after which time he left the city. We shall
return to these lecture courses in due course. Despite Hegel’s repeated
announcements during this Jena period of a forthcoming book on the
subject,3 his published work on logic came considerably later. The first
part of what was announced as the first volume of a planned two-volume
Science of Logic4 was published only in 1812, when Hegel was professor
and rector at a gymnasium in Nürnberg. The second part of the same
volume came the year after, in 1813.5 Both parts went under the subtitle of
Objective Logic, and the second carried the further subtitle “The Doctrine
of Essence.” The announced second volume was finally published in 1816,
still in Nürnberg, in one part and with the subtitle “The Doctrine of
the Concept.”6 Another much-abbreviated Science of Logic appeared in
1817, as the first part of an Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in
Outline7 which Hegel, who in the meantime (1816) had been appointed as
professor at the university in Heidelberg, produced as the textbook for his
lecture courses. He published a second, heavily revised edition of this same
work in 1827, and yet a third, with minor revisions, in 1830.8 These two
last editions of the Encyclopedia were still published in Heidelberg, even
though by that time Hegel had long since moved to Berlin. In this city
he had continued to lecture on the subject of logic.9 We know, moreover,
that in 1826 he had begun to give some thought to a new edition of the
original Nürnberg work,10 and in fact, in January of 1831, he submitted to
the publishers a heavily revised version of Part I of Volume One of that
first Science of Logic, that is, the part published in 1812. This new version,
now entitled “The Doctrine of Being,” came out in print the year after,
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10

He first promised a textbook on the subject in connection with his announcement of a lecture
course on Logic and Metaphysics for the summer term of 1802: “secundum librum sub eodem titulo
proditurum.” GW 7, 361. He repeated the promise in the announcement for the winter of 1802.
Wissenschaft der Logik, erster Band, Die objektive Logik (Nürnberg, 1812). GW 11. This is the
counterpart of Book I in the 1833 edition and also the Lasson edition.
Wissenschaft der Logik, erster Band, Die objektive Logik; zweites Buch, “Die Lehre vom Wesen”
(Nürnberg, 1813). GW 11. This is Book II in the 1833 edition and also in the Lasson edition.
Wissenschaft der Logik oder die Lehre vom Begriff (Nürnberg, 1816). GW 12. This is Book III in the
1833 edition and also in the Lasson edition.
Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse. Zum Gebrauch seiner Vorlesungen
(Heidelberg, 1817). GW 13.
GW 19 and 20.
Notes from the 1831 lectures taken by Hegel’s son Karl have been published in the series Vorlesungen,
Ausgewählte Nachschriften und Manuskripten, Vorlesungen über die Logik, Band 10, ed. Udo Rameil
and H.-Christian Lucas† (Hamburg: Meiner, 2001). Notes from lectures on logic given at Heidelberg
in 1817 and taken by the student F. A. Good have been published in the same series, Vorlesungen
über Logik und Metaphysik, Band 11, ed. Karen Gloy (Hamburg: Meiner, 1992).
Cf. GW 21, 400.

xiv

Introduction

in 183211 – posthumously, for in the meantime, on November 14, 1831,
Hegel had suddenly died. It was then republished in 1833 by Leopold von
Henning, together with Part II of the same Volume One from 1813 and
the Volume Two from 1816. In this form the Logic was part of a complete
edition of the philosopher’s works that his disciples had hastily arranged
after his death. It is this text that became the canonical version of Hegel’s
so-called Greater Logic.12 It was re-edited by Georg Lasson in 1923,13 and
more recently again – now equipped with a detailed critical apparatus and
with Part I of Volume One in both its 1812 and 1832 versions – as Volumes
11, 12, and 21 of the Academy Edition of Hegel’s Gesammelte Werke.
It is likely that Hegel, had he lived longer, would have revised the rest of
this Greater Logic.14 But all changes apart, whether actual or possible, one
thing is certain. As of 1807 at least, and throughout the long subsequent
process of publication of The Science of Logic, the place of this science
as the first of a three-part System of Philosophy that comprises Logic,
Philosophy of Nature, and Philosophy of Spirit was clear and fixed in
Hegel’s mind. This, however, was not the case at the beginning of his
Jena period. In the first sketches of the System, the one extreme of Logic
tended at that time to fall into what he called “Logic and Metaphysics,”
and the other extreme of Philosophy of Spirit tended to fall into Ethics
and Religion. Historically and conceptually, therefore, of greater interest
than any changes later made to the Logic is precisely how Hegel ever came
to merge logic and metaphysics, and how this merger both reflected and
made a difference to his conception of both Logic and System. For this, we
must consider the earlier texts that have come down to us from the Jena
years.
the genesis of the logic
It is only recently, since the Academy Edition of the works of Hegel, that
we have a reliably complete picture of the development of Hegel’s thought
11
12

13
14

Wissenschaft der Logik, erster Teil, Die objektive Logik, erster Band, Die Lehre vom Sein (Stuttgart
und Tübingen, 1832). GW 21.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel’s Werke. Vollständige Ausgabe durch einen Verein von Freunden des
Verewigten. Bände III–V. Wissenschaft der Logic, ed. Leopold von Henning (Berlin, 1833). The 1832
edition of the “Doctrine of Being” was quickly forgotten, so much so that Georg Lasson, in 1932,
was not aware of its existence. He thought that Henning had derived the revised version of the 1812
Part One directly from a manuscript of Hegel intended for publication. For this, see GW 21, 399.
Sämtliche Werke, Band III/IV (Leipzig, 1923 and 1932).
But we have no definite indication to that effect. Cf. GW 21, 403. For actual and possible changes,
see the Appendix to the translation of the text.

Introduction

xv

during that formative period. From the beginning, the archaeological problem has been twofold. For one thing, the texts relating to the formation
of the Logic and the System have come to us in an unpublished and
fragmentary, in some cases extremely fragmentary, form. For another,
these texts were badly misdated by Karl Rosenkranz, the one who had
direct access to Hegel’s literary estate and was the first to report on them.15
This circumstance interfered with later editions of the surviving texts,16
even at a time when the editors had already begun to doubt the accuracy
of Rosenkranz’s dating. Old prejudices die hard. Fortunately these problems have been alleviated lately because of the recovery of hitherto lost
manuscripts and the painstaking work of the editors of the Gesammelte
Werke who have subjected to statistical analysis the progressive changes in
Hegel’s handwriting during the Jena period. Thus our current dating of
texts is as trustworthy as historical methods will allow, and it provides us
with a solid basis for a convincing reconstruction of the evolution of Hegel’s
thought to which the texts themselves give witness.17 For our purposes, the
relevant data are as follows.18
1801/02. In the Jena course catalogue of this winter term Hegel
announced a private seminar in “Logic and Metaphysics” and also, gratis,
an “Introduction to Philosophy.” As described in the announcement, the
seminar would expound a “general or transcendental Logic,” that is to
say, it would treat “the system of the forms of finitude, or a theory of
the objective understanding,” which is the source of the usual logical constructions of subjective reflection. But it would then let reason “destroy”
these finite forms and thereby move on to Metaphysics where the task
of philosophy is finally discharged in its various systematic forms and in
15

16

17

18

Karl Rosenkranz, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel’s Leben: Supplement zu Hegel’s Werke (Berlin, 1844;
reprinted, Darmstadt, 1967); “Hegels ursprüngliches System 1798–1806. Aus Hegels Nachlass,”
Literarhistorisches Taschenbuch, ed. Robert Prutz, Leipzig, ii (1844). A reprint of the four volumes
of this journal is available (psc@periodicals.com).
G. W. F. Hegel: Hegels erstes System, ed. H. Eherenberg and H. Link (Heidelberg, 1915); Jenenser
Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie, ed. George Lasson (Leipzig, 1923); Jenenser Realphilosophie
I, ed. Johannes Hoffmeister (Leipzig, 1932).
Hermann Nohl was the first to subject Hegel’s handwriting to this analysis in connection with
his edition of Hegel’s early theological writings. Theologische Jugendschriften, ed. Hermann Nohl
(Tübingen, 1987; reprinted 1968). For the chronology of the Jena period, see “Die Chronologie der
Manuskripten Hegels in den Bänden 4 bis 9 [of GW],” in the editorial apparatus of GW 8.348ff. Also:
Heinz Kimmerle, “Dokumente zu Hegels Jenaer Dozententätigkeit (1801–1807),” Hegel-Studien,
4 (1967), 21–99; Das Problem der Abgeschlossenheit des Denkens, Hegel-Studien, Beiheft 8 (Bonn:
Bouvier, 1870). For a detailed, English-language study of the period based on the new chronology,
see H. S. Harris, Hegel’s Development: Night Thoughts: Jena 1801–1806 (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1983).
This is a greatly abbreviated list of the documents we actually have. I list only those required for
the subsequent discussion.

xvi

Introduction

accordance with human interests.19 The brief fragments that we have from
these years are of notes that Hegel most likely intended for these announced
courses.20
We can gather from these fragments that Hegel’s “Introduction” would
have aimed to make the same point which he was later to repeat in the
Phenomenology of Spirit, namely that philosophy is its own introduction.21
But, inasmuch as philosophy is an empirical product of history, it always
assumes a subjective shape which, when taken individually, can convey the
false impression of being absolute. There is room, therefore, for a critical
reflection that would dispel this impression. To perform this clarifying
task is precisely the task of an introduction to philosophy. It is simply a
matter of bringing to light an absolute content which is already at hand
in historically conditioned materials, and which, once brought to light,
would stand on its own without the need of historical support. This
content is none other than the life of the Absolute, at least as Schelling
conceived of the Absolute at the time.22 Just as the absolute substance23
first gives a sketch of itself in the idea,24 then realizes itself in nature by
giving itself an articulated body therein, and in spirit finally sums itself up
by recognizing itself in this process of externalization, so philosophy must
display the idea of the Absolute in cognition, and must then develop it into
a philosophy of nature, an ethical system, and finally into a religion that
recaptures the simplicity of the original idea. The assumption is that that
idea is originally present to the philosopher in intuition, that is, in a still
unarticulated immediate awareness. Here we have Hegel’s first outline of a
system: Idea (Logic and Metaphysics), Nature, Ethics, Religion. Philosophy
must re-enact conceptually the process which is the very life of the absolute
substance. As Hegel warns, philosophy’s main adversary in this task is
a spurious metaphysics, the product of bad reflection, which constantly
threatens to introduce rigid conceptual distinctions where there are in fact
none, and thus pre-empts the possibility of a truly organic grasp of reality.
Philosophy’s true intention ought to be none other than that “by it and
through it we learn how to live.”25
19
20
21
22
24
25

For the text, see GW 5, Schriften und Entwürfe (1799–1808), ed. T. Ebert, M. Baum, and K. R. Meist
(Hamburg: Meiner, 1998), p. 654.
For the fragments, see GW 5, 259–275.
Phenomenologie des Geistes (Bamberg & Würzburg, 1807); GW 5, 59–60.
23 das absolute Wesen.
See the second major fragment, GW 5, 262–265.
“ . . . in der Idee sein Bild gleichsam entwirft.” Just how the Absolute accomplishes this, and what
“idea” means in this context, is of course one of the problems of Schelling’s pantheism.
GW 5, 261.

Introduction

xvii

As for the announced “Logic and Metaphysics,”26 we learn from the same
fragments that the Logic would have played precisely the introductory role
of displaying the forms of finite (“bad”) reflection. It would show how this
reflection, which is the product of the understanding, apes the attempt of
reason to generate identity but only ends up with a formalistic counterfeit of
it. By overcoming this formalism, logic then makes possible the transition
to metaphysics, that is to say, it makes possible “the complete construction
of the principle of all philosophy”27 on the basis of which we can then
“construct the possible systems of philosophy.”28 It is in this way, in the
medium of consciousness or in spirit, that for Hegel the reality of an
otherwise shifting world of appearances becomes a harmonious whole.29
1802/03. We have the fair copy of a System of Ethics obviously ready
for publication but in fact never published. It is complete, though the
final pages are sketchy, and there might be two lacunas in the text as it
has come down to us.30 It was composed at a time when Hegel was busy
with a number of other projects, all dedicated to ethical issues. He was still
working on a manuscript concerning the German Constitution, a project
on which he had started even before moving to Jena.31 He also published
an essay on natural law in the Critical Journal of Philosophy;32 announced
courses on the same subject (summers of 1802 and 1803), and gave two of
three announced public lectures on a critique of Fichte’s concept of natural
law.33 All evidence leads one to believe that the text is the reworking of
notes prepared by Hegel for his announced lecture courses. The fact that
it starts quite abruptly makes it likely that it was intended as only one part
of a larger compendium of philosophy, and that it was never published
because the compendium itself was not ready. In the 1801/02 outline of
Hegel’s planned System, it would constitute the third part.
26
27
28
29
30

31
32
33

GW 5, 269–275. There is evidence that Hegel interrupted the seminar before its official end. Cf.
GW 5, 659.
“ . . . das Prinzip aller Philosophie vollständig zu konstruiren.” GW 5, 274.
“ . . . wir uns die Möglichen Systeme der Philosophie konstruiren können.” GW 5, 274.
“ . . . aber diese sich bewegende Welt ist ohne Bewußtsein der Harmonie; sie ist nur im Geist des
Philosophen ein harmonisches.” GW 5, 269.
GW 5, 660–661. The text, which is now available in a critical edition in GW 5, was edited and
translated by H. Harris and T. M. Knox on the basis of an earlier edition of Georg Lasson (Leipzig,
1913). Cf. G. W. F. Hegel: System of Ethical Life (1802/3) and First Philosophy of Spirit (1803/4)
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1979). For a description of the historical and conceptual
context of the text, and an analysis of it, see H. S. Harris’s introduction to this translation.
GW 5, 552–553.
“Über die Wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten des Naturrechts, seine Stelle in der praktischen
Philosophie, und sein Verhältniß zu den positiven Rechtswissenschaften.” GW 4, 415–464.
The third was never given because, as an unsalaried instructor (Privatdozent), he was not allowed
to hold lectures gratis, and a complaint was lodged against him to that effect. GW 5, 665–666.

xviii

Introduction

The text is dense and intricate, but would not necessarily have been
obscure to those who, like Hegel’s prospective students, were familiar with
Schelling’s Identity Philosophy. For it is clear, even from its abrupt opening,
that at the time Hegel still shared his mentor’s basic assumptions regarding
experience.34 We read in the first lines:
Knowledge of the Idea of the absolute ethical order depends entirely on the
establishment of perfect adequacy between intuition and concept, because the
Idea is nothing other than the identity of the two. But if this identity is to be
actually known, it must be thought as a made adequacy. But because they are then
held apart from one another [as its two sides], they are afflicted with a difference.35

The intuition/concept connection is of course Kantian in origin. In
Schelling’s System, however, it acquires a specialized new meaning. Intuition is no longer restricted to the senses but must be understood rather as
the immediate feeling of the totality of reality which is presumably at the
origin of consciousness and which conceptualization is then supposed to
bring to reflective consciousness. But in fulfilling this function, the concept
sets itself up against the intuition, as one particular form of consciousness
as against another, and the task thereby arises of regaining the unity of
reality as originally intuited. This is a task which is to be discharged in the
medium of ideas at different levels of experience. Hegel’s essay is an account
of how the unity is attained in the particularized context of ethical life.
The problem is to think how a people (Volk) can regain in the medium of
appropriate laws and institutions the natural feeling of self-identity which
made it a people originally but which is lost precisely in the attempt to
canonize it in reflective laws and institutions. The conclusion of the essay
is too sketchy to give any clear idea of how this recovery is finally to be
realized. However, if we take Hegel’s 1801/02 outline of a System as the
norm, the resulting new people (the absolute Volk) would be a religious
community. This is exactly what Hegel says in a text which we do not
have, but which Rosenkranz describes at length and which very likely dates
from around this time.36 Moreover, still taking the 1801/02 outline as the
norm, it appears that the interplay of intuition and concept which in this
essay Hegel documents only by reference to the life of a society would
34

35
36

This is in no way to imply that Hegel simply followed Schelling. On the contrary, while using
Schelling’s language, he subtly, and perhaps even inadvertently, gave it new meaning from the
beginning.
GW 5, 279.2–6. I am using the Harris and Knox translation, pp. 99–100.
Rosenkranz, Leben, pp. 132–141. Harris gives a summary of this text in an Appendix to his translation
of the System of Ethics, pp. 178–186. According to Harris, it was likely the conclusion of the
Philosophiæ universæ delineatio of 1803; see GW 6, 340, and Harris’s translation, p. 202, note 1.

Introduction

xix

have to be detected by the philosopher in nature itself, inasmuch as nature
constitutes the antecedent of communal existence. It would consist in a
process by which the more organic forms of existence incorporate in their
internal unity the otherwise dispersed elements of the inanimate forms
that precede them. This is a process that ultimately leads to the creation
of a social organism, and it is the subject matter of the Philosophy of
Nature. Logic, for its part, would critically expose and overcome the type
of conceptualization that tends to absolutize the opposition of intuition
and concept, while Metaphysics would provide the basic ideal schemas of
a reconciliation of the two in real existence.
1803/04. Hegel continued to lecture on his projected system. He
announced a Philosophiæ universæ delineatio for the 1803 summer term,37
and a lecture course again on the system of speculative philosophy for the
subsequent 1803/04 winter term.38 We do not know how extensive a use he
made for these courses of prior notes, but we do have two extensive though
fragmentary manuscripts that are clearly connected to them. One is a text,
in parts left incomplete by Hegel himself, of a Philosophy of Nature and a
Philosophy of Spirit.39 The other is the manuscript of a Logic, Metaphysics,
and Philosophy of Nature, in fair copy but reworked in places, fragmentary
in parts and broken off by Hegel himself somewhere in the Philosophy of
Nature, just before the stage of “organic nature” would have begun.40 Both
texts are important for different but complementary reasons. Regarding the
first, its Philosophy of Spirit differs substantially from the earlier System of
Ethics in two significant respects. For one thing, it starts with consciousness
and not with Volk, as the earlier text does. The introduction of this extra
element provides a smooth transition from the Philosophy of Nature to
that of Spirit which would have been lacking in any intended prior complete System. Consciousness is where organic nature acquires its highest
point of concentration by reflecting upon itself and where nature as such
thus becomes spirit. When this consciousness develops into language, and
language becomes in turn the language of a people, the social character
of spirit is then revealed. It is only at this point that Hegel returns in his
37
38
39
40

GW 6, 340.
“Philosophiae speculativae systema, complectens a) Logicam et Metaphysicam, sive Idealismus
transcendentalem, b) philosophiam naturae et c) mentis, ex dictatis exponet.” GW 6, 340.
Jenaer Systementwürfe I, GW 6.
Jenaer Systementwürfe II, Logik, Metaphysik, Naturphilosophie (1804/05), GW 7. There is an English
translation of the Logic and Metaphysics by the Ontario Hegel Group, G. W. F. Hegel, The
Jena System, 1804–5: Logic and Metaphysics, translation edited by John W. Burbidge and George
di Giovanni, with an Introduction by H. S. Harris (Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s
University Press, 1986).

xx

Introduction

manuscript to social existence, the subject matter of the earlier System of
Ethics. The manuscript breaks off at the point where this existence assumes
the form of labor. We do not know whether Hegel would have proceeded to
develop it into the social products of Art and Religion, thereby merging
the Ethics and Religion of the 1801/02 outline into one unit as is done in
the mature Philosophy of Spirit. But of greater consequence is the other
respect in which the text differs from the System of Ethics. In the latter
work, spirit is treated in the same vein as nature would be, that is, from
the speculative standpoint of an objective observer contemplating it at a
distance – from the outside, so to speak, as one must indeed do when
contemplating nature.41 With the introduction of consciousness, however,
Hegel is now in a position to follow up the development of spirit from
within the subjective standpoint of spirit itself – to follow it internally as it
would appear to the subject matter itself under observation, namely spirit.
Here we have the beginning of a phenomenological analysis of spirit, an
especially significant innovation to which we shall return in a moment.
Regarding the other text, one can discern in it a parallel development.
Logic and Metaphysics still appear as two separate pieces, as they do in
the 1801/02 planned System. Presumably Logic is still intended to be the
introduction to Metaphysics.42 But the distinction between the two tends
in fact to disappear. Hegel still seems to think of dialectic in a negative,
basically still Kantian sense, as a movement that irrupts from within finite
thought revealing the contradictory nature of its determinations when
these are held absolutely apart. But this movement, instead of being elicited
under the pressure of external critical reflection as one would expect on
a purely negative conception of dialectic, now assumes the character of a
movement internal to thought as such, and extending to the categories of
the Metaphysics as well. It is a movement by which thought develops into
ever more complex forms and which can be traced from within thought
itself simply by pursuing its internal logic. The net result is that, de facto,
Logic loses its introductory function. It extends into Metaphysics, thus
turning the latter into Logic. The metaphysical constructions that should
have given objective expressions (in a kind of conceptual art in the style
of Schelling) to the unity of being otherwise only immediately felt in
intuition – a unity in which all differentiation is shown to be null – turn
instead into reflective conceptual elaborations of forms which the concept
itself takes on as concept. The concept thus gains in subjective depth, just
41
42

This is the standpoint from which ethical matters are dealt with in Chapter 5 of the Phenomenology
of Spirit, as contrasted with the way they are treated in Chapter 6.
The first pages of the manuscript are missing.

Introduction

xxi

as spirit does in the text of the Philosophy of Spirit. Connecting the two,
formal thought and spirit, is the concept of the “infinite” which is now
understood as transcending the “finite,” not in the sense that it annuls
it, but in the sense that it provides the conceptual space within which
the finite can emerge in its multifarious forms and yet also be contained
by the infinite. As a concept, the “infinite” provides the abstract schema,
already attributed by Hegel to consciousness in 1801/02, for transforming
the otherwise shifting world of nature into a harmonious whole.43 What
we have, in other words, is a first adumbration of the mature Logic, and,
together with the other text, at least the materials for a System divided into
Logic, Philosophy of Nature, and Philosophy of Spirit. The fact that Hegel
did not complete his long since planned System at this time, even though
he had manuscripts for it apparently intended for publication, might well
indicate that his idea of System was then undergoing radical modifications.
1805/06/07. Two developments, which are the final ones we shall consider here, occurred in these years. Hegel announced a lecture course on
Realphilosophie (that is, on nature and spirit) several times, but we have
secure evidence that he actually gave it only for the 1806 summer term.44
We also have from these years a manuscript which is also on the subject
of Realphilosophie, in fair copy but heavily reworked.45 Of special interest in this text is that in the third and final part of the section on spirit,
detailing the structure of a society such as the absolute Volk would create,
Hegel describes this process of social constitution as one in which nature
becomes certain of itself.46 In other words, while in 1803/04 Hegel provided
a smoother transition from nature to spirit by introducing the factor of
consciousness and thus adding to nature, so to speak, a new dimension
of depth, he now adds to it yet another dimension by conceiving spirit as
the place where nature becomes conscious of its being conscious, that is
to say, the place where it becomes deliberate about itself or, again, where
it becomes a product of spirit. This is a process which is completed in the
media of art, religion, and science, in each of which nature assumes a new
existence as the subject matter of spirit’s interests and activities. But now,
Logic is the science of the concept. What is therefore provided at the conclusion of the system is a smooth transition, not just from nature to spirit,
but from spirit, or the achieved system, back to the concept, that is to say,
43
45

46

44 Cf. GW 8, 318.
See note 29 above.
Jenaer Systementwürfe III, GW 8. There is an English translation of the part on the Philosophy of
Spirit. Leo Rauch, Hegel and the Human Spirit: A Translation of the Jena Lectures on the Philosophy
of Spirit (1805–6) with Commentary (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1983).
GW 8, 258.18–20. English trans., p. 155.

xxii

Introduction

back to the beginning of the System which is also its foundation. Logic thus
loses whatever vestige of a role it might still have had as an introduction to
the system, and regains instead, if one just ignores the “thing-in-itself” of
Kant, a function not unlike that of the latter’s Transcendental Logic. Just
as the categories define the concept of an object in general (ein Gegenstand
überhaupt) which is then to be given content in both theoretical and practical shape, now the Logic defines the structure of an original conceptual
space that makes possible both spirit’s interpretation of nature as its prehistory and of itself as forging that same nature into a meaning-generating
community. Spirit, in other words, transforms nature into a harmonious
whole, and this transformative function is precisely what Hegel had from
the beginning declared philosophy’s purpose to be. That space is at the
origin of experience – is constitutive of it. But it becomes itself the object
of reflective awareness only as the ultimate work of spirit, in the medium of
the consciousness typical of the consummate community. The philosopher
is the one responsible for this Logic, and Logic itself now turns out to be
both the basis and the final product of the system.
This is the first development. The second has to do with Hegel’s publication plans in these years. We know that, in connection with his proposed
teaching for the summer terms of 1805 and 1806, Hegel announced the publication of a book that would contain the whole science of philosophy.47
This promissory note was never honored – at least, not at face value. But
then, for the winter term of 1806/07, Hegel announced a course on “logic
and metaphysics, or speculative philosophy, premised by a phenomenology
of the mind based on the soon to be delivered first part of his book, The
System of Science.”48 And for the summer term of 1807, when Hegel did
not in fact lecture, this announced first part was indeed available at the
bookstore. We learn from Rosenkranz that Hegel had been developing, in
connection with his introduction to logic and metaphysics, the concept
of the experience that consciousness makes of itself. It is now this science of experience, the Phenomenology of Spirit, which was given the role,
previously attributed to logic, of introducing speculative philosophy, logic
included.
Such are the relevant data. An answer to the question of why this shift
of perspectives occurred, how phenomenology replaced logic and how this
change made a difference to Hegel’s conception of logic, cannot avoid an
47
48

“ . . . totam philosophiæ scientiam, i.e. philosophiam speculativam (logicam et metaphysicam)
naturæ et mentis, ex libro per æstatem prodituro . . . ” GW 9, 427.
“ . . . logicam et metaphysicam s. philosophiam speculativam, præmissa Phænomenologia mentis
ex libri sui, System der Wissenschaft, proxime proditura parte prima.” GW 9, 427.

Introduction

xxiii

element of interpretation. But there can be little doubt that the shift was
associated with the distance that Hegel gradually assumed with respect
to Schelling (who, incidentally, left Jena in 1803), or, perhaps more to the
point, with his gradual recognition that the supposed intuition of the Absolute on which Schelling’s system was based no longer served any function
in his own system as this had developed in his hands. And it is at least
not unlikely that Fichte’s subjectivity (which Hegel had severely criticized
in 1801, though not for its being “subjective” but for being “abstractly”
subjective)49 is what provided the extra conceptual factor that cemented
his developing system – even though, it must immediately be added,
in transcending Schelling Hegel was at the same time also transcending
Fichte. The point is that in both Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre (or Science of
Knowledge, as Fichte named his philosophy), and Hegel’s just published
Phenomenology of Spirit, there are, to use Fichte’s early language, two series
of representations: (1) those which are the products of a subject of experience who is engaged in the process of conceptualization, and (2) those
of a subject (the philosopher) who reflects upon the representations of the
other series and explicates what they truly are the representations of.50 And
for both Fichte and Hegel the upshot of this second reflective series is the
same, namely that whatever the experience a subject is engaged in, and
whatever the representational medium in which that experience is realized,
the theme underlying it or the motivation urging it on is the overarching
interest on the part of the subject to construe a world for himself within
which he can attain self-identity. This is of course still a play on Kant’s
transcendental unity of apperception. With reference to Schelling, however, the net result is that truth no longer requires “the establishment of
perfect adequacy between intuition and concept,” as Hegel himself still
thought in the 1802/03 System of Ethics – where intuition would entail
transcending the realm of conceptualization and thus rejoining the unity
of the Absolute. This is a unity in which all distinctions, including that
of subject and object that makes consciousness possible, are dissolved.51
49

50

51

Differenz des Fichte’schen und Schelling’schen System der Philosophie, Journal of Critical Philosophy
(1801). GW 4, 6.23–7.21; English trans. The Difference Between Fichte’s and Schelling’s System of
Philosophy, trans. H. S. Harris and W. Cerf (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1977),
cf. pp. 81–82.
GW 9, 60.33–61.27. J. G. Fichte, [Zweite] Einleitung in der Wissenschaftslehre (1797). GA I.4.200.
English trans., Daniel Breazeale, J. G. Fichte: Introduction to the Wissenschaftslehre and Other Writings
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1994), pp. 37–38.
G. E. Schulze (the author of Aenesidemus, the first skeptical attack on Kant) was very likely an
important catalyst in this distancing process. In 1801 Schulze had published a two-volume opus
under the title of Critique of Theoretical Philosophy in which he again defended the standpoint of

xxiv

Introduction

There is no longer any need to invoke such cosmogonic imagery as that
of the Absolute giving a sketch of itself in the idea (“in der Idee sein
Bild gleichsam entwirft”), as Hegel invoked in 1801/02. Issues of truth are
to be resolved within experience itself, on the basis of the adequacy of
any given construal of reality for satisfying certain presupposed subjective
interests. It is this subjective deepening of experience, clearly reminiscent
of Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre, that made possible for Hegel the transition
from logic, as a negative dialectical exercise externally applied to experience, to a phenomenology of experience. This was Fichte’s contribution
to Hegel – “Fichtes Verdienst,” as Hegel said in an aphorism dating to the
Jena period.52
But Hegel had gone beyond Fichte as well. The difference lies in how
Hegel conceives the subject on whose series of representations the philosopher applies his reflection. For Fichte, that subject is presumed to be a

52

common sense and of theoretical skepticism. Hegel reviewed it in 1802, and Schulze responded to
his review in the subsequent year with an anonymous essay entitled “Aphorisms Concerning the
Absolute.” In the essay Schulze skillfully parodied the Identity Philosophy of Schelling to which
Hegel still clearly adhered at the time of the review. He pretended to be a disciple of Schelling and
pretended to rely on Schellingian principles to criticize what was in fact his own skepticism. He
argued, quite consequentially, that since in intuition there is no distinction between subject and
object, and yet consciousness requires this distinction, the aim of the philosopher is to achieve a
kind of semi-consciousness, a dreamy state so to speak, in which all distinctions are overcome and
all doubts therefore disappear. This is the state of mind which Hegel himself was later to deride in
the Preface to his Phenomenology of Spirit (1807). Using language strongly reminiscent of Schulze’s,
Hegel described it as a “night in which all cows are black” (GW 9, 17.28–29). Among the many
factors that contributed to Hegel’s becoming deliberately aware that he was parting company with
Schelling, this anonymous publication of Schulze might well have been the most decisive.
For the relevant texts, see the following: G. E. Schulze, Kritik der theoretischen Philosophie, 2 vols.
(Hamburg, 1801); [G. W. F. Hegel], “Verhältniß des Skepticismus zur Philosophie, Darstellung
seiner verschiedenen Modificationen, und Vergleichung des neuesten mit dem alten,” Kritisches
Journal der Philosophie (1802), GW 4. English trans. in Between Kant and Hegel: Texts in the
Development of Post-Kantian Idealism, translated with introductory studies by G. di Giovanni
and H. S. Harris; revised edition, G. di Giovanni (Indianapolis and Cambridge: Hackett, 2000);
[G. E. Schulze], “Aphorismen über das Absolute, als das alleinige Prinzip der wahren Philosophie,
über die einzige mögliche Art es zu erkennen, wie auch über das Verhältniß aller Dinge in der Welt
zu demselben,” Neues Museum der Philosophie und Litteratur, ed. Friedrich Bouterwek, I.2 (1803),
110–148. Reproduced in Transzendentalphilosophie und Spekulation: Der Streit um die Gestalt einer
Ersten Philosophie (1799–1807), Quellenband, ed. Walter Jaeschke (Hamburg: Meiner, 1993).
For a discussion of the episode and further relevant materials, see Kurt Reiner Meist, “‘Sich
vollbringende Skeptizismus’: G. E. Schulzes Replik auf Hegel und Schelling,” in Transzendentalphilosophie und Spekulation: Der Streit um die Gestalt einer Ersten Philosophie (1799–1807), ed. Walter
Jaeschke (Hamburg: Meiner, 1993), pp. 192–230.
It is only in the recent past that this aphorism, jotted down by Hegel in a scrapbook which
Rosenkranz entitled “Hegel’s Wastebook,” was recovered. It reads in full: “Only after the history
of consciousness does one know through the concept [durch den Begriff] what one has in these
abstractions: Fichte’s contribution [Fichtes Verdienst].” For the aphorism and how it was lost, see
Friedhelm Nicolin, “Unbekannte Aphorismen Hegels aus der Jenaer Periode,” Hegel-Studien, 4
(1967), 9–19. For a description of the “Wastebook,” see Karl Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, pp. 198–201.

Introduction

xxv

pure “I,” that is to say, a cogito whose whole substance consists precisely in
a thought thinking itself, and the sole interest motivating it (inasmuch as
one can speak of “motivation” at all in this context) is self-expression. It
is an act of unlimited freedom. But any such act, no less than Schelling’s
Absolute, would escape reflective comprehension. The only evidence for
it is the immediate self-awareness that an individual subject presumably
gains of himself inasmuch as he agrees to collude with Fichte in the thought
experiment which is the Wissenschaftslehre. But this self-awareness is unexpressible and therefore ultimately ambiguous. It is an “interest in freedom”
alone, therefore, that motivates Fichte’s Science and also ought to motivate the commitment of every moral individual to interpret experience
as a manifestation of a pure act of freedom.53 Where Schelling relies on
artistic intuition to bring his system to a close, Fichte relies on moral faith.
Of course, that supposed freedom never becomes visibly incarnate. Nevertheless, experience is for Fichte not just a matter of mere appearance;
its objects are not mere semblances of being, as they would have to be in
Schelling’s system of identity. In Fichte’s system, the objects gain depth precisely by being failed attempts to attain the intended pure freedom. They
are the products of a freedom manqué,54 and they find their substantiality
in precisely this missed goal. It is a negative substantiality, so to speak, but
a substantiality just the same, and to this extent the source of a sort of
self-satisfaction.
This last is the aspect of Fichte that Hegel could not accept and chided
as a form of abstract subjectivism. Hegel’s crucial move beyond Fichte is
that he takes the subject on whose representations the philosopher exercises
his reflection as a historical entity. The task of phenomenology is not to
trace in experience the manifestation of freedom ideologically, that is to
say, by virtue of a commitment to it in faith, but to do it historically –
where by “freedom” Hegel now means nothing transcendent but, in a
more transcendental vein, the power that reason demonstrates over nature
by transforming what would otherwise be just something physical into
an object, by humanizing it through labor, and ultimately by making it
re-exist, as Hegel says in the 1805/06 System, as the object of art, religion,
and science. Of course, Fichte too recognized this power of reason, but
only in its negative aspect. He did not see that this is a power that bears
positive effects, and that it attains its total goal in principle the moment
53

54

J. G. Fichte, [Erste] Einleitung in der Wissenschaftslehre (1797). GA I.4.193–195. English trans.,
[First] Introduction to the WL, Breazeale, J. G. Fichte: Introduction to the Wissenschaftslehre and
Other Writings, pp. 17–20.
I am shifting into French to allude to the obvious similarities between Jean-Paul Sartre and Fichte.

xxvi

Introduction

reason comes on the scene. Like an a priori, spirit is either present from
the beginning in toto or not at all. All that is to be added to its presence –
but this is precisely the substance of experience – is for the historical subject
to become explicitly aware of it, in effect, of recognizing that the social
structures that he might have presumed to be the products of nature,
and the accounts that he gives of nature, are in fact from the start the
creative productions of reason. It might seem that Hegel is thereby totally
devaluing nature. In point of fact, the opposite is the case. It is true that by
interpreting nature as its pre-history, spirit invests it with a meaning which
it would not otherwise have. But spirit’s own content, or the determination
of its various meaning-constituting activities, is itself determined by what
that same nature happens to be before it is thus implicated in the life of
spirit. Issues of truth are no longer, therefore, just a matter of telling a tale
that satisfies spirit’s subjective interests in spite of nature’s apparent witness
to the contrary, and even because of it – as it would be the case for Fichte.
The satisfaction must be consummated in nature itself, albeit transformed
by spirit. This means that the tale, while dictated by spirit, must be shown
also to map onto nature as what is given.55 Hegel’s interest in nature was
certainly fueled by the examples of Goethe and Schelling. But it acquired
in his System a significance specific to him.
History is in Hegel’s system the area where spirit and nature overlap.
The Phenomenology is an account of this history from the standpoint of
the historical subject’s increasingly explicit consciousness of the work that
spirit has already accomplished in nature. This is a progress that culminates
with philosophy, as the idea that spirit has of itself. The book that Hegel
finally published in 1807 thus answers to Hegel’s 1801/02 definition of an
introduction to philosophy. Philosophy is its own introduction because
reason, which is its subject matter, is self-justifying. But, as an “empirical”
(read: historical) product, philosophy is affected by a subjective (read:
contingent) element which can obscure its nature to its own eyes and which
therefore needs dissipating. The Phenomenology of Spirit is an account of
philosophy as the latter came to the explicit consciousness of itself within
the confines of that historical episode which we call Western Culture.56
Its content covers in historical mode the content of the whole system,
55

56

Thus prestige is to be gained at the price of risking death, and death is redeemed, not by denying
it as a mere transition to another life, but by humanizing it by means of religious ritual. Cf.
Phenomenology of Spirit, GW 9, 111.18–112.2; 224.14ff.
The Phenomenology of Spirit has, and must have, a historical content. Whether one can map its
course on to the actual course of the history of the Western world, or whether one should rather
treat the book as historical fiction with a philosophical intent, is of course an issue of critical
discussion.

Introduction

xxvii

and one can see how Hegel could have used the materials of its first three
chapters in connection with his lectures on Logic in 1804, as Rosenkranz
tells us.57 In this respect, since the work is governed throughout by the idea
of spirit, it also constitutes the First Part of the System of Science, as Hegel
surnamed it in 1807. This is a title which was dropped in the second edition
of 1832, because it no longer corresponded to the subsequent publication
history of the then planned System, and because Hegel later incorporated
a much abbreviated version of the Phenomenology in the Encyclopedia
as part of the Philosophy of Spirit.58 It is a title nevertheless appropriate
to it, because the Phenomenology of Spirit does presuppose as its a priori
the very idea which it is supposed to bring to explicit consciousness. In
principle at least, therefore, it is already science. How the work can be both
historical in nature and yet be governed a priori is a problem that has vexed
its interpreters but need not concern us here. What does concern us here
is the converse problem, namely how the Logic which the Phenomenology
of Spirit presupposes can at once be logic and yet, as logic, require a history.
Or again, restated in terms of the structure of Hegel’s System, the question
is how the Logic can be both the starting point of the System and its result.
the idea of the logic
Hegel’s Logic has been interpreted in radically different ways. We shall
turn to the more typical of these interpretations in the next section. As I
have already indicated, I shall suggest here a way of reading it which is not
uncontroversial but, precisely for that reason, will serve to highlight where
the fault lines in the history of interpretation lie. On the face of it, Hegel’s
Logic has all the markings of a classical, pre-critical metaphysics. But this
is a false impression, and our first task is to understand in what sense it
in fact still falls within the compass of Kant’s critical project. For this, we
must further elaborate on themes already adumbrated.
The context
Kant’s critical move was to approach experience from the standpoint of a
subject who is engaged in it, and to take the mental space that this subject
brings to it as the originative factor in the whole process of experience.
57
58

Hegels Leben, p. 202.
See the Preface (dated November 1831) to the 1832 edition of “The Logic of Being.” GW 21, 9,
Hegel’s footnote.

xxviii

Introduction

It is its a priori. “Mental space” is of course only a metaphor, but an
apt one. Just as physical space, as we normally picture it, makes possible
the orderly juxtaposition of physical things, so the mind’s representational
activities, be they imaginative or conceptual, make possible the presence
of these same things to the mind as objects. In this extended sense, they
constitute a sort of space sui generis – a subjective a priori, according to
Kant. Moreover, the metaphor aptly alludes to a number of other metaphors
that Kant himself constantly uses, as for instance “the realm of empirical
objects,” or “the kingdom of ends.” Now Kant distinguished types of this
mental space. One is the space generated by the senses, a sort of bodily
a priori in the medium of which objects are immediately or intuitively
present to the subject of experience. Another is of a logical character, the
product of a thought-reflection that defines the concept of an object in
general. It defines the minimum that one must be able to say of an object
(Gegenstand) if it is to be recognized sufficiently as object when intuitively
given to the senses (if ever given) in the space generated by the latter.
Kant’s categories are the determinations of this concept.59 The test of
whether together they adequately define a recognizable object is whether,
in deploying them as a means for sorting out and connecting together the
otherwise undifferentiated content of sense intuition, a subject can retain
in the course of experience a sense of self-identity – or again, whether the
subject can retain a clear distinction between itself and what is given to
it. This self-identity can be taken both abstractly as that of an “I think”
in general, and more concretely as of a singular individual that makes his
way across a field of experience and therein differentiates between his self
and what is given to him. It can therefore also differentiate between the
only apparently or merely subjectively given and the truly or objectively
given. In either case, whether taken abstractly or concretely, the self can
also be more than just an observer. It can be a doer as well, a generator
of values, and its identity, therefore, is also a moral one. Here is where a
third kind of space comes into play. This is the space of reason,60 where
one can think of what might be, or would have to be, and even ought to
59

60

Cf. “Our cognition springs from two fundamental sources of the mind; the first is the receiving
of representations (receptivity of impressions), the second is the power to [re]cognize an object
through these representations (spontaneity of the concepts); through the first an object is given
to us, through the second the object is thought with reference to that representation (as mere
determination of the mind).” A50/B74. “[The categories] are concepts of an object in general” (Sie
sind Begriffe von einem Gegenstande überhaupt). B128.
“Space of reason” comes from Wilfrid Sellars’s “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,” Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, ed. Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1956), pp. 298–299.

Introduction

xxix

be, as contrasted with what is given in sense experience de facto. It is the
space where one can project the moral idea of a “kingdom of ends” and
also the idea of what is for Kant the unknowable “thing-in-itself.” This
last idea is the one which his contemporaries found especially troublesome
from the beginning, but which nevertheless played an indispensable role
in Kant’s system at all levels. This it did first of all at the theoretical
level. The presence of the “thing-in-itself,” as a presumed, empty yet fixed,
external point of reference, allowed the experiencing subject to do both:
gain the required subjective distance from his own experiences to recognize
their subjective character while maintaining a sufficiently robust objective
sense of “givenness” for their content by referring to it. The sense of
“givenness” is made possible precisely by distinguishing between what are
merely subjective impressions and what are, or can at least be interpreted
to be, appearances originating in that irreducibly transcendent “other”
which is the “thing-in-itself.” Phenomenal objectivity might be limited
objectivity, but it is objectivity nonetheless.
This is a minimalist account of Kant’s critical project. But it is sufficient
to understand how and why Fichte would feel obliged to reform it, and why
Hegel found Kant’s original project as well as Fichte’s reform objectionable.
For this, we must return to Fichte’s cogito, or more accurately, to the thought
experiment that Fichte urged on his auditors in order to gain entrance into
his system.61 The immediate occasion for the experiment was Fichte’s
desire to explain why in experience, in determining our objects, we feel
constrained to abide by certain rules; in other words, why there is an a
priori governing our experiences. As he asks, “But what is the basis of the
system of those representations accompanied by a feeling of necessity, and
what is the basis of this feeling of necessity itself?” And he immediately
adds, “Another name for [this system] is ‘experience’ – whether inner or
outer.”62 Whether one explains this “feeling of necessity” as originating in
us because of the external influence of a “thing-in-itself,” or as an internal
a priori product of the cogito itself, marks the difference according to
Fichte between those whom he calls “dogmatists” and the “idealists.” To
elaborate on this difference is Fichte’s main preoccupation. But whether
one follows one line of explanation or the other also makes a difference in
how one interprets the sense of “being merely given,” or of mere facticity,
that characterizes in experience the first presence of its objects.63 This is a
61
62
63

[First] Introduction to the WL, pp. 7–8; GA I.4.186–187.
[First] Introduction to the WL, p. 8; GA I.4.186.
I am borrowing the term “facticity,” Faktizität, from the Fichte of 1810. For instance: “Wenn wir
bis zur Erklärung dieser Fakticität selbst uns emporschwingen werden, dann werden wir vollendet

xxx

Introduction

feature which we tend to attribute to these objects in abstraction from the
subject experiencing them but which in fact implicates the latter from the
start, for it denotes a dissatisfaction on the subject’s part regarding their
presence. It is as if this presence constituted a check on the subject’s attempt
at controlling a priori the space of experience. It therefore generates for the
subject both a sense of irreducible “otherness” with respect to the objects
and equally the need to transcend this sense – to explain it away.64 This
is the point of Fichte’s claim that in experience “form and content are
not two separate elements.”65 Now Fichte strenuously wanted to believe
that this was also Kant’s position.66 But he was very well aware that when
defining the meaning of “being given” – of phenomenal data – Kant
had relied on the then universally accepted scholastic model of the mind,
connecting it with sense impressions whose character was presumed to be
essentially passive. But the model provided at best a psychological rather
than a critical explanation of “impressions,” and it had the unfortunate
side-effect of making Kant’s theory vulnerable to dogmatic interpretations.
His notorious “thing-in-itself,” instead of being understood as an ideal
term of reference that generates a universal space of reason and is itself
a function of the cogito, could be taken instead – as in fact it was by
many contemporaries – as a sort of hyper-physical entity that externally
inflicts on the subject of experience effects over which the latter has no
control. In a critical context, however, any appeal to causality, besides being
inconsistent with Kant’s critical restriction of it to the realm of phenomena
(as Aenesidemus had stridently argued),67 would have had to fall on the

64

65
66
67

haben” [“If we soar upwards to the explanation of this facticity, then we have come to the end”],
WL – 1810, GA II.11: 309.19–20. For a fuller discussion of this aspect of Fichte, which becomes
even more prominent after 1800, cf. George di Giovanni “Sacramentalizing the World: On Fichte’s
Wissenschaftslehre of 1810,” in Grund- und Methodenfragen in Fichtes Spätwerk, Fichte-Studien,
31, ed. Günter Zöller and Hans Georg von Mainz (Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi, 2007),
219–233.
Cf.: “Indeed, something becomes contingent for someone precisely insofar as he inquires concerning
its basis. To seek a basis or reason for something contingent, one has to look towards something
else, something determinate, whose determinacy explains why what is based upon it is determined
precisely the way it is . . . ” [First] Introduction to the WL, p. 9; GA I.4.187, §2.
[First] Introduction to the WL, p. 28; GA I.4.202.
Cf. [Second] Introduction to the WL, p. 71; GA I.4.486. But perhaps in this whole passage Fichte is
protesting too much for one who professes to believe in Kant unreservedly.
Schulze, G. E. [anonymous], Ænesidemus, oder über der vom Herrn Prof. Reinhold in Jena gelieferten
Elementarphilosophie, nebst einer Verteidigung gegen die Anmassungen der Venunftkritik (1792), p. 155;
English trans. in Giovanni and Harris, Between Kant and Hegel, p. 122. Jacobi is generally believed to
have been the first to have raised this objection in his Appendix to the dialogue David Hume (1787).
But in fact his position is much more sophisticated, for Jacobi does not object to the categories being
applied to the “thing-in-itself,” provided that they remain non-schematized. His point is rather that,
because they remain non-schematized, and “thing-in-itself” thus remains a mere idea, Kant cannot

Introduction

xxxi

side of a physiological pre-history of experience. It did not explain the
phenomenon of brute presence precisely as phenomenon, that is, as an
experiential fact of consciousness.
It was to remedy this failure that Fichte undertook his thought experiment, asking his auditors to think simply for the sake of thinking and to
reflect on the result. The attempt was intended as an expression of pure
freedom. But the result, as reflectively apprehended, had to be a failure –
not just because, as a matter of fact, one cannot think without actually
thinking something in particular, but because the difference between the
intended infinite thought and the thought (now an object) de facto finitely
apprehended is precisely what creates the distance between the subject of
experience and his object that makes the experience a conscious one. Without that distance, there is no consciousness. The failure was not, therefore,
an unqualified one. For on the assumption that the expression of freedom is
the interest motivating all experience, or in more concrete terms, provided
that one sees one’s own existence in experience as a protracted attempt at
self-contained activity, then the fact that in these activities one cannot but
take into consideration what at least appears as extraneous circumstances is
felt indeed as a constraint, but a constraint which, no less than the formal
rules that govern the experience of those circumstances, is itself the product
of the original cogito. Without the original attempt at purely autonomous
activity, there would be no sense of “being constrained.” The net result is
that the whole realm of experience becomes colored with a moral tinge,
exactly what Fichte had of course intended from the start. Experience is a
call to transform the otherwise merely brute facts of experience into products of freedom, a call to re-do nature after the image of the Absolute. And
this is a process that requires remembering that the “bruteness” of those
facts is itself the first product of freedom.68

68

escape absolute subjectivism. On this point, see Birgit Sandkaulen, “Das ‘leidige Ding an sich’:
Kant – Jacobi – Fichte,” in Kant und der Frühidealismus, ed. Jürgen Stolzenberg (Hamburg: Meiner,
2007), 175–201. For an English translation of Jacobi’s dialogue, see Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi: The
Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel Allwill, translated with an Introductory Study, Notes,
and Bibliography by George di Giovanni (Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s Press, 1994);
includes G. di Giovanni, The Unfinished Philosophy of Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, pp. 1–167.
“Nature must gradually be resolved into a condition in which her regular actions bear a fixed and
definite relation to that which is destined to govern it – that of man . . . Thus shall Nature ever
become more and more intelligible and transparent . . . ” Die Bestimmung des Menschen, dargestellt
von Johann Gottlieb Fichte (Berlin: Voss, 1800), pp. 182–183. English translation, The Vocation of
Man, trans., ed. Roderick M. Chisholm (New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1956), pp. 103–104. For an
extended discussion of this work, see George di Giovanni, Freedom and Religion in Kant and His
Immediate Successors: The Vocation of Humankind, 1774–1800 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2005), Chapter 8.

xxxii

Introduction

Fichte accomplishes this work conceptually, in accordance with his vocation as a philosopher. In an important sense, the work still falls within the
compass of Kant’s Transcendental Logic, namely inasmuch as its intent is
still to produce a priori the concept of an object in general or of generating a priori the conceptual space that makes the recognition of an object
possible. But there is also an equally important difference. In Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre, Kant’s need to validate the categories by demonstrating that
they are found realized in sense experience – the need of a Transcendental
Deduction, in other words – no longer arises. To make the point in Kant’s
terms, Fichte had relativized the distinction, which for Kant was absolute,
between understanding and reason.69 He had extended to the whole realm
of experience the claim that for Kant applied unqualifiedly only to the
moral realm, namely that conceptualization is essentially a norm-setting
function, and that it is therefore wrong to try to validate its products by
measuring them against any given state of affairs. Or again, Fichte was
taking seriously Kant’s own theoretical claim that nature is an idea, and
that one must approach experience with questions in hand, coercing it
to yield already well-rehearsed answers. The idea of construing objects of
experience by applying categories to a presupposed given content loses all
meaning, except perhaps in some artificially restricted context. One must
rather interpret experience by making sense of its otherwise merely given
content in terms of a priori conceptual constructs which, though evoking actual situations, draw the only possible content appropriate to them
from their place in a system of such constructs, or from experience itself
as already idealized. What Kant had said of “respect for the [moral] law,”
namely that it is the only case of a feeling which is determined a priori by
reason,70 now applies across the whole realm of experience.
Starting from his opening interpretation of the meaning of facticity,
Fichte proceeds methodically in his Wissenschaftslehre to deduce a whole
system of the said constructs, both theoretical and practical. But because
of the nature itself of the overall project, the interpretation of experience
that they provide at each step must remain to the end only interpretation,
never totally absorbing the factual content it interprets, that is to say, never
quite dissolving its facticity. This is of course the price to be paid for
setting as the norm of truth the attainment of a freedom which, if ever
69

70

“For a full-blown idealism, a priori and a posteriori are not two different things, but are one and
the same thing, simply looked at from two different sides, and they can be distinguished from
each other only in terms of the different means one employs in order to arrive at each.” [First]
Introduction to the WL, p. 32; GA I.4.206.
AK V.76.16–17.

Introduction

xxxiii

attained, would transcend consciousness altogether – the price for making
the abstractive power of reflection a wider and prior mental space than the
physical one of being. The phenomenon of facticity is the net result of
precisely this abstractive move. There is, therefore, as we said earlier, a kind
of moral satisfaction in the dissatisfaction with any given situation which
is felt at the level of individual immediate experience. In a Fichtean moral
context, that dissatisfaction is itself an indirect witness to the seriousness of
one’s moral commitment to absolute freedom.71 And there is yet another
price to be paid for the same abstractive move, also at the individual
level of experience. At that level, the gap between interpretation and de
facto experience is ultimately to be filled by pragmatics. It is done with
the needs of the moment as the final determining ground – though with
one’s professed interest in freedom as the subjective guarantee that one
is acting rightly. The consequence for Fichte’s project as a whole is that,
although the Wissenschaftslehre is a work of conceptualization and therefore
of logic, even as logic it is dependent on a phenomenology of the historical
individual responsible for it. To use an expression of Fichte, it is dependent
on “pragmatic history”: at the beginning, where reflection is the moving
force, on the individual’s self-expression in a free but abstract “I”; and at
the end, where action is the issue, on the freedom-inspired rhetoric that
finally fills the gap between interpretation and singular moral judgment.
It is not by chance that Fichte repeatedly lapses into sermonizing.72 In the
end, the logic of his Science naturally gives way to rhetoric.73
We are back to the theme of abstract formalism and subjectivism that
preoccupied Hegel in the Jena years. On Hegel’s analysis of both Kant
and Fichte, the problem is that the “I” that figures so prominently in their
theories is too abstract a product of conceptualization. It means to say much
but in fact says nothing. Therefore, according to Hegel, it lets the content
of experience for which it is supposed to provide the unifying space, its
conceptual a priori, escape from it and fall, so to speak, on the side of a
beyond from which it is retrievable only by means of such non-conceptual
means as intuition. But intuition, whether of the Kantian or the Fichtean
type, is ultimately inexpressible and therefore a source of irrationality. This
is not to say that Hegel does not recognize that facticity is an irreducible
71

72
73

Kant had said something not dissimilar. “Hence we can see a priori that the moral law, as the
determining ground of the will, must by thwarting all our inclinations produce a feeling that can
be called pain; and here we have the first and perhaps the only case in which we can determine a
priori from concepts the relation of a cognition (here the cognition of a pure practical reason) to
the feeling of pleasure or displeasure.” AK 5.73.
Cf. note 68 above.
On this ground, Fichte might indeed deserve indeed the title of being the first post-modernist.

xxxiv

Introduction

element of experience. This is the lesson that he had indeed learned from
Fichte. Hegel’s canonical term for it, about which more in just a moment,
is “immediacy.” But the point is that such a facticity, this immediacy of
experience, ought to be absorbed conceptually even as facticity. It has to be
comprehended positively. To avoid Fichte’s inevitable slide from logic into
rhetoric, one needs a kind of conceptualization that permeates that facticity.
And if Hegel did not want to travel the way of Schelling, which would
have taken him to a pre-Kantian Spinozism, then the only avenue still
open to him was to comprehend facticity discursively, without intuition or
myth-making. How this is to be done is the problem of the beginning of
the Logic.
The beginning
Nothing seems as simple, as irrefutable, and yet as unconvincing, as Hegel’s
opening argument about the concepts of “being” and “nothing” – that they
shift into one another, and that their play of mutual replacement is finally
resolved into a third concept of “becoming.” In the context just defined,
however, these moves do make sense. The problem is still that of Kant’s
Transcendental Logic, namely that of determining the least that must be
said of an object (Gegenstand) in order to recognize it sufficiently as such.
But Kant and Fichte had begun by saying too much – Kant, by introducing
a schema of ready-made categories which he had neither derived nor would
further develop; and Fichte, by promoting freedom as an avowedly extraconceptual cause. And for this reason, as we have just seen, they incurred
the formalism and the subjectivism that Hegel decried in them. Most of all,
they failed to see that the truth of an object (Gegenstand) is only to be found
in the discourse about it, so that any opaqueness as to what that object is, or
whether it is at all, must be resolved from within the original discourse itself
by developing it according to rules internal to it.74 There is no exit from
language. This is the central point of Hegel’s position and the meaning of
his repeated claim that the content of discourse is generated by its form.75
74

75

Of course, “discourse” and “saying” are to be understood here in a logical context, that is, as meaninggenerating performances in which the flautus vocis, though never dissolved, is nevertheless absorbed
into the meaningful intentions that language conveys. This is not to say that it is not appropriate
to distinguish between verbal sounds and concepts, or between “speaking” and “thinking,” or to
enquire how the two are interconnected. But these are psychological reflections that belong to logic,
if they belong to it at all, only accidentally.
This is also the meaning of Hegel’s repeated claim in the Phenomenology that much of the language
that we ordinarily believe to be descriptive statements about things is in fact already reflective, that
is to say, implicitly contains a judgment about how, and to what extent, we truly apprehend a

Introduction

xxxv

Any judgment regarding a subject matter contains a comment on what
has already been said or has been left unsaid about it. The subject matter
of the Logic is not the “thing-in-itself” or its phenomenal manifestations,
whether one conceives its “in-itself” as a substance or as freedom, but is
discourse itself. Hegel’s thesis is that, starting from the least that one can
say about an object in general while still making sense, one can proceed to
identify sets of predicates, namely the categories, each of which defines the
limits of a type of discourse suited to a certain subject matter. Each set is
arrived at by virtue of a reflection upon the prior, a reflection that makes
explicit and formally introduces into a new type of discourse the logical
determinacy that was still missing in the one preceding it and therefore
made its subject matter still unintelligible (or, more precisely, relatively
unintelligible). The Logic itself is a discourse about discourse – the only
discourse which, because of its subject matter, can attain perfect completion
and which, therefore, defines the norm of intelligibility against which all
other types of discourse, all of them more or less open-ended in their own
spheres, are to be measured.
I shall say more about how the Logic unfolds. The important point right
now is that Hegel’s Logic does not proceed from the formal to the real,
where the “real” is the “given” as in Kant’s Transcendental Analytic; nor
does it proceed from the theoretical to the practical, where the “practical”
arises from the challenge that the facticity of experience, as interpreted in
Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre, poses to freedom. On the contrary, the progression is from the abstract to the concrete, or more graphically, from a first
delineation of the intelligible space of reason to a full discourse about it.
There is never an exit from either the logically formal or the theoretical.
Accordingly, the notes of “givenness” and “facticity” lose in Hegel’s Logic
the systematic significance that they respectively had for Kant and Fichte
(though they may well still retain limited applicability in limited contexts).
“Immediacy” is the note that replaces them. Immediacy is a feature that
affects logical discourse at every stage of its development. It is a measure
of the indeterminacy that that discourse still harbors at any particular
stage because of the limitations of the specific set of categories that define
it at that stage; it is “das Rest” of those categories, their still unintelligible residue that the next set will have to absorb by reintroducing it as a
moment of the form governing the following type of discourse. These,
such distinctions as those between “abstract” and “concrete,” “immediate”
supposed thing. For instance: “It is clear that the dialectic of sense-certainty is nothing else but the
simple history of its movement or of its experience, and sense-certainty itself is nothing else but
just this history.” GW 9, 68.34–36.

xxxvi

Introduction

and “reflective,” “material” and “formal,” are the factors that govern the
movement of Hegel’s Logic essentially. And they are all implicated in
a further distinction that Hegel introduces unobtrusively, and one that
tends to be lost in English translation, but which in fact controls the
development of the Logic from beginning to end. This is the distinction
between Gegenstand and Objekt, and between their derived abstract nouns
Gegenständlichkeit and Objecktivität – a translator’s nightmare, since the
dictionary translation of both terms and the derived abstract nouns are the
same: “object” and “objectivity.” The distinction between Gegenstand and
Objekt coincides roughly with the scholastic distinction between “material”
and “formal” object or, in an ordinary epistemological context, between a
“subject matter” as merely intended or merely representable76 and as actually made present in representation. As actually made present, the “subject
matter” is of course made intelligible (that is, it is made to exist for an
intellect),77 and it is so made intelligible by being represented from the
special formal standpoint of some discourse or other (as when we speak,
for instance, of the subject matter specific to a science).78 In the language
of Hegel’s Phenomenology, the Objektivität of a Gegenstand is its truth, its
intelligible content. In the Logic, the Gegenstand or the subject matter is
the Objektivität itself of any Gegenstand, or the possibility of intelligibility
in general. Yet a distinction still emerges between the two because of the
immediacy just noted that affects the logical discourse at its various stages
and still constitutes an area of the “unsaid” within what is actually “said.” It
is only at the end, when the logical process turns upon itself and its various
stages are explicitly determined as constituting the particularized content
of the “idea,” that “subject matter” and “object,” Gegenstand and Objekt,
formally coincide.
We are getting ahead of ourselves, since it is with the beginning of
the Logic that we are concerned here. Yet another general point is also
to be made. As Hegel takes us systematically across the content of his
Logic, he tacitly assumes and makes use of a psychological model which
he borrows from Kant and Fichte and which these had borrowed in turn
from a long-standing scholastic tradition. The transition from the first to
76
77

78

Vorstellbar. Here “representation” must be taken in its wide sense and not as opposed to “concept.”
See the discussion of the term below under “Issues of translation.”
In the late scholastic language of Cajetanus and John of St. Thomas, the object would be the ratio
quod of the subject matter. Cf. Johannes a sancto Thoma, Cursus Philosophicus, ed. B. Reiser (Turin:
Marietti, 1930), Quæstio 27, art. 1. English trans.: The Material Logic of John of St. Thomas, trans. Y.
Simon, J. J. Glanville, and G. D. Hollenhorst (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1955), especially
p. 555.
This standpoint is the object’s ratio formalis sub qua of late scholasticism.

Introduction

xxxvii

the second and third part of the Logic is a progression from the things
of the senses to those of the understanding, and finally to those of reason.
These are distinctions on which Hegel openly relies. However, as used in
the Logic, such terms as “senses,” “understanding,” and “reason,” must be
understood in a wide sense to mean degrees of intelligibility, or as denoting
types of objectivity possible in a subject matter. Any psychological or even
phenomenological connotations that they may carry are strictly accidental.
Also to be understood is that each forward move in the progression of
the Logic is just as much a regression – in the sense that what is being
determinedly explicated at any stage are the conditions of intelligibility
that were already implicitly at work at a prior stage and that de facto made
its specific type of objectivity possible. It follows that at the end, when all
these conditions are fully explicated in the “idea of the idea,” what is being
logically comprehended is the mental attitude, the rationality, that must
be at work in experience from the beginning. It has to be at work if even as
simple a judgment as Hegel subjects to critical reflection at the beginning
of the Phenomenology, if even as simple as a “There it is!,” is to make any
sense. Either rationality is present from the beginning in toto, or it is not
present at all. And this is another way of repeating that for Hegel there is
no exiting from discursiveness.79
One can understand, therefore, Hegel’s opening moves in the Logic.
They are simple and yet profoundly programmatic. They are simple moves
because in the two concepts that are expressed by saying “being” and
“nothing,” Hegel says all that we could possibly say of whatever we would
apprehend in intuition, whether the intuition is of the senses or (if there is
one) of a pure thought,80 namely that it is nothing determinate. Whether
we interpret that “whatever” as “being” in the positive spirit of a Spinoza
or a Schelling, or as “nothing” in the negative spirit of a Fichte who
required that we step outside “being” in order to begin science, the result
amounts to the same: “being” empty of content and therefore determined
as “nothing,” and “nothing” determined as “being” (empty being) in order
to have meaning even as “nothing.” The two shift into one another. And
the moves are also profoundly programmatic because it is not with a
mere void that they leave us, as we would be left by any intuition, a
void for which we would then be required to import a conceptual content
from outside. The resulting indeterminacy is contained within “being” and
“nothing”; it is their determinacy, or the first determination of the subject
79
80

Except in death, of course, whether of an individual or of a community.
Perhaps we do have “intellectual intuition,” though I do not believe that we do. But the point is
that it has no purchase unless it is put into words.

xxxviii

Introduction

matter of the Logic as originatively adumbrated in these first moves. Since
we are dealing here with the simplest of all possible expressions, it is of
course difficult to avoid overt metaphors in order to speak about them,
and Hegel’s own advice is, accordingly, not to say much at all. An apt
metaphor nevertheless, especially if we remember that Bestimmung means
in German both “determination” and “vocation,” is to say that “being”
and “nothing” are a call for determination: that call is their determinacy.
Or to revert to the image of a space of reason, “being” and “nothing”
define together a space of discovery. There is nothing irrational about the
immediacy of their content, or better of their “non-content”; nothing in
principle refractory to conceptualization but the first delineation, rather, of
how to set in motion the process of conceptualization that will fill in their
indeterminacy.
For yet another reason, therefore, these first moves are profoundly programmatic. The first and simplest expression of this determinacy which
the indeterminacy of both “being” and “nothing” together constitute is
“becoming.” Hegel introduces this category at this point. But in thus
advancing to it, he is at the same time also taking a first step backward in
recovering a more concrete delineation of the eventual full logical discourse
of which “being” and “nothing” are but ephemeral moments. “Becoming”
is the first self-contained category, of which “being” and “nothing” are only
abstractive moments. In assuming this position, Hegel is in fact taking a
stand against the whole tradition of Western metaphysics, a tradition that
dates at least as far back as Parmenides, and of which Spinoza was at the
time the latest, most obvious representative. Hegel privileges “becoming”
over “being.” It is not “becoming” which is the source of irrationality, but
the attempt rather to treat “being” by itself, in abstraction from “nothing”
and from the “becoming” which is the matrix of both. It is only inasmuch as “being” is conceived as being whatever it is by becoming it that
it retains identity, while at the same time remaining open to a number of
possible determinations which it nonetheless contains within according to
a rule internal to it. But this is the formula for rationality. And indeed,
the best instance of “becoming,” the one against which we in fact measure
the internal adequacy of other processes of becoming and from which all
our language of becoming is drawn, is precisely the discursiveness of our
discourse – as when a theme, though perhaps declared abstractly at the
beginning of a story, finds its content only in the details of that same
story which it controls, and it truly develops by returning at the end to its
beginning in the form of a full story. But the perfect discourse, according
to Hegel, is that of the Logic. Hegel is orienting himself to this conclusion

Introduction

xxxix

even with his first moves. We must now consider some of the details on
the way to that conclusion.
The development
(1) I have been deliberately using “discourse” and “discursiveness” instead
of “dialectic” (a term, incidentally, that Hegel uses sparsely in the Logic)
in an attempt to demystify the latter term. But it should be clear that
the meaning is the same.81 Now, taken precisely “in becoming,” being
can first be determined as what it is rhapsodically, that is, qualitatively, in
one “what,” then in another, and so on, each “what” never constituting
anything definitive. The logical problem is to hold these “whats” together,
to make a discourse of them – in effect, to give a first, better delineated
definition of the unity which is possible in becoming. Here is where Hegel
makes several conceptual moves, introducing among others the concepts
of “finitude,” “limitation,” and “infinity.” With this last, with “infinity,”
a turning point is reached. As conceived by Hegel, the “infinite” is being
inasmuch as, in being whatever it is (and this could be an indefinite series
of “whats” – a “bad infinite,” as Hegel calls it), it remains by itself, or
is now definable, in Hegel’s terminology, as “being-for-itself.” The turn
consists in the fact that, from now on, the conceptual stress is no longer on
“what” a being happens to be but on its retaining unity (in its abiding with
itself ) regardless of what it might otherwise be as a “what.” This “abiding
with itself” can of course acquire both the meaning of “continuity” and
“discreteness.” The further move from the categories of “quality” to those
of “quantity” is thereby secured. Even though our most elementary talk
about things is unreflectively carried out in qualitative terms, the truth of
that discourse, or the more determinate concept of the being which is its
subject matter, is defined by the categories of “quantity.”
(2) These categories divide into “quantity” as such, “quantum,” and
“measure.” As quantified, being is said to be constituted of parts that can
be taken as both continuous and discrete, and there is in principle no
end to how many such parts can be generated by reflection. These parts
are “quanta.” Now, something analogous was also already said of being
as qualitatively determined, except that instead of “quanta” one had to
speak of “qualia,” of “whats.” The play between quantitative parts which,
as such, can both run into one another and yet also fall apart, was also
81

Etymologically, “discourse” does not derive from dilexiv, which has the more specific meaning of
“dialogue” or of disputatio. But “dialogue” is a type of “discourse.”

xl

Introduction

already played out in terms of the “some” and the “some other,” the “one”
and the “many,” their reciprocal connection ultimately one of “attraction”
and “repulsion.” It was precisely this qualitative play that made possible
the transition to “quantity.” But the difference is that what counts most
in “quantity” for the determination of a being is the rule by which this
play is carried out. True: the “quanta” that make up that being, inasmuch
as they are taken as single terms subject to external calculation, still have
to be qualitatively determined in order to be individually picked out for
the calculation. That is to say, they must be immediately presupposed. As
thus presupposed, however, they are from the start already in principle
relegated – to anticipate now a category that comes into its own only
as a result of the dialectic of “quantity” – to the “unessential.” Only as
implicated in a referential play of terms carried out according to a rule,
and deriving their magnitude from this play, do they denote the new
unity of formal determination that “being” has now acquired. Progress
in the development of quantity is measured precisely by the extent that
the rules determining the play, rather than just presupposing its terms
globally and/or singly, also determine the range within which they can
enter into that play, to the point that the play itself generates the terms that
enter into it. Such are the mathematical ratios. Hegel takes them in order:
direct ratio, y /x = k; inverse ratio, x y = k; and the ratio of powers, x 2 or
x x = k.
Here is where Hegel introduces the new category of “measure” which
explicitly expresses the de facto situation that has just developed and is
fully realized in the ratio of powers. Reflected in his treatment of this
category, and in the terminology that he uses for this purpose, is the
discussion on the nature of calculus, and its place in the study of the
sciences of nature, that had gripped the attention of the learned world
in the eighteenth century and which was also the object of Hegel’s own
reflection throughout his intellectual development. Hegel’s point, in brief,
is this. In a ratio, the terms that enter into it are measured against each
other. As single terms, they do indeed still carry immediate qualitative
determination – and to this extent, therefore, they are still open as objects
to external determination. But the important point is that, whatever the
qualitative determination of such single terms, their stipulated measure
persists, internally resistant to any external manipulation. Because of this
resistance, their objectivity (originatively defined as “being”) acquires yet
another level of formal self-containment, another “for-itselfness.” Hegel can
say, accordingly, that with “measure” there is a return to “quality.” But the
return is with a crucial difference, for the net result of the internal resistance

Introduction

xli

posed by “measure” is that the qualitative differentiation of the terms that
enter into it – an immediate differentiation that belongs to “quality” in
general as a first immediate determination of “being” – becomes to it a
matter of indifference. In the form of “measure,” in other words, “quantity”
has absorbed the indeterminateness that was the determinateness of “being”
as “quality,” and “being” itself, therefore, has acquired a depth that it did
not have before. “Quality,” as it now comes into play again, signifies this
new depth – this enhanced self-containment – that the logical object has
achieved. It has begun explicitly to contain the immediacy of its becoming,
and with this the forward transition to “essence” has in principle already
been made.
(3) This is the place to consider two additions made to the 1832 edition
of the Logic. They are the exceptions to which we alluded in the Prologue.
The first is the much longer discussion (now in three Remarks as contrasted to the earlier one) which immediately follows upon the treatment
of “quantum,” and which anticipates the point that Hegel will then formally develop in the sections on “ratio” and “measure.” These Remarks
also contain Hegel’s criticism of how mathematicians and philosophers,
past as well as current, and including even those who had contributed to
the creation of this new form of calculation, had in fact misunderstood
the nature of their own creation. For this reason, they had been unable to
explain the peculiar advantage that it offered over other forms of calculation, namely that on the basis of admittedly indefinite quantities it can
achieve very definite results. What they had failed to notice was precisely
the extra qualitative character that “quantity” assumes in the course of
its internal conceptual development and of which calculus, as Hegel now
argues, gives a perfect illustration. Central to his argument is a repeated
reflection on the nature of the “true infinite” already defined in connection
with the category of the “for-itself.”
In brief, this is his argument.82 There are actual infinites, that is, magnitudes that cannot be numerically exhausted but of which we nevertheless
have clear and distinct concepts. Spinoza, to whom Hegel duly refers, had
82

GW 21.236ff. I must acknowledge in this connection a number of studies on Hegel’s reflections on
mathematics and calculus that I have found especially instructive: David Gray Carlson, “Hegel’s
Theory of Quantity,” Cardozo Law Review, 23.6 (2002), 2027–2155; “Hegel’s Theory of Measure,”
Cardozo Law Review, 25.1 (2003), 129–213; Antonio Moretto, Hegel e la “Matematica dell’infinito”
(Trento: Verifiche, 1984); Questioni di filosofia della matematica nella “Scienza della Logica” di Hegel
(Trento: Verifiche, 1988); Filosofia della matematica e della meccanica nel sistema hegeliano (Padua:
il Poligrafo, 2004). A deflationary view of Hegel’s Remarks on calculus is that of Clark Butler
who suspects “Hegel of wishing in part to demonstrate his mastery of mathematics and science to
contemporaries and colleagues.” Between Dialectic and History, pp. 110–111.

xlii

Introduction

already made this point.83 Take two unequal circles, the smaller contained
within the larger without touching it and the two non-concentric. Of
the segments generated by the two circumferences intercepting the lines
drawn from the center of the smaller circle to the outer circumference of
the larger circle (and contained in the space between the smaller and larger
circle), there is a longest and a shortest (where the two centers lie on the
same diameter). For each segment lying between these two limits, however,
there is another next to it unequal to it by an infinitesimally ever smaller
or greater magnitude, though never exceeding in the direction of either
smaller or greater the difference between the two set limits, and there is
no number that can express all the inequalities thus generated. We are
confronted here with an “all” for which the usual concept of quantifiability
by means of number no longer applies, but which is clearly and distinctly
definable. The “all” is the actual infinitude of the inequalities of the segments contained between the two stated limits within the space generated
by the two circumferences – an “all” which, as so defined, though infinite
is nonetheless actual and perfectly identifiable. This a perfect figurative
illustration of what Hegel means by a true infinite as contrasted with a
“bad” or indefinite infinite.
In Spinoza’s illustration, this infinite is represented figuratively, still in
the manner of classic Euclidean geometry. But suppose that we try to
represent it analytically as it is done in calculus, visually charting on a
graph the course of the increments or decrements of the segments one by
one, granted the stipulated limits. The infinitesimal change in magnitude
between increments or decrements is neither a null nor a definite quantum: “d x” and “d y ” cannot be named. But this does not mean that the
course of the graph cannot be accurately charted or any point within it
not precisely calculated, for although “d x” and “d y ” cannot be named,
“d x/d y ” can. That is to say, although the infinitude of the terms charted
by the graph cannot be exhaustively enumerated (and would give rise to a
bad infinite if one tried), given any of them as chosen at random on the
basis of external considerations, any other can be exactly determined as
measured against it according to the rule governing the graph. The numerical, quantitative indeterminateness is determinedly contained by that rule.
This is exactly the point that Hegel develops in connection with “ratio”
and “measure,” which he introduces following the three Remarks, and
sums up by claiming that “measure” marks a return to “quality” (though a
83

Cf. GW 21, 247.24ff., and Spinoza, Epistolæ, Nr XXXIX, Nr XII in the Gebhardt numeration:
Benedictus de Spinoza, Opera, ed. Carl Gebhardt, 4 vols. (Heidelberg: Winter, 1925).

Introduction

xliii

return with a difference). Now, using the still figurative language that Newton and Leibniz had put into circulation, the mathematicians of Hegel’s
day referred to the infinitesimal difference between term and term on the
graph as an “evanescent moment,” and they took it to be a quantum so
minute that, in the course of calculation, it can at some point be left out
of consideration without adverse consequences. But they were then left in
the embarrassing situation, with which Hegel confronts them, of having
to explain how accurate results (and their calculations were indisputably
exact) could be obtained on the basis of avowed approximations,84 or, as
some of them argued, how rigor of demonstration could be maintained by
the accidental balancing out of contrary errors.85 What they failed to see is
that when duly developed “quantum” transcends the limits of “quantity.”
Calculus, according to Hegel, was a clear instantiation of this overreaching
of “quantity.”
This is the first addition. The second is much shorter, but arguably
more subtle and certainly more surprising, and consists of a long passage
introduced in the prefatory comments to the section on “measure.”86 It
comes as a surprise and it is generally considered by commentators to
be out of place because it deals with the categories of modality, whereas
modality formally falls within the purview of “essence.”87 It is directed
at Kant, whom Hegel criticizes for assigning to the modal categories an
especially subjective status. All of Kant’s categories are of course subjective.
They define an object which is mere appearance by assumption. In the case
of “contingency,” “possibility,” “actuality,” and “necessity,” however, Kant
adds the further qualification that they say nothing at all about the content
of the object (even as phenomenal) but define rather the relative distance
that obtains in experience between the concept and the intuition of it.
As categories, they are the exclusive function of our subjective (discursive)
84

85
86

87

Hegel singles out for his disapproval the explanation of Christian Wolff who compared the ignoring
of higher order infinitesimals to the procedure of a surveyor who, in measuring a mountain, is not
any less accurate just because the wind has in the meantime blown a speck of sand off from the
top. GW 21, 256.
GW 21, 263–264.
GW 21, 323–326. For a detailed discussion of the changes between 1812 and 1832 in Hegel’s treatment
of the double transition from “quality” to “quantity” and from “quantity” back to “quality” and of
his appreciation of the meaning of this double transition, and also of the possible disparity that these
developments cause between the conclusion of the 1832 Doctrine of Being and the beginning of the
1816 Doctrine of Essence, see Cinzia Ferrini, “Logica e filosofia della natura nella dottrina dell’essere
hegeliana I,” Rivista di storia della filosofia, 4 (1991), 701–735; “Logica e filosofia della natura nella
dottrina dell’essere hegeliana II,” Rivista di storia della filosofia, 1 (1992), 104–124; “On the Relation
between ‘Mode’ and ‘Measure’ in Hegel’s Science of Logic: Some Introductory Remarks,” The Owl
of Minerva, 20.1 (1988), 21–49.
Cf. Ferrini, “Logica e filosofia della natura nella dottrina dell’essere hegeliana I,” pp. 722–723.

xliv

Introduction

way of apprehending objects. If, per impossibile, we had an intellectual
intuition of these objects, the modal categories would lose all meaning.88
In this respect Kant is not unlike Spinoza, to whom Hegel also refers.
Also for Spinoza they are ultimately the product of ignorance. Now, in his
additions, Hegel is taking issue with precisely this position. “Quantity,”
especially when understood as “measure,” entails a distinction that explicitly
obtains within the structure of the being which it determines – namely the
distinction between this being as consisting, on the one hand, of a “bad”
infinity of determinations, and as providing, on the other, an internal rule
by which it contains such determinations and governs (as need be) the
progress of their enumeration. It is this distinction, and the distance that
it creates within being between outer indefinite determination and inner
determining rule, that, as Hegel now implies, is the first adumbration of
the modal categories later to be officially discussed in the context of the
“Doctrine of Essence.” In connecting them with his present treatment of
“measure,” Hegel is proleptically shedding these categories of the purely
subjective meaning that they had for both Spinoza and Kant. We have
already noted how the philosophy of nature is never far away from Hegel’s
mind. Hegel is certainly not committing himself here to any particular
theory of nature. Nor, for that matter, is he renouncing his belief that the
things of nature ultimately lack the internal stability that would make them
intelligible on their own terms – his belief that, in order that they become
objects of scientific knowledge, the concept must step in and provide by
means of theoretical constructs the stability that they otherwise lack per
se. This being said, it is nonetheless clear that Hegel is supplying here the
logic of a scientific language that would allow physical things to have at
least an inchoate internal principle and, therefore, at least a relative control
over their process of determination. Hegel, in other words, is still pursuing
his Jena agenda of allowing for the things of nature to have the depth that
the phenomena lack in the idealism of both Kant and Fichte. All this is
on the assumption, of course, that such things as Hegel logically envisages
are in fact empirically discovered (cf. GW 12.30–201.2). The problem with
Kant was that, by declaring the modal categories to be purely subjective on
88

Critique of the Power of Judgement, §76, AK V.401–404. It is also significant that in the 1812
Division of Being, with reference to “measure,” Hegel says that this category can also be considered
a “modality,” for it does not constitute a determination of content but concerns rather its connection
to thought, to a subject. This is indeed Kant’s definition of a modal category, and Hegel here seems
to endorse it (GW 12, 42.3–5). In the 1832 edition, in the same place, while repeating that “measure”
can also be considered a “modality,” he explicitly attributes to Kant the view that “modalities”
are not content-determinations, with no indication that he personally endorses the view. GW 21,
67.11–17.

Introduction

xlv

transcendental logical grounds alone, he had simply pre-judged the issue
of discovery.
We have said that commentators have normally regarded these 1832
additions as out of place. In fact, the additions are witness to the extra
lucidity that Hegel had gained regarding his own Logic by the time he
set out to revise it. He was still pursuing the double agenda, developed
in the Jena years at least starting from 1805/06, of according to nature a
depth that it does not have in transcendental idealism, while at the same
time maintaining the idealistic thesis that it is only in the medium of the
concept that nature, indeed reality as a whole, attains (not just manifests) its
intelligibility. The presence in experience of “facticity” now reinterpreted as
the “immediacy of becoming,” its generation and containment, is the issue
that underlies the Logic from beginning to end. As we move from “being”
to “essence” and then to “the concept,” we move (as we can reflectively
say at the end of the process) from “immediacy” conceived, respectively, as
“contingency,” “necessity,” and “freedom.”
(4) The categories of “essence” explicitly state and develop what is already
said, but only de facto, by “measure.” They define “being” as internally
differentiated – on the one hand, as containing a principle by virtue of
which it is intelligible as what it is; on the other hand, as equally containing
a number of determinations that are peripheral to it but that acquire a
status as determinations only by being referred to what defines the object
as such in the first instance. This is quite generally the distinction between
the “essential” and the “unessential.” It is a differentiation internal to the
subject matter of discourse because the “essential” proves to be such only
to the extent that it manifests itself to be what the “unessential” would
otherwise seem to be on its own account. And the “unessential,” for its
part, is such only to the extent that it demonstrates itself to be a nothing
in itself – that its true being is the “essential.” Each thus refers to the other,
and the resulting double reference constitutes the internal structure of the
subject matter in question. The development of the latter in the logic of
“essence” is the process by which this reference, whether it proceeds in one
direction or the other, reverses itself, in both instances exhibiting in ever
more complex yet apparent forms the “being oneself in the other” which
is the basic reflective schema of “becoming.”
The categories of “essence” are those of classical metaphysics: ground,
existence, appearance, force, actuality, absolute, relation – just to mention
the ones that make up the main headings. The discourse which they govern
is neither the disconnected one of “quality” nor the one of “measure,” which
is already expressly rule-governed but is still lacking in expressly reflective

xlvi

Introduction

containment. It is a discourse about large things, so to speak, those that we
take for granted in ordinary experience and which are at the basis of classical
metaphysics. Yet its intelligibility is still subject to external constraint, for
the reciprocal reference of contrasting terms which its categories express
is still dependent on the immediate assumption of precisely these terms.
The presence of the thing they define, whether assumed starting from one
term or the other, is therefore affected by an element of opaqueness – an
immediacy still understood in the sense of contingency, for it requires for
each term an explanation by reference to the other, and consequently a
necessitation external to it. The realm of “essence” is one of necessitation.
Progress in the actualization of the intelligibility (the Objektivierung) of the
subject matter (the Gegenstand) proceeds pari passu with the elimination
of precisely this immediacy of the presupposed terms. In effect, this means
their absorption into the very referential process that defines the structure
of essential being, to the point that the latter would have to be conceived,
if still operating within the framework of the categories of “essence,” in the
manner of Spinoza’s causa sui, as a pure self-reference generating its own
content.
How Hegel retrieves, while at the same time transcending, the metaphysics of Spinoza at this final stage of the logic of “essence” constitutes a
complex and delicate transition, upon which much depends for the interpretation of Hegel. Three considerations are relevant here. The first is that,
although “contradiction” is a pervasive theme in the Logic, it is only in
the course of the dialectic of the categories of “essence” that the risk of
formally (not just de facto) incurring it repeatedly arises. This is because of
the structure of the subject matter under consideration. “Essential being”
would explicitly be both at once: made up of materially independent terms,
and a whole in which each term is itself formally the whole. It is this pull in
opposite directions that causes contradiction repeatedly to irrupt, according as the subject matter is successively defined on the basis of presumed
originating terms. The truth of the categories of “being” was the distinction
between “principle of determination” and “determination” itself, and this
truth was finally made explicit in “essence.” The truth of the categories
of “essence” is now the overcoming of precisely this distinction. “Essence”
must be shown to exist only in its determinations. “Essence” is the movement of these determinations, and this movement is propelled forward
precisely by the occurrence of contradiction as caused by the assumption
of determinations independent of it.
This result, however, should not be construed as betraying a deficiency on
the part of the categories as categories. This is the second consideration. To

Introduction

xlvii

make the point in a phenomenological mode, the deficiency is rather on the
part of the things of experience for which the categories of “essence” define
the logic of discourse. These are things of nature. Hence, although Hegel
refuses to reduce them to mere phenomena, they still lack the interiority,
the full self-reflectivity, that would make each a world unto itself and which
would satisfy reason’s quest for intelligibility. Such an interiority, according
to Hegel’s idealistic thesis, is to be found only in the products of reason
itself, that is, in the social entities, the works of art and religion, for which
spirit is responsible. But the special merit of the categories of “essence”
is that their dialectic reproduces in the schematic form proper to a work
in logic what Hegel calls “the arduous labour of the understanding,”89
that is to say, the labor that the concept performs in actual experience by
permeating its whole content discursively. What the concept does is to
introduce within the latter, in the representational medium most suited
to its current purposes, ever new distinctions and ever new principles of
explanation, all for the sake of collecting into a single coherent world free
of internal contradiction the many things that otherwise fall scattered in
experience. This is stating the case, of course, in a manner more suited to
the Phenomenology. But the fact is that the categories of “essence” define
the logic of the sciences of precisely this experiential process.
The further fact is that a complete world of nature cannot be had on
natural terms alone. And were we to try to have it so – metaphysically,
that is, quite apart from the scientific theoretical constructs that one can
always introduce for explanatory purposes but which remain external to
the things themselves and are always reformable – were we to try it, we
would run up against the figure of Spinoza, the philosopher who famously
construed a monistic ontology based on the self-identity of “substance”
alone, itself a category of “essence.” The price for this attempt is to reduce
all the things of nature to mere surface-like events, the truth of which
would consist (just as in Fichte’s system) in their disappearing, in their
nothingness – precisely what Hegel refused to do by insisting on the objectivity of the modal categories. This is the third consideration. Hegel resists
any Spinoza-like reduction of the modes of substance to nothingness, and
thus succeeds in retaining even in the possible things of nature the internal
distinction already adumbrated by “measure,” precisely by transcending
the whole realm of “essence” and revealing as its truth, as subtending it
and containing it all along, a yet more reflective level of discourse. This is
89

E.g. GW 9, 27.18–19. See also the discussion of the work of the understanding in the Addition to
§80 of the Encyclopedia.

xlviii

Introduction

the discourse, specific to the life of spirit, that has the concept itself and its
products as its subject matter. Its logic is that of subjectivity. Only in its
medium is the quest for complete intelligibility that motivates the dialectic
of “essence” (the identification of Objektivität and Gegenständlichkeit) satisfied. But it must be clear that, just as “essence” reflectively made good the
differentiation implicit in “measure” by reinterpreting it as a differentiation
of concrete “things” (the “large things” of experience), so the logic of the
“concept as concept” completes the work of sorting out these things which
is the proper function of the categories of “essence” by reinterpreting them
as the means for generating the things of the spirit. We are moving from
the logic of a discourse about products of nature to that of a discourse
about the products of spirit.
One can understand, therefore, Hegel’s ambiguity with respect to
Spinoza. It is an ambiguity that he shared with Jacobi. Like Jacobi, he
saw in Spinoza the metaphysician who had brought to a logical conclusion
the project of classical metaphysics of founding all things in the Absolute.
He had done it without compromises or prevarications, and for this lucidity of intent he deserved respect. But, in keeping with the pre-Kantian
assumptions of that same metaphysics, Spinoza had defined the Absolute
in categories which are suited to finite objects only. Therefore, he had
achieved the sought for completeness of explanation at the price of absolute abstraction. This is the point that Hegel was making in the second of
his additions to the 1832 edition in connection with measure. By reducing
the modal categories to merely subjective expressions, Spinoza had in fact
emptied things of their inner measure, even of such as can be had quantitatively. He had pre-empted the possibility of their ever being assumed
within the works of spirit, that is to say, of being made the subject matter
of judgment. “The Spinozistic mode, just like the Indian principle of alteration, is the measureless,”90 as Hegel then put it. But already in 1813, in
connection with “actuality,” Hegel had made it clear, echoing Jacobi, that
Spinoza’s Absolute is the abyss, der Abgrund, in which all determinations
are made to disappear.91 Their truth is their nothingness. “Determinatio
negatio est,” was Spinoza’s motto. And for Hegel (though not necessarily
for Jacobi), there was a truth in this. The truth of the “modes” of substance
is the absoluteness of substance. But what Hegel found lacking in Spinoza’s
system was the contrary positive manifestation of the power of the Absolute
in the appearance of the “modes,” the positive presence of spirit in them.
90
91

GW 21, 325.27–28.
Cf. GW 11, 372.28–37. Spinoza is not named, but the criticism is obviously directed at him.

Introduction

xlix

For that, according to Hegel, the extra dimension of subjectivity had to
be added to that of objective substantiality. This was a need, of course,
that Fichte and the pre-Romantics had already recognized long before the
composition of Hegel’s Logic. But, so far as Hegel was concerned, the move
to subjectivity was not a matter of adding a thinking head, so to speak,
to Spinoza’s monistic substance. That would have been indeed making a
mockery of Spinoza’s otherwise perfectly self-consistent system. Nor was it
a matter of escaping conceptualization, taking refuge either in the darkness
of Romantic intuition or in Spinoza’s perfect brightness of vision – in
either case, letting all distinctions go lost. Hegel never leaves discursiveness
behind. On the contrary, the transition to subjectivity is one of recovering
conceptually precisely the source of discursiveness, the concept as concept.
(5) With the categories of the “concept” one can say indeed that we have
stepped into the mind of God before the creation of the world92 – though
by “world” we must now understand nothing physical but a universe of
meaning instead, and by “creation” the constitution of the conceptual
medium that will make any reality, such as already exists or might exist,
re-exist as intelligible. But of this universe it can also be said that it is a
“realm of shadows,” for it is made up of reflective abstractions only. Hegel
speaks of the “impotence of subjective reason”93 just as he speaks of the
“impotence of nature” (die Ohnmacht der Natur).94 Reason manifests its
power only in the effect that it has by investing nature with a new meaning,
and for that it needs the work of the finite concept that provides for it the
required de facto material. In a way, Hegel’s point is still a Kantian one. It is
only ideally that full intelligibility is attained, the kind of intelligibility, to
put it in more phenomenological terms, that would satisfy reason. But Kant
was still beholden to the “thing-in-itself,” to the metaphysics of “essence.”
Kant still believed that, if we just had intellectual intuition, the vision of a
Spinoza, or a Leibniz, would be vindicated. Therefore he had declared the
products of ideal conceptualization to be merely subjective – “subjective” in
the pejorative sense of lacking objective truth – and their content ultimately
self-contradictory. For Hegel, on the contrary, it is only when the concept
has itself as its object that a perfect determination is achieved by virtue
of which the particular and the singular, as particular and singular, and
as distinct from the universal, coincide nonetheless with the universal
and with each other, so that, regardless of where one starts, one already
has in principle the whole object. The immediacy of the starting point,
which was irreducible in the categories of “essence,” is totally relativized by
92

Cf. GW 21, 34.9–11.

93

GW 12, 42.19.

94

GW 19, 187.11, §250.

Introduction

li

is an issue to which we shall briefly return later. The point now is that,
once Hegel has worked out through the classical theory of predication
and syllogism all the mutations and permutations that are possible in the
reciprocal relation of these three first determinations of the concept, what
we have is a fully determined concept of the concept, a self-standing and
self-justifying discourse – therefore, also a first realization of objectivity
understood as self-contained intelligibility (Objekt). This realization, and
nothing else, constitutes the transition from subjectivity to objectivity.
The distinction between “subjective” and “objective” is for Hegel first
and foremost a logical one, a distinction between types of discourse. It is
not dependent, as it is for both Kant and Fichte, on any psychological
or even phenomenological model of the mind – a model which would
depend for Hegel, on the contrary, on the logical distinction. Hegel’s distinction is more in line with, but not quite the same as, that of Descartes
between “clear and distinct” and “unclear and indistinct” – not quite the
same because the categories of the Logic, and the discourse associated with
each, are all clear and distinct on their own respective terms. The distinction, to repeat a point already stressed, is rather between the “abstract” and
the “concrete,” between the less and the more developed form of objectivity. Another puzzling feature of the Logic is therefore also dispelled. It
might seem strange indeed that in a formal logic, under the heading of
“objectivity,” Hegel would consider such earthly sounding categories as
“mechanism,” “chemism,” and “teleology,” as he does in the second section
of Book Three. To be sure, these are concepts obviously derived from,
and referring to, the Philosophy of Nature.96 But, inasmuch as they enter
into the Logic, what they signify are forms of objectivity – more precisely,
such types and degrees of intelligibility as we might expect in different
experiential contexts.97 In this segment, the Logic reflects upon the kind of
self-sustaining objectivity that the categories of “being” and “essence” were
in fact able to deliver within the artificial context of its ideal reconstruction
96

97

Erdmann rightly points out that these concepts are treated in the Logic precisely as logical categories,
and that “mechanism” therefore defines a sphere of objectivity that exceeds the subject matter of
the physical sciences alone. “Mechanism” can apply, for instance, to the things of the spirit as
well. “Since mechanism is a logical category, one correctly speaks of it even in the sphere of the
mind. There is mechanical memory; there are mechanical arrangements in the State, just as much
as, where various sensible objects form an aggregate, there are mechanical combinations of them.”
Johann Eduard Erdmann, Outlines of Logic and Metaphysics, trans. B. C. Burt (London: Swan
Sonnenschein, 1896), p. 210, §192, note 2.
For a discussion of how Hegel progressively came to realize that the categories of quantity as
developed in a philosophy of mathematics are not sufficient for a comprehension of nature, that
the latter requires more concrete categories than are developed in this part of the Logic, see Cinzia
Ferrini, Dai primi hegeliani a Hegel (Napoli: Città del Sole), pp. 227ff.

lii

Introduction

of discourse in general. It judges the extent to which that objectivity is
indeed self-sustaining or requires instead the support of discourse itself, as
itself the source of intelligibility and as now explicitly considered (in this
final part of the Logic) in precisely this role.
The Logic concludes, therefore, with a final segment on the “idea.” Here
we find the categories of freedom that are at work in the Philosophy of
Spirit. They are the categories of a discourse that explicitly has itself as
object – knows itself to be the source of the norm of what constitutes the
true and the good. Most of all – to make this point in a phenomenological
mode first – it recognizes its pre-conceptual or natural past. It recognizes
it, however, as already implicated in the realm of the conceptual in the
form of immediacy, as that which needs explaining. Hegel’s move in this
respect is the same as Fichte’s, but with the essential difference to which we
have already adverted. Fichte’s Science begins with an abstractive act that
would have its self-expression as its only product but finds itself generating
instead an “other” which, on its original intention, has to appear to it as but
a scandal. The truth, in a Fichtean context, lies necessary in an unattainable
beyond. For Hegel, the conceptual reflection which is at the source of the
Logic also dissolves, as for Fichte, any otherwise merely presupposed natural
ties in order to re-establish them on its own terms in a universe of meaning.
But such ties come to (werden zu) their truth in this universe positively, in
the forms of human institutions in which, and in which alone, the concept
finds its satisfaction. And their being turned into contingent facts is the
first step in their attaining this truth. In a Hegelian context, therefore,
the point just made phenomenologically, namely that discourse recognizes
its pre-conceptual past, is open to strict conceptual formulation, with no
residue of mythical imagery. What is recognized at the end of this long
reflective discourse which is the Logic is that reflection is responsible for
the immediacy which is first expressed in the category of “being” and is
then methodically contained in various forms of “becoming,” all of them
culminating in that perfect “coming to be oneself” which is the concept
of the concept. At the end, the Logic rejoins its beginning. We are ready,
therefore, for the transition (which is in fact no transition because it never
leaves thought behind) by which we begin the existentially more concrete
work of retrieving the immediacy of nature bit by bit, first of all by simply
discovering it.98
98

I say “discovering” rather than “observing” in order to avoid the empiricist connotations of this last
term. Had not the empirical sciences made the word their own by associating it with their artificial
methodology, “observing” would be perfectly acceptable. One must begin by simply looking at
nature, though intelligently.

Introduction

liii

Therefore “method” is the category which brings the Logic to an end.
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason also concluded with a chapter on the methodology of pure reason. But, in that context, method is an order which reason
seeks indeed to discover in experience out of a need which is typically its
own, but which remains nonetheless external to the content of experience.
It is a subjective product, where “subjective” is understood in a privative
sense. For Hegel, on the contrary, “method” is the rhythm (Lebenspuls) of
experience itself. It is an ordering which is internal to it and the consequence of the fact that experience is an idealizing process from beginning
to end. As a work of conceptual art, the Logic stands of course at the end
of that process. The “logical order” (das Logische) that it makes explicit,
however, stands with respect to the same process as its a priori. It is in this
sense, again, that the Logic stands in Hegel’s system as both the final and
first part.
issues of interpretation
The Logic does make an ontological commitment, namely that being is in
becoming. But it makes it transcendentally, one might say, by demonstrating that, unless so conceived – unless “being” holds an internal difference
by virtue of which a discursive account of what it is can be construed –
it could not be the object of intelligent apprehension. The categories are
the forms of precisely this discourse in the medium of which “being” is
made intelligible and the process of discovering what it is in actual fact
can begin. But this discovery is realized only in the sciences of nature and
spirit. In other words, to the extent that Hegel’s Logic is identical with
metaphysics, it is so only in a sense which is definitely post-Kantian. The
meaning of “metaphysics” is modified by being identical with “logic” just
as much as the meaning of the latter is modified by being identical with the
former.99 There is no question of the categories of thought being tout court
“the most general and fundamental forms of being.”100 One can also say
99
100

GW 20, 67, §24.
S. Houlgate, “Logic and Nature in Hegel’s Philosophy: A Response to John Burbidge,” Owl of
Minerva, 34.1 (2002–2003), 107–125, p. 109; also, The Opening of Hegel’s Logic, p. 436. Houlgate’s
position is developed explicitly in opposition to that of Robert Pippin, according to whom the
project of Hegel’s Logic is the transcendental one of determining “the conditions under which
any subject must think in order to think objectively at all.” For Pippin, see Hegel’s Idealism: The
Satisfaction of Self-Consciousness (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 246. I have
also interpreted Hegel’s Logic in a transcendental spirit. But one must remember that, for one
thing, Hegel presents the Logic as itself a form of life, the perfect instance of self-becoming in
which nature finds intelligent completion; and, for another, that there is no question of applying
the categories to a material external to them, as is the case for Kant’s categories. Just as a grammar

liv

Introduction

that the Logic is a renewed ontological argument, but again, only in a sense
consistent with Kant’s critique of that otherwise traditional argument. The
Logic only demonstrates that the perfect conceptual determination of an
object is achieved when the subject matter is the concept itself – that only
by virtue of the self-contained, reflective movement of conceptualization
(which is itself the perfect instance of “becoming” and thus precludes any
Kantian opposition between “thought” and “being”) is the mental space
generated within which “being” is manifested, or becomes reconstituted
for us as what it happens to be in itself. The move in discourse is necessarily
from concept to existence. The Logic also has phenomenological implications, for it follows that, whatever the pre-conscious or purely physiological
pre-history of experience, once the latter comes on the scene, it comes fully
dressed, so to speak – already rich in distinctions and commitments. Even
as simple a gesture as the pointing at this or that, provided the gesture is
intelligent at all, already contains a judgment. We may call it a judgment
of the senses, to use the language of scholastic psychology. But the point
is that such a judgment is the precursor of the abstract, artful judgment
which is performed in the Logic. For Hegel, we are logicians from the
beginning.
This is not, however, the only way in which Hegel’s Logic has been read
or is still read, and to ferret out all the various strands of this interpretation
is a complicated affair indeed. For one thing, the Logic has been from early
on an easy object of ridicule. The judgment of Trendelenburg, an author
whom Kierkegaard had occasion to quote,101 is typical in this respect.
As he says, “it does not make much difference that [Hegel’s dialectic,
unlike Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre] begins with the concept of Being, for
this concept is the empty image of Being. If it nevertheless comes to the
concept of reality and to concrete forms, we do not perceive whence it gets
to them. For pure thought will not accept them, and then permeates them,
but endeavours to make them. Thought, expressed in this way, is born
blind and centers no eyes towards the outside.”102 Yet, despite ridicule,
the Logic has undeniably exercised a mighty influence, in all lands and in
the most disparate of fields. In the political arena, it has been repeatedly
“reformed” to serve the cause of both left- and right-wing movements, and

101
102

distills in a medium typically its own the structure of a language, so too the Logic distills in the
medium of pure reflection the rationality of any and every discourse.
Søren Kierkegaard, Concluding Unscientific Postscript, Vol. I, ed. trans. H. V. Hong and E. H.
Hong (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992), pp. 110–111.
F. A. Trendelenburg, Logische Untersuchungen, 2 vols. (Leipzig: Hirzel, 1862), Vol. I, p. 92 (my
translation).

Introduction

lv

of liberalism as well.103 In America, it was spread by the St. Louis Hegelians.
It eventually found a lively expression in the pragmatism of Charles S. Peirce
and, in more recent times, of Wilfrid Sellars. Interpreted in the spirit of
this pragmatism, Hegel’s Logic is still very much alive today.104 However,
typical of these movements and traditions (the St. Louis Hegelians perhaps
excepted) is that they were Hegel-inspired, yet independent philosophical
positions rather than schools of textual exegesis. And there is, so far as the
Logic itself is concerned, also a long-standing tradition of textual exegesis. It
can be traced at least as far back as Johann Eduard Erdmann’s commentary
on the Logic,105 and, in English, to J. Hutchison Stirling’s exciting The
Secret of Hegel.106 It is a variegated tradition, not seldom motivated by
religious interests. In the case of Stirling, the religious inspiration of Hegel
is beyond doubt. We read: “Kant and Hegel . . . have no object but to
restore Faith – Faith in God – Faith in the immortality of the Soul and the
Freedom of the Will – nay, Faith in Christianity as the Revealed Religion –
and that, too, in perfect harmony with the Right of Private Judgement,
and the Rights, or Lights, or Mights of Intelligence in general” (xxii). This
religious motivation raises of course the issue of whether Hegel’s Logic
ought to be interpreted as buttressing Christian faith or, on the contrary, as
demythologizing it. It also raises the broader issue of hermeneutic strategy –
whether one should take the Logic as the norm for interpreting other parts
of Hegel’s system or, on the contrary, read some of the religious imagery
that Hegel uses elsewhere back into the Logic.
But if we abstract from these broader considerations and concentrate
instead on the more logical/metaphysical issues that the Logic raises, two
lines of interpretation can be identified that roughly correspond to its two
aspects, namely, on the one hand, the interpretation that the Logic makes
an ontological commitment and to that extent advances a dogma, and,
on the other hand, the interpretation that the Logic still operates within
the general framework of Kant’s and Fichte’s idealism and to that extent
103

104

105
106

Karl Marx famously used Hegel’s Logic for his leftist political agenda, Benedetto Croce used it in
his defense of Italian political liberalism, and Giovanni Gentile drew upon it in defense of Italian
fascism.
Robert Brandom is at the moment perhaps the best-known example of one who still reads Hegel
pragmatically in the spirit of Wilfrid Sellars. Although he relies mostly on the Phenomenology of
Spirit, he methodically reads the text in accordance with the linguistic turn. See, for instance, Robert
Brandom, Tales of the Mighty Dead (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), pp. 31–32,
44–57; “The Structure of Desire and Recognition: Self-Consciousness and Self-Constitution,” Von
der Logik zur Sprache, Stuttgarter Hegel-Kongress 2005, ed. R. Bubner and G. Hindrichs (Stuttgart:
Klett-Cotta, 2007), 426–449.
J. E. Erdmann, Grundriß der Logik und Metaphysik (Halle: Schmid, 1864, 4th edn).
J. Hutchison Stirling, The Secret of Hegel (Edinburgh and New York, 1865; 2nd revised edn, 1898).

lvi

Introduction

never abandons the realm of discursive thought. John M. E. McTaggart –
personally an atheist and by no means an orthodox Hegelian – may be
taken as a reliable representative of the first line of interpretation. It is
the ambiguity of his position, itself characteristic of that tradition, that
makes his studies on the Logic particularly interesting. McTaggart leaves
no doubt that this work of Hegel must be read as a work in logic. That
is to say, the Logic deals from beginning to end with categories and their
dialectical development. The Idea with which it culminates is exclusively
the product of reason. But McTaggart then balks at Hegel’s claim that
“method” is the exclusive content of the Idea of the Idea but insists that
it has a content of its own over and above the categories that have led up
to it.107 What this content might be is not clear, but I presume that it
would have to be an abstract schema of the harmony that obtains in the
real universe between individual and individual, and between individual
and universe. Accordingly, McTaggart has no problem advancing a Hegelinspired cosmology, where by “cosmology” he means “the application, to
subject-matter empirically known, of a priori conclusions derived from the
investigation of the nature of pure thought.”108 This is not to say that
McTaggart believes that it is possible or that Hegel himself ever tried to
derive particular laws of nature a priori. But he does apparently believe that
the categories have an explanatory role to play even in the empirical sciences,
or that in the Idea we already have, but sub specie æternitatis, that which, sub
specie temporis, is the goal towards which all reality is moving. “But such
an idea is, sub specie æternitatis, far too implicit, and, sub specie temporis,
far too distant, to allow us to use it in deciding on any definite course of
action in the present.”109 In principle, however, the two opposites ought to
be joined. Or again, although McTaggart obviously does not believe that it
would be possible in fact, or even desirable, to deduce the pen of Herr Krug
from the Idea, he has difficulties accepting the category of “contingency”
as truly objective, and he does leave open the possibility of that deduction
at least in principle. As he says in connection with “contingency”,
the nature of each individual is to be taken as determined by his place in a whole,
which we must conceive on the analogy of an organism – a unity manifesting itself
in multiplicity. The individual has his entire nature in the manifestation of this
107
108
109

Cf. J. M. E. McTaggart, A Commentary on Hegel’s Logic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1931), pp. 305ff.
J. M. E. McTaggart, Studies in Hegelian Cosmology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1918),
p. 1.
J. M. E. McTaggart, Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic, 2nd edn (New York: Russell & Russell, 1910),
p. 232.

Introduction

lvii

whole, as the whole, in turn, is nothing else but its manifestation in individuals.
Through this unity the parts will mutually determine one another, so that from
any one all the rest could, with sufficient insight, be deduced, and so that no
change could be made in any without affecting all.110

And McTaggart is also puzzled by the notion of an “Ohnmacht der Natur,”
apparently unaware that for Hegel, just as it was also the case for Fichte,
nature or the things of experience acquire for us the character of irreducible
contingency as measured against the norms of an intelligibility that reason
alone brings to them.111 It is reason that makes nature contingent. It transpires, in other words, that despite all protestations that the Logic must
be read as logic, McTaggart has in fact invested it from the beginning with
pre-Kantian Spinozist overtones. While taking the Logic to lay out the
blueprint of a universe of meaning that makes the discovery of an actual
cosmos possible, he assumes that it thereby also lays out the blueprint of
that cosmos. It is from the start an exercise in cosmogony. This is the
source of the ambiguity that pervades his position throughout, as well as
the tradition that he represents.
This reading of Hegel is in some quarters still accepted today.112 The slide
back into Spinoza’s metaphysics of substance is avowedly avoided because
110

111

112

McTaggart, Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic, p. 209. For McTaggart’s claim that Hegel’s philosophy
does not try to trace the rationality of the universe in all its details, see pp. 204–205. Wilhelm
Traugott Krug (1770–1842) is notorious for the challenge that he issued to the “new idealism”
of Fichte and Schelling to “deduce his pen” from their first principles. Hegel must have found
the challenge particularly irritating, for he waxed ironic against it in one of his earliest published
essay and repeatedly returns to it. According to Hegel’s mature position, the notion that it is
possible to determine anything in nature absolutely makes no sense, for the simple reason that
things of nature do not perfectly control their own becoming and are therefore susceptible to a
potentially infinite number of external influences. Perfect determination is possible only in the
ideal realm of the concept. So far as nature is concerned, determination will always be relative
and reformable, according to limits which are to be determined by the physical sciences. This, I
take it, is what Hegel means by the Ohnmacht der Natur, “the impotence of nature,” in §250 of
the Encyclopedia where he again waxes ironically against Herr Krug. For Hegel’s essay, “Wie der
gemeine Menschenverstand die Philosophie nehme – dargestellet an den Werken des Herrn Krug,”
Kritisches Journal der Philosophie, 1.1 (1802), see GW 4.174ff. English trans. “How the Ordinary
Human Understanding Takes Philosophy (as displayed in the works of Mr. Krug),” in di Giovanni
and Harris, Between Kant and Hegel, pp. 292ff.
McTaggart’s interpretation is the exact opposite. “The cause of the imperfection [of things] is
nothing but the fact that we do not see everything at once. Seen as we see things now, reality
must be imperfect. But if we can attain to the point of looking at the whole universe sub specie
æternitatis, we shall see just the same subject-matter as in time; but it will appear perfect, because
seen as a single concrete whole, and not as a succession of separated abstractions.” Studies in the
Hegelian Dialectic, p. 175.
It is in effect that of Charles Taylor in Hegel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975),
cf. pp. 97–98; and more recently of Frederick Beiser in Hegel (New York: Routledge, 2005),
cf. pp. 71ff.

lviii

Introduction

of the principle of subjectivity that Hegel had added to his predecessor’s
view of the universe. But it is precisely on this issue, namely whether a
principle of subjectivity can be added to Spinoza’s pantheism, that a host
of difficulties arise. On the one hand, there is the question of how radical Hegel’s break was from Schelling and his Romantic Spinozism in the
Jena years, and how serious was “Fichtes Verdienst” – the debt he owed to
Fichte. The more radical the break, and the more serious the debt that
Hegel owed, the more his Logic ought to be read as issuing, not indeed in
any metaphysical theory, but, as Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre does, ultimately
in social theory – or more accurately, into what the Germans call the Geisteswissenschaften, the disciplines that have the historical works of spirit for
their subject matter. On the other hand, if one insists on maintaining a
strong continuity between Hegel’s Logic and Schelling’s Identity Philosophy, then the question is how seriously one should take Hegel’s comments
regarding modality added in the 1832 edition of the Logic. The point is that
one cannot add a subjective dimension to Spinoza’s “substance” without
turning it into a mind, that is to say, either into what would no longer
be “substance” but only a mode of it on Spinoza’s own principles or, on
Hegel’s, into an individual that needs a community of other individuals
in order himself to be one. In either case, we do not have anything that
would amount to McTaggart’s Absolute Idea from which, allegedly, every
minute detail of reality can in principle be deduced. This is a position that
Hegel unequivocally rejected and even found infuriating. The alternative
is to consider the same Idea as another version of the scholastic ens
realissimum – but, as Kant well knew, that idea is inherently contradictory
unless taken as an empty abstraction where all determinations, rather than
being grounded, are in fact made to disappear. The strength of Spinoza’s
position lies precisely in the fact that it bypasses the need to derive anything from “substance” directly. The latter contains all its attributes, as well
as both its infinite and finite modes, in the way in which a differential
equation contains within it a definite infinity of differing terms. When it
is a matter of calculating the value of any single term, one must start arbitrarily by assuming some other given term – the choice of the latter being
dependent on factors which, so far as the equation is concerned, are purely
“subjective” in a privative sense of the word. In Spinoza’s language, that
means assuming a finite standpoint, the presence of which in the system
remains an irreducible surd. As for Hegel, the strength of his Logic lies
in the fact that it finds a ground for this contingency in the indeterminacy necessarily inherent in the structure of things which are in becoming.
And this is an indeterminacy which is either contained by such theoretical

Introduction

lix

constructs or such cosmogonic theories as the sciences provide or, as one
might say in the spirit of Hegel, is redeemed by the works of spirit.
The second line of interpretation is more recent and more diffused, and
also never unequivocally presented as an actual reading of Hegel’s Logic or
as a position inspired by it. In brief, the claim is that “the truth is worked out
by telling a story. It is not just that the story attempts to tell the truth that
is already there. Rather, in telling the story, we partly create the truth we
are attempting to articulate.”113 Any non-story residue in a story for which
the “partly” in the quote makes allowance would have to be absorbed into
some other story. And indeed, for Hegel we cannot ever step outside the
boundaries of discourse. But what is missing in this hermeneutic reading
of Hegel is the Schellingian moment which, however much Hegel might
have learned from Fichte, is never lost in his Logic; missing is the fact that
it is nature which in the abstract medium of logical discourse attains the
self-comprehension, and the efficacy, which we attribute to spirit. Nature
is for Hegel, just as it was for Schelling, the “pre-self” of the “self,” not
just the “other-than-self” of Fichte. It is true that human birth is never
simply a biological event but always a birth into a community. Genes and
chromosomes work their magic only as personally named within a system
of family relations. And neither is human death simply a biological event
but is always either peaceful or violent, surprising or expected, cowardly
or heroic, or what have you. But it is the irrevocability, the utter finality,
of both birth and death as biological events that makes for the seriousness
of the experiences mediated by language built around them. As Hegel
makes clear in the Phenomenology of Spirit in connection with the battle
of prestige which is his dramatic account of the origin of human history,
that battle would not be serious, nor would the prestige or the claims to
rightful possession which are at stake in it be more than empty words,
if the battle were not a life-and-death struggle.114 In other words, it is
only from the detached standpoint of a badly abstractive reflection that
the distinction between story-telling and history gets blurred. To the one
caught up existentially in the event that the story-teller might romance
about, the difference between story and history is undoubted. It is precisely
113

114

I am borrowing this description from Christopher J. Insole’s sympathetic but also sharply critical
review of Charles Taylor’s book, A Secular Age (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007),
“Informed Tolerance,” The Times Literary Supplement, 5470 (February 1, 2008), 5. It is not clear
how far Charles Taylor personally espouses this position. But to the extent that he does and in thus
espousing it ascribes it also to Hegel, then if one takes into consideration his 1975 book (see note
112), he would stand on both sides of the dogmatic/hermeneutic spectrum in the interpretation of
Hegel.
GW 9, 111.25–112.2.

lx

Introduction

the function of logical discourse to produce clarity about it, the very clarity
which has traditionally gone under the name of wisdom.
Nature is important. I have remarked more than once that its presence is
never far from Hegel’s mind. Nor is it far from the Logic. But precisely this
presence poses problems for his System in general, and for the Philosophy
of Spirit in particular, on any reading of the Logic. There is, in the first
place, the issue of the relation of the Logic to the Philosophy of Nature.
One can understand how that Logic should provide the basis for a reflection
upon, and often destructive critique of, current mathematical and scientific
theories. This has always been one task of philosophy. Hegel performs it
admirably in his many Remarks, especially those added in 1832. But there
is more. Granted that the Logic brings to explicit, formal expression the
logicality of experience, one should expect that this reflective work would
be continued in what we may call a phenomenology of the body – above
all of the human body – showing how the body generates indeed by virtue
of its attitudes and activities an organic space typically its own, and how a
hierarchy of such spaces might together constitute a world of experience.
One should expect, in the words of a recent commentator,115 a “system
of natural kinds,” each exhibiting an internal and more or less complex
structure of its own, and all of them the physical analogs (but not the
applications, as they would be in Kant) of the logical schemas that Hegel has
developed in the Logic. One might even take this phenomenology of nature
as the more reflective expression of the natural attitudes that we instinctively
assume towards nature in lived experience and which, existentially but not
systematically, in fact underpin the work of the empirical sciences and make
them possible. These are scenarios all perfectly consistent with Hegel’s idea
of the Logic on this post-Kantian reading. But is this all that Hegel is
doing in his Philosophy of Nature? Is he not rather trying to establish, as
if a priori, the originating categories of nature that would systematically
provide the basis of all physical science? And would not such an attempt,
although perhaps still conceivable in Hegel’s times granted the state of the
physical sciences in his day, still be of any value for the modern sciences?
Most of all, is it consistent with Hegel’s idea of the Logic?
Then there is the issue of the relation of the Logic to the Philosophy
of Spirit. The latter, and especially the Phenomenology of Spirit, is the part
of Hegel’s legacy which is still very much alive today. Hegel’s apparent
attitude towards history, however, harbours a serious ambiguity. There is
115

Brigitte Falkenburg, “How to Save the Phenomena,” in Hegel and the Philosophy of Nature, ed.
Stephen Houlgate (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1998), p. 129.

Introduction

lxi

no doubt teleology in history, at least in the sense that historical events are
the product of rational (or irrational) decisions, and such decisions have a
logic of their own which may or may not work to the natural and spiritual
advantage of the agents responsible for them and their inheritors. Barring
natural accidents or changes of heart, they bring in train consequences
which are like a self-fulfilling prophecy. In this sense reason realizes itself.
A humanity that decides to arm itself with nuclear weapons should not
be surprised (it would be only rational!) if it finds itself immolating itself
for the sake of self-defense. Historians and philosophers would do well
to detect such rational (irrational) intentions working themselves out in
history. In the Phenomenology of Spirit Hegel himself gave splendid analyses
of cultures being born and dying on the basis of specific attitudes assumed
with respect to nature. But this does not mean that there is a single end
guiding the whole of history underhandedly, so to speak – as if, seen
in the context of the broader picture, everything would appear to be
exactly as it ought to be. This was the view of the Enlightenment. Kant
himself still held on to it in his critically modified fashion. It is obviously
a secularized form of the Christian belief in the Parousia and there is
evidence that it also governs, at least at the rhetorical level, Hegel’s view of
the development of spirit in history. But is this view consistent with the
logic of his Logic? Would it not force us into a reading of the Logic quite
like that proposed by McTaggart? This is an important issue, all the more
important because it also implicates the other issue, already mentioned, of
how much Hegel’s thought is substantially dependent (not just historically)
on Christian religious belief.
There is finally the issue that the Logic itself raises. It purports to be
the product of pure reason – the most abstract conceptualization of the
concept precisely as concept. But the fact is that, as Hegel himself indicates
in his Remarks, it closely reflects the historical progress of classical Western
metaphysics. It would seem that, although Hegel might have freed the
Logic from the mythology of reason on which Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre
depended – and Kant’s critical system also, in its own way – he did not
free it from its historical past. And it would have been peculiar indeed
if he had, seeing that the Logic is the logic of a thought that has for its
object “being in becoming” and is itself the instance of a perfectly selfcontained process of precisely such a becoming. But then, how dependent
is this Logic on what happens to be the lexical structure of the language
of the metaphysics which it reflects historically? How dependent is it on
Aristotle’s logic of predication? While the Logic is admittedly still a work
in progress, in what sense can it claim to be, in principle at least, the

lxii

Introduction

absolutely accomplished science without appearing to be an instance of
intellectual imperialism? One way perhaps of disarming this criticism is to
say that the Logic is absolute science only in the sense that it is capable
of recognizing itself (and thus containing its limitation even as logic) as
an analog of rationality as such – a rationality of which there can be other
analogs, all of them capable of communicating across cultures and across
times precisely because they are the analogs of one rationality – but at a
distance as it were, with something always being lost in translation. I would
like to take the claim in this sense, but it is not at all clear that this was
Hegel’s intent.
These and many others are the issues raised by any reading of Hegel’s
Logic. What they have in common is that they are all uniformly philosophically significant issues. And this is sufficient motivation for a renewed
study of this now classic Wissenschaft der Logik.

Translator’s note

the history of translation
Hegel’s Logic has a long tradition of translation into English. In the Secret
of Hegel (1898), Stirling included a translation of the section on “quality,”
as well as loose renditions of substantial excerpts from “quantity,” notably
Remark I on calculus.1 On the American side, there already was the translation of a brief excerpt taken from the concluding chapter of the Subjective
Logic (GW 12.236.3–20; 25.10–13) in the Journal of Speculative Philosophy
(1869). It came as the Appendix to what appears to be a précis of the
Encyclopedia Logic intended for a course of instruction.2 We also know
from the testimony of William T. Harris that the St. Louis Hegelian Henry
C. Brockmeyer, to whom the same Harris dedicated his Hegel’s Logic, had
translated the whole Logic in 1859 and 1860. Apparently this translation
was Harris’s first exposure to Hegel. Harris had copied it out and, as he
says, it “still exists, but has never been printed, any portion of it.”3 Back in
Great Britain, a translation of the Subjective Logic was published in two
volumes at Oxford by H. S. Macran, in 1912 and 1929.4 And it was also
1
2
3

4

The Secret of Hegel (Edinburgh and New York, 1865), pp. 218–321; 510ff.; 557ff.
Journal of Speculative Philosophy, 33 (1869), 257–281; 34 (1869), 369–371.
William T. Harris, Hegel’s Logic, a Book on the Genesis of the Categories of the Mind (Chicago, 1890),
pp. xi, xii. But Brockmeyer’s translation must have been printed at least in parts, perhaps privately. The
Harvard collection includes a volume that contains a translation of Hegel’s “Doctrine of Essence,”
with no name of author or place and no date of publication (pp. iv–214). Inserted between the pages
are notes written on the stationery of W. T. Harris. This is very likely a portion of Brockmeyer’s
translation. (I am grateful to my McGill colleague Andrew Reisner for having physically examined
the book for me.) The editor of the Muirhead Library of Philosophy, which included the 1929
translation of the Logic (see note 5 below), relates in a prefatory note that he had been approached
some years before “by the surviving friends of Henry Brockmeyer with a view to the publication
in that series of the translation that he had left. It was to be accompanied with a short biography
of the translator, and to partake of the character of a tribute to his memory both as philosopher
and as Governor of the State of Missouri.” This request was declined because the tribute seemed
inappropriate to the aims of the series. (Vol. 1, pp. 17–18.)
Hegel’s Doctrine of Formal Logic, Being a Translation of the First Section of the Subjective Logic, trans.
H. S. Macran (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1912); Hegel’s Logic of World and Idea, Being a Translation

lxiii

lxiv

Translator’s note

in 1929 that a first complete translation finally became available, produced
by W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers. It was published in both London
and New York.5 This text remained the standard English translation of the
Logic until it was replaced in 1969 by that of Arthur V. Miller.6 As for
the Encyclopedia Logic, a translation was published at Oxford in 1873 by
William Wallace. It was republished in revised form in 18927 and again,
but with only minor variations and with an Introduction by J. N. Findlay,
in 1975.8 A completely new translation by T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting,
and W. H. Harris was published in 1991.9 Finally, Stephen Houlgate has
included a portion of the German text of Book One of the Greater Logic
(up to the end of Section 1, Chapter 2), together with an edited version of
the Miller translation of the same text, in his 2006 commentary.10
In preparing the present text, I have of course consulted and profited
from the results of all previous efforts. Throughout I have also used as
control the excellent Italian translation of Arturo Moni, first published in
1924–1925 and revised in 1968 by Claudio Cesa.11 The present translation
is, however, completely new, and, since I have departed from standing
conventions on several key terms, a few words of explanation are now in
order.
issues of translation
The Logic’s range of vocabulary is extremely narrow, as one would expect of
any logic. The few terms which are key to it present, however, considerable
difficulty. In this translation, I have taken as my starting point the Glossary

5
6

7
8
9

10
11

of the Second and Third Parts of the Subjective Logic, trans. H. S. Macran (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1929).
Hegel’s Science of Logic, trans. W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers, 2 vols. (London: Allen & Unwin;
New York: Macmillan, 1929).
Hegel’s Science of Logic, trans. A. V. Miller (London: Allen & Unwin; New York: Humanities Press,
1969). A list of corrections which Miller circulated among friends and colleagues was never included
in the subsequent reprints or in the paperback edition.
The Logic of Hegel, Translated from the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, by William Wallace
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1873, 1892).
Hegel’s Logic, Being Part One of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830), trans. William
Wallace, with a Foreword by J. N. Findlay (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975).
G. W. Hegel: The Encyclopedia Logic, trans. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting, and H. S. Harris
(Indianapolis/Cambridge, MA: Hackett, 1991). The Introduction (pp. xxxii–xlviii) includes a
minority report by the late Suchting which takes issue with many of the majority decisions regarding
the translation of key terms.
S. Houlgate, The Opening of Hegel’s Logic: From Being to Infinity (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue,
2006).
G. W. F. Hegel: Scienza della Logica, Vols. I and II, trans. Arturo Moni (1924–1925), revised by
Claudio Cesa (Roma-Bari: Laterza, 2001).

Translator’s note

lxv

of the Geraets/Suchting/Harris translation of the Encyclopedia Logic, but
I have taken to heart, and have often agreed with, the Suchting minority
report.12 I have steadfastly refused to resort to mechanical devices in cases
where different words in German need to be kept distinct but are normally
translated by the same word in English. Artificial constructs (unless they are
in the original languages) are not translations but rather open admissions
of failure in translation. Below is a list of terms that presented special
difficulty, along with a brief explanation of my decisions on how to handle
them.
an (in) sich, an (in) sich selbst, an (in) ihm (ihr), an (in) ihm (ihr)
selbst, für sich, für sich selbst, für ihm (ihr) selbst. These are simple
expressions, but difficult to translate and all the more challenging because
there are important conceptual distinctions riding on them, as I now must
explain.
There are two syntactic distinctions at work in them. One is between
pronouns in indirect objective form (ihm, ihr) and in subjective or reflective
form (sich). The difference between an (in) sich and an (in) ihm (ihr), and
between für sich selbst and für ihm (ihr) selbst, is, therefore, syntactic in
origin (sich refers to the subject of a sentence; ihm (ihr) to a third term).
But Hegel uses the contrast between an (in) sich and an (in) ihm (ihr) also to
convey a conceptual difference. A determination is present in a concept an
ihm when it accrues to it because of its external context (cf. GW 21, 112.9–11:
“In so far as that which something is in itself (an sich) is also in it (an ihm),
the something is affected with being-for-other”; also, GW 21, 108.10–11). It
may well be that the determination already implicitly belongs to the internal
logic of the concept (that is, is present in the concept an sich), and that a
logician would already be able to recognize it as thus belonging to it on
the basis of its external usage and its genesis as concept. (Cf. 21, 219.13–31.)
As yet, however, the determination is not said by the concept itself – that
is to say, the concept has not as yet expressly appropriated it. It remains,
therefore, still external to it. When the concept explicitly expresses the
determination, then the latter is present in it für ihm, or, conversely, the
concept possesses it für sich.
The other distinction is between sich understood as subjective/reflective
pronoun and selbst (“self”) understood demonstratively. It is in this demonstrative sense, that is, in order to reinforce the sich and the ihm (ihr) rhetorically, that Hegel uses the selbst in an (in) sich selbst, an (in) ihm (ihr) selbst,
etc. To further complicate things, selbst can be used in German, just as it
12

See note 9 above.

lxvi

Translator’s note

can in English, both in this just cited meaning of demonstrative pronoun
or as a noun.
Now a problem of translation arises because English does not verbally
distinguish between objective and subjective pronouns but, when necessary,
adds “-self” to a pronoun in order to make it subjective/reflective. Nor
does English verbally distinguish between this subjective/reflective form
and the same form but used in demonstrative function. (Cf.: “He did it to
himself”; “He did it himself.”) The net result is that, if we were to translate
the German expressions literally, we would come up with the awkward “in
it itself,” “in itself itself,” “for it itself,” “for itself itself,” or with variations
thereof. The problem is how to avoid this awkwardness and at the same
time make sure that, in using “self,” we do not surreptitiously introduce in
English the word’s meaning as noun whereas in German the corresponding
selbst is purely demonstrative. The problem is especially acute in rendering
the distinction between an ihm selbst and an sich selbst.
I concede that there is no single way of dealing with this problem, and
that each carries its own difficulties. I have opted for simply dropping the
demonstrative selbst. In English we only need to say “in it,” “in itself,”
“for it,” “for itself.” I have rejected the current widespread convention of
translating an ihm selbst as “in its own self,” for two reasons. For one thing,
the formula is more of a gloss than a translation. The German phrase that
it translates would be an seinem eigenen Selbst, an expression that carries the
connotations of “on its own account,” exactly the formula sometimes used
to translate Hegel’s für sich sein. Mind you, no German is likely to say an
seinem eigenen Selbst; but neither would an English person say “in its own
self.” Another reason is that here more than anywhere else the use of “self”
as noun can be misleading because it suggests a subjectivity which is not in
the German text. Regarding für sich selbst, I have avoided as a general rule
the currently often used “on its own account” – not because the formula
is necessarily wrong (I have occasionally used it myself ) but because it is
unduly verbose and not necessary; the simpler “for itself” suffices.
I admit that the use of “in it” as a translation of an ihm selbst was
often problematic. It failed in context to identify its referent unambiguously. I have often replaced it, therefore, with “within it” or adverbially
simply with “within,” and occasionally with “internally” – in all cases hoping to retain the contrast with the “out,” the “without,” or the “external
other,” which is in Hegel’s mind. Despite these difficulties, one advantage
is that the English text has been rid of otherwise innumerable instances
of the “self” used as noun whereas its counterpart in German is only
demonstrative.

Translator’s note

lxvii

I have often replaced “in itself” with “within itself.” An sich and für sich
can often be translated conveniently as simply “implicitly” and “explicitly”
respectively. I saw no way of rendering in English the distinction between
an and in consistently. Besides, I am not sure that there is a clear difference
in German.
Finally, in sich (selbst), used in connection with Reflexion (for instance,
as in Reflexion-in-sich-selbst) contrasts in meaning – though not always
explicitly so – with mit sich (selbst), this last used in connection with such
term as “equality” or “unity” to express a state of immediacy (for instance, as
in Gleichheit mit sich). I have translated the in sich (selbst) with “immanent”
(cf. GW 12, 35.1–2, where Hegel uses immanente Reflexion) and the mit sich
(selbst) with “self-” as, for instance, in “self-equality.”
Ansichsein. “Being-in-itself” is the normal translation, especially when
contrasted with Fürsichsein, “being-for-itself.” But I have also rendered
Ansichsein as “the in-itself” and “the in-itselfness.”
aufheben, Aufhebung. The commonly accepted translations of these
terms are “to sublate” and “sublation.” These are terms of art which
were originally coined by Stirling precisely for the purpose of translating the corresponding German words but have now made their way into
the OED. Much as I have tried to replace them with words that are just
as common in English as the German equivalents are in German, and
having even experimented for a while with Suchting’s suggestion of “to
suspend” and “suspension,” I finally had to give up and return to the traditional translations of “to sublate” and “sublation.” The fact is that the
only common English word which would somewhat adequately render the
double meaning of the German aufheben is the lowly “to take up” (which,
incidentally, is the translation of the Latin tollere from which “to sublate”
was coined). “To take something up” means “to take it away” while at the
same time to “appropriate it.” But “to take” is in English an all too widely
used word, and with too many shades of different meanings, to allow the
technical narrowing that Hegel has in mind.
Begriff. Following Geraets/Suchting/Harris, I have departed from longstanding usage and have translated Begriff as “concept” rather than as
“notion.” B. C. Burt also used “concept” in his 1896 translation of Erdmann’s Outlines of Logic and Metaphysics, for the very good reason that
“notion” carries the connotation of being a subjective representation.13
Its meaning is also much too vague. It should be reserved for precisely
such contexts as require a term without too precise a meaning. “Concept”
13

J. E. Erdmann, Outlines of Logic and Metaphysics, trans. B. C. Burt (New York, 1896), pp. xiv–xv.

lxviii

Translator’s note

has the further advantage of being patently connected with “to conceive,”
just as Begriff is connected with greifen, and can easily be expanded into
“conceptual” and “conceptually grasped” or replaced, if need be, with
“comprehension” and “conceptually comprehended.”
Beziehung and Verhältnis and the related verbs sich beziehen and
sich verhälten. This distinction is conceptually very important and crucial
to the development of the Logic. Quite generally, Beziehung affects the
terms that enter into it externally or reflectively, whereas Verhältnis affects
them substantially. To differentiate the two terms by translating them
as “relation” and “relationship” respectively is not wrong. “Relationship,”
moreover, might also well convey the right nuance of “family [as contrasted
with ‘external’] relation.” But all this is much too vague. I have followed,
therefore, the convention already adopted in The Jena System, 1804–5: Logic
and Metaphysics (1985) by reserving “relation” (“relating,” “relating oneself”)
for Verhältnis and “connection” for Beziehung. To “connection,” however,
I have also added “reference” and “connecting reference.” In this I follow
Stirling who renders Beziehung as “reference,” and then glosses the term
in his usual rich language with “be-drawing” or “drawing together” or
“connection” (The Secret of Hegel, p. 479). It is instructive to note that as
the Logic progresses from the immediacy of the categories of “being” to
the reflectivity of those of “essence,” Beziehung naturally shifts in nuance of
meaning from plain “connection” to reflective “reference” or “connecting
reference.” Verhältnis comes into its own only in connection with “concept”
and “idea.” It must be added that Verhältnis also connotes “behavior” or
“comportment” (sich verhalten means “to behave” or “to comport oneself”),
and that there are passages in which this nuance of meaning needs to be
brought out. For a passage in which Beziehung and Verhältnis are used in
contrast to each other, cf. GW 11, 353.32–354.6. In mathematical contexts,
especially in connection with Hegel’s discussion of calculus, Verhältnis is
to be translated as “ratio.”
Dasein and Existenz. The widely accepted translation of Dasein is
“determinate being.” This is not incorrect, but it is not sufficiently precise.
All Dasein is “determinate being,” but not all “determinate being” is merely
Dasein. Moreover, using “determinate being” makes the task of translating
such derivatives as seiend, Seiendes, and Daseiendes, practically impossible
or at least very cumbersome. One must fall back on long circumlocutions. The “thereness” and “there-being” in Geraets/Suchting/Harris (to
which Suchting, however, objects, pp. xxxvi–xxxviii) were also used by
Stirling and Burt. They are not wrong, but the problem with them, besides
their unusualness and the difficulties that they too create in translating

lxx

Translator’s note

opposite of what one would expect. In that one case, I have translated it as
“differentiation” (GW 21, 144.8–9).
Einzeln and Individuum. Einzeln is normally translated as “individual,”
but I have regularly used “singular” instead in order to reserve “individual”
for Individuum. The latter signifies in Hegel’s usage a special kind of
individuality, one which is best realized in a person but for which we can
see at least a first delineation in any internally organized object such as a
living being. (Cf. GW 12, 144.3–11, where Hegel gives a broad definition
of Individuum; also 12, 31ff., where the term is applied to living things,
and 12, 189.21–25, where it is used in contrast to Einzelnheit.) I recognize
that “singular” and “singularity” sometimes tend to denote “peculiar” and
“peculiarity,” but they do not have to, and in context do not.
erkennen and wissen, and related nouns Erkenntnis and Wissen. The
difference in German between the two verbs is basically idiomatic. Both
verbs can be used transitively and intransitively, but in different contexts.
It is helpful to think of erkennen as a kind of “recognition”; for wissen, the
English of the King James Bible can help: “Wist ye not that I must be about
my Father’s business?” (Luke 2:49). The idiomatic difference points to a
difference in meaning nuance that can be lost if one translates both with
“to know,” and, since Hegel bases a conceptual difference on this nuance,
it must be protected. Wissen carries the connotation of “being aware of”;
erkennen, of “being acquainted with.” Accordingly, Hegel uses Erkenntnis
in the specialized meaning of ratiocinative knowledge. By contrast, Wissen,
like both “wisdom” and “faith,” connotes direct apprehension. It signifies
the product or the origin, rather than the process, of reason. I have therefore
followed the now common practice of translating erkennen and Erkenntnis
with “cognize” and “cognition” respectively, though I do it reluctantly
because “cognize” and “cognition” tend to make the already ponderous
prose of the Logic even more ponderous. In places, where meaning is not
at stake, I have not hesitated to replace inflected verbal forms such as
“cognizing” with the plain “knowing.”
Gegenstand and Objekt. I have already indicated in the body of the
Introduction the difference between these two terms. The clue for how to
differentiate them in English can be obtained from what amounts basically
to an idiomatic difference. In English, we say “the subject matter of a
science”; the Germans say “the object (Gegenstand) of a science.” “Subject
matter” renders quite well the meaning of Gegenstand precisely as “material
object,” objectum quod. This is how I have translated it, reserving “object”
for Objekt. In a few cases, where the context is clearly phenomenological,
I have used “intended object” for Gegenstand, and in yet others, where

Translator’s note

lxxi

Hegel refers to mathematical entities or where he cites other philosophers
(notably Kant), I have used “object.” There is no other way of referring to
a “triangle,” for instance, than as a “mathematical object.” And as for the
other philosophers whom Hegel cites and often criticizes, the difficulty is
precisely that in the context of their philosophy it is impossible to draw the
precise distinction between Gegenstand and Objekt that Hegel has in mind.
Regarding Objektivität, which I translate as “objectivity,” two important
texts can be found in GW 11, 324.19–22 and 12, 126ff. For the adjectival
form, gegenständlich, I had no choice but to use “objective.”
das Ideelle. Miller translates the term as “the ideal,” but enters the
German in square brackets; Geraets/Suchting/Harris also translate it as “the
ideal,” but enter an explanatory note in the Glossary. I have tried to get away
from “ideal” because the common meaning of this English word, just like
that of its German counterpart (das Ideal), is misleading. Ideell has nothing
to do, except in a derivative sense, with an ideal state or situation which is
archetypical or “perfect in its kind” (OED, sub voce; see also GW 21, 137
and Hegel’s note). An Ideelles is rather an object which, in being in itself
and even for itself, at the same time refers to an other that transcends it – an
“other” with respect to which it is both identical yet differentiated. Hegel’s
typical example of an Ideelles is “the finite.” Something finite is a reality
whose whole truth lies in the “infinite” that transcends it – a transcendent
“infinite” which is nevertheless present in it, inherent in its very structure as
“finite.” However, that such is the truth of anything finite is made explicit
only in the conceptual medium of spirit’s reflection. The Ideelles is an
Objekt, the product or achievement of spiritual activity (GW 21, 142–150).
I have translated it with “idealization” for several reasons: (1) because the
word, just like Ideelles, denotes an achievement rather than just a physical
state of being; (2) because an “idealization” stands to the idealized in the
relation just defined, that is, as bringing to light what is essential to the
latter; (3) because the word retains the connection with “representation”
which Hegel also has in mind (cf. GW 21, 143.5); (4) and because, just like its
German counterpart, the word also carries the pejorative meaning of “mere
idealization” from which Hegel wants to rescue it.
Sache. In non-technical contexts, the term can and should be translated
in a variety of ways, such as “substance,” or even “thing.” As a category,
however, “fact” seems to be the best rendering. Sache, like “fact,” denotes
a thing or a situation which we understand to implicitly contain all the
factors required for an explanation of its existence. Its presence cannot
therefore be doubted even when those factors have yet to be made explicit.
The related word, Tatsache, was first coined by the theologian Johann

lxxii

Translator’s note

Joachim Spalding precisely in order to translate the English term “matter
of fact” as used by Joseph Butler in The Analogy of Religion (1736).14
Schein. Hegel says: “Der Schein is dasselbe, was die Reflexion ist; aber er
ist die Reflexion als unmittelbar” (GW 11, 249.21–22). Schein is generated
by reflection inasmuch as the movement of the latter, in arriving at a
would-be term, immediately turns back from it (kehrt züruck), annuls it
as its end-term, and thereby returns to that from which it had begun –
only, however, in order to perform there the same move of turning back and
returning. “Die Reflexion . . . , die Bewegung des Nichts durch Nichts zu
sich selbst züruck, ist das Scheinen seiner in einem andern” (GW 11, 292.11–
12). It is a movement which, on the face of it, offers no fixed point of
reference. Just like a play of lights, it might be taken as an illusion. But
there is nothing illusionary about it because, on the contrary, its reality
is totally exhausted by what it is simply on the face of it – that is, it is
movement simply as movement, self-referring as referring to an other.
Anyone as sensitive to literature as Hegel was would have associated the
term with the quip from an early play of Lessing that Mendelssohn cited
to Jacobi as an example of the kind of doubt that common sense cannot
countenance. “Oh yes! Ghosts have their fun! That’s no real flame there.
It only looks like a flame! It’s not burning; it only seems to burn! It’s
not shining; it only seems to shine. [Das scheint nicht, das scheint nur
zu scheinen.] There is no lighting a real light from such a ghostly one!”
(Die Matrone von Ephesus, Act I, Scene 2). Schein can be, however, the
source of delusions, notably of the mistake of thinking that there must be
for it some stabilizing factor outside it. Hegel’s subsequent logical moves
consist precisely in demonstrating that any stabilizing determination must
be sought within the very movement of reflection of which Schein is the
immediate presentation. There is no simple or single way of translating the
term in English. In German, Schein and scheinen can mean “shine” and “to
shine,” but “semblance” and “to seem” just as well. I have chosen “shine,”
both as noun and intransitive verb, in an effort to retain the metaphor of
“light” which is at least partly behind Hegel’s choice of Schein. (Cf. GW
11, 391.38–392; 11, 393.13–15: “Just as the light of nature is not a something,
nor is it a thing, but its being is rather only its shining, so manifestation
is self-identical absolute actuality.”) Admittedly, “shine” and “to shine”
do not sit well in a procession of logical categories. For this reason, I
have normally accompanied the terms with “reflective” and “reflectively”
14

See Reinhart Staats, “Der theologischgeschichtliche Hintergrund des Begriffs ‘Tatsache,’” in
Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche, 70 (1973), 316–345.

Translator’s note

lxxiii

respectively – except in contexts where Hegel himself explicitly uses the
terms in connection with “reflection” – in order to signal the fact that the
terms are used technically, in a specifically contrived sense. In very few
instances, as required by context, I have also used “semblance” and “to
seem” (for instance, in GW 11, 251.31; 12, 133.14; 12, 177.16).
selbstständig. I have translated this term with “self-subsistent,” except
in mathematical contexts, and also in connection with “relation,” where I
have used “independent.”
Unterschied and Verschiedenheit. The problem with this pair of terms
is that the area of meaning that they cover is the same as is covered in
English by the three terms “difference,” “distinction,” and “diversity.” It is
difficult to correlate the two German terms with the three English ones. I
agree with Suchting (versus Harris/Geraets, p. xlv) that the natural way of
translating Unterschied is “difference.” We say “specific difference” where
the Germans say spezifischer Unterschied. Verschiedenheit, for its part, is naturally translated as “diversity.” However, although this distinction is easy to
pin down in principle, it does not always hold in fact. In different contexts,
Unterschied also calls for “distinction,” and Verschiedenheit for “difference.”
In English, “distinction” tends to be a difference in dictu; “difference,” one
in re. I have used this rough rule as a guide when translating Unterschied as
“distinction,” though I must admit that on occasions I had to rely simply
on my intuitive sense of the text. It was more difficult to come up with
even a rough rule for Verschiedenheit. “Diversity” tends to stress the plurality and variety of the things (or the moments of one single object) that
are different, their “being versed in different directions,” so to speak, and
therefore standing apart, each reflected into itself (cf. GW 11, 267.5–6);
“difference” tends to stress what makes them different. This is the image
that I have kept in mind when translating Verschiedenheit with “difference”
rather than with the more canonical “diversity.” But here, more so than in
the case of Unterschied, I often had to rely on intuition.
Vorstellung. The normal translation of this term is “representation.”
But Hegel uses it in different contexts in two quite distinct senses – in a
generic sense that would include the specific type of representation which
is the concept; and in a narrower sense which is normally associated with
“imagination” and is opposed to “concept.” In this last sense, it can be
translated in a variety of ways – for instance, as “ordinary representation,”
“figurative representation,” or “representation of the imagination.”
zu Grunde gehen. This is a common German expression normally translated as “to perish.” But Hegel often plays on the word Grund (“ground”
or “foundation”) in order to make a conceptual point. In an effort at saving

lxxiv

Translator’s note

the image behind the German expression, I have translated it as “to
founder”; “to founder to the ground”; and “to founder, thus sinking to
the ground.”
the text of the present translation
In producing this translation, I have consulted the critical edition of the
text in Volumes 21, 11, and 12 of the Gesammelte Werke. I have also learned
immensely from the critical apparatus of these volumes. I have consulted
all past English translations and have used the excellent Moni/Cesa Italian
translation as a control. The translation itself, however, is original, and it is
made from the Georg Lasson text (1923/1932). This text rarely diverges from
that of the critical edition, and, when it diverges, never does so significantly.
The pagination in margins refers to the text of the Gesammelte Werke, by
volume and page number. Footnotes numbered in Arabic are Hegel’s own.

The Science of Logic

The Science of Logic

volume one: the objective logic
Preface to the first edition
Preface to the second edition

Page 7
7
11
23

Introduction

With what must the beginning of science be made?
General division of being

45
45
56

section i: determinateness (quality)

58

Chapter 1. Being

59

Chapter 2. Existence

83

book one: the doctrine of being

Chapter 3. Being-for-itself

126

section ii: magnitude (quantity)

152

Chapter 1. Quantity

154

Chapter 2. Quantum

168
204
234

Remark 1: The conceptual determination of the mathematical infinite
Remark 2: The purpose of differential calculus deduced from its application
Remark 3: Further forms associated with the qualitative determinateness of
magnitude

Chapter 3. Ratio or the quantitative relation

3

260
271

4

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

section iii: measure

282

Chapter 1. Specific quantity

288

Chapter 2. Real measure

302

Chapter 3. The becoming of essence

326

book two: the doctrine of essence

337

section i: essence as reflection within

340

Chapter 1. Shine

341

Chapter 2. The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

354

Chapter 3. Ground

386

section ii: appearance

418

Chapter 1. Concrete existence

420

Chapter 2. Appearance

437

Chapter 3. The essential relation

449

section iii: actuality

465

Chapter 1. The absolute

466

Chapter 2. Actuality

477

Chapter 3. The absolute relation

489

volume two: the science of subjective logic or the
doctrine of the concept
Foreword
Of the concept in general
Division

507
507
508
526

The Science of Logic

5

section i: subjectivity

528

Chapter 1. The concept

529

Chapter 2. Judgment

550

Chapter 3. The syllogism

588

section ii: objectivity

625

Chapter 1. Mechanism

631

Chapter 2. Chemism

645

Chapter 3. Teleology

651

section iii: the idea

670

Chapter 1. Life

676

Chapter 2. The idea of cognition

689

Chapter 3. The absolute idea

735

The Science of Logic
by
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

volume one

The Objective Logic
Book One
The Doctrine of Being
preface to the first edition
The complete transformation that the ways of philosophical thought have
undergone among us in the past twenty-five odd years, the higher standpoint in self-awareness that spirit has attained in this period of time, has
so far had little influence on the shape of the logic.
What was hitherto called “metaphysics” has been, so to speak, extirpated
root and branch, and has vanished from the ranks of the sciences. Where are
the voices still to be heard of the ontology of former times, of the rational
psychology, the cosmology, or indeed, even of the natural theology of the
past, or where are they allowed to be heard? Inquiries, for instance, into
the immateriality of the soul, into mechanical and final causes – where is
interest in them still to be found? Even the former proofs of God’s existence
are cited only out of historical interest, or for the purpose of edification and
the uplifting of the mind. The fact is that interest, whether in the content
or in the form of the former metaphysics, or in both together, has been
lost. Remarkable as it is if a people has become indifferent, for instance,
to its constitutional law, to its convictions, its moral customs and virtues,
just as remarkable it is when a people loses its metaphysics – when the
spirit engaged with its pure essence no longer has any real presence in its
life.
The exoteric teaching of the Kantian philosophy – that the understanding ought not to be allowed to soar above experience, lest the cognitive faculty
become a theoretical reason that by itself would beget nothing but mental
fancies – this was the justification coming from the scientific camp for
7

8

21.6

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

renouncing speculative thought. In support of this popular doctrine there
was added the cry of alarm of modern pedagogy, that the pressing situation
of the time called for attention to immediate needs – that just as in the
ways of knowledge experience is first, so for skill in public and private
life, exercise and practical education are the essential, they alone what is
required, while theoretical insight is even harmful. – With science and
common sense thus working hand in hand to cause the downfall of metaphysics, the singular spectacle came into view of a cultivated people without
metaphysics – like a temple richly ornamented in other respects but without
a holy of holies. – Theology, which in former times was the custodian of
the speculative mysteries and of the albeit subordinate metaphysics, had
relinquished this last science in exchange for feelings, popular practicality,
and erudite historiography. And it was in keeping with this change that,
for their part, those solitary individuals, whom their people had exiled
from the world and dedicated to the contemplation of the eternal, also
disappeared. Theirs was a life devoted exclusively to the service of contemplation, without practical gain but only for the sake of blessedness, and
their disappearance can be regarded as essentially the same phenomenon,
though in a different context, as the one just mentioned. – And so this
darkness, this colorless self-preoccupation of spirit bent upon itself, having been dispelled, existence shone transformed into the bright world of
flowers – of which, as is well known, none is black.
Logic did not fare quite as badly as metaphysics. That from logic one
learns how to think, which for lack of anything else was considered its
usefulness and therefore its purpose – just as if one were to learn how to
digest or to move first from the study of anatomy and physiology – this
is a prejudice that has long been put to rest, and in this respect the spirit
of practicality certainly did not intend any better fate for logic than it
did for its sister science. Nevertheless, probably for the sake of a certain
formal utility, a place was still allowed for it among the sciences; it was even
retained as a subject of public instruction. However, this better lot concerns
only the outer fate of logic, for its shape and content have remained the
same throughout a long inherited tradition, though progressively more
diluted and emaciated in the course of the transmission; no trace is so far
to be detected in it of the new spirit that has awakened in the sciences
no less than in the world of actuality. However, once the substantial form
of the spirit has reconstituted itself, it is of no avail to want to retain the
forms of an earlier culture. These are like withered leaves pushed aside by
the new buds already being generated at their roots.

The Science of Logic

9

Also in the scientific realm this ignoring of the universal change is gradually beginning to lose ground. The new ideas have imperceptibly become
the accepted currency even to those opposed to them. And if these continue
to fuss about their sources and principles and to dispute them, they have
nevertheless surrendered to their consequences, unable to fend off their
influence. They have no other way of giving a positive importance, and
some content, to their increasingly irrelevant negative attitude, except by
falling in with the new ways of thinking.
However, the period of fermentation that goes with the beginning of
every new creation seems to be past. In its first manifestation, a new creation usually behaves towards the entrenched systematization of the earlier
principle with fanatical hostility; in fear of losing itself in the expansion of
the particular, it also shuns the labor that goes with scientific cultivation
and, nevertheless in need of it, it grasps at first at an empty formalism. The
demand for the elaboration and cultivation of the material becomes at that
point all the more pressing. There is a period in the formation of an epoch
in which, just as in the formation of the individual, the foremost concern
is the acquisition and reinforcement of the principle in its undeveloped
intensity. But the higher demand is that such a principle should be made
into science.
Now, whatever might already have happened to the substance and form
of science in other respects, the science of logic that makes up metaphysics
proper or pure speculative philosophy has to date been much neglected.
What I more precisely understand by this science and its standpoint, I
have provisorily stated in the Introduction. The fact that it was necessary to
make a completely fresh start with this science, the nature itself of its subject
matter, and the lack of any previous work that could have been used for
the undertaken reform of it, may be taken into account by the fair-minded
critic if even a labor of many years was unable to give this effort a greater
perfection. – The essential point to be kept in mind is that an altogether
new concept of scientific procedure is at work here. As I have remarked
elsewhere,a inasmuch as philosophy is to be science, it cannot borrow its
method from a subordinate science, such as mathematics, any more than
it can remain satisfied with categorical assurances of inner intuition, or can
make use of argumentation based on external reflection. On the contrary,
it can only be the nature of the content which is responsible for movement
a

Phenomenology of Spirit, Preface to the first edition. [GW 9, pp. 31, 33–36] – The actual demonstration
is the cognition of the method, such as has its place in the logic itself.

21.7

10
21.8

21.9

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

in scientific knowledge, for it is the content’s own reflection that first posits
and generates what that content is.
The understanding determines, and holds the determination fixed. Reason is negative and dialectical, since it dissolves the determinations of the
understanding into nothing; it is positive, since it generates the universal,
and comprehends the particular therein. Just as the understanding is usually taken as something separate from reason in general, so also dialectical
reason is taken as something separate from positive reason. In its truth
reason is however spirit, which is higher than both reason bound to the
understanding and understanding bound to reason. It is the negative, that
which constitutes the quality of both the dialectical reason and the understanding: it negates the simple, thereby posits the determinate difference
of the understanding; but it equally dissolves this difference, and so it is
dialectical. But spirit does not stay at the nothing of this result but is in
it rather equally positive, and thereby restores the first simplicity, but as
universal, such as it is concrete in itself; a given particular is not subsumed
under this universal but, on the contrary, it has already been determined
together with the determining of the difference and the dissolution of this
determining. This spiritual movement, which in its simplicity gives itself its
determinateness, and in this determinateness gives itself its self-equality –
this movement, which is thus the immanent development of the concept,
is the absolute method of the concept, the absolute method of cognition
and at the same time the immanent soul of the content. – On this selfconstructing path alone, I say, is philosophy capable of being objective,
demonstrative science. – In this fashion have I tried to portray consciousness in the Phenomenology of Spirit. Consciousness is spirit as concrete,
self-aware knowledge – to be sure, a knowledge bound to externality, but
the progression of this subject matter, like the development of all natural
and spiritual life, rests exclusively on the nature of the pure essentialities
that constitute the content of the logic. Consciousness, as spirit which on
the way of manifesting itself frees itself from its immediacy and external
concretion, attains to the pure knowledge that takes these same pure essentialities for its subject matter as they are in and for themselves. They are
pure thoughts, spirit that thinks its essence. Their self-movement is their
spiritual life and is that through which science constitutes itself, and of
which it is the exposition.
The connection of the science that I call Phenomenology of Spirit to
the Logic is thereby stated. – As regards the way it stands to it externally, a second part was intended to follow the first part of the System

11

The Science of Logic

of Scienceb that contains the Phenomenology. This second part would have
contained the Logic and both the two real sciences of philosophy, the Philosophy of Nature and the Philosophy of Spirit, and would have brought
the system of science to completion. However, the necessary expansion
which the Logic demanded by itself has led me to have this particular part
published separately. It therefore constitutes the first sequel to the Phenomenology of Spirit in an expanded plan of the system of science. I shall
later follow up with a treatment of both the two mentioned real sciences
of philosophy. – This first volume of the Logic contains the Doctrine of
Being, as Book One; Book Two, the second section of the same volume
which contains the Doctrine of Essence is already in the presses; finally, the
second volume will contain the Subjective Logic, or the Doctrine of the
Concept.
Nürnberg, March 22, 1812
preface to the second edition
I undertook this revision of the Science of Logic, of which the first volume is
hereby being published, in full consciousness not only of the difficulty of its
subject matter and of its exposition besides, but equally of the imperfection
from which its treatment in the first edition suffers. As earnestly as I have
striven after many years of further occupation with this science to remedy
this imperfection, I still feel that I have cause enough to appeal to the
reader’s indulgence. One title to such appeal in the first instance may well be
based on the circumstance that for the most part only external material was
available for its content in the earlier metaphysics and logic. Although the
practice of these disciplines had been universal and customary, in the case
of logic down to our own time, its interest in their speculative side has been
just as universally and customarily restricted. It is the same material which
is repeated over and over again, whether it is thinned out to the point of
trivial superficiality, or whether the ancient ballast is freshly trotted out and
dragged to new lengths, so that, through these habitually only mechanical
efforts, no gain could be had for the philosophical content. To display
b

(Bamberg and Würzburg: at Göbbard’s, 1807). This title [i.e. “First Part of the System of Science”]
will no longer be added to the second edition to be published this coming Easter. – In place of
the intended second part here mentioned, which was to contain the complement of the other
philosophical sciences, I have since brought out the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, in its
third edition last year. [1832]

21.10

12

21.11

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the realm of thought philosophically, that is, in its own immanent activity
or, what is the same, in its necessary development, had to be, therefore,
a new undertaking, one that had to be started right from the beginning.
Nevertheless, the received material, the known thought-forms, must be
regarded as an extremely important fund, even a necessary condition, a
presupposition to be gratefully acknowledged even though what it offers
here and there is only a bare thread, the dead bones of a skeleton thrown
together in a disorderly heap.
The forms of thought are first set out and stored in human language,
and one can hardly be reminded often enough nowadays that thought is
what differentiates the human being from the beast. In everything that
the human being has interiorized, in everything that in some way or other
has become for him a representation, in whatever he has made his own,
there has language penetrated, and everything that he transforms into
language and expresses in it contains a category, whether concealed, mixed,
or well defined. So much is logic natural to the human being, is indeed
his very nature. If we however contrast nature as such, as the realm of the
physical, with the realm of the spiritual, then we must say that logic is the
supernatural element that permeates all his natural behavior, his ways of
sensing, intuiting, desiring, his needs and impulses; and it thereby makes
them into something truly human, even though only formally human –
makes them into representations and purposes. It is to the advantage
of a language when it possesses a wealth of logical expressions, that is,
distinctive expressions specifically set aside for thought determinations.
Many of the prepositions and articles already pertain to relations based on
thought (in this the Chinese language has apparently not advanced that
far culturally, or at least not far enough), but such particles play a totally
subordinate role, only slightly more independent than that of prefixes
and suffixes, inflections, and the like. Much more important is that in a
language the categories should be expressed as substantives and verbs, and
thus be stamped into objective form. In this respect, the German language
has many advantages over other modern languages, for many of its words
also have the further peculiarity of carrying, not just different meanings,
but opposite ones, and in this one cannot fail to recognize the language’s
speculative spirit. It can delight thought to come across such words, and
to discover in naı̈ve form, already in the lexicon as one word of opposite
meanings, that union of opposites which is the result of speculation but
to the understanding is nonsensical. Philosophy, therefore, stands in no
need of special terminology; true, some words are to be taken from foreign
languages; yet, through use these have already acquired citizenship in it and

The Science of Logic

13

an affected purism would be all the more out of place where everything
depends on meaning the most. – The advance of culture in general and
of the sciences in particular, even the empirical sciences which are bound
to the senses and generally operate in the medium of the most common
categories (e.g. whole and parts, a thing and its properties, and the like),
gradually fosters the rise of thought-relations that are also more advanced,
or it at least raises them to wider universality and consequently brings them
to greater notice. In Physics, for instance, where the predominant category
previously was that of force, it is the category of polarity that now plays the
most significant role – a category which, incidentally, is randomly being
imposed all too often on everything, even on light. It defines a difference in
which the different terms are inseparably bound together, and it is indeed
of infinite importance that an advance has thereby been made beyond the
abstractive form of identity, by which a determinateness such as for example
that of force acquires independent status, and the determining form of
difference, the difference that at the same time remains an inseparable
moment of identity, is instead brought to the forefront and is given general
acceptance. The study of nature, because of the stable reality of its objects,
is inevitably led to fix categories that can no longer be ignored in it, even if
with complete disregard for consistency towards other categories which are
also allowed to stand; it is not given room for abstracting from opposition
and moving on to generalities, as so easily happens when spirit is the object.
But even when logical matters and their expressions are common coin
in a culture, still, as I have said elsewhere,1 what is familiar is for that reason
not known, and it can even be a source of irritation to have to occupy
oneself with the familiar – and what could be more familiar than just those
determinations of thought which we employ everywhere, and are on our
lips in every sentence that we utter? To indicate the general features of
the course that cognition goes through as it leaves familiar acquaintance
behind, the essential moments in the relationship of scientific thought to
this natural thought, this is the purpose of the present preface. Together
with the earlier Introduction, it will suffice for a general idea of what is
meant by logical cognition – the kind of general idea which is demanded
of a science prior to the science itself.
First of all, it must be regarded as an infinite step forward that the forms
of thought have been freed from the material in which they are submerged
in self-conscious intuition, in representation, as well as in our desires and
volitions or, more accurately, in ideational desiring and willing (and there
1

In the Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit, GW 9, 26.21.

21.12

14

21.13

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is no human desire or volition without ideation); a step forward that these
universalities have been brought to light and made the subject of study on
their own, as was done by Plato, and after him by Aristotle especially; this
step marks the beginning of our knowledge of them. “Only after almost
everything which is necessary to life, and pertains to its comfort and
sociability, was made available,” says Aristotle, “did man begin to trouble
himself with philosophical knowledge.”2 “In Egypt,” he had previously
remarked, “there was an early development of the mathematical sciences
because there the priestly caste were brought early to a state of leisure.”3 –
Indeed, the need to occupy oneself with pure thoughts presupposes a
long road that the human spirit must have traversed; it is the need, one
may say, of having already attained the satisfaction of necessary need, the
need of freedom from need, of abstraction from the material of intuition,
imagination, and so forth; from the material of the concrete interests of
desire, impulse, will, in which the determinations of thought hide as if
behind a veil. In the silent regions of thought that has come to itself and
communes only with itself, the interests that move the life of peoples
and individuals are hushed. “In so many respects,” says Aristotle in the
same context, “is human nature in bondage; but this science, which is not
pursued for any utility, is alone free in and for itself, and for this reason it
appears not to be a human possession.”4 Philosophical thinking in general
still deals with concrete subject matters, with God, Nature, Spirit; but
logic occupies itself exclusively with these thoughts as thought, in complete
abstraction by themselves. For this reason it is customary to reserve it for
the instruction of youth, for youth is not yet involved in the practical affairs
of concrete life but lives a life of leisure so far as these are concerned, and
it is only for its own subjective ends that it has to busy itself acquiring –
at the level of theory at least – the means that will eventually enable it to
become actively engaged in the objects of those practical interests. Contrary
to Aristotle’s view just mentioned, the science of logic is counted among
these means; the study of it is a preliminary labor and its place is the school,
while the seriousness of life and the active pursuit of substantial ends are
left for later. In real life, it is then a matter of making use of the thought
determinations. From the honor of being contemplated for their own sake,
such determinations are debased to the position of serving in the creation
and exchange of ideas required for the hustle and bustle of social life. They
are in part used as abbreviations, because of their universality. Indeed, what
an infinite host of particulars relating to external existence and to action
2

Aristotle, Metaph., 982b.

3

Aristotle, Metaph., 981b.

4

Aristotle, Metaph., 982b.

The Science of Logic

15

are summed up in a representation, for instance, of battle, war, nation, or
of sea and animal, etc.! And also, what an infinite host of images, actions,
situations, etc. are epitomized in the representation of God, or of love, etc.,
epitomized in the simplicity of this way of representing! In part they are also
used for the closer specification and discovery of objective relations, but in
this role the content and the purpose of the thought involved, its correctness
and truth, are made to depend entirely on the given data, and the thought
determinations are not themselves credited with any active function in
the determination of content. The use of thought determinations that we
earlier called “natural logic” is unconscious; and when in science this role
of serving as means is reflectively attributed to them, then thinking as such
is made subordinate in the life of spirit to the other spiritual activities. We
do not indeed say of our feelings, impulses, interests, that they serve us;
on the contrary, they count as independent forces and powers, so that to
have this particular feeling, to desire and to will this particular thing, to
make this our interest – just this, is what we are. And it is more likely that
we become conscious of obeying our feelings, impulses, passions, interests,
not to mention our habits, than of having them in our possession, still
less, in view of our intimate union with them, of their being means at our
disposal. Such determinations of mind and spirit, when contrasted with
the universality which we are conscious of being and in which we have our
freedom, quickly show themselves to be particulars, and we rather regard
ourselves to be caught up in their particularities and to be dominated
by them. It is all the less possible, therefore, to believe that the thought
determinations that pervade all our representations – whether these are
purely theoretical or hold a material belonging to sensation, impulse, will –
that such thought determinations are at our service; that it is we who have
them in our possession and not they who have us in theirs.5 What is there
of more in us as against them? How would we, how would I, set myself up
as the superior universal over them – they that are the universal as such?
When we give ourselves up to a sensation, a purpose, an interest, and feel
restricted therein, feel unfree, then the place where we can withdraw from
5

There seems to be an allusion here to the question that Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi raised in Supplement
VII of the second edition of F. H. Jacobi, Über die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn
Moses Mendelssohn (Breslau, 1789): “Is man in possession of reason, or reason in possession of
man?,” p. 422. Werke: Gesamtausgabe, Series 1, Vol. 1, pp. 247–265. For an English translation,
Concerning the Doctrine of Spinoza in Letters to Herr Moses Mendelssohn, see F. H. Jacobi, The
Main Philosophical Works and the Novel Allwill, trans. and ed. George di Giovanni (Montreal
and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1994), p. 375. Jacobi returned to the question in
Supplement II to Jacobi an Fichte (Hamburg,1799) pp. 65ff., Jacobi to Fichte, pp. 528ff. of the English
translation.

21.14

16

21.15

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

it back into freedom is this area of self-certainty, of pure abstraction, of
thought. Or again, when we speak of things, we call their nature or essence
their concept, and this concept is only for thought; but still less shall we
say of the concepts of things that we dominate them, or that the thought
determinations of which they are the complex are at our service. On the
contrary, our thought must accord with them, and our choice or freedom
ought not to want to fit them to its purposes. Thus, inasmuch as subjective
thought is our own most intimately inner doing, and the objective concept
of things constitutes what is essential to them, we cannot step away from
this doing, cannot stand above it, and even less can we step beyond the
nature of things. We can, however, dispense with this last claim; inasmuch
as it is symmetrical with the one preceding it, it says that our thoughts
have a reference to the essence of things; but this is an empty claim, for
the essence of things would then be set up as the rule for our concepts
whereas, for us, that essence can only be the concepts that we have of
the things. The way in which critical philosophy understands the relation
of these three termini is that we place thoughts as a medium between us and
the things, in the sense that this medium, instead of joining us with such
things, would rather cut us off from them. But this view can be countered
by the simple remark that these same things that are supposed to stand at
the opposite extreme beyond us and beyond the self-referring thoughts, are
themselves things of thought6 which, taken as entirely indeterminate, are
only one thing (the so called thing-in-itself ), the thought product of pure
abstraction.
Enough said to dispel any notion that thought determinations are only
for use, are only a means; more important is the related further notion
that they are external forms. – The activity of thought at work in us across
all representations, interests, and actions is, as we have said, unconsciously
busy (the natural logic); explicit consciousness is of the content, the subject
matters of representations, all the things that interest us; taken in this
relation, thought determinations are generally taken to be forms that only
attach to the content without however being this content itself. But if the
truth of the matter is as was already stated and is otherwise generally
admitted, that the nature, the specific essence, that which is truly permanent
and substantial in the manifold and accidentality of appearance and fleeting
externalization, is the concept of the thing, the universal which is present in it
just as there is present in each human being, although universally unique,
a specific principle that makes him human (or in each individual animal
6

Gedankendinge, i.e. the scholastic entia rationis.

The Science of Logic

17

a specific principle that makes it animal): if this is true, then there is
no saying what such an individual could still be if this foundation were
removed from him, no matter how many the predicates with which he
would still be otherwise adorned – if, that is, such a foundation can be
called a predicate like the rest. The indispensable foundation, the concept,
the universal which is thought itself (provided that with the word “thought”
one can abstract from figurative representation), cannot be regarded as just
an indifferent form that attaches to a content. But these thoughts of all
things natural and spiritual, even the substantial content, still contain a
variety of determinacies and are still affected by the distinction of soul and
body, of concept and reality relative to it; the profounder foundation is the
soul standing on its own, the pure concept which is the innermost moment
of the objects, their simple life pulse, just as it is of the subjective thinking of
them. To bring to consciousness this logical nature that animates the spirit,
that moves and works within it, this is the task. The broad distinction
between instinctive act and act which is intelligent and free is that the
latter is performed consciously; when the content that motivates a subject
to action is drawn out of its immediate unity with the subject and is made to
stand before it as an object, then it is that the freedom of spirit begins, the
same spirit who, when thought is an instinctive activity, is caught up in
the web of its categories and is splintered into a material of infinite variety.
Here and there on this web there are knots, more firmly tied than others,
which give stability and direction to the life and consciousness of spirit;
they owe their firmness and power simply to the fact that, having been
brought before consciousness, they stand as independent concepts of its
essential nature. The most important point for the nature of spirit is the
relation, not only of what it implicitly is in itself to what it actually is, but
of what it knows itself to be to what it actually is; because spirit is essentially
consciousness, this self-knowledge is a fundamental determination of its
actuality. As impulses the categories do their work only instinctively; they
are brought to consciousness one by one and so are variable and mutually
confusing, thus affording to spirit only fragmentary and uncertain actuality.
To purify these categories and in them to elevate spirit to truth and freedom,
this is therefore the loftier business of logic.
What we indicated as constituting the beginning of science and have
just now recognized to be of great value both on its own account and as
the condition of true knowledge – namely, the treatment of concepts and
of the moments of the concept in general, of the thought determinations
as forms that are at first different from the material and are only attached
to it – this is a work that quickly gives itself away as being inherently

21.16

18

21.17

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

inadequate for the attainment of truth which is the object and purpose of
logic. For as mere forms, as distinct from the content, such concepts and
their moments are taken in a determination that stamps them as finite and
makes them unfit to hold the truth which is in itself infinite. In whatever
respect the true may otherwise be again associated with restriction and
finitude, this aspect is the side of its negation, of its untruth and lack of
actuality, even of its cessation, and not of the affirmation which, as the
true, it is. Confronted by the barrenness of the merely formal categories,
healthy common sense instinctively felt that it had the upper hand after
all, and it contemptuously relinquished acquaintanceship with them to
the domain of school logic and school metaphysics. In this, however, it
underestimated the value that the consciousness of these threads already
possesses by itself; it also did not perceive that when given over to the
instinctive practices of natural logic, especially when all acquaintance and
cognition of the thought determinations themselves have deliberately been
rejected, it is in bondage to unclarified and therefore unfree thought. The
simple basic determination or common form of the collection of such
forms is identity which, in the logic of this collection, is asserted as the
law of identity, as A = A, and as the principle of contradiction. So much
has healthy common sense lost respect for the school which still holds on
to such laws of truth and still busies itself with them, that it ridicules the
school and regards as insufferable anyone who believes that in following
such laws one actually says anything at all: the plant is a – plant; science is –
science; and so on in infinitum. Regarding the formulas that define the rules
of inference which in fact is a principal function of the understanding,
however mistaken healthy common sense might be in ignoring that they
have their place in cognition where they must be obeyed, and also that
they are essential material for rational thought, it has nonetheless come to
the equally correct realization that such formulas are indifferently at the
service just as much of error as of sophistry, and that, however truth may
be defined, so far as higher truth is concerned, for instance religious truth,
they are useless – that in general they have to do only with the correctness
of knowledge, not its truth.
The inadequacy of this way of regarding thought which leaves truth
on one side can only be remedied by including in our consideration of
thought, not merely what is customarily credited to external form, but the
content as well. It is soon evident that what in ordinary reflection is, as
content, at first separated from the form cannot in fact be in itself formless,
devoid of determination (in that case it would be a vacuity, the abstraction
of the thing-in-itself ); that it rather possesses form in it; indeed that it

The Science of Logic

19

receives soul and substance from the form alone and that it is this form
itself which is transformed into only the semblance of a content, hence
also into the semblance of something external to this semblance. By thus
introducing content into logical consideration, it is not the things, but
what is rather the fact [Sache], the concept of the things, that becomes the
subject matter. In this connection, however, one must also be reminded
that there is a multitude of concepts, a multitude of facts. One way in
which limits are imposed on this multitude has already been said, that the
concept as thought in general, as universal, as against the particularity of
the things vaguely parading their multitudinousness before indeterminate
intuition and representation, is their immeasurable abbreviation. But a
concept is also, first of all, in itself the concept, and this concept is only
one concept, the substantial foundation; it is of course also a determinate
concept, and it is this determinateness that appears in it as content even
though, in fact, it is a form determination of the substantial unity of the
concept, a moment of the form as totality, of the concept itself which is
the foundation of the determinate concepts. This concept is not intuited
by the senses, is not represented in imagination; it is only subject matter,
the product and content of thought, the fact that exists in and for itself,
the logos, the reason of that which is, the truth of what we call things;
it is least of all the logos that should be kept outside the science of logic.
It cannot therefore be a matter of choice whether to include it within
the science or leave it out. When the thought determinations which are
only external forms are seriously considered in themselves, the result can
only be the demonstration of their finitude and of the untruth of their
supposed being-for-itself, and that the concept is their truth. Therefore,
inasmuch as the science of logic deals with the thought determinations
that instinctively and unconsciously pervade our spirit everywhere – and
remain non-objectified and unnoticed even when they enter language –
it will also be a reconstruction of those determinations which reflection
has already abstracted and fixed as subjective forms external to a material
content.
The presentation of no subject matter can be in and for itself as strictly
and immanently plastic as is that of thought in its necessary development; nor would any subject matter require such a presentation; in this
respect, the science of logic must surpass even mathematics, for no subject
matter intrinsically possesses this freedom and independence. The presentation would demand that at no stage of the development should any
thought determination or reflection occur that does not directly emerge
at that specific stage and does not proceed in it from the preceding

21.18

20

21.19

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determinations – a demand which is also to be found after a fashion
in the process of mathematical inference. But I must admit that such an
abstract perfection of presentation must generally be renounced; the very
fact that the logic must begin with the purely simple, and therefore the
most general and empty, restricts it to expressions of this simple that are
themselves absolutely simple, without the further addition of a single word;
only allowed, as the matter at hand requires, would be negative reflections
intended to ward off and keep at bay whatever the imagination or an undisciplined thinking might otherwise adventitiously bring in. However, such
intrusive elements in the otherwise simple immanent course of the development are essentially accidental, and the effort to ward them off would,
therefore, be itself tainted with this accidentality; and besides, it would be
futile to try to deal with them all, precisely because they lie outside the
essence of the subject matter, and incompleteness is at best what would
have to do to satisfy systematic expectations. Yet the restlessness and the
distraction characteristic of our modern consciousness leave us no choice
but to also take into account the more current of these reflections and these
adventitious notions. A plastic discourse requires a plasticity of sense also
in hearing and understanding; but youths and men of such a temper who
would calmly suppress their own reflections and opinions in which original
thought is so impatient to manifest itself, such listeners attentive to the
facts as Plato portrayed them, could hardly be imagined in a modern dialogue; and even less could one count on readers of similar disposition. On
the contrary, all too often and all too vehemently have I been confronted
by opponents incapable of the simple consideration that their opinions
and objections imply categories which are presuppositions and themselves
in need of being criticized first before they are put to use. Lack of selfawareness in this matter is incredibly profound; it is responsible for the
misunderstanding which is the cause of all others, the nasty and uneducated practice of taking for a category under consideration something other
than this category itself. This lack of self-awareness is all the less justifiable
when this something other consists of determinate thoughts and concepts,
and these other categories also would have to have a place in a system of
logic and be subjected there to examination on their own. This is most
conspicuously the case in the vast majority of the objections and attacks on
the first concepts or propositions of the logic, on being and nothing, and
on becoming which, itself a simple determination, contains (indisputably
indeed, as the simplest analysis shows) the other two determinations as
moments. Thoroughness seems to require that the beginning, as the foundation upon which everything else is built, should be examined before all

The Science of Logic

21

else, in fact that we should not proceed further until its solidity has been
demonstrated, and if the contrary should be the case, that we reject all that
follows. This thoroughness has the added advantage of guaranteeing that
the labor of thinking is reduced to a minimum; for it has before it, enclosed
in this germ, the entire development and reckons that it has settled the
whole business when it has disposed of the beginning, the easiest matter to
dispatch because it is the simplest, the simple itself; it is the trifling labor
required for this that really recommends this “thoroughness” which is so
satisfied with itself. This restriction to the simple allows free play to the
arbitrariness of thought which will not itself remain simple but brings in its
own reflections on the subject. Having good right to occupy itself at first
only with the principle and therefore not to let itself be involved in anything
else, this industrious thoroughness in fact does the very opposite, for it does
bring in the “else,” that is, other categories besides just the principle, extra
presuppositions and prejudices. Such presuppositions as that infinity is
different from finitude, content something else than form, the inner something else than the outer, likewise that mediation is not immediacy (as if
anyone did not know these things), are didactically presented, narrated and
affirmed, rather than demonstrated. There is something stupid – I have
no other word for it – about this didactic mannerism; at a deeper level,
there is the illegitimacy of simply presupposing and straight away accepting such propositions; still more, there is the failure to recognize that the
requirement and the business of logical thinking is to investigate precisely
this, whether apart from infinity a finite would be by itself something true;
likewise, whether such an abstracted infinity, or whether a content without
form or a form without content, an inner by itself without further externalization, an externality without inwardness, whether any of this would
be something true or something actual. – But this culture and discipline of
thought by which the latter acquires plasticity and overcomes the impatience of incidental reflection is procured solely by pressing onward, by
study, and by carrying out to its conclusion the entire development.
Anyone who in our times labors at erecting anew an independent edifice of philosophical sciences may be reminded, thinking of how Plato
expounded his, of the story that he reworked his Republic seven times over.
The reminder of this, any comparison, such as may seem implied in it,
should only serve to incite ever stronger the wish that for a work which,
as belonging to the modern world, is confronted by a profounder principle, a more difficult subject matter and a material of greater compass,
the unfettered leisure had been afforded of reworking it seven and seventy
times over. But the author, in face of the magnitude of the task, had to

21.20

22

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

content himself with what could be made of it in circumstances of external
necessity, of the inevitable distraction caused by the magnitude and multitude of contemporary interests, all the while in doubt whether the noisy
clamor of the day and the deafening chatter of a conceit that takes pride in
confining itself to just these interests, might still leave room for partaking
in the dispassionate calm of a knowledge dedicated to thought alone.
Berlin, November 7, 1831

Introduction

21.27

general concept of logic
In no science is the need to begin with the fact [Sache] itself, without
preliminary reflections, felt more strongly than in the science of logic. In
every other science, the matter that it treats, and the scientific method, are
distinguished from each other; the content, moreover, does not make an
absolute beginning but is dependent on other concepts and is connected
on all sides with other material. It is therefore permitted to these sciences to
speak of their ground and its context, as well of their method, in the form
of lemmas;7 to apply presupposed forms of definitions and the like without
further ado, as known and accepted; and to make use of customary ways of
argumentation in order to establish their general concepts and fundamental
determinations.
Logic, on the contrary, cannot presuppose any of these forms of reflection, these rules and laws of thinking, for they are part of its content and
they first have to be established within it. And it is not just the declaration
of scientific method but the concept itself of science as such that belongs to
its content and even makes up its final result. Logic, therefore, cannot say
what it is in advance, rather does this knowledge of itself only emerge as
the final result and completion of its whole treatment. Likewise its subject matter, thinking or more specifically conceptual thinking, is essentially
elaborated within it; its concept is generated in the course of this elaboration and cannot therefore be given in advance. What is anticipated in
this Introduction, therefore, is not intended to ground as it were the concept of logic, or to justify in advance its content and method scientifically,
but rather to make more intuitable, by means of some explanations and
reflections of an argumentative and historical nature, the standpoint from
which this science ought to be considered.
7

i.e. premises taken for granted.

23

21.28

24

21.29

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Whenever logic is taken as the science of thinking in general, it is thereby
understood that this “thinking” constitutes the mere form of a cognition;
that logic abstracts from all content, and the so-called second constitutive
piece that belongs to the cognition, namely the matter, must be given from
elsewhere; hence that logic, since this matter does not in the least depend
on it, can give only the formal conditions of genuine knowledge, but does
not itself contain real truth; or again, that logic is only the pathway to real
knowledge, for the essential component of truth, the content, lies outside
it.
But, first, to say that logic abstracts from all content, that it only teaches
the rule of thinking without being able to engage in what is being thought or
to take its composition into consideration, this alone is already inadequate.
For, since thinking and the rules of thinking are supposed to be its subject
matter, in these logic already has a content specifically its own; in them it has
that second constituent of knowledge, namely a matter whose composition
is its concern.
But, second, the notions on which the concept of logic has generally
rested so far have in part already passed away, and for the rest, it is time that
they disappear altogether, that the standpoint of this science were grasped
at a higher level, and that the science gained a completely altered shape.
The concept of logic has hitherto rested on a separation, presupposed
once and for all in ordinary consciousness, of the content of knowledge and
its form, or of truth and certainty. Presupposed from the start is that the
material of knowledge is present in and for itself as a ready-made world
outside thinking; that thinking is by itself empty, that it comes to this
material as a form from outside, fills itself with it, and only then gains a
content, thereby becoming real knowledge.
Further, these two component parts (for they are supposed to be related
to each other as component parts, and cognition is compounded from
them in a mechanical, or at best chemical, manner) are said to stand to
each other in this order: the object is complete and finished all by itself
and, for its actuality, can fully dispense with thought; thought, for its part,
is something deficient and in need of a material in order to complete itself,
and also, as a pliable indeterminate form, must adapt itself to its matter.
Truth is the agreement of thought with the subject matter, and in order to
produce this agreement – for it is not there on its own account – thought
is expected to be subservient and responsive to the subject matter.
Third, when the difference of matter and form, of subject matter and
thought, is not left in this nebulous indeterminacy but is more specifically defined, each turns out to be a sphere divorced from the other.

The Science of Logic

25

Consequently, as thought receives and informs the material, it does not
transcend itself but its reception of this material and its responsiveness to it
remain modifications of itself; thus thought does not become its other; the
self-conscious determining, at any rate, belongs only to it; even as it refers
to the subject matter, therefore, it does not reach out to it outside itself;
the subject matter remains a thing in itself, utterly a “beyond” of thought.
These views on the relation of subject and object to each other express
the determinations that constitute the nature of our ordinary, phenomenal
consciousness. However, when these prejudices are carried over to reason,
as if in reason the same relation obtained, as if this relation had any truth
in and for itself, then they are errors, and the refutation of them in every
part of the spiritual and natural universe is what philosophy is; or rather,
since they block the entrance to philosophy, they are the errors that must
be removed before one can enter it.
The older metaphysics had in this respect a higher concept of thinking
than now passes as the accepted opinion. For it presupposed as its principle
that only what is known of things and in things by thought is really
true in them, that is, what is known in them not in their immediacy
but as first elevated to the form of thinking, as things of thought. This
metaphysics thus held that thinking and the determination of thinking are
not something alien to the subject matters, but are rather their essence,
or that the things and the thinking of them agree in and for themselves
(also our language expresses a kinship between them); that thinking in its
immanent determinations, and the true nature of things, are one and the
same content.
But the reflection of the understanding seized hold of philosophy. We
must know exactly what is meant by this saying which is otherwise often
used as a slogan. It refers in general to an understanding that abstracts and
therefore separates, that remains fixed in its separations. Turned against
reason, this understanding behaves in the manner of ordinary common sense,
giving credence to the latter’s view that truth rests on sensuous reality, that
thoughts are only thoughts, that is, that only sense perception gives filling
and reality to them; that reason, in so far as it abides in and for itself,
generates only mental figments. In this self-renunciation of reason, the
concept of truth is lost, is restricted to the knowledge of mere subjective
truth, of mere appearances, of only something to which the nature of the
fact does not correspond; knowledge has lapsed into opinion.
Yet there is something deeper lying at the foundation of this turn which
knowledge takes, and appears as a loss and a retrograde step, something
on which the elevation of reason to the loftier spirit of modern philosophy

21.30

26

21.31

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

in fact rests. The basis of that conception now universally accepted8 is to
be sought, namely, in the insight into the necessary conflict of the determinations of the understanding with themselves. – The reflection already
mentioned consists in transcending the concrete immediate, in determining and parting it. But this reflection must equally transcend its separating
determinations and above all connect them. The conflict of determinations
breaks out precisely at the point of connection. This reflective activity of
connection belongs in itself to reason, and to rise above the determinations
and attain insight into their discord is the great negative step on the way
to the true concept of reason. But, when not carried through, this insight
runs into the misconception that reason is the one that contradicts itself;
it fails to see that the contradiction is in fact the elevation of reason above
the restrictions of the understanding and the dissolution of them. At that
point, instead of making the final step that would take it to the summit,
knowledge flees from the unsatisfactoriness of the determinations of the
understanding to sensuous existence, believing that there it will find stability and accord. On the other hand, since this cognition is self-admittedly a
cognition only of appearances, the unsatisfactoriness of the latter is admitted but at the same time presupposed: as much as to say that although we do
not have cognition of things in themselves, nevertheless, within the sphere
of appearance we do have correct cognition; as if, so to speak, there were
a difference only in the kind of subject matters and one kind, namely the
things in themselves, does not fall within the scope of knowledge whereas
the other kind, namely the appearances, does.9 This is like attributing right
insight to someone, with the stipulation, however, that he is not fit to see
what is true but only what is false. Absurd as this might be, no less absurd
would be a cognition which is true but does not know its subject matter
as it is in itself.
The critique of the forms of the understanding10 has arrived precisely at this
result, namely that such forms do not apply to things in themselves. – This
can only mean that they are in themselves something untrue. However,
since they have been allowed to remain valid for reason and experience, the
critique has not altered them in any way but rather has let them be for the
subject in the same shape as they formerly applied to the object. But if they
are inadequate for the thing in itself, still less must the understanding to
which they supposedly belong have to put up with them and rest content
with them. If they cannot be determinations of the thing in itself, still less
8
10

i.e. the concept of truth as merely subjective.
The reference is to Kant. Cf. A276/B332ff.

9

This is a criticism of Kant. Cf. Bxxv.

The Science of Logic

27

can they be determinations of the understanding, to which one ought to
concede at least the dignity of a thing. The determinations of finite and
infinite run into the same conflict, whether they are applied to time and
space, to the world, or are determinations internal to the spirit – just as
black and white yield gray, whether they are mixed on a wall or on a
palette. If our representation of the world is dissolved when we carry over
to it the determinations of the infinite and finite, still more is spirit itself,
which contains both determinations within itself, something inwardly selfcontradictory, self-dissolving. – It is not the nature of the material or of the
subject matter to which they are applied or in which they are found that
can make a difference; for it is only through such determinations, and in
accordance with them, that the subject matter has contradiction within it.
The said critique has therefore removed the forms of objective thinking only from the thing, but has left them in the subject as it originally
found them. That is to say, it did not consider them in and for themselves,
according to their proper content, but simply took them over from subjective logic in the manner of lemmas. There was no question, therefore,
of an immanent deduction of such forms, or also of deducing them as
logico-subjective forms, still less, of a dialectical treatment of them.
In its more consistent form, transcendental idealism did recognize the
nothingness of the spectral thing-in-itself, this abstract shadow divorced
from all content left over by critical philosophy, and its goal was to destroy
it completely. This philosophy also made a start at letting reason produce
its determinations from itself. But the subjective attitude assumed in the
attempt prevented it from coming to fruition. This attitude and, together
with it, the attempt and the cultivation of pure science were eventually
abandoned.
But what is commonly understood by logic is considered with a total
disregard of metaphysical significance. This science, in the state in which
it still finds itself, has admittedly no content of the kind which ordinary
consciousness would accept as reality, or as a genuine fact. But it is not for
that reason a formal science void of any material truth. Besides, the region
of truth is not to be sought in that material missing in it – a lack to which
the insufficiency of logic is usually attributed. More to the point is that the
emptiness of the logical forms lies rather solely in the manner in which they
are considered and dealt with. Scattered in fixed determinations and thus
not held together in organic unity, they are dead forms and the spirit which
is their vital concrete unity does not reside in them. Therefore they lack
proper content – a matter that would in itself be substance. The content
which is missed in the logical forms is nothing else than a fixed foundation

21.32

28

21.33

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

and a concretion of these abstract determinations, and such a substantial
being is usually sought for them outside them. But logical reason is itself
the substantial or real factor which, within itself, holds together all the
abstract determinations and constitutes their proper, absolutely concrete,
unity. There is no need, therefore, to look far and wide for what is usually
called a matter; it is not the fault of the subject matter of logic if the
latter seems empty but only of the manner in which this subject matter is
grasped.
This reflection brings us to a statement of the standpoint from which
logic is to be considered, of how this standpoint differs from previous
treatments of this science and is alone the true base on which the science
is to rest in the future.
In the Phenomenology of Spirit11 I have presented consciousness as it
progresses from the first immediate opposition of itself and the subject
matter to absolute knowledge. This path traverses all the forms of the
relation of consciousness to the object and its result is the concept of science.
There is no need, therefore, to justify this concept here (apart from the fact
that it emerges within logic itself ). It has already been justified in the other
work, and would indeed not be capable of any other justification than is
produced by consciousness as all its shapes dissolve into that concept as
into their truth. – A discursive justification or explanation of the concept of
science can yield at best a general notion of it and a historical acquaintance;
but a definition of science – or more precisely of logic – has its proof
only in the necessity of the manner it is produced by consciousness as
just mentioned. Any definition with which a science makes an absolute
beginning can contain nothing else than the precise and correct expression
of what is represented in one’s mind as the traditionally accepted subject
matter and purpose of the science. That just this subject matter and this
purpose are so represented is a historical warrant for invoking such or such
fact as conceded, or, more precisely, only for pleading that such or such fact
should be accepted as conceded. There will always be the possibility that
someone else will adduce a case, an instance, in which something more
and different must be understood by some term or other – a term which is
therefore to be defined in a narrower or broader sense and the science, too,
will have to be refashioned accordingly. – Further still, definition is always
a matter of argumentation as to what is to be included in it or excluded
from it, within which limits and to what extent; but argumentation is open
11

i.e. in Hegel’s final Jena work (1807). Hegel gives one summary of this process at the beginning of
Chapter 8, the concluding chapter.

The Science of Logic

29

to the most manifold and various opinions, and on these a decision can
finally be determined only arbitrarily. In this method of beginning science
with a definition, no mention is made of the need to demonstrate the
necessity of its subject matter, and hence the necessity of the science itself.
The concept of pure science and its deduction is therefore presupposed
in the present work in so far as the Phenomenology of Spirit is nothing other
than that deduction. Absolute knowledge is the truth of all the modes of
consciousness because, as the course of the Phenomenology brought out,
it is only in absolute knowledge that the separation of the subject matter
from the certainty of itself is completely resolved: truth has become equal
to certainty and this certainty to truth.
Pure science thus presupposes the liberation from the opposition of
consciousness. It contains thought in so far as this thought is equally the fact
as it is in itself; or the fact in itself in so far as this is equally pure thought.
As science, truth is pure self-consciousness as it develops itself and has the
shape of the self, so that that which exists in and for itself is the conscious
concept and the concept as such is that which exists in and for itself.
This objective thinking is thus the content of pure science. Consequently,
far from being formal, far from lacking the matter required for an actual
and true cognition, it is its content which alone has absolute truth, or,
if one still wanted to make use of the word “matter,” which alone is the
veritable matter – a matter for which the form is nothing external, because
this matter is rather pure thought and hence the absolute form itself.
Accordingly, logic is to be understood as the system of pure reason, as the
realm of pure thought. This realm is truth unveiled, truth as it is in and for
itself. It can therefore be said that this content is the exposition of God as he
is in his eternal essence before the creation of nature and of a finite spirit.
Anaxagoras is celebrated as the man who first gave voice to the thought
that Nous, thought, is the principle of the world; that the essence of the
world is to be defined as thought.12 In this, he laid down the foundation for
an intellectual view of the universe, the pure shape of which must be logic.
Logic has nothing to do with a thought about something which stands
outside by itself as the base of thought; nor does it have to do with forms
meant to provide mere markings of the truth; rather, the necessary forms of
thinking, and its specific determinations, are the content and the ultimate
truth itself.
To get at least some inkling of this, one must put aside the notion that
truth must be something tangible. Such tangibility, for example, is carried
12

Cf. Aristotle, Metaph., 984b.

21.34

30

21.35

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

over even into the ideas of Plato which are in God’s thought, as if they were,
so to speak, things that exist but in another world or region, and a world of
actuality were to be found outside them which has a substantiality distinct
from those ideas and is real only because of this distinctness. The Platonic
idea is nothing else than the universal, or, more precisely, it is the concept of
the subject matter; it is only in the concept that something has actuality, and
to the extent that it is different from its concept, it ceases to be actual and is
a nullity; the side of tangibility and of sensuous self-externality belongs to
this null side. – But on the other side one can appeal to the representations
typical of ordinary logic; for it is assumed that in definitions, for example,
the determinations are not just of the knowing subject but are rather
determinations of the subject matter, such that constitute its innermost
essential nature. Or in an inference drawn from given determinations to
others, the assumption is that the inferred is not something external to the
subject matter and alien to it, but that it belongs to it instead, that to the
thought there corresponds being. – Everywhere presupposed by the use
of the forms of the concept, of judgment, inference, definition, division,
etc., is that they are not mere forms of self-conscious thinking but also of
objective understanding. – Thought is an expression which attributes the
determination contained in it primarily to consciousness. But inasmuch
as it is said that understanding, that reason, is in the objective world, that
spirit and nature have universal laws to which their life and their changes
conform, then it is conceded just as much that the determinations of
thought have objective value and concrete existence.
Critical philosophy did indeed already turn metaphysics into logic but, like
the subsequent idealism, it gave to the logical determinations an essentially
subjective significance out of fear of the object, as we said earlier;13 for
that reason, these determinations remained affected by the very object that
they avoided, and were left with the remains of a thing-in-itself, an infinite
check, as a beyond. But the liberation from the opposition of consciousness
that science must be able to presuppose elevates the determinations of
thought above this anxious, incomplete standpoint, and demands that
they be considered for what they are in and for themselves without any
such cautious restriction, as the logical, the purely rational.
Kant thought further of logic, that is, the aggregate of definitions and
propositions that ordinarily passes for logic, as fortunate because, as contrasted with other sciences, it was its lot to attain an early completion; since
Aristotle, it has taken no backward step, but also none forward, the latter
13

Hegel is probably referring to 21.29, above.

The Science of Logic

31

because to all appearances it seems to be finished and complete. If logic has
not undergone change since Aristotle – and in fact, judging from the latest
compendiums of logic, the usual changes mostly consist only of omissions –
then surely the conclusion to be drawn is that it is all the more in need
of a total reworking; for the two thousand years of spirit’s continuous
labor must have procured for it a higher consciousness about its thinking and the purity of its inner essence. A comparison of the shapes to
which the spirit of the practical and the religious world, and of science
in every form of real or idealized consciousness, has raised itself, with
the shape in which logic, spirit’s consciousness of its own pure essence,
finds itself, reveals too wide a difference that one would not be struck,
even on the most superficial observation, by the disproportion and the
unworthiness of the latter consciousness as contrasted with spirit’s other
elevations.
As a matter of fact, the need for a reformation of logic has long been
felt. In the form and content in which it is found in the textbooks, it must
be said that it has fallen into disrepute. It is still being dragged along, more
from a feeling that one cannot dispense with a logic altogether and the
persisting traditional belief in its importance, than from any conviction
that such a commonplace content and the occupation with such empty
forms are of any value or use.
The additions of psychological, pedagogical, and even physiological
material which logic was at one time given, have later been almost universally recognized as disfigurations. A large part of these psychological,
pedagogical, or physiological observations, of these laws and rules, whether
they occur in logic or anywhere else, must appear in and for themselves to
be quite shallow and trivial. The rule, for instance, that one should think
through and personally test what one reads in books or hears by word of
mouth; or, if one has poor sight, that one should aid the eyes with spectacles – rules which were offered for the attainment of truth in the textbooks
of so-called applied logic, and even pompously set out in paragraphs –
these must immediately strike everyone as superfluous – apart from the
writer or the teacher who is in the embarrassing position of having to
pad with extra material the otherwise too short and lifeless content of
logic.c,14
c

14

A just published and most up-to-date adaptation of this science, Fries’s System of Logic [1811,
Introduction §1] goes back to its anthropological foundations. The shallowness of the representation
or opinion on which it is based, in and of itself, and of the execution, dispenses me from the trouble
of taking any notice of this insignificant publication.
Note in the first edition, dropped in the second.

21.36

32

21.37

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Regarding this content, the reason why it is so spiritless has already been
given above. Its determinations are accepted in their undisturbed fixity
and are brought together only in external connection. Since in judgments
and syllogisms the operations are mostly reduced to, and founded upon,
the quantitative aspect of the determinations, everything rests on external
differentiation, on mere comparison, and becomes a completely analytical
procedure and a calculus void of concept. The deduction of the so-called
rules and laws, of inference especially, is no better than the manipulation
of rods of unequal lengths for sorting them out in groups according to
size – than a children’s game of fitting together the pieces of a colored
picture puzzle. – Not incorrectly, therefore, has this thinking been equated
with reckoning, and reckoning again with this thinking.15 In mathematics, numbers have no conceptual content, no meaning outside equality
or inequality, that is, outside relations which are entirely external; neither
in themselves nor in connection are they a thought. When one mechanically calculates that three-fourths multiplied by two-thirds makes one-half,
this operation contains about as much and as little thought as estimating
whether in a logical figure this or that kind of syllogism applies.
For the dead bones of logic to be quickened by spirit and become
substance and content, its method must be the one which alone can make
it fit to be pure science. In the present situation of logic, hardly a trace of
scientific method is to be seen in it. It has roughly the form of an empirical
science. The empirical sciences did find a method of defining and classifying
their material specifically suited, such as it is, to what they are supposed
to be. Pure mathematics, too, has its method suited to its abstract objects
and the quantitative form in which alone it considers them. In the Preface
to the Phenomenology of Spirit, I have said what is essential regarding this
method and, in general, the derived form of scientific procedure proper
to mathematics,16 but we shall return to it in more detail within the logic
itself.17 Spinoza, Wolff, and others, have let themselves be led astray into
applying that method also to philosophy and in making the conceptually
void external course of quantity, the course of the concept – a move
contradictory in and for itself. Hitherto philosophy had yet to find its
method but looked with envy at the systematic edifice of mathematics and,
15

16

Hegel is referring to Reinhold, at the time when the latter had espoused the philosophy of C. G.
Bardili. Reinhold defines thought as “the determinable and, to this extent, finite repeatability of one
and just this one in an other, through the indeterminable and, to this extent, infinite repeatability of
one and just this one in one and just this one determining.” He calls this process a “Rechnen.” K. L.
Reinhold, “Was ist das Denken, als Denken?” in Beyträge zur leichtern Übersicht der Philosophie
beym Anfange des 19. Jahrhunderts I (Hamburg: Perthes, 1801), p. 103.
17 GW 12, 226–229.
GW 9, 31–34.

The Science of Logic

33

as we have said, borrowed it from it or helped itself with the method of
sciences which are only an admixture of given material, propositions of
experience and thoughts – or it even resorted to the crude rejection of all
method. But the exposition of that which alone can be the true method of
philosophical science falls within the treatment of logic itself; for method
is the consciousness of the form of the inner self-movement of the content
of logic. In the Phenomenology of Spirit, I have presented an example of this
method with respect to a concrete object, namely consciousness.d At issue
there are shapes of consciousness, each of which dissolves itself in being
realized, has its own negation for result – and thereby has gone over to a
higher shape. The one thing needed to achieve scientific progress – and it
is essential to make an effort at gaining this quite simple insight into it –
is the recognition of the logical principle that negation is equally positive,
or that what is self-contradictory does not resolve itself into a nullity, into
abstract nothingness, but essentially only into the negation of its particular
content; or that such a negation is not just negation, but is the negation of
the determined fact which is resolved, and is therefore determinate negation;
that in the result there is therefore contained in essence that from which
the result derives – a tautology indeed, since the result would otherwise be
something immediate and not a result. Because the result, the negation, is
a determinate negation, it has a content. It is a new concept but one higher
and richer than the preceding – richer because it negates or opposes the
preceding and therefore contains it, and it contains even more than that,
for it is the unity of itself and its opposite. – It is above all in this way
that the system of concepts is to be to erected – and it has to come to
completion in an unstoppable and pure progression that admits of nothing
extraneous.
How could I possibly pretend that the method that I follow in this
system of logic, or rather the method that this system itself follows within,
would not be capable of greater perfection, of greater elaboration of detail?
Yet I know that it is the one and only true method. This is made obvious
by the very fact that this method is not something distinct from its subject
matter and content – for it is the content in itself, the dialectic which it
possesses within itself, which moves the subject matter forward. It is clear
that no expositions can be accepted as scientifically valid that do not follow
the progression of this method and are not in tune with its simple rhythm,
for it is the course of the fact itself.
d

Later, with respect to other concrete objects and corresponding parts of philosophy.

21.38

34

21.39

21.40

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

In keeping with this method, I remind the reader that the divisions and
the headings of the books, the sections and chapters given in this work, as
well as the explanations associated with them, are made for the purpose of
a preliminary overview, and that strictly speaking they only are of historical
value. They do not belong to the content and body of the science but
are rather compilations of an external reflection which has already gone
through the whole of the exposition, therefore knows the sequence of its
moments in advance and anticipates them before they are brought on by
the matter at issue itself.
Similarly in other sciences, preliminary definitions and divisions are by
themselves nothing other than such external indications; but also within
the science they never exceed this status. Even in logic, for example, we are
told something like this, that “logic has two main parts, the doctrine of the
elements and methodology,” and under the doctrine of the elements we
then immediately find such headings as “Laws of Thinking,” followed by
Chapter One, “On Concepts,” Section One, “On the Clarity of Concepts,”
etc. – These definitions and divisions, made without any deduction and
justification, constitute the systematic framework and the entire connectedness of such sciences. Such a logic considers it its vocation to talk about
the necessity of deducing concepts and truths from principles; however, of
what they call method, there is not the shadow of a deduction. Order consists in something like grouping together what is alike, in bringing in the
simple ahead of the composite, and in other such external considerations.
But as regards any internal, necessary connectedness, the list of headings
is all that there is, and a transition is made simply by saying that now
we are at “Chapter Two,” or that “we now come to judgments,” and the
like.
Also the headings and divisions that appear in the present system are
not intended to have for themselves any other significance than that of an
indication of content. But then the necessity of the connectedness and the
immanent emergence of distinctions must be found in the treatment of the
fact itself, for it falls within the concept’s own progressive determination.
What propels the concept onward is the already mentioned negative18
which it possesses in itself; it is this that constitutes the truly dialectical
factor. Dialectic, once considered a separate part of logic and, one may say,
entirely misunderstood so far as its purpose and standpoint are concerned,
thereby assumes a totally different position. – Even the Platonic dialectic,
in the Parmenides itself and elsewhere even more directly, on the one hand
18

Cf. above, 21.28.

The Science of Logic

35

only has the aim of refuting limited assertions by internally dissolving them
and, on the other hand, generally comes only to a negative result. Dialectic
is commonly regarded as an external and negative activity which does
not belong to the fact itself but is rooted in mere conceit, in a subjective
obsession for subverting and bringing to naught everything firm and true,
or at least as in resulting in nothing but the vanity of the subject matter
subjected to dialectical treatment.
Kant had a higher regard for dialectic – and this is among his greatest
merits – for he removed from it the semblance of arbitrariness which it
has in ordinary thought and presented it as a necessary operation of reason.19
Because dialectic was held to be merely the art of practicing deceptions and
producing illusions, it was straight away assumed that it plays a false game;
that its whole power rests solely on hiding its deception; that its results
are only deviously obtained, a subjective shine. True, Kant’s dialectical
displays in the antinomies of pure reason, when examined more closely as
will be done at length in the course of this work,20 do not deserve great
praise; but the general idea to which he gave justification and credence is
the objectivity of reflective shine and the necessity of the contradiction which
belongs to the nature of thought determinations: of course, this he did above
all with reference to the way in which these determinations are applied by
reason to the things in themselves; nevertheless, what such determinations
are in reason, and with reference to what is in itself, this is precisely their
nature. This result, grasped in its positive aspect, is nothing else but the
inner negativity of the determinations which is their self-moving soul, the
principle of all natural and spiritual life. But if one stays fixed at the abstract
negative aspect of dialectics, the result is only the commonplace that reason
is incapable of knowing the infinite – a peculiar result indeed, for it says
that, since the infinite is what is rational, reason is not capable of cognizing
the rational.
It is in this dialectic as understood here, and hence in grasping opposites
in their unity, or the positive in the negative, that the speculative consists.
It is the most important aspect of dialectic, but for the still unpracticed,
unfree faculty of thought, the most difficult. Such a faculty, if still occupied
with breaking itself free of the concrete representations of the senses and
of ratiocination, must first practice abstract thinking, hold fast to concepts
in their determinateness and learn to gain knowledge by means of them.
An exposition of logic to this end would have, in its method, to keep
to a subject division as mentioned above, and with regard to the more
19

Cf. A321/B377ff.

20

Cf below, 21.179ff., 228ff.

21.41

36

21.42

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

detailed content, to the definitions given to the single concepts, without
getting itself involved in dialectic. In external shape, it would turn out to
be similar to the usual presentation of this science, yet would also depart
from it in content and, though of no use for the practice of speculative
thinking, it would however serve abstract thinking, and this is a purpose
which can never be realized by a logic popularized with the additions of
psychological and anthropological materials. What it would give to the
mind is the picture of a methodically ordered whole, even though the soul
of the edifice, the method dwelling in the dialectic, would not itself appear
in it.
Finally, with respect to the education and the relation of the individual
to logic, I would further remark that this science, like grammar, appears
in two different aspects or values. It is one thing for one who comes to it
and to the sciences generally for the first time, and something else for one
who returns to it from these sciences. He who is beginning to make his
acquaintance with grammar finds in its forms and laws dry abstractions,
arbitrary rules, quite in general a disconnected aggregate of definitions that
have no other value or meaning than what they immediately signify; at the
start, there is nothing to be known in them except themselves. On the other
hand, he who has mastered a language and is also acquainted with other
languages with which to compare it, to such is given the capacity to feel in
the grammar of the language the spirit and culture of a people; the same
rules and forms now have an enriched, living value. In the medium of the
language, he can recognize the expression of spirit as spirit, and this is logic.
So, he who first comes to this science, at first finds in logic an isolated system
of abstractions which, confined to itself, does not reach over to embrace
other forms of cognition and of science. On the contrary, when held against
the riches of the world-scenario, against the apparently real content of the
other sciences; when compared with the promise of the absolute science
to unveil the essence of these riches, to unveil the inner nature of spirit
and of the world, the truth, then in the abstractness of its shape, in the
colorlessness and stark simplicity of its pure determinations; this science
has rather the look of one who can sooner afford anything than any such
promise but stands penniless before those riches. The first acquaintance
with logic restricts its significance to it alone; its content passes only for an
isolated occupation with thought determinations, next to which the other
scientific endeavors constitute a material and content of their own, one
over which logical thought may indeed have some formal influence, but
an influence which is more of their own making and which, if need be,
scientific form and the study of this form can at any rate also dispense with.

The Science of Logic

37

The other sciences have on the whole discarded the well-regulated method
of proceeding by way of definitions, axioms, theorems and their proofs,
and so on; so-called natural logic has become their accepted norm and
this manages to do its work without any specialized knowledge of thought
itself. All in all, the matter and the content of these sciences stand totally
independent of logic and are also better suited to the senses, to feeling, the
imagination, and any kind of practical interest.
So logic must indeed at first be learned as something which one may well
understand and penetrate into but in which, at the beginning, one misses
the scope, depth, and broader significance. Only after a more profound
acquaintance with the other sciences does logic rise for subjective spirit
from a merely abstract universal to a universal that encompasses within
itself the riches of the particular: in the same way a moral maxim does not
possess in the mouth of a youngster who otherwise understands it quite
well the meaning and scope that it has in the spirit of a man with a lifetime
of experience, to whom therefore the weight of its content is expressed
in full force. Thus logic receives full appreciation of its value only when
it comes as the result of the experience of the sciences; then it displays
itself to spirit as the universal truth, not as a particular cognition alongside
another material and other realities, but as the essence rather of this further
content.
Now although this power of logic is not consciously present to spirit at
the beginning of its study, such a study will nevertheless impart to it the
inward power which will lead it to the truth. The system of logic is the
realm of shadows, the world of simple essentialities, freed of all sensuous
concretion. To study this science, to dwell and to labor in this realm of
shadows, is the absolute culture and discipline of consciousness. Its task
is one which is remote from the intuitions and the goals of the senses,
remote from feelings and from the world of merely fancied representation.
Considered from its negative side, this task consists in holding off the
accidentality of ratiocinative thought and the arbitrariness in the choice to
accept one ground as valid rather than its opposite.
But above all, thought thereby gains self-subsistence and independence.
It will make itself at home in abstractions and in the ways of working with
concepts without sensuous substrata, will develop an unconscious power to
assimilate in rational form the otherwise dispersed manifold of cognitions
and sciences, the power to grasp and hold them in their essentiality, to
strip them of every externality and in this way to abstract from them the
logical element – or what is the same thing, the power to fill the abstract
groundwork of logic previously acquired through study with the content of

21.43

38

21.44

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

every truth, and to bestow upon this content the value of a universal which
no longer stands as a particular alongside other particulars but embraces
them all in its grasp and is their essence, the absolutely true.
general division of the logic

21.45

It follows from what has been said regarding the concept of this science
and where its justification lies that the general division of it can be only
provisional here – can be given, as it were, only in so far as the author is
already acquainted with the science and is consequently historically in a
position to indicate in advance the main distinctions in which the concept
assumes determination as it develops.
Still, the attempt can be made to elicit in advance some general understanding of what is required for performing the division, although even
here recourse must be made to a procedural method which will attain
full disclosure and justification only within the science. – One must thus
be reminded, first and foremost, that presupposed here is that the division
must be connected with the concept, or rather must lie in the concept itself.
The concept is not indeterminate but is determinate within; the division,
however, expresses this determinateness of the concept in developed form;
it is the parting of the concept in judgment,21 not a judgment about some
subject matter or other picked out externally, but the judging, that is, the
determining, of the concept within it. Right-angularity, acute-angularity,
etc., or equilaterality, which are the determinations according to which
triangles are divided, do not lie in the determinateness of the triangle itself,
that is, not in what is usually called the concept of a triangle, no more than
in the concept of animal in general, or of mammal, bird, etc., one can find
the determinations according to which animal in general is divided into
mammal, bird, etc., and these classes are then divided into further genera.
Such determinations are taken from elsewhere, from empirical intuition;
they come to those so-called concepts from without. In the philosophical
treatment of division, the concept must show that it itself holds the source
of the determinations.
But in the Introduction, the concept of logic was itself presented as the
result of a science that transcends it, and hence as equally a presupposition
here. Accordingly, logic was defined as the science of pure thought – the
science that has pure knowledge for its principle and is a unity which is not
21

parting . . . in judgment = Urteil. The German Urteil (“judgment”) connotes a “parting,” like the
Greek kr©stv.

The Science of Logic

39

abstract but living and concrete, so that the opposition of consciousness
between a being subjectively existing for itself, and another but objectively
existing such being, has been overcome in it, and being is known to be in
itself a pure concept and the pure concept to be true being. These, then,
are the two moments contained in logic. But they are now known to exist
inseparably, not as in consciousness, where each exists for itself; it is for this
reason and this reason alone, because they are at the same time known to
be distinct (yet not to exist for themselves), that their unity is not abstract,
dead and inert, but concrete.
This unity also constitutes the logical principle as element,22 so that the
development of the distinction which is from the start present in it proceeds
only inside this element. For since the division is, as we said, the parting or
the judgment of the concept – is the positing of the determination which is
already immanent in it and therefore the positing of its distinction – this
positing must not be understood as resolving that concrete unity back into
its determinations, as if these were to exist on their own, for this would
be here a vacuous return to the previous standpoint, to the opposition
of consciousness. But this opposition has vanished; the unity remains the
element, and the distinctions of the division and of the development in
general no longer transgress that unity. Therefore the earlier determinations
which (on the pathway to truth) existed for themselves, as for instance that
of subjective and objective, or also of thought and being, of concept and
reality, no matter from what standpoint they were determined, are now
in their truth, that is, in their unity, reduced to forms. In their difference
they therefore implicitly remain, in themselves, the whole concept, and this
concept is posited in the division only under its own determinations.
Thus it is the whole concept which we must consider, first as existent
concept, and then as concept; in the one case it is concept only implicitly,
in itself, the concept of reality or being; in the other, it is the concept as
such, the concept that exists for itself (in more concrete forms, the concept
as it is in the human being, who is endowed with thought, and also in
the sentient animal and in general in organic individuality, although, of
course, in these last it is not conscious and still less known; it is concept in
itself only in inorganic nature). – Accordingly, the first division must be
between the logic of the concept as being and of the concept as concept, or
(if we want to avail ourselves of otherwise familiar, but very indeterminate
and therefore very ambiguous expressions) in objective and subjective logic.
22

“Element” has classical connotations here. Like “water,” “fire,” or “air,” this unity is a pervasive
element that embraces differences.

21.46

40

21.47

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

However, in accordance with the elemental unity which is immanent in
the concept as basis, and hence in accordance with the inseparability of the
concept’s determinations, such determinations, even as differentiated (the
concept is posited in their difference), must also stand at least in reference to
each another. There results a sphere of mediation, the concept as a system
of reflected determinations, that is, of being as it passes over into the initselfness of the concept – a concept which is in this way not yet posited
for itself as such but is also fettered by an immediate being still external to
it. This sphere is the doctrine of essence that stands between the doctrine of
being and of the concept. – In the general division of logic in this work,
it has been included in objective logic because, although essence is indeed
already inwardness, the character of subject is to be reserved nominatim for
the concept.
Recently Kante has opposed to what has usually been called “logic”
another, namely a transcendental logic.24 What has been called objective
logic here would correspond in part to what for him is transcendental
logic. Kant distinguishes it from what he calls general logic because (a)
it deals with concepts that refer to intended objects a priori, and hence
does not abstract from all the content of objective cognition, or in that it
contains the rules of the pure thinking of an intended object; and because
(b) it thereby goes to the source of our cognition so far as this cognition cannot be attributed to the intended objects. – It is to this second
aspect that Kant’s philosophical interest is exclusively directed. His principal idea is to vindicate the categories for self-consciousness understood as the
e

23

24

I should point out that in this work I make frequent references to the Kantian philosophy (which to
many might seem superfluous) because, whatever might be said here or elsewhere of its distinctive
character or of particular parts of its exposition, it constitutes the foundation and the starting point
of the new German philosophy, and this is a merit of which it can boast undiminished by whatever
fault may be found in it. An added reason for these frequent references in the objective logic is
that Kantian philosophy delves deeply into important, more specific aspects of the logic, whereas
later philosophical expositions have paid little attention to these aspects and in some instances have
even expressed crude – though not unavenged – contempt for them. The philosophizing most
widespread among us does not reach past the Kantian results that reason cannot cognize any true
content, and that, when it comes to absolute truth, it must be directed to faith.23 But what for Kant
is the result is for this philosophizing the immediate starting point, so that the exposition which
precedes the result, from which this result is derived and which constitutes philosophical cognition,
is excised beforehand. The philosophy of Kant thus serves as a cushion for an intellectual indolence
which takes comfort in the fact that everything is already proved and settled. For cognition and a
specific content of thought which is not found in such a barren and arid complacency, one must
therefore turn to that preceding exposition.
The allusion here is at least to Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi. Cf. Jacobi, David Hume über den Glauben,
oder Idealismus und Realismus, Ein Gespräch (Breslau, 1787), pp. 48–49; Werke: Gesamtausgabe,
Series 2, Vol. 1, pp. 31–32. English trans., David Hume on Faith, or Idealism and Realism: A Dialogue,
in Main Philosophical Works, pp. 271–272.
A50/B74ff.

The Science of Logic

41

subjective “I.”25 Because of this determination, his point of view remains
confined within consciousness and its opposition, and, besides the empirical element of feeling and intuition, is left with something else not posited
or determined by thinking self-consciousness, a thing-in-itself, something
alien and external to thinking – although it is easy to see that such an
abstract entity as the thing-in-itself is itself only the product of thought,
and of merely abstractive thought at that. – If other Kantians26 have
expanded on the determining of the intended object by the “I” by saying
that the objectifying of the “I” is to be regarded as an original and necessary deed of consciousness, so that in this original deed there is not yet the
representation of the “I” – which would be only a consciousness of that
consciousness, or itself an objectifying of that consciousness – then this
objectifying deed, liberated from the opposition of consciousness, is closer
to what may be taken simply as thinking as such.f But this deed should
no longer be called consciousness; for consciousness holds within itself the
opposition of the “I” and its intended object which is not to be found
in that original deed.27 The name “consciousness” gives it more of a semblance of subjectivity than does the term “thought,” which here, however,
is to be taken in the absolute sense of infinite thought, not as encumbered
by the finitude of consciousness; in short, thought as such.
Now because the interest of the Kantian philosophy was directed to
the so-called transcendental nature of the categories, the treatment itself
of such categories came up empty. What they are in themselves apart
from their abstract relation to the “I,” a relation which is the same for all,
how they are determined and related to each other, this was not made a
subject of consideration, and therefore knowledge of their nature was not
in the least advanced by this philosophy. What alone is of interest in this
connection comes only in the Critique of Ideas. – However, if there was
to be a real progress in philosophy, it was necessary that the interest of
f

25
26

27

If the expression, the “objectifying deed of the ‘I’,” brings to mind other products of spirit, e.g.
those of fantasy, it is to be observed that we are speaking of the determining of an intended object
inasmuch as the elements of its content do not belong to feeling and intuition. The intended object
is here a thought, and to determine it means both to produce it originally, and also, inasmuch as it
is something presupposed, to have further thoughts about it, to develop it further by thinking.
Cf., among other places, the B edition of the Critique of Pure Reason, §§25, 26.
The most obvious allusion is to J. G. Fichte. For a clear statement of Fichte’s still early position
on the matter, see his Zweite Einleitung in die Wissenschaftslehre, Philosophisches Journal, 6 (1797)
§5; English trans., Second Introduction to the Wissenschaftslehre, trans. and ed. Daniel Breazeale
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1994), pp. 46ff.; GA I.4.463.
Fichte was aware of this. Cf.: “I become conscious only of the concepts involved, that is, the concept
of the object and the concept of the goal, not however of the two intuitions [i.e. intellectual intuition
and intuition of the senses] that lie at the basis of these concepts.” Fichte, Second Introduction to the
Wissenschaftslehre, p. 47; GA I.4, 467.

21.48

42

21.49

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

thought should be drawn to the consideration of the formal side, of the
“I,” of consciousness as such, that is, of the abstract reference of a subjective
awareness to an object, and that in this way the path should be opened for
the cognition of the infinite form, that is, of the concept. Yet, in order to
arrive at this cognition, the finite determinateness in which that form is
as “I,” as consciousness, must be shed. The form, when thought out in its
purity, will then have within itself the capacity to determine itself, that is,
to give itself a content, and to give it as a necessary content – as a system
of thought-determinations.
The objective logic thus takes the place rather of the former metaphysics
which was supposed to be the scientific edifice of the world as constructed
by thoughts alone. – If we look at the final shape in the elaboration of this
science, then it is ontology which objective logic most directly replaces in
the first instance, that is, that part of metaphysics intended to investigate
the nature of ens in general28 (and ens comprises within itself both being and
essence, a distinction for which the German language has fortunately preserved different expressions). – But objective logic comprises within itself
also the rest of metaphysics, the metaphysics which sought to comprehend
with the pure forms of thought such particular substrata, originally drawn
from the imagination,29 as the soul, the world, and God, and in this type of
consideration the determinations of thought constituted the essential factor.
Logic, however, considers these forms free of those substrata, which are
the subjects of figurative representation, considers their nature and value in
and for themselves. That metaphysics neglected to do this, and it therefore
incurred the just reproach that it employed the pure forms of thought
uncritically, without previously investigating whether and how they could
be the determinations of the thing-in-itself, to use Kant’s expression –
or more precisely, of the rational. – The objective logic is therefore the
true critique of such determinations – a critique that considers them, not
according to the abstract form of the a priori as contrasted with the a
posteriori, but in themselves according to their particular content.
The subjective logic is the logic of the concept – of essence which has
sublated its reference to a being or to its reflective shine, and in its determination is no longer external but something subjective, freely self-subsisting,
self-determining, or rather the subject itself. – Since subjective brings with
it the misconception of “accidental” and “arbitrary” and also, in general,
28

29

Cf.: “Ontology or first philosophy is the science of being in general or being as such.” Christian
Wolff, Philosophia prima, sive ontologia, methodo scientifica pertractata (Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1736),
§1.
Vorstellen.

The Science of Logic

43

of determinations that belong to the form of consciousness, no particular
weight is to be attached here to the distinction of subjective and objective.
This is a distinction which will be more precisely developed later in the
logic itself.
Logic thus divides overall into objective and subjective logic, but more
specifically it has three parts:
I. The Logic of Being,
II. The Logic of Essence, and
III. The Logic of the Concept.

book one

The Doctrine of Being

21.51
21.53

with what must the beginning of science be made?
It is only in recent times that there has been a new awareness of the difficulty
of finding a beginning in philosophy, and the reason for this difficulty, and
so also the possibility of resolving it, have been discussed in a variety of
ways. The beginning of philosophy must be either something mediated or
something immediate, and it is easy to show that it can be neither the one
nor the other; so either way of beginning runs into contradiction.1
The principle of a philosophy also expresses a beginning, of course,
but not so much a subjective as an objective one, the beginning of all
things. The principle is a somehow determinate content – “water,” “the
one,” “nous,” “idea,” or “substance,” “monad,” etc. – or, if it designates
the nature of cognition and is therefore meant simply as a criterion rather
than an objective determination, as “thinking,” “intuition,” “sensation,”
“I,” even “subjectivity,” then here too the interest still lies in the content
determination. The beginning as such, on the other hand, as something
subjective in the sense that it is an accidental way of introducing the
exposition, is left unconsidered, a matter of indifference, and consequently
also the need to ask with what a beginning should be made remains of no
importance in face of the need for the principle in which alone the interest
of the fact seems to lie, the interest as to what is the truth, the absolute
ground of everything.
But the modern perplexity about a beginning proceeds from a further
need which escapes those who are either busy demonstrating their principle dogmatically or skeptically looking for a subjective criterion against
dogmatic philosophizing, and is outright denied by those who begin, like
a shot from a pistol, from their inner revelation, from faith, intellectual
1

There is an allusion here to Fichte. Cf. Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre (1794), English
trans., The Science of Knowledge, Peter Heath and John Lachs (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1982), pp. 93ff. GA, I.2, 255ff.

45

46

21.54

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

intuition, etc. and who would be exempt from method and logic.2 If earlier
abstract thought is at first interested only in the principle as content, but
is driven as philosophical culture advances to the other side to pay attention to the conduct of the cognitive process, then the subjective activity has
also been grasped as an essential moment of objective truth, and with this
there comes the need to unite the method with the content, the form with
the principle. Thus the principle ought to be also the beginning, and that
which has priority for thinking ought to be also the first in the process of
thinking.
Here we only have to consider how the logical beginning appears. The
two sides from which it can be taken have already been named, namely
either by way of mediation as result, or immediately as beginning proper.
This is not the place to discuss the question apparently so important
to present-day culture, whether the knowledge of truth is an immediate
awareness that begins absolutely, a faith, or rather a mediated knowledge.
In so far as the issue allows passing treatment, this has already been done
elsewhere (in my Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, 3rd edn, in the
Prefatory Concept, §§21ff.). Here we may quote from it only this, that
there is nothing in heaven or nature or spirit or anywhere else that does
not contain just as much immediacy as mediation, so that both these
determinations prove to be unseparated and inseparable and the opposition
between them nothing real. As for a scientific discussion, a case in point is
every logical proposition in which we find the determinations of immediacy
and mediacy and where there is also entailed, therefore, a discussion of their
opposition and their truth. This opposition, when connected to thinking,
to knowledge, to cognition, assumes the more concrete shape of immediate
or mediated knowledge, and it is then up to the science of logic to consider
the nature of cognition in general, while the more concrete forms of
the same cognition fall within the scope of the science of spirit and the
phenomenology of spirit. But to want to clarify the nature of cognition
prior to science is to demand that it should be discussed outside science,
and outside science this cannot be done, at least not in the scientific manner
which alone is the issue here.
A beginning is logical in that it is to be made in the element of a free,
self-contained thought, in pure knowledge; it is thereby mediated, for pure
knowledge is the ultimate and absolute truth of consciousness. We said in
the Introduction that the Phenomenology of Spirit is the science of consciousness, its exposition; that consciousness has the concept of science,
2

The allusion here is most likely to Jacobi. Cf. also the Preface to the Phenomenology, GW 9, 24.10–12.

The Doctrine of Being

47

that is, pure knowledge, for its result.3 To this extent, logic has for its
presupposition the science of spirit in its appearance, a science which
contains the necessity, and therefore demonstrates the truth, of the standpoint which is pure knowledge and of its mediation. In this science of
spirit in its appearance the beginning is made from empirical, sensuous
consciousness, and it is this consciousness which is immediate knowledge
in the strict sense; there, in this science, is where its nature is discussed.
Any other consciousness, such as faith in divine truths, inner experience,
knowledge through inner revelation, etc., proves upon cursory reflection
to be very ill-suited as an instance of immediate knowledge. In the said
treatise, immediate consciousness is also that which in the science comes
first and immediately and is therefore a presupposition; but in logic the
presupposition is what has proved itself to be the result of that preceding
consideration, namely the idea as pure knowledge. Logic is the pure science,
that is, pure knowledge in the full compass of its development. But in
that result the idea has the determination of a certainty that has become
truth; it is a certainty which, on the one hand, no longer stands over and
against a subject matter confronting it externally but has interiorized it, is
knowingly aware that the subject matter is itself; and, on the other hand,
has relinquished any knowledge of itself that would oppose it to objectivity
and would reduce the latter to a nothing; it has externalized this subjectivity
and is at one with its externalization.
Now starting with this determination of pure knowledge, all that we have
to do to ensure that the beginning will remain immanent to the science
of this knowledge is to consider, or rather, setting aside every reflection,
simply to take up, what is there before us.
Pure knowledge, thus withdrawn into this unity, has sublated every
reference to an other and to mediation; it is without distinctions and as
thus distinctionless it ceases to be knowledge; what we have before us is
only simple immediacy.
Simple immediacy is itself an expression of reflection; it refers to the
distinction from what is mediated. The true expression of this simple
immediacy is therefore pure being. Just as pure knowledge should mean
nothing but knowledge as such, so also pure being should mean nothing
but being in general; being, and nothing else, without further determination
and filling.
Being is what makes the beginning here; it is presented indeed as originating through mediation, but a mediation which at the same time sublates
3

Cf above, 21.32.

21.55

21.56

48

21.57

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

itself, and the presupposition is of a pure knowledge which is the result
of finite knowledge, of consciousness. But if no presupposition is to be
made, if the beginning is itself to be taken immediately, then the only
determination of this beginning is that it is to be the beginning of logic, of
thought as such. There is only present the resolve, which can also be viewed
as arbitrary, of considering thinking as such. The beginning must then be
absolute or, what means the same here, must be an abstract beginning; and
so there is nothing that it may presuppose, must not be mediated by anything
or have a ground, ought to be rather itself the ground of the entire science.
It must therefore be simply an immediacy, or rather only immediacy itself.
Just as it cannot have any determination with respect to an other, so too it
cannot have any within; it cannot have any content, for any content would
entail distinction and the reference of distinct moments to each other, and
hence a mediation. The beginning is therefore pure being.
After this simple exposition of what alone first belongs to this simplest of
all simples, the logical beginning, we may add the following further reflections which should not serve, however, as elucidation and confirmation of
the exposition – this is complete by itself – but are rather occasioned by
notions and reflections which may come our way beforehand and yet, like
all other prejudices that antedate the science of logic, must be disposed
of within the science itself and are therefore to be patiently deferred until
then.
The insight that absolute truth must be a result, and conversely, that a
result presupposes a first truth which, because it is first, objectively considered is not necessary and from the subjective side is not known – this
insight has recently given rise to the thought that philosophy can begin only
with something which is hypothetically and problematically true, and that
at first, therefore, philosophizing can be only a quest. This is a view that
Reinhold has repeatedly urged in the later stages of his philosophizing,4
and which must be given credit for being motivated by a genuine interest
in the speculative nature of philosophical beginning. A critical examination
of this view will also be an occasion for introducing a preliminary understanding of what progression in logic generally means, for the view has
direct implications for the nature of this advance. Indeed, as portrayed by
it, progression in philosophy would be rather a retrogression and a grounding, only by virtue of which it then follows as result that that, with which
the beginning was made, was not just an arbitrary assumption but was in
fact the truth, and the first truth at that.
4

Reinhold, Beyträge I (1801), p. 101.

The Doctrine of Being

49

It must be admitted that it is an essential consideration – one which
will be found elaborated again within the logic itself – that progression is a
retreat to the ground, to the origin and the truth on which that with which
the beginning was made, and from which it is in fact produced, depends. –
Thus consciousness, on its forward path from the immediacy with which
it began, is led back to the absolute knowledge which is its innermost
truth. This truth, the ground, is then also that from which the original
first proceeds, the same first which at the beginning came on the scene as
something immediate. – It is most of all in this way that absolute spirit
(which is revealed as the concrete and supreme truth of all being) comes
to be known, as at the end of the development it freely externalizes itself,
letting itself go into the shape of an immediate being – resolving itself into
the creation of a world which contains all that fell within the development
preceding that result and which, through this reversal of position with
its beginning, is converted into something dependent on the result as
principle. Essential to science is not so much that a pure immediacy should
be the beginning, but that the whole of science is in itself a circle in which
the first becomes also the last, and the last also the first.
Conversely, it follows that it is just as necessary to consider as result that
into which the movement returns as to its ground. In this respect, the first
is just as much the ground, and the last a derivative; since the movement
makes its start from the first and by correct inferences arrives at the last as the
ground, this last is result. Further, the advance from that which constitutes
the beginning is to be considered only as one more determination of the
same advance, so that this beginning remains as the underlying ground of
all that follows without vanishing from it. The advance does not consist in
the derivation of an other, or in the transition to a truly other: inasmuch
as there is a transition, it is equally sublated again. Thus the beginning
of philosophy is the ever present and self-preserving foundation of all
subsequent developments, remaining everywhere immanent in its further
determinations.
In this advance the beginning thus loses the one-sidedness that it has
when determined simply as something immediate and abstract; it becomes
mediated, and the line of scientific forward movement consequently turns
into a circle. – It also follows that what constitutes the beginning, because it
is something still undeveloped and empty of content, is not yet truly known
at that beginning, and that only science, and science fully developed, is the
completed cognition of it, replete with content and finally truly grounded.
But for this reason, because it is as absolute ground that the result finally
emerges, the progression of this cognition is not anything provisory, still

21.58

50

21.59

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

problematic and hypothetical, but must be determined through the nature
of the matter at issue and of the content itself. Nor is the said beginning an
arbitrary and only temporary assumption,5 or something which seems to
be an arbitrary and tentative presupposition but of which it is subsequently
shown that to make it the starting point was indeed the right thing to do;
this is not as when we are instructed to make certain constructions in order
to aid the proof of a geometrical theorem, and only in retrospect, in the
course of the proof, does it become apparent that we did well to draw
precisely these lines and then, in the proof itself, to begin by comparing
them or the enclosed angles – though the line-drawing or the comparing
themselves escape conceptual comprehension.
So we have just given, right within science itself, the reason why in pure
science the beginning is made with pure being. This pure being is the unity
into which pure knowledge returns, or if this knowledge, as form, is itself
still to be kept distinct from its unity, then pure being is also its content.
It is in this respect that this pure being, this absolute immediate, is just as
absolutely mediated. However, just because it is here as the beginning, it is
just as essential that it should be taken in the one-sidedness of being purely
immediate. If it were not this pure indeterminacy, if it were determined, it
would be taken as something mediated, would already be carried further
than itself: a determinate something has the character of an other with
respect to a first. It thus lies in the nature of a beginning itself that it should
be being and nothing else. There is no need, therefore, of other preparations
to enter philosophy, no need of further reflections or access points.
Nor can we derive a more specific determination or a more positive content
for the beginning of philosophy from the fact that it is such a beginning.6
For here, at the beginning, where the fact itself is not yet at hand, philosophy
is an empty word, a received and yet unjustified notion. Pure knowledge
yields only this negative determination, namely that the beginning ought
to be abstract. If pure being is taken as the content of pure knowledge,
then the latter must step back from its content, allowing it free play and
without determining it further. – Or again, inasmuch as pure being is
to be considered as the unity into which knowledge has collapsed when
at the highest point of union with its objectification, knowledge has then
disappeared into this unity, leaving behind no distinction from it and hence
no determination for it. – Nor is there anything else present, any content
whatever, that could be used to make a more determinate beginning with
it.
5

i.e. as Reinhold thought.

6

The allusion is still to Reinhold.

The Doctrine of Being

51

But, it may be said, the determination of being assumed so far as the
beginning can also be let go, so that the only requirement would be that a
pure beginning should be made. Nothing would then be at hand except the
beginning itself, and we must see what this would be. – This position could
be suggested also for the benefit of those who are either not comfortable,
for whatever reason, with beginning with being and even less with the
transition into nothing that follows from being, or who simply do not
know how else to make a beginning in a science except by presupposing
a representation which is subsequently analyzed, the result of the analysis
then yielding the first determinate concept in the science. If we also want
to test this strategy, we must relinquish every particular object that we may
intend, since the beginning, as the beginning of thought, is meant to be
entirely abstract, entirely general, all form with no content; we must have
nothing, therefore, except the representation of a mere beginning as such.
We have, therefore, only to see what there is in this representation.
As yet there is nothing, and something is supposed to become. The
beginning is not pure nothing but a nothing, rather, from which something
is to proceed; also being, therefore, is already contained in the beginning.
Therefore, the beginning contains both, being and nothing; it is the unity
of being and nothing, or is non-being which is at the same time being, and
being which is at the same time non-being.
Further, being and nothing are present in the beginning as distinguished;
for the beginning points to something other – it is a non-being which refers
to an other; that which begins, as yet is not; it only reaches out to being.
The being contained in the beginning is such, therefore, that it distances
itself from non-being or sublates it as something which is opposed to it.
But further, that which begins already is, but is also just as much not yet.
The opposites, being and non-being, are therefore in immediate union in
it; or the beginning is their undifferentiated unity.
An analysis of the beginning would thus yield the concept of the unity of
being and non-being – or, in a more reflected form, the concept of the unity
of differentiated and undifferentiated being – or of the identity of identity
and non-identity.7 This concept could be regarded as the first, purest, that
is, most abstract, definition of the absolute – as it would indeed be if the
issue were just the form of definitions and the name of the absolute. In this
sense, just as such an abstract concept would be the first definition of the
absolute, so all further determinations and developments would be only
7

This is Hegel’s earliest formulation of his position. Cf. The Difference Between Fichte’s and Schelling’s
System of Philosophy (1801), p. 156. GW 4, 6.23.7–21.

21.60

21.61

52

21.62

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

more determinate and richer definitions of it. But let those who are not
satisfied with being as the beginning, since being passes over into nothing
and what emerges is the unity of the two – let them consider what is more
likely to satisfy them: this beginning that begins with the representation
of the beginning and an analysis of it (an analysis that is indeed correct yet
equally leads to the unity of being and non-being) or a beginning which
makes being the beginning.
But, regarding this strategy, there is still a further observation to be made.
The said analysis presupposes that the representation of the beginning is
known; its strategy follows the example of other sciences. These presuppose
their object and presume that everyone has the same representation of it and
will find in it roughly the same determinations which they have collected
here or there, through analysis, comparison, and sundry argumentation,
and they then offer as its representations. But that which constitutes the
absolute beginning must likewise be something otherwise known; now,
if it is something concrete and hence in itself variously determined, then
this connectedness which it is in itself is presupposed as a known; the connectedness is thereby adduced as something immediate, which however it is
not; for it is connectedness only as a connection of distinct elements and
therefore contains mediation within itself. Further, the accidentality and
the arbitrariness of the analysis and the specific mode of determination
affect the concrete internally. Which determinations are elicited depends
on what each individual happens to discover in his immediate accidental
representation. The connection contained within a concrete something,
within a synthetic unity, is necessary only in so far as it is not found already
given but is produced rather by the spontaneous return of the moments
back into this unity, a movement which is the opposite of the analytical
procedure that occurs rather within the subject and is external to the fact
itself.
Here we then have the precise reason why that with which the beginning is to be made cannot be anything concrete, anything containing a
connection within its self. It is because, as such, it would presuppose within
itself a process of mediation and the transition from a first to an other, of
which process the concrete something, now become a simple, would be
the result. But the beginning ought not itself to be already a first and an
other, for anything which is in itself a first and an other implies that an
advance has already been made. Consequently, that which constitutes the
beginning, the beginning itself, is to be taken as something unanalyzable,
taken in its simple, unfilled immediacy; and therefore as being, as complete
emptiness.

The Doctrine of Being

53

If, impatient with this talk of an abstract beginning, one should say that
the beginning is to be made, not with the beginning, but directly with the
fact itself, well then, this subject matter is nothing else than that empty
being. For what this subject matter is, that is precisely what ought to result
only in the course of the science, what the latter cannot presuppose to
know in advance.
On any other form otherwise assumed in an effort to have a beginning
other than empty being, that beginning would still suffer from the same
defects. Let those who are still dissatisfied with this beginning take upon
themselves the challenge of beginning in some other way and yet avoiding
such defects.
But we cannot leave entirely unmentioned a more original beginning
to philosophy which has recently gained notoriety, the beginning with the
“I.”8 It derived from both the reflection that all that follows from the first
truth must be deduced from it, and the need that this first truth should be
something with which one is already acquainted, and even more than just
acquainted, something of which one is immediately certain. This proposed
beginning is not, as such, an accidental representation, or one which might
be one thing to one subject and something else to another. For the “I,” this
immediate consciousness of the self, appears from the start to be both itself
an immediate something and something with which we are acquainted in a
much deeper sense than with any other representation; true, anything else
known belongs to this “I,” but it belongs to it as a content which remains
distinct from it and is therefore accidental; the “I,” by contrast, is the simple
certainty of its self. But the “I” is, as such, at the same time also a concrete,
or rather, the “I” is the most concrete of all things – the consciousness of
itself as an infinitely manifold world. Before the “I” can be the beginning
and foundation of philosophy, this concreteness must be excised, and this
is the absolute act by virtue of which the “I” purifies itself and makes its
entrance into consciousness as abstract “I.” But this pure “I” is now not
immediate, is not the familiar, ordinary “I” of our consciousness to which
everyone immediately links science. Truly, that act of excision would be
none other than the elevation to the standpoint of pure knowledge in
which the distinction between subject and object has disappeared. But
as thus immediately demanded, this elevation is a subjective postulate;
before it proves itself as a valid demand, the progression of the concrete “I”
from immediate consciousness to pure knowledge must be demonstratively
exhibited within the “I” itself, through its own necessity. Without this
8

The reference here is to Fichte. Cf. Wissenschaftslehre (1794), §1.

21.63

54

21.64

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

objective movement, pure knowledge, also when defined as intellectual
intuition, appears as an arbitrary standpoint, itself one of those empirical
states of consciousness for which everything depends on whether someone,
though not necessarily somebody else, discovers it within himself or is able
to produce it there. But inasmuch as this pure “I” must be essential, pure
knowledge – and pure knowledge is however one which is only posited in
individual consciousness through an absolute act of self-elevation, is not
present in it immediately – we lose the very advantage which was to derive
from this beginning of philosophy, namely that it is something with which
everyone is well acquainted, something which everyone finds within himself
and to which he can attach further reflection; that pure “I,” on the contrary,
in its abstract, essential nature, is to ordinary consciousness an unknown,
something that the latter does not find within itself. What comes with it is
rather the disadvantage of the illusion that we are speaking of something
supposedly very familiar, the “I” of empirical self-consciousness, whereas
at issue is in fact something far removed from the latter. Determining
pure knowledge as “I” acts as a continuing reminder of the subjective “I”
whose limitations should rather be forgotten; it leads to the belief that
the propositions and relations which result from the further development
of the “I” occur within ordinary consciousness and can be found pregiven there, indeed that the whole issue is about this consciousness. This
mistake, far from bringing clarity, produces instead an even more glaring
and bewildering confusion; among the public at large, it has occasioned
the crudest of misunderstandings.
Further, as regards the subjective determinateness of the “I” in general,
pure knowledge does remove from it the restriction that it has when understood as standing in unsurmountable opposition to an object. But for this
reason it would be at least superfluous still to hold on to this subjective
attitude by determining pure knowledge as “I.” For this determination not
only carries with it that troublesome duality of subject and object; on closer
examination, it also remains a subjective “I.” The actual development of
the science that proceeds from the “I” shows that in the course of it the
object has and retains the self-perpetuating determination of an other with
respect to the “I”; that therefore the “I” from which the start was made
does not have the pure knowledge that has truly overcome the opposition
of consciousness, but is rather still entangled in appearance.
In this connection, there is the further essential observation to be made
that, although the “I” might well be determined to be in itself pure knowledge or intellectual intuition and declared to be the beginning, in science
we are not concerned with what is present in itself or as something inner, but

The Doctrine of Being

55

with the external existence9 rather of what in thought is inner and with the
determinateness which this inner assumes in that existence. But whatever
externalization there might be of10 intellectual intuition at the beginning of
science, or – if the subject matter of science is called the eternal, the divine,
the absolute – of the eternal or absolute, this cannot be anything else than a
first, immediate, simple determination. Whatever richer name be given to
it than is expressed by mere being, the only legitimate consideration is how
such an absolute enters into discursive11 knowledge and the enunciation of
this knowledge. Intellectual intuition might well be the violent rejection
of mediation and of demonstrative, external reflection. However, anything
which it says over and above simple immediacy would be something concrete, and this concrete would contain a diversity of determinations in it.
But, as already remarked, the enunciation and exposition of this concrete
something is a process of mediation which starts with one of the determinations and proceeds to another, even though this other returns to the first –
and this is a movement which, moreover, is not allowed to be arbitrary
or assertoric. Consequently, that from which the beginning is made in any
such exposition is not something itself concrete but only the simple immediacy from which the movement proceeds. Besides, what is lacking if we
make something concrete the beginning is the demonstration which the
combination of the determinations contained in it requires.
Therefore, if in the expression of the absolute, or the eternal, or God (and
God would have the perfectly undisputed right that the beginning be made
with him), if in the intuition or the thought of them, there is more than
there is in pure being, then this more should first emerge in a knowledge
which is discursive12 and not figurative;13 as rich as what is implicitly
contained in knowledge may be, the determination that first emerges in
it is something simple, for it is only in the immediate that no advance is
yet made from one thing to an other. Consequently, whatever in the richer
representations of the absolute or God might be said or implied over and
above being, all this is at the beginning only an empty word and only
being; this simple determination which has no further meaning besides,
this empty something, is as such, therefore, the beginning of philosophy.
This insight is itself so simple that this beginning is as beginning in
no need of any preparation or further introduction, and the only possible
purpose of this preliminary disquisition regarding it was not to lead up to
it but to dispense rather with all preliminaries.
9
11

external existence = Dasein.
12 denkendes.
denkende.

10
13

whatever externalization there might be of = was vom . . . da ist.
vorstellendes.

21.65

21.66

56

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
general division of being

21.67

Being is determined, first, as against another in general; secondly, it is
internally self-determining; thirdly, as this preliminary division is cast off,
it is the abstract indeterminateness and immediacy in which it must be the
beginning.
According to the first determination, being partitions itself off from
essence, for further on in its development it proves to be in its totality only
one sphere of the concept, and to this sphere as moment it opposes another
sphere.
According to the second, it is the sphere within which fall the determinations and the entire movement of its reflection. In this, being will posit
itself in three determinations:
I. as determinateness; as such, quality;
II. as sublated determinateness; magnitude, quantity;
III. as qualitatively determined quantity; measure.
This division, as was generally remarked of such divisions in the
Introduction,14 is here a preliminary statement; its determinations must
first arise from the movement of being itself, and receive their definitions
and justification by virtue of it. As regards the divergence of this division
from the usual listing of the categories, namely quantity, quality, relation
and modality – for Kant, incidentally, these are supposed to be only classifications of his categories, but are in fact themselves categories, only more
abstract ones15 – about this, there is nothing to remark here, since the entire
listing will diverge from the usual ordering and meaning of the categories
at every point.
This only can perhaps be remarked, that the determination of quantity
is ordinarily listed ahead of quality and as a rule this is done for no given
reason. It has already been shown that the beginning is made with being
as such, and hence with qualitative being. It is clear from a comparison
of quality with quantity that the former is by nature first. For quantity is
quality which has already become negative; magnitude is the determinateness which, no longer one with being but already distinguished from it, is
the sublated quality that has become indifferent. It includes the alterability of being without altering the fact itself, namely being, of which it is
the determination; qualitative determinateness is on the contrary one with
its being, it neither transcends it nor stays within it but is its immediate
14

Cf. above, 21.38 and 39.

15

Cf A80/B106, B110.

The Doctrine of Being

57

restrictedness. Hence quality, as the determinateness which is immediate,
is the first and it is with it that the beginning is to be made.
Measure is a relation, not relation in general but specifically of quality
and quantity to each other; the categories dealt with by Kant under relation
will come up elsewhere in their proper place.16 Measure, if one so wishes,
can be considered also a modality; but since with Kant modality is no
longer supposed to make up a determination of content, but only concerns
the reference of the content to thought, to the subjective, the result is a
totally heterogeneous reference that does not belong here.17
The third determination of being falls within the section Quality inasmuch as being, as abstract immediacy, reduces itself to one single determinateness as against its other determinacies inside its sphere.
16
17

Cf. below, 11.394–409.
There is an almost imperceptible, yet very important difference here between the 1812 and the 1832
edition. In the earlier text, Kant is not mentioned at all, but Hegel seems to accept what is in fact
his position regarding modality. In the present text, Kant’s position is explicitly mentioned, but
Hegel distances himself from it. For the importance of this change, see the editor’s “Introduction.”
Cf. A219/B266.

21.68

section i

Determinateness (Quality)

Being is the indeterminate immediate; it is free of determinateness with
respect to essence, just as it is still free of any determinateness that it can
receive within itself. This reflectionless being is being as it immediately is
only within.
Since it is immediate, it is being without quality; but the character
of indeterminateness attaches to it in itself only in opposition to what is
determinate or qualitative. Determinate being thus comes to stand over and
against being in general; with that, however, the very indeterminateness
of being constitutes its quality. It will therefore be shown that the first
being is in itself determinate, and therefore, secondly, that it passes over
into existence, is existence; that this latter, however, as finite being, sublates
itself and passes over into the infinite reference of being to itself; it passes
over, thirdly, into being-for-itself.

58

c h a p ter 1

Being

a. being
Being, pure being – without further determination. In its indeterminate
immediacy it is equal only to itself and also not unequal with respect to
another; it has no difference within it, nor any outwardly. If any determination or content were posited in it as distinct, or if it were posited by this
determination or content as distinct from an other, it would thereby fail to
hold fast to its purity. It is pure indeterminateness and emptiness. – There
is nothing to be intuited in it, if one can speak here of intuiting; or, it is
only this pure empty intuiting itself. Just as little is anything to be thought
in it, or, it is equally only this empty thinking. Being, the indeterminate
immediate is in fact nothing, and neither more nor less than nothing.
b. nothing
Nothing, pure nothingness; it is simple equality with itself, complete emptiness, complete absence of determination and content; lack of all distinction
within. – In so far as mention can be made here of intuiting and thinking,
it makes a difference whether something or nothing is being intuited or
thought. To intuit or to think nothing has therefore a meaning; the two
are distinguished and so nothing is (concretely exists) in our intuiting or
thinking; or rather it is the empty intuiting and thinking itself, like pure
being. – Nothing is therefore the same determination or rather absence of
determination, and thus altogether the same as what pure being is.
c. becoming
1. Unity of being and nothing
Pure being and pure nothing are therefore the same. The truth is neither
being nor nothing, but rather that being has passed over into nothing and
59

21.69

60

21.70

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

nothing into being – “has passed over,” not passes over. But the truth is
just as much that they are not without distinction; it is rather that they are
not the same, that they are absolutely distinct yet equally unseparated and
inseparable, and that each immediately vanishes in its opposite. Their truth
is therefore this movement of the immediate vanishing of the one into the
other: becoming, a movement in which the two are distinguished, but by a
distinction which has just as immediately dissolved itself.
Remark 1
It is customary to oppose nothing to something. Something is however
already a determinate existent that distinguishes itself from another something; consequently, the nothing which is being opposed to something
is also the nothing of a certain something, a determinate nothing. Here,
however, the nothing is to be taken in its indeterminate simplicity. – If it
is deemed more correct to oppose non-being to being, instead of nothing,
there is no objection to this as regards the result, since in non-being there is
contained the reference to being. Non-being is both, being and its negation
as said in one: nothing as it is in becoming. But the issue first of all is not
the form of opposition, which is at the same time the form of reference, but
the abstract, immediate negation, the nothing purely for itself, negation
devoid of reference – and this can also be expressed, if one so wishes, simply
by saying “nothing.”
The Eleatics were the first to give voice to the simple thought of pure
being – notable among them Parmenides, who declared it to be the absolute and sole truth. In his surviving fragments, he did it with the pure
enthusiasm of thought which has for the first time apprehended itself in its
absolute abstraction: only being is, and nothing is not absolutely.18 – In the
oriental systems, essentially in Buddhism, it is well known that nothing,
the void, is the absolute principle. – Against that simple and one-sided
abstraction, the profound Heraclitus proposed the loftier, total concept of
becoming and said: being is no more than nothing; or also, all flows, that
is, all is becoming.19 – The popular proverbs, particularly the oriental ones,
that all that exists has the germ of death in its very birth, that death is
on the other hand the entrance into a new life, express at bottom the
same union of being and nothing. But these expressions have a substrate in
which the transition takes place; being and nothing are held apart in time,
represented as alternating in it; they are not thought in their abstraction
and also, therefore, not so that they are the same in and for themselves.
18

Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics, 986b.28–29.

19

Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics, 985b7–8.

Being

61

Ex nihilo, nihil fit – is one of the propositions to which great significance
was attributed in metaphysics. The proposition is either to be viewed as just
a barren tautology, nothing is nothing, or, if becoming is supposed to have
real meaning in it, then, since only nothing comes from nothing, there is in
fact none in it, for the nothing remains nothing in it. Becoming entails that
nothing not remain nothing, but that it pass over into its other, being. –
Later metaphysics, especially the Christian, rejected the proposition that
out of nothing comes nothing, thus asserting a transition from nothing
into being; no matter how synthetically or merely imaginatively it took
this proposition, there is yet even in the most incomplete unification of
being and nothing a point at which they meet, and their distinguishedness
vanishes. – The proposition, nothing comes from nothing, nothing is just
nothing, owes its particular importance to its opposition to becoming in
general and hence also to the creation of the world out of nothing. Those
who zealously hold firm to the proposition, nothing is just nothing, are
unaware that in so doing they are subscribing to the abstract pantheism of
the Eleatics and essentially also to that of Spinoza. The philosophical view
that accepts as principle that being is only being, nothing only nothing,
deserves the name of “system of identity”; this abstract identity is the
essence of pantheism.
If the result that being and nothing are the same seems inherently
startling or paradoxical, there is not much to be done about it. We should
be amazed rather at this amazement that appears so refreshing in philosophy
but forgets that the determinations that occur in this science of logic are
quite different from those of so-called common sense – which is not exactly
sound understanding but an understanding schooled rather in abstractions
and in the belief in abstractions, or more accurately in the superstitious
belief in them. It would not be difficult to demonstrate the unity of being
and nothing in every example, in every actual thing or thought. The same
must be said of being and nothing as was said above of immediacy and
mediation (which contain a reference to each other and hence negation),
that nowhere on heaven or on earth is there anything which does not contain
both being and nothing in itself.20 To be sure, since we are speaking here
of a certain something and a certain actual thing, those determinations are
no longer present in the complete untruth in which they are as being and
nothing; they are rather present in some more advanced determination
and are grasped, for example, as positive or negative, the one as reflected
being and the other as reflected nothing; but the positive contains being
20

Cf. above, 21.54.

21.71

21.72

62

21.73

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

and the negative contains nothing, as their abstract foundation. – Thus
even in God quality carries essentially the determination of the negative:
activity, creation, power, and so forth, are the bringing forth of an other.
But an empirical elucidation of the claim by means of examples would be
entirely superfluous here. For from now on this unity of being and nothing
will stand once and for all as foundation, as first truth, and will thus
constitute the element of all that follows. All further logical determinations
besides becoming itself (existence, quality, and in general all the concepts
of philosophy) are therefore examples of this unity. – As for that sense that
styles itself as common or sound, if it rejects the inseparability of being
and nothing, let it try to produce an example in which the one is found
separate from the other (let it separate something from limit or limitation,
or, as just said, the infinite, God, from activity). Only the empty figments
of thought, being and nothing, only these, are separate things, and they
are the ones which are accorded priority by common sense over the truth,
the inseparability of the two which is everywhere before us.
We cannot hope to address all the confusions in which ordinary consciousness lands itself in connection with this logical proposition, for they
are inexhaustible. Only a few can be cited. One cause among others of
such confusions is that consciousness brings with it, to such an abstract
logical proposition, the figure of some concrete thing, forgetting that the
issue here is not anything concrete but only the pure abstractions of being
and nothing and that these alone are to be held firmly in mind.
Being and non-being are the same; therefore it is the same whether I am
or am not, whether this house is or is not, whether these hundred dollars
are in my possession or not. – This conclusion from the proposition,
or this application of it, alters its meaning completely. The proposition
contains the pure abstractions of being and nothing; but the application
makes of them a determinate being and a determinate nothing. But, as
we have said, determinate being is not an issue here. A determinate, a
finite being, is one that refers to another; it is a content that stands in the
relation of necessity to another content, to the whole world. As regards
the reciprocal determinations that hold the whole together, metaphysics
could make the basically tautological claim that if one speck of dust were
destroyed the whole universe would collapse. In the instances adduced
against our proposition, something appears as not indifferent to whether it
is or is not, not on account of being or non-being, but because of its content
which connects it with some other content. If a determinate content, some
determinate being, is presupposed, this being, since it is determinate, stands
in manifold reference to another content. It is not a matter of indifference

Being

63

to it whether a certain other content to which it refers is or is not, for
only through such a referring is it essentially what it is. The same applies
to representing (inasmuch as we take non-being in the determinate sense
of representing as contrasted with actuality). In this case the being or the
absence of a content, which is a determinate representation that refers to
another, is not a matter of indifference. –
This observation already contains what constitutes a capital point in the
Kantian critique of the ontological proof of God’s existence, although we
only consider it here with reference to the distinction that comes up in it
of being and nothing in general and of determinate being or non-being. –
As we know, that so-called proof presupposed the concept of a being that
possesses all realities, including therefore concrete existence, which it likewise
assumed as one of the realities. Kant’s critique took mainly the line that
existence or being (the two taken here as synonymous) is not a property or a
real predicate, that is to say, not a concept of something that can be added
to the concept of a thing.g – What Kant means to say is that being is not
a content determination. – Therefore, he goes on, the possible does not
contain more than the actual; a hundred actual dollars do not contain a whit
more than a hundred possible ones;21 – that is, the actual one hundred have
no other content determination than the possible. And in fact, considered
in isolation, it is a matter of indifference to this content whether it is or is
not; there is no distinction of being and non-being in it, this distinction
does not affect it at all; the one hundred dollars do not become less if they
do not exist, or more if they do. Any distinction would have to originate
from elsewhere. – “But in my financial state,” Kant reminds us, “there
is more to a hundred actual dollars than there is to the mere concept of
them (that is, their possibility). For with actuality the intended object is not
merely included in my concept analytically, but is synthetically added to my
concept (which is a determination of my state), without the thought itself of
the hundred dollars being in the least increased by this being which they
have outside my concept.”22
Here two kinds of “states” (to retain Kantian expressions which are
not free of a confused awkwardness) are presupposed: one that Kant calls
“concept,” by which we must understand “representation”; and another,
my “financial state.” For the one as for the other, for the finances and
the representation, the hundred dollars are a content determination, or
g
21
22

Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, 2nd edn, pp. 628ff.
A598/B626–A599/B627. The following dash, presumably, is to set off Hegel’s own gloss on the
paraphrase of Kant’s own words.
A599/B627.

21.74

64

21.75

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

“they are added to each synthetically,” as Kant puts it. “I,” as possessing a
hundred dollars or as not possessing them, or again, “I,” as representing
a hundred dollars to myself or as not representing them, is of course a
different content. Stated more generally: the abstractions of being and
nothing both cease to be abstractions by receiving a determinate content;
being is then reality, the determinate being of one hundred dollars; and
nothing is negation, the determinate non-being of the same dollars. This
determinate content itself, the hundred dollars, also abstracted by itself, is
unaltered the same in the one as in the other. But when being is further
taken as a financial state, the hundred dollars refer to this state, and for this
state their determinate content is not a matter of indifference; their being
or non-being is only an alteration; they are transposed into the sphere of
existence. When it is therefore urged against the unity of being and nothing
that it is not a matter of indifference whether this or that (the hundred
dollars) are or are not, the deception is to project the difference, whether
I have or do not have the hundred dollars, into the difference merely of
being and non-being. And this is a deception, as we have shown, based on
a one-sided abstraction that leaves out the determinate existence present in
such examples and retains only being and non-being; just as, conversely, it
transforms the abstract being and non-being that should be apprehended
into a determinate being or non-being, into an existence. Only existence
contains the real distinction of being and nothing, namely, a something
and an other. – This real distinction is the one that comes to mind in
representation instead of that of abstract being and nothing and their
merely intended distinction.
As Kant puts it, “through existence something enters into the context of
the whole experience . . . We obtain one more object of perception, but our
concept of the intended object is not thereby augmented.”23 – This only
means, as follows from our explanation, that through existence, essentially
because something is a determinate existence, this something is in relationship to others, and also to a perceiver among these others. – “The concept
of a hundred dollars,” Kant says, “is not augmented through perception.”24
By “concept” is meant here the above noted hundred dollars represented in
isolation. As so isolated, these dollars are indeed an empirical content, but
cut off, without connection or determinateness as against something else;
their form of immediate self-identity deprives them of external connection
and makes them indifferent to whether they are perceived or not. This
so-called concept of a hundred dollars is however a false concept; the form
23

A599/B627–A600/B628.

24

A599/B627.

Being

65

of simple self-reference does not belong to such a limited, finite content
itself; it is a form on loan to it, like a dress, by a subjective understanding;
a “hundred dollars” is nothing self-referring but something alterable and
perishable.
This thinking or imagining which has before it only a determinate being,
existence, must be referred back to the previously mentioned beginning of
science which Parmenides made – the one who purified and elevated to
pure thought, to being as such, his own otherwise pictorial representations
and hence also those of posterity, thus ushering in the element of science. –
What is the first in science had of necessity to show itself to be the first
historically. And we must regard the one or the being of the Eleatics as
the first instance of knowledge by thought. Water and suchlike material
principles are indeed meant to be the universal even though, as things
material, they are not pure thoughts; numbers are neither the first simple,
nor the self-abiding thought,25 but thought rather which is entirely selfexternal.
The move from particular finite being to being as such in its totally
abstract universality is to be regarded not only as the very first theoretical
demand but also as the very first practical one. For when a lot of fuss
is made about the hundred dollars, that it does make a difference to my
financial state whether I have them or not, still more whether I am or am
not or something else is or is not, we can then be reminded that the human
being (quite apart from such financial situations in which the possession
of a hundred dollars will in fact be a matter of indifference) ought to raise
his mind to this abstract universality in which it is in fact indifferent to
him whether the hundred dollars, whatever the quantitative relation that
they might have to his financial state, are or are not; just as it would be
indifferent to him whether he himself is or is not, that is, whether he is or
is not in finite life (by which is meant a state, a determinate being), and
so on. Si fractus illabatur orbis, impavidum ferient ruinæ, a Roman even
said,26 and still more ought the Christian to find himself in this state of
indifference.
Still to be noted is the immediate connection between, on the one hand,
the elevation above the hundred dollars and finite things generally, and, on
the other hand, the ontological proof and the mentioned Kantian criticism
of it. This criticism, because of its popular example, has won universal
plausibility. Who does not know that a hundred actual dollars are different
25
26

bey sich bleibende.
Flaccus: Carminum liber tertium. Ode III, verse 7–8. “If the world were to fall to pieces, the ruins
would still sustain the undaunted.”

21.76

66

21.77

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

from a hundred merely possible dollars and that they make a difference to
my financial situation? This difference is easily demonstrable in the case of
the hundred dollars: therefore, the concept, that is, the determinateness of
the content as empty possibility, and being are different from each other;
therefore, the concept of God and his being are also different, and just as
I cannot extract from the possibility of the hundred dollars their actuality,
I can just as little “extract”27 God’s existence from his concept. But the
ontological proof consists precisely in thus extracting God’s existence from
his concept. Now, though there is of course truth to the claim that the
concept is different from being, God’s difference from the hundred dollars
and other finite things is yet greater. It is the definition of finite things that
in them concept and being are different; that the concept and reality, soul
and body, are separable; that they are therefore perishable and mortal. The
abstract definition of God, on the contrary, is precisely that his concept and
his being are unseparated and inseparable. The true critique of the categories
and of reason28 is just this: to acquaint cognition with this distinction and
to prevent it from applying to God the determinations and the relations of
the finite.
Remark 2
Yet another reason can be cited that helps to explain the resistance to the
proposition about being and nothing. This reason is that, as expressed in
the proposition “being and nothing are one and the same,” the result of
considering being and nothing is incomplete. The accent falls primarily on
the being-one-and-the-same, as is the case in judgment generally, where the
predicate says what the subject is. Consequently, the sense seems to be that
the distinction is denied which yet patently occurs in the proposition at the
same time; for the proposition says both determinations, being and nothing, and contains them as distinguished. – At the same time, the meaning
cannot be that abstraction ought to be made from the two determinations
and only their unity retained. This sense would be manifestly one-sided,
since that from which abstraction would be made is equally present in the
proposition and explicitly named there. – Now, in so far as the proposition
“being and nothing are the same” expresses the identity of these determinations, yet in fact equally contains the two as distinguished, it internally
contradicts itself and thus dissolves itself. And if we concentrate on this
result, what we have before us is a proposition which, on closer inspection,
27
28

Cf. A603/B631.
Kant’s critical work was in his day generically referred to as “the critique of reason.”

Being

67

turns out to vanish spontaneously. It has movement. But in thus vanishing,
it is its proper content which comes to be in it, namely becoming.
The proposition thus contains the result; it is this result implicit in it. But
the circumstance to which we must pay attention here is the defect that
this result is not itself expressed in the proposition; it is external reflection
that recognizes it there. – In this connection, we must observe right at the
beginning that the proposition, in the form of a judgment, is not adept
to express speculative truths; recognition of this circumstance would go
a long way in preventing many misunderstandings of speculative truths.
Judgment joins subject and object in a connection of identity; abstraction
is therefore made from the fact that the subject has yet more determinacies
than the predicate has, just as that the predicate is wider than the subject.
Now, if the content is speculative, the non-identity of subject and predicate
is also an essential moment; but this is not expressed in judgment. The
paradoxical and even bizarre light in which much of recent philosophy is
cast for those not intimate with speculative thought is due in many ways to
the form of the simple judgment when used to convey speculative results.
For the purpose of expressing the speculative truth, the defect is first
remedied by adding the contrary proposition, namely “being and nothing
are not the same,” which we also stated above. But another defect then
crops up, for these propositions are disconnected and therefore present
their content only in an antinomy, whereas the content refers to one and
the same thing, and the determinations expressed in the two propositions
should be united absolutely – in a union which can then only be said to
be an unrest of simultaneous incompatibles, a movement. The commonest
injustice done to a speculative content is to render it one-sidedly, that is,
to give prominence only to one of the propositions in which it can be
resolved. This proposition is then undeniably asserted; but the statement
is just as false as it is correct, for once one proposition is taken out of its
speculative context, the other also must be given at least as much attention
and articulation. – Attention must also be drawn at this point to, so to
speak, the unfortunate word “unity.” “Unity,” even more so than identity,
designates a subjective reflection. It is normally taken as a connection that
arises from comparison, from external reflection. Inasmuch as this reflection
finds the same thing in two different subject matters, a unity is there with
respect to which complete indifference is presupposed on the part of the
subject matters compared, so that the comparing and the unity do not touch
these subject matters themselves but are rather a doing and a determining
external to them. Unity thus expresses a totally abstract sameness, and it
will sound all the harsher and the more discordant the more the terms of

21.78

21.79

68

21.80

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which it is asserted show themselves to be utterly distinct. For this reason it
would therefore be better to say simply unseparatedness and inseparability;
but then the affirmative aspect of the connection of the whole would not
be expressed.
So the whole true result that we have here before us is becoming, but a
becoming which is not the merely one-sided or abstract unity of being and
nothing. It consists rather in this movement, that pure being is immediate
and simple and for that very reason is just as much pure nothing; that
the distinction between them is, but equally sublates itself and is not. This
result does also assert, therefore, the distinction of being and nothing, but
it asserts it as one which is merely intended.
The ordinary assumption is that being is the absolutely other of nothing,
and that there is nothing as clear as this absolute distinction; indeed,
nothing seems easier than being able to state it. But it is just as easy to
convince oneself that this is impossible, that the distinction is unsayable. Let
those who insist on the distinction of being and nothing, let them just try to state
in what the distinction consists. If being and nothing had any determinateness
differentiating them, then, as we said, they would be determinate being
and determinate nothing, not the pure being and the pure nothing which
they still are at this point. Their distinction is therefore completely empty,
each is as indeterminate as the other; the distinction depends, therefore,
not on them but on a third element, on intention. But intention is a
form of subjectivity, and subjectivity does not belong to the present order
of exposition. The third element in which being and nothing have their
subsistence must however also be present here; and it is present indeed, it is
becoming. In becoming, they are present as distinct; becoming only occurs
to the extent that they are distinguished. This third is an other than they –
they subsist only in an other, which is equivalent to saying that they do not
subsist on their own. Becoming equally is the subsistence of being and of
non-being; or their subsistence is only their being in a one; precisely this,
their subsistence in a one, is that which equally sublates their distinction.
The challenge to produce the distinction between being and nothing also
brings with it the challenge to state what, then, is being, and what is nothing.
Those who resist acknowledging that the two are equally only a transition of
the one into the other, and who assert this or that about being and nothing,
let them declare whereof they speak, that is, let them advance a definition
of being and nothing, and let them demonstrate that it is correct. Without
having satisfied this first demand of the ancient science, whose logical
rules they otherwise accept and apply, all their assertions about being and
nothing are only assurances without scientific validity. If it has somewhere

Being

69

been said that existence,29 which is held from the start to be equivalent to
being, is the completion of possibility, then another determination, namely
possibility, is presupposed along with it; so being is not declared in its
immediacy but precisely as not standing on its own, as conditioned. For
being which is mediated, we shall reserve the expression concrete existence.30
But the common practice is to imagine being, as if it were a picture of
pure light, the clarity of unclouded seeing, and then nothing as the pure
night – and the distinction between the two is then enshrined into this wellknown sensuous difference. But in fact, if this very seeing is more accurately
imagined, one can readily perceive that in absolute light one sees just as
much and just as little as in absolute darkness; that the one seeing is just as
good as the other; that pure seeing is a seeing of nothing. Pure light and pure
darkness are two voids that amount to the same thing. Only in determinate
light (and light is determined through darkness: in clouded light therefore),
just as only in determinate darkness (and darkness is determined through
light: in illuminated darkness therefore), can something be distinguished,
since only clouded light and illuminated darkness have distinction in them
and hence are determinate being, existence.
Remark 3
The unity, whose moments, being and nothing, are inseparable, is at the
same time different from these moments. It thus stands as a third with
respect to them – a third which, in its most proper form, is becoming.
Transition is the same as becoming except that the two terms, from one
of which the transition is made to the other, are represented in it more as
at rest, outside each other, the transition occurring between them. Now,
wherever and however being or nothing are at issue, this third must be there;
for the two have no subsistence on their own but are only in becoming,
in this third. But this third has various empirical shapes that abstraction
either sets aside or neglects for the sake of holding fast to its two products,
being and nothing, each for itself, and showing them as protected against
29

30

“I define existence as the complement of possibility.” Wolff, Philosophia prima, sive ontologia (1736),
§174. Hegel uses here the term “Existenz,” which I normally translate as “concrete existence” to
differentiate it from “Dasein.” See the note immediately following.
For the distinction between Existenz and Dasein, see “Issues of translation” in the editor’s “Translator’s note.” To be noted here is that both terms signify “being” as determinate and therefore as
mediated. But the difference is whether the mediation is explicitly expressed within the structure of
the logical object itself (as it is the case with Existenz, which explicitly refers to “essence”) or is only
immediately present there (as it is the case with Dasein). I translate Existenz as “concrete existence”
because of the immediately preceding mention of “possibility” that definitely places it within the
realm of “essence,” which is the realm of explicit mediation.

21.81

70

21.82

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

transition. Such a simple manoeuver of abstraction can be countered, with
equal ease, simply by pointing to the empirical concrete existence in which
that abstraction itself is only a something, has a determinate existence.
Or else it is by virtue of other forms of reflection that this separation of
the inseparable would be held fixed. But in any such determination of
reflection, its opposite is present within it in and for itself, and it is thus
possible to refute it on its own terms without going back to the nature of the
fact and appealing to it, by taking the determination as it presents itself, and
by pointing to its other in it. It would be labor in vain to attempt to ensnare,
so to speak, all the shifts and turns of reflection and its argumentation in
order to pre-empt and render impossible all the evasions and the leaps with
which it hides its own contradiction from itself. For this reason I also refrain
from taking notice of the many self-styled objections and refutations that
have been advanced against the claim that neither being nor nothing are
something true but that becoming is their truth. The intellectual education
required to perceive the nothingness of these refutations, or rather to dispel
such arbitrary ideas on one’s own, will be attained only through a critical
cognition of the forms of the understanding. But those who are the most
prolific in such objections straight away set themselves upon reflecting
on the first propositions, without helping themselves or having helped
themselves through further study of the logic to the awareness of the
nature of their crude reflections.
We shall consider some of the cases that occur when being and nothing
are posited in isolation, each outside the sphere of the other, with the result
that the transition is negated.
Parmenides held fast to being and was the most consistent, since he also
said of nothing that it absolutely is not; only being is.31 Totally for itself,
being is thus the indeterminate, and has therefore no connecting reference
to any other; consequently, it seems that from this beginning no further
forward move is possible – that is, from that beginning itself – and that
an advance can only occur by adding something foreign to it from outside.
The advance, where being is the same as nothing, thus appears as a second,
absolute beginning – a transition which is for itself, and that would be added
to being externally. Being would not be an absolute beginning at all if it had
a determinateness; in that case, it would depend on another and would not
be immediate, would not be the beginning. If, however, it is indeterminate
and is therefore a true beginning, it has nothing by virtue of which it can
31

Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker (The Fragments of the Pre-Socratics) Volume II, ed. Hermann Diels
and Walther Kranz (Berlin: Weidmannsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1956), Parmenides, 232B6.

71

Being

pass over to an other; as beginning it is equally the end. It is just as impossible
for anything to break out of it as to break into it; with Parmenides as with
Spinoza, there is no advance from being or from absolute substance to the
negative, the finite. If there is forward movement nevertheless – something
which, as just remarked, can occur only externally if we start from being
devoid of any connecting reference and so without forward movement –
then, this advance is a second, new beginning. Thus, Fichte’s most absolute,
unconditional first principle, A = A, is a positing, a thesis; the second
principle is a counter-positing, an antithesis; this latter should be partly
conditioned, partly unconditioned (and so contradiction in itself ).32 This
is an advance by external reflection that negates the absolute with which
it makes its beginning (the counter-positing is the negation of the first
identity) while at the same time equally reducing its second absolute,
explicitly, to something conditioned. But if there were any justification
at all for the advance, that is, for sublating the first beginning, then the
possibility that an other could connect with it would have to lie in the nature
of this first beginning itself; the beginning would have to be, therefore, a
determinate being. But being, as also the absolute substance, will not be such,
quite the contrary. Being is the immediate, the still absolutely indeterminate.
The most eloquent, perhaps most forgotten accounts of the impossibility of advancing from an abstraction to something beyond it, and of
uniting the two, are given by Jacobi in support of his polemic against the
Kantian a priori synthesis of self-consciousness, in his Treatise Concerning
the Undertaking of Critique to Reduce Reason to the Understanding (Jacobi,
Werke, Vol. III).33 He defines the task (p. 113) as one of demonstrating
the originating or the producing of a synthesis in a pure somewhat, be it
consciousness, space or time. “Let space be a one; time a one; consciousness a one. Now, do say how any of these three ‘ones’ purely turns itself
internally into a manifold: each is a one and no other; an all-the-same-ness;
just selfhood in general without a he-hood, she-hood, or it-hood, for these
still slumber together with the he, she, it in the infinite zero of the indeterminate from which each and every determinate being has yet to proceed!
What brings finitude into these three infinitudes? What impregnates space
and time a priori with number and measure, and turns them into a pure
manifold? What brings pure spontaneity (‘I’) into oscillation? How does
its pure vowel sound come to its concomitant sound, the consonant, or
better, how does its soundless, uninterrupted sounding interrupt itself and
break off in order to gain at least some kind of self-sound, an accent?” One
32

Cf. Fichte, Wissenschaftslehre (1794) §§1, 2; GA I.2.

33

Leipzig, 1816.

21.83

72

21.84

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

sees that Jacobi very distinctly recognized that abstraction is a nonentity,
whether this nonentity is the so-called absolute (only abstract) space, or the
equally abstract time or abstract pure consciousness, the “I.” He insists on
this nonentity for the sake of maintaining the impossibility of any advance
to an other, which is the condition of a synthesis, and to a synthesis itself.
The synthesis which is the point of interest here must not be taken as a
tying together of external determinations already at hand. Rather, the issue
is twofold: one of the genesis of a second next to a first, of a determinate
something next to something which is initially indeterminate, but also one
of immanent synthesis, of synthesis a priori – a unity of distinct terms that
exists in and for itself. Becoming is this immanent synthesis of being and
nothing; but because the sense most closely attached to “synthesis” is that
of an external gathering of things externally at hand, the name of synthesis,
of synthetic unity, has rightly gone out of use. – Jacobi asks, how does the
pure vowel of the “I” come to its concomitant sound, to the consonant?
what brings determinacy to indeterminateness? – The question of the what
would be easy to answer, and has been answered by Kant in his way. The
question of the how, however, means: in which way and manner? in what
relation? and so forth, and requires the application of a particular category;
but there can be no question here of a “way” or “manner,” of the categories
of the understanding. The question of the how is itself one that belongs to
the bad practices of reflection, which demands comprehensibility, but for
that it presupposes its fixed categories and is thereby assured from the start
to be forearmed against the answer to what it asks. Nor does the question
have in Jacobi the higher sense of a query regarding the necessity of the
synthesis, for Jacobi, as we said, remains fixed in the abstractions in order
to assert the impossibility of the synthesis. Especially graphic is his description (p. 147) of the procedure for attaining the abstraction of space. “For a
time I must try clean to forget that I ever saw anything, heard, touched or
moved anything, myself expressly not exempted. Clean, clean, clean must
I forget all movement, and let precisely this forgetting be my most pressing
concern, since it is the hardest. Just as I have thought all things away, so
must I also get perfectly rid of them all, retaining nothing at all except
the intuition, which violently held its ground, of the infinite immutable
space. I may not, therefore, think even myself back into it as something
distinguished from it yet equally bound to it; I may not let myself even be
merely surrounded and pervaded by it, but I must rather give myself over to
it totally, become a one with it, transform myself into it; I must allow no
leftover of myself except this my intuition itself, in order to behold it as a
truly self-subsisting, independent, single and sole representation.”

73

Being

With this totally abstract purity of continuity, that is, with this indeterminateness and emptiness of representation, it is indifferent whether
one names this abstraction “space” or “pure intuition” or “pure thought.”
It is altogether the same as what an Indian calls Brahma, when for years
on end, looking only at the tip of his nose, externally motionless and
equally unmoved in sensation, representation, phantasy, desire, and so on,
he inwardly says only Om, Om, Om, or else says nothing at all. This dull,
empty consciousness, taken as consciousness, is just this – being.
In this void, Jacobi now states further, he encounters the opposite of
what should happen to him according to Kant’s assurance. He does not
find himself to be a many and a manifold but to be rather a one without any
plurality and manifoldness; indeed, “I am impossibility itself, the nihilating
of all things manifold and plural – cannot, from my pure, absolutely
simple and unchanging essence, produce again, or conjure in me as shadow,
even the least bit of anything . . . Thus all externality and juxtaposition, any
manifoldness and plurality dependent on them, are revealed in this purity
as a pure impossibility.”34
The meaning of this impossibility is nothing else than the tautology:
I hold fast to abstract unity and exclude all plurality and manifoldness;
I keep myself in indistinctness and indeterminacy, and look away from
anything distinguished and determinate. Kant’s a priori synthesis of selfconsciousness, that is, the work of this unity of differentiating itself but
in this differentiation of preserving itself, is diluted by Jacobi to just this
abstraction. He one-sidedly reduces that “synthesis in itself,” the “original
parting of judgment,”35 to “the copula in itself; – an ‘is, is, is’ without beginning and end, without ‘what’, ‘who’, or ‘which’; this repetition of repetition
ad infinitum is the one single occupation, function, and production of the
purest of all pure syntheses; the synthesis is itself this mere, pure, absolute
repetition.”36 Though, in fact, since there is no pause in it, that is, no
negation, no distinguishing, the synthesis is not a repetition but rather
undifferentiated simple being. – But then, is this still a synthesis when
Jacobi leaves out precisely that which makes the unity a synthetic unity?
First of all, it must be said that when Jacobi assumes his position in
absolute (that is, abstract) space, time, and consciousness as well, he transposes himself into something which is empirically false, and fixes himself
there. There is no such thing as a spatially or temporally unlimited space
or time, that is, none is empirically at hand which would not be filled with
a continuous manifold of limited existence and of change, so that these
34

pp. 148ff., paraphrase.

35

“parting of judgment” = Urteil.

36

pp. 125ff., paraphrase.

21.85

74

21.86

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

limits and these changes would not belong, unseparated and inseparably,
to spatiality. Consciousness is likewise filled with determinate sensation,
representation, desire, and so forth; it does not exist in concreto apart from
some particular content or other. – The transition to the empirical then
goes without saying. Consciousness can indeed make empty space, empty
time, and even empty consciousness or pure being, its intended object
and content, but it does not stay with them. Rather, from this emptiness
it passes over – more than that, it forces itself over to a better content,
that is, one which is somehow more concrete and to this extent, however bad as content, still better and truer. Precisely such a content is the
synthetic as such, “synthetic” understood in its more general sense. Thus
Parmenides has to make do with semblance and opinion, the opposite
of being and truth; Spinoza likewise, with attributes, modes, extension,
movement, understanding, will, and so forth. The synthesis contains as
well as exposes the untruth of those abstractions; in it they are in unity
with their other, are not therefore as self-subsistent, not as absolute but
strictly as relative.
The demonstration of the empirical nullity of empty space and so forth
is not however the task here. Consciousness can of course, by means of
abstraction, fill itself with such indeterminateness, and the abstractions
to which it thus holds fast are the thoughts of pure space, time, pure
consciousness, pure being. It is the thought of pure space etc. (that is, pure
space etc. taken in themselves) which is to be demonstrated to be null, that
is, what must be demonstrated is that, as such a thought, its opposite has
already forced its way into it, that by itself it is already being that has gone
outside itself, a determinateness.
But this happens in them immediately. They are, as Jacobi correctly
describes them, results of abstraction; they are expressly determined as
indeterminate – and this, to go back to their simplest form, is being. This
indeterminateness is however precisely what constitutes their determinateness. For indeterminateness is opposed to determinateness; as opposed, it
is therefore itself something determinate or negative – the pure, entirely
abstract negative. This indeterminateness or abstract negation which thus
has being in it is that to which reflection, whether external or internal,
gives voice when it equates such a being with nothing, when it declares it
to be an empty product of thought, a nothingness. – Or, one can say, since
being is the indeterminate, it is not the (affirmative) determinateness that
it is; it is not being but nothing.
In the pure reflection of the beginning as it is made in this Logic with
being as such, the transition is still hidden; because being is posited as

Being

75

immediate, the nothing only breaks out in it immediately. All the subsequent determinations are however more concrete, like existence which
follows right after; there is already posited in existence that which contains
and produces the contradiction of those abstractions, and consequently
their transition. In being, when taken in that simplicity and immediacy,
the memory that it is the result of a perfect abstraction, and that it is therefore already abstract negativity, nothing, is left back behind the science
which, starting explicitly from essence, will exhibit that one-sided immediacy as a mediated immediacy where being is posited as concrete existence,
and that which mediates being, the ground, is also posited.
With the recovery of this memory, it is possible to present the transition
from being to nothing, or also, as it is said, to clarify it and make it comprehensible, as something itself easy and trivial. Of course, the being which
is made into the beginning of science is a nothing, since it is possible to
abstract from everything, and when abstraction is made from all, nothing
is left over. However, one can continue, so understood the beginning is
nothing affirmative, not being, but just nothing, and nothing is then the
end, at least as much as immediate being, and even more so. Shortest is to
let such an argument run its course and to observe how the results of which
it boasts take shape. That “nothing” is the result of the argument, and that
the beginning would then have to be made with nothing (as in Chinese
philosophy)37 need not cause us to lift a finger. For even before we had lifted
it, this nothing would have turned into being just as much (see Section B
above, “Nothing”). But further, if we presuppose the said abstraction
from everything (an “everything” which is an existent nevertheless), such
an abstraction must be defined with greater exactitude. The result of such
an abstraction from everything existent is first of all abstract being, being in
general. For just as in the cosmological proof of the existence of God from
the contingent being of the world, where we ascend above this contingent
being, being is still taken up with us in the ascent; it is determined as infinite
being. But of course, one can abstract also from this pure being. Being can
be thrown in with the everything from which abstraction has already been
made, and then nothing remains. Now, if we want to ignore the thinking of
nothing, that is, that it turns around into being, or would know nothing
of it, one can indeed proceed in this way in the style of the “one can.”
One can (God be praised!) even abstract from nothing (for the creation of
the world, too, is an abstraction from nothing). But then, what remains
37

Apparently Hegel is associating Buddhism with China. Cf. above, 21.70, where Hegel speaks of
oriental philosophies.

21.87

76

21.88

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is not nothing, since abstraction would be made even from it and so we
would be back at being again. – This “one can” generates an external play of
abstraction in which the abstracting itself is only the one-sided activity of
the negative. Directly implied in this very “one can” is that being is just as
indifferent to it as nothing, and that as the one vanishes, the other appears
in turn; but whether a beginning is made with the activity of nothing or
with nothing is equally indifferent, for the activity of nothing, that is, the
mere abstracting, is neither more nor less true than the mere nothing.
Plato’s dialectical treatment of the One in the Parmenides must also be
regarded rather as a dialectic of external reflection. Being and the One are
both Eleatic forms which are the same thing. But, as Plato understands
them in that dialogue, they are also to be distinguished. After he removes
from the One the various determinations of whole and parts, of being-initself, of being-in-another, etc.; of figure, time, etc., his result is that being
does not pertain to the One, for being does not accrue to a something
except according to one of these forms. (Ed. Stephanus, Vol. II, p. 141e.)
Plato then turns to the proposition, “the One is”; and it is there that we
can see how, starting from this proposition, he performs the transition to
the non-being of the One. It happens by way of a comparison between the
two determinations of the presupposed proposition, namely of “the One
is.” This proposition contains “the One” and “being”; but “the one is”
contains more than when one only says “the One.” In this, in their being
distinguished, the moment of negation is demonstrated. It is clear that this
method has a presupposition and is an external reflection.
Just as the One is posited here in combination with being, so is being,
which should be held fast abstracted by itself in the simplest form without
entering into thought, exhibited in a combination that entails the opposite of what should be asserted. Taken in its immediacy, being belongs
to a subject, is something said, has an empirical existence in general, and
therefore stands on a ground of restriction and negativity. Whatever the
expressions or the turns of phrase that the understanding adopts in protesting against the unity of being and nothing, however much it appeals to
what is immediately given, it will find precisely in this experience nothing
but determinate being, being with a restriction or negation – the very unity
which it rejects. The assertion of immediate being thus comes down to an
empirical concrete existence, and it cannot reject the demonstration of it,
since it is the immediacy outside thought to which it wants to cling.
The same is the case with nothing, only in the contrary way. This is
a well-known reflection, made often enough respecting nothing. When
taken in its immediacy, nothing shows itself as existing; for it is by nature

Being

77

the same as being. Nothing is thought of, represented; it is spoken about;
it therefore is; nothing has its being in thinking, representing, speaking,
etc. But, further, this being is also distinguished from it; it is therefore said
that nothing is indeed in thinking or representing, yet for that very reason
it is not it which is, it is not it to which being belongs, that only thinking
or representing are this being. Even on this distinction, there is no denying
that nothing refers to a being; but in this reference, though the latter
equally also contains distinction, there is a unity with being. In whatever
way nothing is said or demonstrated, it shows itself in combination with
or, if one prefers, in touch with a being, unseparated from a being, that is
to say, precisely in a determinate existence.
But when the presence of nothing in a determinate existence is thus
demonstrated, this distinction of it from being still commonly comes to
mind, namely that the existence of the nothing is nothing at all that pertains to it per se. It is said that nothing does not have being in it; that it is
not being as such; that it is rather an absence of being, just as darkness is
only the absence of light, cold only the absence of warmth, and so forth. It
is said that darkness has meaning only with reference to the eye, by being
externally compared with the positive, with light, just as cold is something
only in our sensation, whereas light, warmth, just like being, are on the
contrary objective on their own, they are the real, the effective, of quite
another quality and dignity than those negatives, than nothing. One can
often find it advanced as a very weighty reflection and a significant item of
cognition that darkness is only absence of light, cold only absence of warmth.
Regarding this astute reflection, it can be observed empirically in this field
of empirical subject matters that darkness in fact shows its effective presence in light by determining it as color and thereby imparting visibility to
it in the first place, because, as we said above, one can see just as little in
pure light as in pure darkness. Visibility, however, is an effect in the eye,
and the said negative makes just as much of a contribution to it as does the
light that passes for the real, the positive; similarly, cold makes itself present
enough to water, to our sensation, and so forth, and if we deny its so-called
objective reality, we thereby stand to gain absolutely nothing against it.
And we should further repeat38 the complaint that here the talk is again of
a negative with determinate content; that one has not restricted oneself to
the nothing, with respect to which, so far as empty abstraction goes, being
is neither at a loss nor at an advantage. – But we must equally take cold,
darkness, and similar determinate negations, just for themselves, and, in
38

Cf above, 21.72 and 75.

21.89

78

21.90

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

respect to their general determination which is at issue here, let us see what
is posited thereby. They are supposed to be not nothing in general, but the
nothing rather of light, warmth, and so forth, of something determinate,
of a content; thus they are a determinate, “contentful nothing” if one may
so speak. A determinateness, however, as will be found later on, is itself a
negation; thus they are negative nothings; a negative nothing is however
something affirmative. The conversion of nothing into an affirmative by
virtue of its determinateness (which previously appeared as a determinate
existence in a subject or in what have you) appears to a consciousness bound
to the abstraction of the understanding as the greatest paradox. Simple as
it is, or rather because of its very simplicity, the insight that the negation
of negation is something positive appears a trivial matter to which the
haughty understanding need pay no heed, even though its correctness is
undeniable – and not just its correctness, but also, on account of the universality of the determinations involved, its infinite extension and universal
applicability, so that it would indeed be well to pay heed to it.
Regarding the determination of the transition of being and nothing
into each other, the further remark can be made that such a transition
is to be taken just as it is without additional reflective determination.
It is immediate and entirely abstract, on account of the abstractness of
the moments in transition, that is, because there is yet to be posited in
these moments the determinateness of the other through which they have
undergone the transition. Nothing is not yet posited in being, even though
being is essentially nothing, and the other way around. It is therefore
improper to apply here more determinate mediations, and to take being
and nothing in some relation – their transition is not yet a relation. Thus it
is inadmissible to say: nothing is the ground of being, or being is the ground
of nothing; nothing is the cause of being, and so forth; or, the transition
into nothing can have occurred only under the condition that something
is, or the transition into being only under the condition of non-being. The
mode of the connecting reference cannot be further determined without
the connected sides being at the same time also further determined. The
connection of ground and consequent, and so forth, no longer has mere
being and nothing for the sides which it binds, but has being expressly as
ground, and something which, although only posited and not standing on
its own, is however not abstract nothing.
Remark 4
One can gather from the preceding what to think of the dialectic directed
against the beginning of the world and also its end (that dialectic which

Being

79

would prove the eternity of matter), that is, of the dialectic directed at
becoming, against coming-to-be or passing-away in general. (Kant’s antinomies regarding the finitude or the infinity of the world in space and time
will be more closely considered below, under the concept of the quantitative
infinity.)39 This simple, common dialectic rests on fixing the opposition of
being and nothing. That a beginning of the world or of anything is not
possible is proven as follows:
Nothing can begin, either in so far as something is, or in so far as it is
not; for in so far as it is, it does not begin to be; and in so far as it is not, it
also does not begin to be. – If the world, or anything, had begun, it would
have begun in nothing; but in nothing there is no beginning – or nothing
is not a beginning; for a beginning implies a being, but nothing contains
no being. Nothing is only nothing. In a ground, a cause, and so on, if this
is how nothing is determined, there is contained an affirmation, being. –
For the same reason, too, something cannot cease to be. For then it would
have to contain nothing, but being is only being, not the opposite of itself.
It is clear that in this proof there is nothing brought against becoming, or
beginning and ceasing-to-be, against this unity of being and nothing, except
an assertorical denial and the ascription of truth to being and nothing taken
in separation each from the other. – Such a dialectic is however at least
more consistent than ordinary reflective thought. This thought accepts as
the whole truth that being and nothing are only in separation, yet allows
on the other hand for a beginning and a ceasing-to-be that are equally
accepted as true determinations; in these, however, it in fact assumes the
inseparability of being and nothing.
Once we presuppose that being and nothing are absolutely divorced,
beginning or becoming, as we often hear said, is of course incomprehensible,
for we make a presupposition which does away with beginning or becoming
and yet again admits it. And this contradiction, which we create ourselves
and make impossible to resolve, this is what is called the incomprehensible.
The dialectic just cited is also the same as the understanding deploys
against the concept of infinitesimal magnitude given by higher analysis.
More will be said below about this concept.40 – These magnitudes are so
determined that they are in their vanishing – not before this vanishing, for
they would then be finite magnitudes; not after it, for then they would be
nothing. Against this pure thought, it is objected and endlessly repeated
that these magnitudes are either something or nothing; that there is no intermediary state between being and nothing (“state” is here an inappropriate,
39

See below, 21.228–232.

40

See below, 21.252–253.

21.91

21.92

80

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

barbaric expression). – Assumed here is again the absolute separation of
being and nothing. But we have shown against this that being and nothing
are in fact the same, or to speak in the language cited, that there is nothing
which is not an intermediary state between being and nothing. Mathematics
owes its most brilliant successes to precisely that determination which the
understanding rejects.
This form of argumentation that falsely presupposes the absolute separation of being and nothing, and insists on it, should be called not dialectic
but sophistry. For sophistry is an argumentation derived from a baseless
presupposition rashly accepted without critique; but we call dialectic the
higher rational movement in which these, being and nothing, apparently
utterly separated, pass over into each other on their own, by virtue of what
they are, and the presupposition sublates itself. It is the dialectical immanent nature of being and nothing themselves to manifest their unity, which
is becoming, as their truth.
2. The moments of becoming

21.93

Becoming is the unseparatedness of being and nothing, not the unity that
abstracts from being and nothing; as the unity of being and nothing it is
rather this determinate unity, or one in which being and nothing equally
are. However, inasmuch as being and nothing are each unseparated from
its other, each is not. In this unity, therefore, they are, but as vanishing, only
as sublated. They sink from their initially represented self-subsistence into
moments which are still distinguished but at the same time sublated.
Grasped as thus distinguished, each is in their distinguishedness a unity
with the other. Becoming thus contains being and nothing as two such
unities, each of which is itself unity of being and nothing; the one is being
as immediate and as reference to nothing; the other is nothing as immediate
and as reference to being; in these unities the determinations are of unequal
value.
Becoming is in this way doubly determined. In one determination,
nothing is the immediate, that is, the determination begins with nothing
and this refers to being; that is to say, it passes over into it. In the other
determination, being is the immediate, that is, the determination begins
with being and this passes over into nothing – coming-to-be and ceasingto-be.
Both are the same, becoming, and even as directions that are so different
they interpenetrate and paralyze each other. The one is ceasing-to-be; being
passes over into nothing, but nothing is just as much the opposite of

Being

81

itself, the passing-over into being, coming-to-be. This coming-to-be is the
other direction; nothing goes over into being, but being equally sublates
itself and is rather the passing-over into nothing; it is ceasing-to-be. –
They do not sublate themselves reciprocally – the one sublating the other
externally – but each rather sublates itself in itself and is within it the
opposite of itself.
3. Sublation of becoming
The equilibrium in which coming-to-be and ceasing-to-be are poised is in
the first place becoming itself. But this becoming equally collects itself in
quiescent unity. Being and nothing are in it only as vanishing; becoming
itself, however, is only by virtue of their being distinguished. Their vanishing is therefore the vanishing of becoming, or the vanishing of the vanishing
itself. Becoming is a ceaseless unrest that collapses into a quiescent result.
This can also be expressed thus: becoming is the vanishing of being
into nothing, and of nothing into being, and the vanishing of being and
nothing in general; but at the same time it rests on their being distinct. It
therefore contradicts itself in itself, because what it unites within itself is
self-opposed; but such a union destroys itself.
This result is a vanishedness, but it is not nothing; as such, it would be
only a relapse into one of the already sublated determinations and not the
result of nothing and of being. It is the unity of being and nothing that has
become quiescent simplicity. But this quiescent simplicity is being, yet no
longer for itself but as determination of the whole.
Becoming, as transition into the unity of being and nothing, a unity
which is as existent or has the shape of the one-sided immediate unity of
these moments, is existence.
Remark
To sublate and being sublated (the idealized ) constitute one of the most
important concepts of philosophy. It is a fundamental determination that
repeatedly occurs everywhere in it, the meaning of which must be grasped
with precision and especially distinguished from nothing. – What is sublated
does not thereby turn into nothing. Nothing is the immediate; something
sublated is on the contrary something mediated; it is something nonexistent but as a result that has proceeded from a being; it still has in itself,
therefore, the determinateness from which it derives.
The German “aufheben” (“to sublate” in English) has a twofold meaning
in the language: it equally means “to keep,” “to ‘preserve’,” and “to cause

21.94

82

21.95

21.96

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to cease,” “to put an end to.” Even “to preserve” already includes a negative
note, namely that something, in order to be retained, is removed from
its immediacy and hence from an existence which is open to external
influences. – That which is sublated is thus something at the same time
preserved, something that has lost its immediacy but has not come to
nothing for that. – These two definitions of “to sublate” can be cited as
two dictionary meanings of the word. But it must strike one as remarkable
that a language has come to use one and the same word for two opposite
meanings. For speculative thought it is gratifying to find words that have
in themselves a speculative meaning. The German language has several
such words. The double meaning of the Latin “tollere” (made notorious by
Cicero’s quip, “tollendum est Octavium”)41 does not go as far; its affirmative
determination only goes so far as “lifting up.” Something is sublated only
in so far as it has entered into unity with its opposite; in this closer
determination as something reflected, it may fittingly be called a moment.
In the case of the lever, “weight” and “distance from a point” are called its
mechanical moments because of the sameness of their effect, in spite of the
difference between something real like weight, and something idealized
such as the merely spatial determination of “line.” (See Encycl. of the
Phil. Sc., 3rd edn, §261, Remark.) – We shall often not help but observe
that the technical language of philosophy uses Latin terms for reflected
determinations, either because the mother tongue has no terms for them,
or, if it has as it does here, because in expressing them it is more likely to call
to mind the immediate, whereas the foreign tongue recalls the reflected.
The more precise sense and precise expression that being and nothing
receive now that they are moments will have to transpire from the consideration of existence, the unity in which they are preserved. Being is being, and
nothing is nothing, only as held distinct from each other; in their truth,
however, in their unity, they have vanished as such determinations and are
now something else. Being and nothing are the same and, precisely because
they are the same, they no longer are being and nothing but possess a different
determination; in becoming they were coming-to-be and ceasing-to-be; in
existence, which is another determinate unity, they are again moments but
differently determined. This unity now remains their base from which they
no longer surface in the abstract meaning of being and nothing.
41

“Caesar [Octavianus], he says, made no complaints against you to be sure, except as to a remark
which he attributed to you: ‘the young man must be praised, honoured, and lifted up [tollendum].’”
Brutus (2001), Letter 401, to Cicero, p. 307. Tollendum can also be translated as “immortalized.”
Of course, to be made into a god one must die first.

ch a p ter 2

Existence

Existence is determinate being; its determinateness is existent determinateness, quality. Through its quality, something is opposed to an other; it is
alterable and finite, negatively determined not only towards an other, but
absolutely within it. This negation in it, in contrast at first with the finite
something, is the infinite; the abstract opposition in which these determinations appear resolves itself into oppositionless infinity, into being-for-itself.
The treatment of existence is therefore in three divisions:
A. existence as such
B. something and other, finitude
C. qualitative infinity.
a. existence as such
In existence (a) as such, its determinateness is first (b) to be distinguished as
quality. The latter, however, is to be taken in both the two determinations of
existence as reality and negation. In these determinacies, however, existence
is equally reflected into itself, and, as so reflected, it is posited as (c)
something, an existent.
a. Existence in general
Existence proceeds from becoming. It is the simple oneness of being and
nothing. On account of this simplicity, it has the form of an immediate. Its
mediation, the becoming, lies behind it; it has sublated itself, and existence
therefore appears as a first from which the forward move is made. It is
at first in the one-sided determination of being; the other determination
which it contains, nothing, will likewise come up in it, in contrast to the
first.
It is not mere being but existence, or Dasein [in German]; according to
its [German] etymology, it is being (Sein) in a certain place (da). But the
83

21.97

84

21.98

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

representation of space does not belong here. As it follows upon becoming,
existence is in general being with a non-being, so that this non-being is taken
up into simple unity with being. Non-being thus taken up into being with
the result that the concrete whole is in the form of being, of immediacy,
constitutes determinateness as such.
The whole is likewise in the form or determinateness of being, since in
becoming being has likewise shown itself to be only a moment – something
sublated, negatively determined. It is such, however, for us, in our reflection;
not yet as posited in it. What is posited, however, is the determinateness as
such of existence, as is also expressed by the da (or “there”) of the Dasein. –
The two are always to be clearly distinguished. Only that which is posited in
a concept belongs in the course of the elaboration of the latter to its content.
Any determinateness not yet posited in the concept itself belongs instead to
our reflection, whether this reflection is directed to the nature of the concept
itself or is a matter of external comparison. To remark on a determinateness
of this last kind can only be for the clarification or anticipation of the whole
that will transpire in the course of the development itself. That the whole,
the unity of being and nothing, is in the one-sided determinateness of being
is an external reflection; but in negation, in something and other, and so
forth, it will become posited. – It was necessary here to call attention to
the distinction just given; but to comment on all that reflection can allow
itself, to give an account of it, would lead to a long-winded anticipation
of what must transpire in the fact itself. Although such reflections may
serve to facilitate a general overview and thus facilitate understanding,
they also bring the disadvantage of being seen as unjustified assertions,
unjustified grounds and foundations, of what is to follow. They should
be taken for no more than what they are supposed to be and should be
distinguished from what constitutes a moment in the advance of the fact
itself.
Existence corresponds to being in the preceding sphere. But being is the
indeterminate; there are no determinations that therefore transpire in it.
But existence is determinate being, something concrete; consequently, several determinations, several distinct relations of its moments, immediately
emerge in it.
b. Quality
On account of the immediacy with which being and nothing are one in
existence, neither oversteps the other; to the extent that existence is existent,
to that extent it is non-being; it is determined. Being is not the universal,

Existence

85

determinateness not the particular.42 Determinateness has yet to detach itself
from being; nor will it ever detach itself from it, since the now underlying
truth is the unity of non-being with being; all further determinations will
transpire on this basis. But the connection which determinateness now has
with being is one of the immediate unity of the two, so that as yet no
differentiation between the two is posited.
Determinateness thus isolated by itself, as existent determinateness, is
quality – something totally simple, immediate. Determinateness in general
is the more universal which, further determined, can be something quantitative as well. On account of this simplicity, there is nothing further to
say about quality as such.
Existence, however, in which nothing and being are equally contained,
is itself the measure of the one-sidedness of quality as an only immediate or existent determinateness. Quality is equally to be posited in the
determination of nothing, and the result is that the immediate or existent
determinateness is posited as distinct, reflected, and the nothing, as thus
the determinate element of determinateness, will equally be something
reflected, a negation. Quality, in the distinct value of existent, is reality;
when affected by a negating, it is negation in general, still a quality but one
that counts as a lack and is further determined as limit, restriction.
Both are an existence, but in reality, as quality with the accent on being
an existent, that it is determinateness and hence also negation is concealed;
reality only has, therefore, the value of something positive from which
negating, restriction, lack, are excluded. Negation, for its part, taken as
mere lack, would be what nothing is; but it is an existence, a quality, only
determined with a non-being.
Remark
Reality may seem to be an ambiguous word, since it is used in different,
even opposite determinations. In philosophical usage, for instance, one
speaks of mere empirical reality as of a worthless being. But when it is
said of thoughts, concepts, theories, that they have no reality, this means
that there is no actuality to them. Of the idea of a Platonic republic, for
instance, it is said that it might well be true in itself or in its concept. Here
the idea is not denied its value and is even allowed room alongside reality.
However, as against the so-called mere ideas, the mere concepts, “the real”
counts as alone true. – The sense in which external existence is made the
criterion of the truth of a content is for its part just as one-sided as when
42

This will happen in the Subjective Logic, when the logical object assumes the form of “concept.”

21.99

86

21.100

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the idea, the essence, or even inner feeling, is represented as indifferent to
external existence and is even held to be all the more estimable the more
remote it is from reality.
In connection with the term “reality,” mention must be made of the
former metaphysical concept of God that was once made the foundation of
the so-called ontological proof of God’s existence.43 God was defined as the
sum-total of all realities, and of this sum-total it was said that it contained
no contradiction within, that none of the realities canceled any other, for
a reality is to be taken only as a perfection, as something affirmative that
contains no negation. Consequently, as it was said, the realities are not in
opposition and do not contradict one another.
On this concept of reality, the assumption is that the latter still remains
after all negation has been thought away; however, to do this is to remove
all determinateness from reality. Reality is quality, existence; it therefore
contains the moment of the negative and is the determinate being that it
is only through it. Taken in the so-called eminent sense, or as infinite in
the ordinary meaning of the word – as we are said we should – reality is
expanded into indeterminateness and loses its meaning. God’s goodness
is supposed to be such not in the ordinary sense but eminently; it is not
different from justice but is rather tempered by it (an expression of mediation
of Leibnizian origin)44 just as contrariwise justice is tempered by goodness;
and so neither is goodness goodness any longer, nor justice justice. Power
should be tempered by wisdom – but is then no longer power as such, for
it is subject to wisdom. – Wisdom should be expanded into power, but
then it vanishes as end and measure setting wisdom. The true concept of
the infinite and of its absolute unity that will later emerge45 is not to be
understood as a tempering, a mutual restricting or blending – a superficial,
nebulous connection that can only satisfy mindless representation. – When
reality, taken in the sense of a determinate quality as in the said definition
of God, is made to transgress its determinateness, it ceases to be reality;
it becomes abstract being; God as the pure reality in all realities, or as the
sum-total of all realities, is the same empty absolute, void of determination
and content, in which all is one.
If, on the contrary, reality is taken in its determinateness, then, since
it essentially contains the moment of the negative, the sum-total of all
realities becomes just as much a sum-total of all negations, the sum-total
43

44

“The most perfect being is defined as one in which all co-possible realities inhere in the absolutely
highest degree.” Christian Wolff, Theologia naturalis methodo scientifica pertractata (Frankfurt and
Leipzig, 1741), §6.
45 Cf. below, 21.130–37.
Leibniz, Monadology (1714), §41.

Existence

87

of all contradictions, a sort of first absolute power in which everything
determinate is absorbed. However, since reality only exists in so far as it still
has over against it something which it has not sublated, by being thought
expanded in this way into an accomplished power void of restrictions, it
becomes the abstract nothing. The said reality in everything real, the being
in all existence that should express the concept of God, is nothing else than
abstract being, the same as nothing.
That determinateness is negation posited as affirmative is Spinoza’s
proposition: omnis determinatio est negatio,46 a proposition of infinite
importance. Only, negation as such is formless abstraction. However, speculative philosophy must not be accused of taking negation or nothing as an
ultimate: negation is as little an ultimate for it as reality is for it the truth.
The unity of Spinoza’s substance, or that there is only one substance,
is the necessary consequence of this proposition, that determinateness is
negation. Spinoza had of necessity to posit thought and being or extension,
the two determinations, namely, which he had before him, as one in this
unity,47 for as determinate realities the two are negations whose infinity
is their unity;48 according to Spinoza’s definition, about which more later
on,49 the infinity of something is its affirmation. He therefore conceived
them as attributes, that is, such as do not have a particular subsistence,
a being-in-and-for-itself, but only are as sublated as moments; or rather,
since substance is the total void of internal determinateness, they are not
even moments; the attributes, like the modes, are distinctions made by
an external understanding. – Also the substantiality of individuals cannot
hold its own before that substance. The individual refers to itself by setting
limits to every other; but these limits are therefore also the limits of its
self; they are references to the other; the individual’s existence is not in the
individual. True, the individual is more than just restrictions on all sides;
but this more belongs to another sphere, that of the concept; in the metaphysics of being, the individual is an absolutely determinate something;
and against this something, against this finite that would be in and for
itself as such, determinateness asserts itself essentially as negation, dragging it into the same negative movement of the understanding that makes
everything vanish into the abstract unity of substance.
Negation stands immediately over against reality; further on, in the
sphere proper to reflected determinations, it will be opposed to the positive,
46
47

Letter 50 (1674) to Jarig Jellis. Works of Spinoza, trans. R. H. M. Elwes (New York: Dover, 1951),
Vol. II, pp. 369–370.
48 Ethics, Part I, Prop. 8, note 1.
49 Cf. below, 21.139.
Ethics, Part 2, Prop. 1, 2.

21.101

21.102

88

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which is reality reflecting upon negation – the reality in which the negative,
still hiding in reality as such, shines forth.50
Quality specifically is a property only when, in an external connection,
it manifests itself as an immanent determination. By properties of herbs,
for instance, we understand determinations which are not just proper to
a something but are such that, in virtue of them, the something holds its
own while referring to others and will not give in to the alien influences
posited in it by them; on the contrary, it imposes its own determinations
in the other – though it does not keep it at a distance. On the other hand,
more stable determinacies such as figure or shape are not called properties,
nor even qualities, for they are thought of as alterable and therefore as not
identical with being.
“Qualierung” or “Inqualierung,” an expression of Jacob Boehme’s profound but also profoundly turbid philosophy, signifies the movement
within a quality (sourness, bitterness, fieriness, etc.) inasmuch as in its
negative nature (in its Qual or torment) the quality posits itself, securing
itself from another; it signifies in general the internal unrest of quality by
which it produces and preserves itself only in conflict.51
c. Something

21.103

In existence its determinateness has been distinguished as quality; in this
quality as something existing, the distinction exists – the distinction of
reality and negation. Now though these distinctions are present in existence,
they are just as much null and sublated. Reality itself contains negation; it
is existence, not indeterminate or abstract being. Negation is for its part
equally existence, not the supposed abstract nothing but posited here as it
is in itself, as existent, as belonging to existence. Thus quality is in general
unseparated from existence, and the latter is only determinate, qualitative
being.
This sublating of the distinction is more than the mere retraction and
external re-omission of it, or a simple return to the simple beginning, to
existence as such. The distinction cannot be left out, for it is. Therefore,
what de facto is at hand is this: existence in general, distinction in it, and the
sublation of this distinction; the existence, not void of distinctions as at the
50
51

Cf. below 11.273ff.
For mention of Inqualierung, see Böhme, Sämtliche Schriften, Vol. I, Aurora, oder Morgenröthe im
Aufgang, ed. August Faust and Will-Erich Peuckert (Stuttgart: Fr. Frommanns, 1955), chapter 13,
§40. Böhme refers to these specific qualities mentioned by Hegel in chapter 4, §6 of the same text.
(This text is a facsimile of the edition from 1730 in 11 volumes.)

Existence

89

beginning, but as again self-equal through the sublation of the distinction;
the simplicity of existence mediated through this sublation. This state of
sublation of the distinction is existence’s own determinateness; existence is
thus being-in-itself; it is existent, something.
Something is the first negation of negation, as simple existent selfreference. Existence, life, thought, and so forth, essentially take on the
determination of an existent being, a living thing, a thinking mind (“I”),
and so forth. This determination is of the highest importance if we do not
wish to halt at existence, life, thought, and so forth, as generalities – also
not at Godhood (instead of God). In common representation, something
rightly carries the connotation of a real thing. Yet it still is a very superficial
determination, just as reality and negation, existence and its determinateness, though no longer the empty being and nothing, still are quite abstract
determinations. For this reason they also are the most common expressions,
and a reflection that is still philosophically unschooled uses them the most;
it casts its distinctions in them, fancying that in them it has something
really well and firmly determined. – As something, the negative of the negative is only the beginning of the subject – its in-itselfness is still quite
indeterminate. It determines itself further on, at first as existent-for-itself
and so on, until it finally obtains in the concept the intensity of the subject. At the base of all these determinations there lies the negative unity
with itself. In all this, however, care must be taken to distinguish the first
negation, negation as negation in general, from the second negation, the
negation of negation which is concrete, absolute negativity, just as the first
is on the contrary only abstract negativity.
Something is an existent as the negation of negation, for such a negation
is the restoration of the simple reference to itself – but the something is
thereby equally the mediation of itself with itself. Present in the simplicity
of something, and then with greater determinateness in being-for-itself, in
the subject, and so forth, this mediation of itself with itself is also already
present in becoming, but only as totally abstract mediation; mediation
with itself is posited in the something in so far as the latter is determined as
a simple identity. – Attention can be drawn to the presence of mediation
in general, as against the principle of the alleged bare immediacy of a
knowledge from which mediation should be excluded. But there is no
further need to draw particular attention to the moment of mediation,
since it is to be found everywhere and on all sides, in every concept.
This mediation with itself which something is in itself, when taken only
as the negation of negation, has no concrete determinations for its sides;
thus it collapses into the simple unity which is being. Something is, and

21.104

90

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is therefore also an existent. Further, it is in itself also becoming, but a
becoming that no longer has only being and nothing for its moments.
One of these moments, being, is now existence and further an existent.
The other moment is equally an existent, but determined as the negative of
something – an other. As becoming, something is a transition, the moments
of which are themselves something, and for that reason it is an alteration – a
becoming that has already become concrete. – At first, however, something
alters only in its concept; it is not yet posited in this way, as mediated and
mediating, but at first only as maintaining itself simply in its reference to
itself; and its negative is posited as equally qualitative, as only an other in
general.
b. finitude

21.105

(a) Something and other: at first they are indifferent to one another; an
other is also an immediate existent, a something; the negation thus falls
outside both. Something is in itself in contrast to its being-for-other.
But the determinateness belongs also to its in-itself, and
(b) the determination of this in-itself in turn passes over into constitution,
and this latter, as identical with determination, constitutes the immanent and at the same time negated being-for-another, the limit of
something which
(c) is the immanent determination of the something itself, and the something thus is the finite.
In the first division where existence in general was considered, this existence had, as at first taken up, the determination of an existent. The
moments of its development, quality and something, are therefore of
equally affirmative determination. The present division, on the contrary,
develops the negative determination which is present in existence and was
there from the start only as negation in general. It was then the first negation but has now been determined to the point of the being-in-itself of the
something, the point of the negation of negation.
a. Something and an other
1. Something and other are, first, both existents or something.
Second, each is equally an other. It is indifferent which is named first,
and just for this reason it is named something (in Latin, when they occur
in a proposition, both are aliud, or “the one, the other,” alius alium; in the
case of an alternating relation, the analogous expression is alter alterum).

Existence

91

If of two beings we call the one A and the other B, the B is the one which
is first determined as other. But the A is just as much the other of the
B. Both are other in the same way. “This” serves to fix the distinction
and the something which is to be taken in the affirmative sense. But
“this” also expresses the fact that the distinction, and the privileging of one
something, is a subjective designation that falls outside the something itself.
The whole determinateness falls on the side of this external pointing; also
the expression “this” contains no distinctions; each and every something is
just as good a “this” as any other. By “this” we mean to express something
completely determinate, overlooking the fact that language, as a work of
the understanding, only expresses the universal, albeit naming it as a single
object. But an individual name is something meaningless in the sense that
it does not express a universal. It appears as something merely posited and
arbitrary for the same reason that proper names can also be arbitrarily
picked, arbitrarily given as well as arbitrarily altered.52
Otherness thus appears as a determination alien to the existence thus
pointed at, or the other existence as outside this one existence, partly
because the one existence is determined as other only by being compared
by a Third, and partly because it is so determined only on account of the
other which is outside it, but is not an other for itself. At the same time,
as has been remarked, even for ordinary thinking every existence equally
determines itself as an other existence, so that there is no existence that
remains determined simply as an existence, none which is not outside an
existence and therefore is not itself an other.
Both are determined as something as well as other : thus they are the
same and there is as yet no distinction present in them. But this sameness of
determinations, too, falls only within external reflection, in the comparison
of the two; but the other, as posited at first, though an other with reference
to something, is other also for itself apart from the something.
Third, the other is therefore to be taken in isolation, with reference to
itself, has to be taken abstractly as the other, the t¼ teron of Plato who
opposes it to the one as a moment of totality, and in this way ascribes
to the other a nature of its own. Thus the other, taken solely as such, is
not the other of something, but is the other within, that is, the other of
itself. – Such an other, which is the other by its own determination, is
physical nature; nature is the other of spirit; this, its determination, is at first
a mere relativity expressing not a quality of nature itself but only a reference
external to it. But since spirit is the true something, and hence nature is
52

Hegel is repeating the argument of Chapter 1 of the Phenomenology of Spirit.

21.106

92

21.107

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

what it is within only in contrast to spirit, taken for itself the quality of
nature is just this, to be the other within, that which-exists-outside-itself (in
the determinations of space, time, matter).
The other which is such for itself is the other within it, hence the other
of itself and so the other of the other – therefore, the absolutely unequal in
itself, that which negates itself, alters itself. But it equally remains identical
with itself, for that into which it alters is the other, and this other has no
additional determination; but that which alters itself is not determined in
any other way than in this, to be an other; in going over to this other, it only
unites with itself. It is thus posited as reflected into itself with sublation of
the otherness, a self-identical something from which the otherness, which is
at the same time a moment of it, is therefore distinct, itself not appertaining
to it as something.
2. The something preserves itself in its non-being; it is essentially one
with it, and essentially not one with it. It therefore stands in reference to
an otherness without being just this otherness. The otherness is at once
contained in it and yet separated from it; it is being-for-other.
Existence as such is an immediate, bare of references; or, it is in the
determination of being. However, as including non-being within itself,
existence is determinate being, being negated within itself, and then in the
first instance an other – but, since in being negated it preserves itself at the
same time, it is only being-for-other.
It preserves itself in its non-being and is being; not, however, being
in general but being with reference to itself in contrast to its reference
to the other, as self-equality in contrast to its inequality. Such a being is
being-in-itself.
Being-for-other and being-in-itself constitute the two moments of something. There are here two pairs of determinations: (1) something and
other; (2) being-for-other and being-in-itself. The former contain the nonconnectedness of their determinateness; something and other fall apart.
But their truth is their connection; being-for-other and being-in-itself are
therefore the same determinations posited as moments of one and the same
unity, as determinations which are connections and which, in their unity,
remain in the unity of existence. Each thus itself contains within it, at the
same time, also the moment diverse from it.
Being and nothing in their unity, which is existence, are no longer
being and nothing (these they are only outside their unity); so in their
restless unity, in becoming, they are coming-to-be and ceasing-to-be. – In
the something, being is being-in-itself. Now, as self-reference, self-equality,
being is no longer immediately, but is self-reference only as the non-being

Existence

93

of otherness (as existence reflected into itself ). – The same goes for nonbeing: as the moment of something in this unity of being and non-being:
it is not non-existence in general but is the other, and more determinedly –
according as being is at the same time distinguished from it – it is reference
to its non-existence, being-for-other.
Hence being-in-itself is, first, negative reference to non-existence; it has
otherness outside it and is opposed to it; in so far as something is in itself,
it is withdrawn from being-other and being-for-other. But, second, it has
non-being also right in it; for it is itself the non-being of being-for-other.
But being-for-other is, first, the negation of the simple reference of being
to itself which, in the first place, is supposed to be existence and something;
in so far as something is in an other or for an other, it lacks a being of
its own. But, second, it is not non-existence as pure nothing; it is nonexistence that points to being-in-itself as its being reflected into itself, just
as conversely the being-in-itself points to being-for-other.
3. Both moments are determinations of one and the same, namely of
something. Something is in-itself in so far as it has returned from the
being-for-other back to itself. But something has also a determination or
circumstance, whether in itself (here the accent is on the in) or in it; in so
far as this circumstance is in it externally, it is a being-for-other.
This leads to a further determination. Being-in-itself and being-for-other
are different at first. But that something also has in it what it is in itself and
conversely is in itself also what it is as being-for-other – this is the identity of
being-in-itself and being-for-other, in accordance with the determination
that the something is itself one and the same something of both moments,
and these are in it, therefore, undivided. – This identity already occurs
formally in the sphere of existence, but more explicitly in the treatment of
essence and later of the relations of interiority and externality, and in the
most determinate form in the treatment of the idea, as the unity of concept
and actuality. – Opinion has it that with the in-itself something lofty is
being said, as with the inner; but what something is only in itself, is also only
in it; in-itself is a merely abstract, and hence itself external determination.
The expressions: there is nothing in it, or there is something in it, imply,
though somewhat obscurely, that what is in a thing also pertains to its
in-itselfness, to its inner, true worth.
It may be observed that here we have the meaning of the thing-in-itself.
It is a very simple abstraction, though it was for a while a very important
determination, something sophisticated, as it were, just as the proposition
that we know nothing of what things are in themselves was a much valued
piece of wisdom. – Things are called “in-themselves” in so far as abstraction

21.108

21.109

94

21.110

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is made from all being-for-other, which really means, in so far as they are
thought without all determination, as nothing. In this sense, of course, it
is impossible to know what the thing-in-itself is. For the question “what?”
calls for determinations to be produced; but since the things of which the
determinations are called for are at the same time presumed to be things-inthemselves, which means precisely without determination, the impossibility
of an answer is thoughtlessly implanted in the question, or else a senseless
answer is given. – The thing-in-itself is the same as that absolute of which
nothing is known except that in it all is one. What there is in these thingsin-themselves is therefore very well known; they are as such nothing but
empty abstractions void of truth. What, however, the thing-in-itself in
truth is, what there basically is in it, of this the Logic is the exposition.
But in this Logic something better is understood by the in-itself than an
abstraction, namely, what something is in its concept; but this concept is
in itself concrete: as concept, in principle conceptually graspable; and, as
determined and as the connected whole of its determinations, inherently
cognizable.
Being-in-itself has at first the being-for-other as a moment standing
over against it. But positedness also comes to be positioned over against
it, and, although in this expression being-for-other is also included, the
expression still contains the determination of the bending back, which
has already occurred, of that which is not in itself into that wherein it is
positive, and this is its being-in-itself. Being-in-itself is normally to be taken
as an abstract way of expressing the concept; positing, strictly speaking, first
occurs in the sphere of essence, of objective reflection; the ground posits
that which is grounded through it; more strongly, the cause produces an
effect, an existence whose subsistence is immediately negated and which
carries the meaning that it has its substance, its being, in an other. In the
sphere of being, existence only emerges out of becoming. Or again, with
the something an other is posited; with the finite, an infinite; but the finite
does not bring forth the infinite, does not posit it. In the sphere of being,
the self-determining of the concept is at first only in itself or implicit, and
for that reason it is called a transition or passing over. And the reflecting
determinations of being, such as something and other, or finite and infinite,
although they essentially point to one another, or are as being-for-other,
also stand on their own qualitatively; the other exists; the finite, like the
infinite, is equally to be regarded as an immediate existent that stands firm
on its own; the meaning of each appears complete even without its other.
The positive and the negative, on the contrary, cause and effect, however
much they are taken in isolation, have at the same time no meaning each

Existence

95

without the other; their reflective shining in each other, the shine in each of
its other, is present right in them. – In the different cycles of determination
and especially in the progress of the exposition, or, more precisely, in the
progress of the concept in the exposition of itself, it is of capital concern
always to clearly distinguish what still is in itself or implicitly and what is
posited, how determinations are in the concept and how they are as posited
or as existing-for-other. This is a distinction that belongs only to the
dialectical development and one unknown to metaphysical philosophizing
(to which the critical also belongs); the definitions of metaphysics, like
its presuppositions, distinctions, and conclusions, are meant to assert and
produce only the existent and that, too, as existent-in-itself.
In the unity of the something with itself, being-for-other is identical with
its in-itself; the being-for-other is thus in the something. The determinateness thus reflected into itself is therefore again a simple existent and hence
again a quality – determination.
b. Determination,53 constitution, and limit
The in-itself, in which the something is reflected into itself from its beingfor-other, no longer is an abstract in-itself but, as the negation of its
being-for-other, is mediated through this latter, which is thus its moment.
It is not only the immediate identity of the something with itself, but
the identity by virtue of which the something also has present in it what
it is in itself; the being-for-other is present in it because the in-itself is the
sublation of it, is in itself from it; but, because it is still abstract, and therefore
essentially affected with negation, it is equally affected with being-for-other.
We have here not only quality and reality, existent determinateness, but
determinateness existent-in-itself; and the development consists in positing
such determinateness as thus immanently reflected.
1. The quality which in the simple something is an in-itself essentially in
unity with the something’s other moment, its being-in-it, can be named its
determination, provided that this word is distinguished, in a more precise
signification, from determinateness in general. Determination is affirmative
determinateness; it is the in-itself by which a something abides in its
existence while involved with an other that would determine it, by which
it preserves itself in its self-equality, holding on to it in its being-forother. Something fulfills its determination to the extent that the further
53

Bestimmung also carries the meaning of “vocation” or “destiny” as in “die Bestimmung des Menschen,”
the vocation of humankind.

21.111

96

21.112

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determinateness, which variously accrues to it in the measure of its beingin-itself as it relates to an other, becomes its filling. Determination implies
that what something is in itself is also present in it.
The determination of the human being, its vocation, is rational thought:
thinking in general is his simple determinateness; by it the human being
is distinguished from the brute; he is thinking in himself, in so far as
this thinking is distinguished also from his being-for-other, from his own
natural and sensuous being that brings him in immediate association with
the other. But thinking is also in him; the human being is himself thinking,
he exists as thinking, thought is his concrete existence and actuality; and,
further, since thinking is in his existence and his existence is in his thinking,
thinking is concrete, must be taken as having content and filling; it is rational
thought and as such the determination of the human being. But even this
determination is again only in itself, as an ought, that is to say, it is, together
with the filling embodied in its in-itself, in the form of an in-itself in general
as against the existence which is not embodied in it but still lies outside
confronting it, immediate sensibility and nature.
2. The filling of the being-in-itself with determinateness is also distinct from the determinateness which is only being-for-other and remains
outside the determination. For in the sphere of the qualitative, the distinguished terms are left, in their sublated being, also with an immediate,
qualitative being contrasting them. That which the something has in it
thus separates itself and is from this side the external existence of the something and also its existence, but not as belonging to its being-in-itself. –
Determinateness is thus constitution.
Constituted in this or that way, the something is caught up in external
influences and in external relationships. This external connection on which
the constitution depends, and the being determined through an other,
appear as something accidental. But it is the quality of the something to
be given over to this externality and to have a constitution.
In so far as something alters, the alteration falls on the side of its constitution; the latter is that in the something which becomes an other. The
something itself preserves itself in the alteration; the latter affects only this
unstable surface of the something’s otherness, not its determination.
Determination and constitution are thus distinct from each other; something, according to its determination, is indifferent to its constitution.
But that which the something has in it is the middle term of this syllogism connecting the two, determination and constitution. Or, rather, the
being-in-the-something showed itself to fall apart into these two extremes.
The simple middle term is determinateness as such; its identity belongs to

Existence

97

determination just as well as to constitution. But determination passes over
into constitution on its own, and constitution into determination. This
is implied in what has been said. The connection, upon closer consideration, is this: in so far as that which something is in itself is also in it,
the something is affected with being-for-other; determination is therefore
open, as such, to the relation with other. Determinateness is at the same
time moment, but it contains at the same time the qualitative distinction
of being different from being-in-itself, of being the negative of the something, another existence. This determinateness which thus holds the other
in itself, united with the being-in-itself, introduces otherness in the latter or
in determination, and determination is thereby reduced to constitution. –
Conversely, the being-for-other, isolated as constitution and posited on its
own, is in it the same as what the other as such is, the other in it, that is,
the other of itself; but it consequently is self-referring existence, thus beingin-itself with a determinateness, therefore determination. – Consequently,
inasmuch as the two are also to be held apart, constitution, which appears
to be grounded in something external, in an other in general, also depends
on determination, and the determining from outside is at the same time
determined by the something’s own immanent determination. And further, constitution belongs to that which something is in itself: something
alters along with its constitution.
This altering of something is no longer the first alteration of something
merely in accordance with its being-for-other. The first was an alteration
only implicitly present, one that belonged to the inner concept; now the
alteration is also posited in the something. – The something itself is further
determined, and negation is posited as immanent to it, as its developed
being-in-itself.
The transition of determination and constitution into each other is at
first the sublation of their distinction, and existence or something in general
is thereby posited; moreover, since this something in general results from a
distinction that also includes qualitative otherness within it, there are two
somethings. But these are, with respect to each other, not just others in
general, so that this negation would still be abstract and would occur only
in the comparison of the two; rather the negation now is immanent to the
somethings. As existing, they are indifferent to each other, but this, their
affirmation, is no longer immediate: each refers itself to itself through the
intermediary of the sublation of the otherness which in determination is
reflected into the in-itselfness.
Something behaves in this way in relation to the other through itself;
since otherness is posited in it as its own moment, its in-itselfness holds

21.113

98

21.114

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

negation in itself, and it now has its affirmative existence through its
intermediary alone. But the other is also qualitatively distinguished from
this affirmative existence and is thus posited outside the something. The
negation of its other is only the quality of the something, for it is in
this sublation of its other that it is something. The other, for its part,
truly confronts an existence only with this sublation; it confronts the first
something only externally, or, since the two are in fact inherently joined
together, that is, according to their concept, their connectedness consists
in this, that existence has passed over into otherness, something into other;
that something is just as much an other as the other is. Now in so far as the
in-itselfness is the non-being of the otherness that is contained in it but
is at the same time also distinct as existent, something is itself negation,
the ceasing to be of an other in it; it is posited as behaving negatively in
relation to the other and in so doing preserving itself. This other, the initselfness of the something as negation of the negation, is the something’s
being-in-itself, and this sublation is as simple negation at the same time in
it, namely, as its negation of the other something external to it. It is one
determinateness of the two somethings that, on the one hand, as negation of the negation, is identical with the in-itselfness of the somethings,
and also, on the other hand, since these negations are to each other as
other somethings, joins them together of their own accord and, since each
negation negates the other, equally separates them. This determinateness is
limit.
3. Being-for-other is indeterminate, affirmative association of something
with its other; in limit the non-being-for-other is emphasized, the qualitative negation of the other, which is thereby kept out of the something
that is reflected into itself. We must see the development of this concept –
a development that will rather look like confusion and contradiction.
Contradiction immediately raises its head because limit, as an internally
reflected negation of something, ideally holds in it the moments of something and other, and these, as distinct moments, are at the same time
posited in the sphere of existence as really, qualitatively, distinct.
a. Something is therefore immediate, self-referring existence and at first
it has a limit with respect to an other; limit is the non-being of the other,
not of the something itself; in limit, something marks the boundary of its
other. – But other is itself a something in general. The limit that something
has with respect to an other is, therefore, also the limit of the other as a
something; it is the limit of this something in virtue of which the something
holds the first something as its other away from itself, or is a non-being of
that something. The limit is thus not only the non-being of the other, but of

Existence

99

the one something just as of the other, and consequently of the something
in general.
But the limit is equally, essentially, the non-being of the other; thus,
through its limit, something at the same time is. In limiting, something
is of course thereby reduced to being limited itself; but, as the ceasing of
the other in it, its limit is at the same time itself only the being of the
something; this something is what it is by virtue of it, has its quality in it. –
This relation is the external appearance of the fact that limit is simple
negation or the first negation, whereas the other is, at the same time, the
negation of the negation, the in-itselfness of the something.
Something, as an immediate existence, is therefore the limit with respect
to another something; but it has this limit in it and is something through
the mediation of that limit, which is just as much its non-being. The limit
is the mediation in virtue of which something and other each both is and
is not.
b. Now in so far as something in its limit both is and is not, and these
moments are an immediate, qualitative distinction, the non-existence and
the existence of the something fall outside each other. Something has its
existence outside its limit (or, as representation would also have it, inside it);
in the same way the other, too, since it is something, has it outside it. The
limit is the middle point between the two at which they leave off. They have
existence beyond each other, beyond their limit; the limit, as the non-being
of each, is the other of both.
– It is in accordance with this difference of the something from its limit
that the line appears as line outside its limit, the point; the plane as plane
outside the line; the solid as solid only outside its limiting plane. – This
is the aspect of limit that first occurs to figurative representation (the selfexternal-being of the concept) and is also most commonly assumed in the
context of spatial objects.
g. But further, something as it is outside the limit, as the unlimited
something, is only existence in general. As such, it is not distinguished
from its other; it is only existence and, therefore, it and its other have the
same determination; each is only something in general or each is other;
and so both are the same. But this, their at first immediate existence, is now
posited in them as limit: in it both are what they are, distinct from each
other. But it is also equally their common distinguishedness, the unity and
the distinguishedness of both, just like existence. This double identity of
the two, existence and limit, contains this: that something has existence
only in limit, and that, since limit and immediate existence are each at the
same time the negative of each other, the something, which is now only

21.115

100

21.116

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

in its limit, equally separates itself from itself, points beyond itself to its
non-being and declares it to be its being, and so it passes over into it. To
apply this to the preceding example, the one determination is this: that
something is what it is only in its limit. Therefore, the point is the limit of
line, not because the latter just ceases at the point and has existence outside
it; the line is the limit of plane, not because the plane just ceases at it; and
the same goes for the plane as the limit of solid. Rather, at the point the line
also begins; the point is its absolute beginning, and if the line is represented
as unlimited on both its two sides, or, as is said, as extended to infinity, the
point still constitutes its element, just as the line constitutes the element
of the plane, and the plane that of the solid. These limits are the principle
of that which they delimit; just as one, for instance, is as hundredth the
limit, but also the element, of the whole hundred.
The other determination is the unrest of the something in its limit in
which it is immanent, the contradiction that propels it beyond itself. Thus
the point is this dialectic of itself becoming line; the line, the dialectic of
becoming plane; the plane, of becoming total space. A second definition
is given of line, plane, and whole space which has the line come to be
through the movement of the point; the plane through the movement of
the line, and so forth. This movement of the point, the line, and so forth, is
however viewed as something accidental, or as movement only in figurative
representation. In fact, however, this view is taken back by supposing that
the determinations from which the line, and so forth, originate are their
elements and principles, and these are, at the same time, nothing else but
their limits; the coming to be is not considered as accidental or only as
represented. That the point, the line, the plane, are per se self-contradictory
beginnings which on their own repel themselves from themselves, and
consequently that the point passes over from itself into the line through
its concept, moves in itself and makes the line come to be, and so on – all
this lies in the concept of the limit which is immanent in the something.
The application itself, however, belongs to the treatment of space; as an
indication of it here, we can say that the point is the totally abstract limit,
but in a determinate existence; this existence is still taken in total abstraction,
it is the so-called absolute, that is, abstract space, the absolutely continuous
being-outside-one-another. Inasmuch as the limit is not abstract negation,
but is rather in this existence, inasmuch as it is spatial determinateness, the
point is spatial, is the contradiction of abstract negation and continuity
and is, for that reason, the transition as it occurs and has already occurred
into the line, and so forth. And so there is no point, just as there is no line
or plane.

Existence

101

The something, posited with its immanent limit as the contradiction of
itself by virtue of which it is directed and driven out and beyond itself, is
the finite.
c. Finitude
Existence is determinate. Something has a quality, and in this quality it is
not only determined but delimited; its quality is its limit and, affected by it,
something remains affirmative, quiescent existence. But, so developed that
the opposition of its existence and of the negation as the limit immanent to
this existence is the very in-itselfness of the something, and this is thus only
becoming in it, this negation constitutes the finitude of the something.
When we say of things that they are finite, we understand by this that
they not only have a determinateness, that their quality is not only reality
and existent determination, that they are not merely limited and as such
still have existence outside their limit, but rather that non-being constitutes their nature, their being. Finite things are, but in their reference to
themselves they refer to themselves negatively – in this very self-reference
they propel themselves beyond themselves, beyond their being. They are,
but the truth of this being is (as in Latin) their finis, their end.54 The finite
does not just alter, as the something in general does, but perishes, and its
perishing is not just a mere possibility, as if it might be without perishing. Rather, the being as such of finite things is to have the germ of this
transgression55 in their in-itselfness: the hour of their birth is the hour of
their death.
a. The immediacy of finitude
The thought of the finitude of things brings this mournful note with it
because finitude is qualitative negation driven to the extreme, and in the
simplicity of such a determination there is no longer left to things an
affirmative being distinct from their determination as things destined to
ruin.56 Because of this qualitative simplicity of negation that has returned
to the abstract opposition of nothing and perishing to being, finitude
is the most obstinate of the categories of the understanding; negation in
54

55
56

“ . . . (as in Latin) their finis . . .” is my gloss. The Latin root of “finite” and “finitude” is finis, that
is, “end.” This connection between “finite” and “end” is clear in the German, endlich, Endlichkeit,
Ende, and Hegel plays on it. I have tried to bring out this wordplay, which in English implicates
the Latin word.
Vergehen has the meaning of both “offence” (as in “transgression”) and “passage of time.”
Bestimmung zum Untergange. Bestimmung means both “determination” and “destiny” or “vocation.”

21.117

102

21.118

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

general, constitution, limit, are compatible with their other, with existence;
even the abstract nothing, by itself, is given up as an abstraction; but
finitude is negation fixed in itself and, as such, stands in stark contrast to its
affirmative. The finite thus does indeed let itself be submitted to flux; this
is precisely what it is, that it should come to an end, and this end is its only
determination. Its refusal is rather to let itself be brought affirmatively to its
affirmative, the infinite, to be associated with it; it is therefore inseparably
posited with its nothing, and thereby cut off from any reconciliation with
its other, the affirmative. The determination of finite things does not go
past their end. The understanding persists in this sorrow of finitude, for
it makes non-being the determination of things and, at the same time,
this non-being imperishable and absolute. Their transitoriness would only
pass away in their other, in the affirmative; their finitude would then be
severed from them; but this finitude is their unalterable quality, that is,
their quality which does not pass over into their other, that is, not into the
affirmative; and so finitude is eternal.
This is a very important consideration. But that the finite is absolute is
certainly not a standpoint that any philosophy or outlook, or the understanding, would want to endorse. The opposite is rather expressly present
in the assertion of finitude: the finite is the restricted, the perishable, the
finite is only the finite, not the imperishable; all this is immediately part
and parcel of its determination and expression. But all depends on whether
in one’s view of finitude its being is insisted on, and the transitoriness thus
persists, or whether the transitoriness and the perishing perish. The fact is
that this perishing of the perishing does not happen on precisely the view
that would make the perishing the final end of the finite. The official claim
is that the finite is incompatible with the infinite and cannot be united
with it; that the finite is absolutely opposed to the infinite. Being, absolute
being, is ascribed to the infinite. The finite remains held fast over against it
as its negative; incapable of union with the infinite, it remains absolute on
its own side; from the affirmative, from the infinite, it would receive affirmation and thus it would perish; but a union with the infinite is precisely
what is declared impossible. If the finite were not to persist over against
the infinite but were to perish, its perishing, as just said, would then be
the last of it – not its affirmative, which would be only a perishing of the
perishing. However, if it is not to perish into the affirmative but its end
is rather to be grasped as a nothing, then we are back at that first, abstract
nothing that itself has long since passed away.
With this nothing, however, which is supposed to be only nothing
but to which a reflective existence is nevertheless granted in thought, in

Existence

103

representation or in speech, the same contradiction occurs as we have
just indicated in connection with the finite, except that in the nothing
it just occurs but in the finite it is instead expressed. In the one case, the
contradiction appears as subjective; in the other, the finite is said to stand
in perpetual opposition to the infinite, in itself to be null, and to be as null
in itself. This is now to be brought to consciousness. The development
of the finite will show that, expressly as this contradiction, it collapses
internally, but that, in this collapse, it actually resolves the contradiction; it
will show that the finite is not just perishable, and that it perishes, but that
the perishing, the nothing, is rather not the last of it; that the perishing
rather perishes.
b. Restriction and the ought
This contradiction is indeed abstractly present by the very fact that the
something is finite, or that the finite is. But something or being is no longer
posited abstractly but reflected into itself, and developed as being-in-itself
that has determination and constitution in it, or, more determinedly still,
in such a way that it has a limit within it; and this limit, as constituting
what is immanent to the something and the quality of its being-in-itself,
is finitude. It is to be seen what moments are contained in this concept of
the finite something.
Determination and constitution arose as sides for external reflection,
but determination already contained otherness as belonging to the in-itself
of something. On the one side, the externality of otherness is within the
something’s own inwardness; on the other side, it remains as otherness
distinguished from it; it is still externality as such, but in the something.
But further, since otherness is determined as limit, itself as negation of
the negation, the otherness immanent to the something is posited as the
connection of the two sides, and the unity of the something with itself (to
which both determination and constitution belong) is its reference turned
back upon itself, the reference to it of its implicitly existing determination
that in it negates its immanent limit. The self-identical in-itself thus refers
itself to itself as to its own non-being, but as negation of the negation, as
negating that which at the same time retains existence in it, for it is the
quality of its in-itselfness. Something’s own limit, thus posited by it as a
negative which is at the same time essential, is not only limit as such, but
restriction. But restriction is not alone in being posited as negative; the
negation cuts two ways, for that which it posits as negated is limit, and
limit is in general what is common to something and other, and is also

21.119

104

21.120

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the determinateness of the in-itself of determination as such. This in-itself,
consequently, as negative reference to its limit (which is also distinguished
from it), as negative reference to itself as restriction, is the ought.
In order for the limit that is in every something to be a restriction, the
something must at the same time transcend it in itself – must refer to it
from within as to a non-existent. The existence of something lies quietly
indifferent, as it were, alongside its limit. But the something transcends
its limit only in so far as it is the sublatedness of the limit, the negative
in-itselfness over against it. And inasmuch as the limit is as restriction in
the determination itself, the something thereby transcends itself.
The ought therefore contains the double determination: once, as a determination which has an in-itselfness over against negation; and again, as a
non-being which, as restriction, is distinguished from the determination
but is at the same time itself a determination existing in itself.57
The finite has thus determined itself as connecting determination and
limit; in this connection, the determination is the ought and the limit is the
restriction. Thus the two are both moments of the finite, and therefore both
themselves finite, the ought as well as the restriction. But only restriction is
posited as the finite; the ought is restricted only in itself, and therefore only
for us. It is restricted by virtue of its reference to the limit already immanent
within it, though this restriction in it is shrouded in in-itselfness, for
according to its determinate being, that is, according to its determinateness
in contrast to restriction, it is posited as being-in-itself.
What ought to be is, and at the same time is not. If it were, it would
not be what merely ought to be. The ought has therefore a restriction
essentially. This restriction is not anything alien; that which only ought to
be is determination now posited as it is in fact, namely as at the same time
only a determinateness.
The being-in-itself of the something is thus reduced in its determination
to the ought because the very thing that constitutes the something’s initselfness is, in one and the same respect, as non-being; or again, because
in the in-itselfness, in the negation of the negation, the said being-in-itself
is as one negation (what negates) a unity with the other, and this other, as
qualitatively other, is the limit by virtue of which that unity is as reference
57

Hegel is making a deflationary move here. The “ought” is nothing special. It defines explicitly the
true relation that obtains between any subject and its predicate. The subject is its predicate while
at the same time being distinguished from it. The relation between the two is therefore always one
of identity but at a distance. The predicate is what the subject is “destined” or “said” to be. It is
important to keep in mind that Bestimmung in German means both, “determination” and “destiny”
or “vocation.”

Existence

105

to it.58 The restriction of the finite is not anything external, but the finite’s
own determination is rather also its restriction; and this restriction is both
itself and the ought; it is that which is common to both, or rather that in
which the two are identical.
But further, as “ought” the finite transcends its restriction; the same
determinateness which is its negation is also sublated, and is thus its initself; its limit is also not its limit.
As ought something is thus elevated above its restriction, but conversely
it has its restriction only as ought. The two are indivisible. Something has
a restriction in so far as it has negation in its determination, and the
determination is also the being sublated of the restriction.
Remark
The ought has of late played a major role in philosophy, especially in
connection with morality but also in metaphysics in general, as the final
and absolute concept of the identity of the in-itself or of self-reference, and
of determinateness or the limit.
“You can because you ought.”59 This expression, which is supposed to
say a lot, is implied in the concept of the ought. For the ought is the
transcendence of restriction; restriction is sublated in it, the in-itself of the
ought is thus identical self-reference, and consequently the abstraction of
“being able.” – But, conversely, “you cannot, even though you ought” is just
as correct. For the restriction as restriction is equally implied in the ought;
the one formalism of possibility has in it a reality, a qualitative otherness,
that stands opposed to it, and the connection of each to the other is a
contradiction, and thus a “cannot” or rather an impossibility.
In the ought the transcendence of finitude, infinity, begins. The ought
is that which, in the subsequent development, in accordance with the said
impossibility, will display itself as a progress to infinity.
Regarding the form of restriction and of the ought, two prejudices deserve
more detailed criticism. First, much is commonly made of the restrictions of
thought, of reason, and so forth, and the claim is made that it is impossible
58

59

This is a very convoluted sentence. Hegel’s point seems to be this. A subject is reflectively what it is
by negating that its predicate (otherwise qualitatively other than it) is truly an other. The subject is
that predicate as other; it negates the predicate as a would-be other (i.e. as a negative with respect
to it). The subject is therefore reflectively what the predicate is qualitatively (i.e. immediately). It is
what the predicate is, but at a distance as it were. Its self-identity (the negation of the negation that
constitutes its internal being) is thus modified by carrying a reference to the would-be, qualitatively
independent predicate. The latter is what the subject ought to be, what it is “destined” or “said” to
be.
Cf. A807/B835.

21.121

106

21.122

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to transcend such restrictions. What is lost track of in this claim is that
something is already transcended by the very fact of being determined as a
restriction. For a determinateness, a limit, is determined as restriction only
in opposition to its other in general, that is, in opposition to that which
is without its restriction; the other of a restriction is precisely the beyond
with respect to it. Stone, metal, do not transcend their restriction, for the
simple reason that the restriction is not a restriction for them. However,
with respect to such general propositions that are typical of the way the
understanding thinks, as that it is impossible to transcend restriction, if
thought will not apply itself to see what is implied in the concept, it can
then be referred to actuality, where the propositions prove themselves to be
completely unrealistic. Just because thought ought to be something higher
than actuality, just because it ought to dwell in higher regions remote from
it, and therefore be itself determined as an ought, it fails on the one hand
to advance to the concept, and on the other hand it manages to be equally
untrue both in its relation to actuality and to the concept. – Because a stone
does not think, does not even feel, its determinateness is not a restriction
for it, that is, it is not in it a negation for the sensation, the representation,
the thought, and so on, which it does not have. But the stone too is as a
something distinguished in its determination or its in-itself and existence,
and to this extent it too transcends its restriction; the concept which the
stone is in itself contains the identity with its other. If it is a base receptive
to acids then it is oxidizable, neutralizable, and so on. In the process of
oxidization, neutralization, and so on, its restriction to being only a base is
sublated; the base transcends it; similarly, the acid transcends its restriction
to being an acid, and in the acid just as in the caustic base the ought, the
imperative to transcend their restriction, is so strong that it is only with
violence that they can be kept fixed as acid and caustic base (as waterless,
that is, purely non-neutral).
If, however, a concrete existence contains the concept not merely as
abstract in-itselfness, but as a totality existing for itself, as instinct, life, sensation, representation, and so forth, it itself then brings about, by itself, this
transcendence and this transcending. The plant transcends the restriction
of being a seed, similarly, of being blossom, fruit, leaf; the seed becomes
the developed plant, the blossom fades, and so forth. In the grip of hunger,
thirst, and so forth, the sentient is the impulse to transcend this restriction,
and it does transcend it. It feels pain, and to feel pain is the privilege of
sentient nature. Pain is a negation within the sentient’s self, and this negation is determined as a restriction in the sentient’s feeling just because the
sentient has a feeling of its self, and this self is the totality that transcends

Existence

107

the determinateness of the negation. If the sentient did not transcend it,
it would not feel it as its negation and would have no pain. – But reason,
thought, is not supposed to be able to transcend this restriction: reason,
which is the universal, which is for itself the beyond of particularity as
such, that is, of all particularity, only is the transcendence of restriction. –
To be sure, not every transcending, not every transcendence beyond restriction, is a true liberation from it, a true affirmation; even the “ought” itself
is this kind of imperfect transcending, and so abstraction in general. But
the mention of a totally abstract universal is sufficient to counter the
equally abstract pronouncement that restriction cannot be transcended,
or, again, the mention of the infinite in general is sufficient to counter the
pronouncement that the finite cannot be transcended.
We can recall in this context a seemingly ingenious notion of Leibniz:
that if a magnet had consciousness, it would regard its pointing to the North
as a determination of its will, a law of its freedom.60 Rather, if the magnet
did have consciousness and along with it a will and freedom, it would be a
thinking being. Consequently, space would be for it a universal embracing
all directions, and its one direction to the North thus a restriction rather
of its freedom – just as being held fixed to one place is a restriction for a
human being, but not for a plant.
The ought, for its part, is the transcending of restriction, but a transcending which is itself only finite. It therefore has its place and legitimacy in the
field of finitude, where it holds in-itself fixed over against what is restricted,
declaring it to be the norm and the essential relative to what is null. Duty
is an ought directed against the particular will, against self-seeking desire
and arbitrary interest; it is the ought held up before a will capable of isolating itself from the truth because of its instability. Those who hold the
ought of morality so high as to believe that, by not recognizing it as the
ultimate truth, morality itself would be destroyed; the brokers of reason
whose understanding takes unceasing satisfaction in being able to confront
everything that there is with an ought and consequently a would-be superior knowledge – who therefore are all the more resistant to being robbed
of the ought – these do not see that, as regards the finitude of their sphere,
the ought receives full recognition. – But in the actual order of things,
reason and law are not in such a sad state of affairs that they only ought
to be (only the abstraction of the in-itself stays at this); equally, the ought
does not perpetuate itself nor, which is the same, is finitude absolute. The
philosophy of Kant and Fichte holds out the ought as the resolution of
60

Leibniz, Theodicy (1710), Part 1, §50.

21.123

108

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the contradictions of reason – though it is rather only a standpoint that
remains fixed in finitude and therefore in contradiction.
g. Transition of the finite into the infinite

21.124

The ought contains restriction explicitly, for itself, and restriction contains
the ought. Their mutual connection is the finite itself, which contains them
both in its in-itself. These moments of its determination are qualitatively
opposed; restriction is determined as the negative of the ought, and the
ought equally as the negative of restriction. The finite is thus in itself the
contradiction of itself; it sublates itself, it goes away and ceases to be.61
But this, its result, the negative as such, is (a) its very determination; for
it is the negative of the negative. So, in going away and ceasing to be,
the finite has not ceased; it has only become momentarily an other finite
which equally is, however, a going-away as a going-over into another finite,
and so forth to infinity. But, (b) if we consider this result more closely, in
its going-away and ceasing-to-be, in this negation of itself, the finite has
attained its being-in-itself; in it, it has rejoined itself. Each of its moments
contains precisely this result; the ought transcends the restriction, that is,
it transcends itself; but its beyond, or its other, is only restriction itself.
Restriction, for its part, immediately points beyond itself to its other, and
this is the ought; but this ought is the same diremption of in-itselfness and
determinateness as is restriction; it is the same thing; in going beyond itself,
restriction thus equally rejoins itself. This identity with itself, the negation
of negation, is affirmative being, is thus the other of the finite which is
supposed to have the first negation for its determinateness; this other is the
infinite.
c. infinity
The infinite in its simple concept can be regarded, first of all, as a fresh
definition of the absolute; as self-reference devoid of determination, it is
posited as being and becoming. The forms of existence have no place in the
series of determinations that can be regarded as definitions of the absolute,
since the forms of that sphere are immediately posited for themselves
only as determinacies, as finite in general. But the infinite is accepted
unqualifiedly as absolute, since it is explicitly determined as the negation
61

“It goes away or ceases to be” = vergeht. I am using both expressions to retain Hegel’s play on words
in this whole passage.

Existence

109

of the finite; the restrictedness – to which being and becoming would
somehow be susceptible even if they do not have it or exhibit it – is thereby
both explicitly referred to and denied in it.
But, in fact, by just this negation the infinite is not already free from
restrictedness and finitude. It is essential to distinguish the true concept
of infinity from bad infinity, the infinite of reason from the infinite of the
understanding. The latter is in fact a finitized infinite, and, as we shall now
discover, in wanting to maintain the infinite pure and distant from the
finite, the infinite is by that very fact only made finite.
The infinite
(a) in simple determination, is the affirmative as negation of the finite;
(b) but is thereby in alternating determination with the infinite, and is
abstract, one-sided infinite;
(c) is the self-sublation of this infinite and of the finite in one process. This
is the true infinite.
a. The infinite in general
The infinite is the negation of negation, the affirmative, being that has
reinstated itself out of restrictedness. The infinite is, in a more intense
sense than the first immediate being; it is the true being; the elevation
above restriction. At the mention of the infinite, soul and spirit light up,
for in the infinite the spirit is at home, and not only abstractly; rather, it
rises to itself, to the light of its thinking, its universality, its freedom.
What is first given with the concept of the infinite is this, that in its
being-in-itself existence is determined as finite and transcends restriction.
It is the very nature of the finite that it transcend itself, that it negate its
negation and become infinite. Consequently, the infinite does not stand
above the finite as something ready-made by itself, as if the finite stood fixed
outside or below it. Nor is it we only, as a subjective reason, who transcend
the finite into the infinite – as if, in saying that the infinite is a concept of
reason and that through reason we elevate ourselves above things temporal,
we did this without prejudice to the finite, without this elevation (which
remains external to the finite) affecting it. In so far as the finite itself is
being elevated to infinity, it is not at all an alien force that does this for it;
it is rather its nature to refer itself to itself as restriction (both restriction
as such and as ought) and to transcend this restriction, or rather, in this
self-reference, to have negated the restriction and gone above and beyond
it. It is not in the sublation of the finite in general that infinity in general
comes to be, but the finite is rather just this, that through its nature it

21.125

110

21.126

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

comes to be itself the infinite. Infinity is its affirmative determination, its
vocation, what it truly is in itself.
The finite has thus vanished into the infinite and what is, is only the
infinite.

b. Alternating determination of finite and infinite
The infinite is; in this immediacy it is at the same time the negation of
an other, of the finite. And so, as existent and at the same time as the
non-being of an other, it has fallen back into the category of the something,
of something determinate in general. More precisely: the infinite is the
existence reflected into itself which results from the mediating sublation of
determinateness in general and is consequently posited as existence distinct
from its determinateness; therefore, it has fallen back into the category of
something with a limit. In accordance with this determinateness, the finite
stands over against the infinite as real existence; they thus remain outside
each other, standing in qualitative mutual reference; the immediate being of
the infinite resurrects the being of its negation, of the finite again, which
seemed at first to have vanished into the infinite.
But the infinite and the finite are not in these referential categories only;
the two sides are further determined in addition to being as mere others
to each other. Namely, the finite is restriction posited as restriction; it is
existence posited with the determination that it passes over into what is its
in-itself and becomes infinite. Infinity is the nothing of the finite, the in-itself
that the latter ought to be, but it is this at the same time as reflected within
itself, as realized ought, as only affirmative self-referring being. In infinity
we have the satisfaction that all determinateness, alteration, all restriction
and the ought itself together with it, have vanished, are sublated, and the
nothing of the finite is posited. As this negation of the finite is the beingin-itself determined which, as negation of negation, is in itself affirmative.
Yet this affirmation is qualitatively immediate self-reference, being; and,
because of this, the affirmative is led back to the category of being that has
the finite confronting it as an other; its negative nature is posited as existent
negation, and hence as first and immediate negation. The infinite is in this
way burdened with the opposition to the finite, and this finite, as an other,
remains a real existence even though in its being-in-itself, in the infinite,
it is at the same time posited as sublated; this infinite is that which is not
finite – a being in the determinateness of negation. Contrasted with the
finite, with the series of existent determinacies, of realities, the infinite is

Existence

111

indeterminate emptiness, the beyond of the finite, whose being-in-itself is
not in its existence (which is something determinate).
As thus posited over against the finite, the two connected by the qualitative mutual reference of others, the infinite is to be called the bad infinite,
the infinite of the understanding, for which it counts as the highest, the
absolute truth. The understanding believes that it has attained satisfaction
in the reconciliation of truth while it is in fact entangled in unreconciled,
unresolved, absolute contradictions. And it is these contradictions, into
which it falls on every side whenever it embarks on the application and
explication of these categories that belong to it, that must make it conscious
of the fact.
This contradiction is present in the very fact that the infinite remains
over against the finite, with the result that there are two determinacies.
There are two worlds, one infinite and one finite, and in their connection
the infinite is only the limit of the finite and thus only a determinate, itself
finite infinite.
This contradiction develops its content into more explicit forms. – The
finite is the real existence which persists as such even when it has gone
over into its non-being, the infinite. As we have seen, this infinite has
for its determinateness, over against the finite, only the first, immediate
negation, just as the finite, as negated, has over against this negation
only the meaning of an other and is, therefore, still a something. When,
therefore, the understanding, elevating itself above this finite world, rises
to what is the highest for it, to the infinite, the finite world remains for it
as something on this side here, and, thus posited only above the finite, the
infinite is separated from the finite and, for the same reason, the finite from
the infinite: each is placed in a different location, the finite as existence here,
and the infinite, although the being-in-itself of the finite, there as a beyond,
at a nebulous, inaccessible distance outside which there stands, enduring,
the finite.
As thus separated, they are just as much essentially connected with each
other, through the very negation that divides them. This negation connecting them – these somethings reflected into themselves – is the common
limit of each over against the other; and that, too, in such a way that each
does not merely have this limit in it over against the other, but the negation
is rather the in-itselfness of each; each thus has for itself, in its separation
from the other, the limit in it. But the limit is the first negation; both are
thus limited, finite, in themselves. Yet, as each affirmatively refers itself to
itself, each is also the negation of its limit; each thus immediately repels
the negation from itself as its non-being, and, qualitatively severed from it,

21.127

21.128

112

21.129

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

posits it as an other being outside it: the finite posits its non-being as this
infinite, and the infinite likewise the finite. It is readily conceded that the
finite passes over into the infinite necessarily (that is, through its determination) and is thereby elevated to what is its in-itself, for while the finite
is indeed determined as subsistent existence, it is at the same time also a
null in itself and therefore destined to self-dissolution; whereas the infinite,
although burdened with negation and limit, is equally also determined as
the existent in-itself, so that this abstraction of self-referring affirmation is
what constitutes its determination, and hence finite existence is not present
in it. But it has been shown that the infinite itself attains affirmative being
only by the mediation of negation, as negation of negation, and that when
its affirmation thus attained is taken as just simple, qualitative being, the
negation contained in it is demoted to simple immediate negation and,
therefore, to determinateness and limit; and these, then, are excluded
from the infinite as contradicting its in-itself; they are posited as not
belonging to it but rather as opposed to its in-itself, as the finite. Since each
is in it and through its determination the positing of its other, the two are
inseparable. But this unity rests hidden in their qualitative otherness; it is
their inner unity, one that lies only at their base.
The manner of the appearance of this unity has thereby been defined.
The unity is posited in existence as a turning over or transition of the
finite into the infinite, and vice-versa; so that the infinite only emerges in
the finite, and the finite in the infinite, the other in the other; that is
to say, each arises in the other independently and immediately, and their
connection is only an external one.
The process of their transition has the following, detailed shape. We
have the finite passing over into the infinite. This passing over appears as
an external doing. In this emptiness beyond the finite, what arises? What is
there of positive in it? On account of the inseparability of the infinite and
the finite (or because this infinite, which stands apart, is itself restricted),
the limit arises. The infinite has vanished and the other, the finite, has
stepped in. But this stepping in of the finite appears as an event external
to the infinite, and the new limit as something that does not arise out of
the infinite itself but is likewise found given. And with this we are back
at the previous determination, which has been sublated in vain. This new
limit, however, is itself only something to be sublated or transcended. And
so there arises again the emptiness, the nothing, in which we find again the
said determination – and so forth to infinity.
We have before us the alternating determination of the finite and the
infinite; the finite is finite only with reference to the ought or the infinite,

Existence

113

and the infinite is only infinite with reference to the finite. The two are
inseparable and at the same time absolutely other with respect to each
other; each has in it the other of itself; each is thus the unity of itself and
its other, and, in its determinateness – not to be what itself and what its
other is – it is existence.
This alternating determination of self-negating and of negating the
negating is what passes as the progress to infinity, which is accepted in
so many shapes and applications as an unsurpassable ultimate at which
thought, having reached this “and so on to infinity,” has usually achieved
its end. – This progress breaks out wherever relative determinations are
pressed to the point of opposition, so that, though in inseparable unity,
each is nevertheless attributed an independent existence over against the
other. This progress is therefore the contradiction which is not resolved but
is rather always pronounced simply as present.
What we have before us is an abstract transcending which remains
incomplete because the transcending itself has not been transcended. Before
us we have the infinite; of course, this infinite is transcended, for another
limit is posited, but just because of that only a return is instead made back
to the finite. This bad infinite is in itself the same as the perpetual ought;
it is indeed the negation of the finite, but in truth it is unable to free
itself from it; the finite constantly resurfaces in it as its other, since this
infinite only is with reference to the finite, which is its other. The progress
to infinity is therefore only repetitious monotony, the one and the same
tedious alternation of this finite and infinite.
The infinity of the infinite progress remains burdened by the finite as
such, is thereby restricted, and is itself finite. In fact, however, it is thereby
posited as the unity of the finite and the infinite. Only, this unity is not
reflected upon. Yet it alone rouses the finite in the infinite, and the infinite
in the finite; it is, so to speak, the impulse driving the infinite progress. This
progress is the outside of this unity at which representation remains fixated –
fixated at that perennial repetition of one and the same alternation; at the
empty unrest of a progression across the limit towards the infinite which, in
this infinity, finds a new limit but is just as unable to halt at it as it is at the
infinite. This infinite has the rigid determination of a beyond that cannot
be attained, for the very reason that it ought not be attained, since the
determinateness of the beyond, of an existent negation, has not been let go.
In this determination, the infinite has the finite as a this-side over against it –
a finite that is likewise unable to raise itself up to the infinite just because
it has this determination of an other, that is, of an existence that perennially
regenerates itself in that beyond precisely by being different from it.

21.130

114

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
c. Affirmative infinity

21.131

In this reciprocal determination of the finite and the infinite alternating
back and forth as just indicated, the truth of these two is already implicitly
present in itself, and all that is needed is to take up what is there. This back
and forth movement constitutes the external realization of the concept in
which the content of the latter is posited, but externally, as a falling out of
the two; all that is needed is the comparing of these two different moments
in which the unity is given which the concept itself gives. “Unity of the
finite and the infinite” – as has often been already noted but must especially
be kept in mind at this juncture – is the uneven expression for the unity as
it is in truth; but also the removal of this uneven determination must be
found in the externalization of the concept that lies ahead of us.
Taken in their first, only immediate determination, the infinite is the
transcending of the finite; according to its determination, it is the negation
of the finite; the finite, for its part, is only that which must be transcended,
the negation in it of itself, and this is the infinite. In each, therefore, there is
the determinateness of the other, whereas, according to the viewpoint of the
infinite progression, the two should be mutually excluded and would have
to follow one another only alternately; neither can be posited and grasped
without the other, the infinite without the finite, the finite without the
infinite. In saying what the infinite is, namely the negation of the finite,
the finite itself is said also; it cannot be avoided in the determination
of the infinite. One need only know what is being said in order to find
the determination of the finite in the infinite. Regarding the finite, it
is readily conceded that it is the null; this very nothingness is however
the infinite from which it is inseparable. – Understood in this way, they
may seem to be taken according to the way each refers to its other. Taken
without this connecting reference, and thus joined only through an “and,”
they subsist independently, each only an existent over against the other.
We have to examine how they would be constituted in this way. The
infinite, thus positioned, is one of the two; but, as only one of them, it
is itself finite, it is not the whole but only one side; it has its limit in
that which stands over against it; and so it is the finite infinite. We have
before us only two finites. The finitude of the infinite, and therefore its
unity with the finite, lies in the very fact that it is separated from the finite
and placed, consequently, on one side. – The finite, for its part, removed
from the infinite and positioned for itself, is this self-reference in which the
relativity, its dependence and transitoriness, are removed; it is the same
self-subsistence and self-affirmation which the infinite is presumed to be.

Existence

115

The two pathways of consideration, even though they seem at first to
have each a different determinateness for their point of departure – the
former inasmuch as it assumes it to be only the reference of infinite and
finite to each other, of each to the other; and the latter their complete
separation from each other – yield one and the same result. The infinite
and the finite, taken together as referring to each other in a connection
which is presumed external but is in fact essential to them (for without it,
neither is what it is), each contains its other in its own determination, just
as, when each is taken for itself, when looked at on its terms, each has the
other present in it as its own moment.
This yields, then, the scandalous unity of the finite and the infinite –
the unity which is itself the infinite that embraces both itself and the
finite – the infinite, therefore, understood in a sense other than when the
finite is separated from it and placed on the other side from it. Since they
must now also be distinguished, each is within it, as just shown, itself
the unity of both; there are thus two such unities. The common element,
the unity of both determinacies, as such a unity, posits them at first as
negated, for each is to be what it is in being distinguished; in their unity,
therefore, they lose their qualitative nature – an important reflection for
countering the incorrigible habit of representing the infinite and the finite,
in their unity, as still holding on to the quality that they would have when
taken apart from each other; of seeing in that unity, therefore, nothing
except contradiction, and not also the resolution of the contradiction by
the negation of the qualitative determinateness of each. And so is the unity
of the infinite and the finite, at first simple and universal, falsified.
But further, since the two are now to be taken also as distinguished, the
unity of the infinite which is itself both of these moments is determined
differently in each. The infinite, determined as such, has in it the finitude
which is distinct from it; in this unity, the infinite is the in-itself while the
finite is only determinateness, the limit in the infinite. But such a limit is
the absolute other of the infinite, its opposite. The infinite’s determination,
which is the in-itself as such, is corrupted by being saddled with a quality
of this sort; the infinite is thus a finitized infinite. Likewise, since the finite
is as such only the non-in-itself but equally has its opposite in it by virtue
of the said unity, it is elevated above its worth and, so to speak, infinitely
elevated; it is posited as the infinitized finite.
Likewise, just as the simple unity of infinite and finite was falsified before
by the understanding, so too is the double unity. Here also this happens
because the infinite is taken in one of the two unities not as negated but,
rather, as the in-itself in which, therefore, determinateness and restriction

21.132

116
21.133

21.134

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

should not be posited, for they would debase and corrupt it. Conversely,
the finite is equally held fixed as not negated, although null in itself; so
that, in combination with the infinite, it is elevated to what it is not and is
thereby infinitized notwithstanding its determination that has not vanished
but is rather perpetuated.
The falsification that the understanding perpetrates with respect to the
finite and the infinite, of holding their reciprocal reference fixed as qualitative differentiation, of maintaining that their determination is separate,
indeed, absolutely separate, comes from forgetting what for the understanding itself is the concept of these moments. According to this concept,
the unity of the finite and the infinite is not an external bringing together of
them, nor an incongruous combination that goes against their nature, one
in which inherently separate and opposed terms that exist independently
and are consequently incompatible, would be knotted together. Rather,
each is itself this unity, and this only as a sublating of itself in which neither
would have an advantage over the other in in-itselfness and affirmative
existence. As has earlier been shown, finitude is only as a transcending
of itself; it is therefore within it that the infinite, the other of itself, is
contained. Similarly, the infinite is only as the transcending of the finite;
it therefore contains its other essentially, and it is thus within it that it is
the other of itself. The finite is not sublated by the infinite as by a power
present outside it; its infinity consists rather in sublating itself.
This sublating is not, consequently, alteration or otherness in general,
not the sublating of something. That into which the finite is sublated is
the infinite as the negating of finitude. But the latter has long since been
only existence, determined as a non-being. It is only the negation, therefore,
that in the negation sublates itself. Thus infinity is determined on its side
as the negative of the finite and thereby of determinateness in general, as
an empty beyond; its sublating of itself into the finite is a return from an
empty flight, the negation of the beyond which is inherently a negative.
Present in both, therefore, is the same negation of negation. But this
negation of negation is in itself self-reference, affirmation but as turning
back to itself, that is, through the mediation that the negation of negation is.
These are the determinations that it is essential to bring to view; the second
point, however, is that in the infinite progression they are also posited, and
how they are posited therein, namely, not in their ultimate truth.
First, both are negated in that progression, the infinite as well as the finite;
both are equally transcended. Second, they are also posited as distinct, one
after the other, each positive for itself. We sort out these two determinations
while comparing them, just as in the comparison (in an external comparing)

Existence

117

we have separated the two ways of considering them: the finite and the
infinite as referring to one another, and each taken for itself. The infinite
progression, however, says more than this. Also posited in it, though at
first still only as transition and alternation, is the connectedness of the terms
being distinguished. We now only need to see, in one simple reflection,
what is in fact present in it.
In the first place, the negation of the finite and the infinite which is
posited in the infinite progression can be taken as simple, and hence as
mutual externality, only a following of one upon the other. Starting from
the finite, the limit is thus transcended, the finite negated. We now have
its beyond, the infinite, but in this the limit rises up again; so we have the
transcending of the infinite. This twofold sublation is nonetheless partly
only an external event and an alternating of moments in general, and partly
still not posited as one unity; each of these moves beyond is an independent
starting point, a fresh act, so that the two fall apart. – But, in addition, their
connection is also present in the infinite progression. The finite comes first;
then there is the transcending of it, and this negative, or this beyond of the
finite, is the infinite; third, this negation is transcended in turn, a new limit
comes up, a finite again. – This is the complete, self-closing movement that
has arrived at that which made the beginning; what emerges is the same as
that from which the departure was made, that is, the finite is restored; the
latter has therefore rejoined itself, in its beyond has only found itself again.
The same is the case regarding the infinite. In the infinite, in the beyond
of the limit, only a new limit arises which has the same fate, namely, that
as finite it must be negated. Thus what is again at hand is the same infinite
that just now disappeared in the new limit; by being sublated, by traversing
the new limit, the infinite has not therefore advanced one jot further: it
has distanced itself neither from the finite (for the finite is just this, to pass
over into the infinite), nor from itself, for it has arrived at itself.
Thus the finite and the infinite are both this movement of each returning
to itself through its negation; they are only as implicit mediation, and the
affirmative of each contains the negative of each, and is the negation of the
negation. – They are thus a result and, as such, not in the determination
that they had at the beginning: neither is the finite an existence on its side
nor the infinite an existence or a being-in-itself beyond that existence, that
is, beyond existence in the determination of finitude. The understanding
strongly resists the unity of the finite and the infinite only because it presupposes restriction and finitude to remain, like being-in-itself, constants.
It thereby overlooks the negation of both which is in fact present in the
infinite progression, just as it equally overlooks that the two occur in this

21.135

118

21.136

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

progression only as moments of a whole – that each emerges only through
the mediation of its opposite but, essentially, equally by means of the
sublation of its opposite.
If this immanent turning back has for the moment been reckoned to
be just as much the turning back of the finite to itself and of the infinite
to itself, noticeable in this very result is an error connected with the onesidedness just criticized: the finite and then the infinite is each taken as
the starting point, and only in this way two results ensue. But it is a matter
of total indifference which is taken as the starting point and, with this,
the distinction caused by the duality of results dissolves of itself. This is
likewise posited in the line of the infinite progression, open-ended on both
sides, wherein each of the moments recurs in equal alternation, and it is
totally extraneous at which position the progression is arrested and taken
as beginning. – The moments are distinguished in the progression but each
is equally only moment of the other. Since both, the finite and the infinite,
are themselves moments of the progress, they are jointly the finite, and,
since they are equally jointly negated in it and in the result, this result as
the negation of their joint finitude is called with truth the infinite. Their
distinction is thus the double meaning which they both have. The finite has
the double meaning, first, of being the finite over against the infinite which
stands over against it, and, second, of being at the same time the finite
and the infinite over against the infinite. Also the infinite has the double
meaning of being one of the two moments (it is then the bad infinite)
and of being the infinite in which the two moments, itself and its other,
are only moments. Therefore, as in fact we now have it, the nature of the
infinite is that it is the process in which it lowers itself to be only one of its
determinations over against the finite and therefore itself only one of the
finites, and elevates this distinction of itself and itself to be self-affirmation
and, through this mediation, the true infinite.
This determination of the true infinite cannot be captured in the already
criticized formula of a unity of the finite and the infinite; unity is abstract,
motionless self-sameness, and the moments are likewise unmoved beings.
But, like both its moments, the infinite is rather essentially only as becoming,
though a becoming now further determined in its moments. Becoming has
for its determinations, first, abstract being and nothing; as alteration, it has
existence, something and other; now as infinite, it has finite and infinite,
these two themselves as in becoming.
This infinite, as being-turned-back-unto-itself, as reference of itself
to itself, is being – but not indeterminate, abstract being, for it is
posited as negating the negation; consequently, it is also existence or

Existence

119

“thereness,”62 for it contains negation in general and consequently determinateness. It is, and is there, present, before us. Only the bad infinite is
the beyond, since it is only the negation of the finite posited as real and,
as such, it is abstract first negation; thus determined only as negative, it
does not have the affirmation of existence in it; held fast only as something
negative, it ought not to be there, it ought to be unattainable. However, to
be thus unattainable is not its grandeur but rather its defect, which is at
bottom the result of holding fast to the finite as such, as existent. It is the
untrue which is the unattainable, and what must be recognized is that such
an infinite is the untrue. – The image of the progression in infinity is the
straight line; the infinite is only at the two limits of this line, and always
only is where the latter (which is existence) is not but transcends itself, in
its non-existence, that is, in the indeterminate. As true infinite, bent back
upon itself, its image becomes the circle, the line that has reached itself,
closed and wholly present, without beginning and end.
True infinity, thus taken in general as existence posited as affirmative in
contrast to abstract negation, is reality in a higher sense than it was earlier
as simply determined; it has now obtained a concrete content. It is not
the finite which is the real, but rather the infinite. Thus reality is further
determined as essence, concept, idea, and so forth. In connection with the
more concrete, it is however superfluous to repeat such earlier and more
abstract categories as reality, and to use them for determinations more
concrete than they are by themselves. Such a repetition, as when it is said
that essence, or that the concept, is real, has its origin in the fact that to
uneducated thought the most abstract categories such as being, existence,
reality, finitude, are the most familiar.
The more immediate occasion, however, for recalling here the categories
of reality is that the negation, against which reality is the affirmative, is here
the negation of negation, and consequently itself posited over against that
reality which finite existence is. – Negation is thus determined as ideality;
the idealizedh is the finite as it is in the true infinite – as a determination, a
content, a distinct but not a subsistent existent, a moment rather. Ideality has
this more concrete signification which is not fully expressed through the
negation of finite existence. – As regards reality and ideality, the opposition
h

62

The ideal [das Ideale] has a broader meaning (such as of the beautiful and its associations) than
the idealized [das Ideelle]. The former does not belong here yet, and for this reason the expression
idealized is being used. There is no such distinction made in language usage for “reality”; in German
reelle and reale are used as roughly synonymous and no interest is served in nuancing the two in
some sort of opposition.
I am glossing in “thereness” in order to retain Hegel’s subsequent play on words.

21.137

120

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of finite and infinite is, however, so grasped that the finite assumes the value
of “the real,” whereas the infinite that of “the idealized”; in the same way,
further on, also the concept is regarded as an idealization, that is, as a mere
idealization, in contrast to existence in general, which is regarded as “the
real.” When contrasted in this way, it is of course of no use to have reserved
for the said concrete determination of negation the distinctive expression
of “idealization”; in that opposition of finite and infinite, we are back to
the one-sidedness of the abstract negative characteristic of the bad infinite
and still fixed in the affirmative existence of the finite.
Transition
Ideality can be called the quality of the infinite; but it is essentially the
process of becoming, and hence a transition – like the transition of becoming
into existence. We must now explicate this transition. This immanent
turning back, as the sublating of finitude – that is, of finitude as such
and equally of the negative finitude that only stands opposite to it, is only
negative finitude – is self-reference, being. Since there is negation in this
being, the latter is existence; but, further, since the negation is essentially
negation of the negation, self-referring negation, it is the existence that
carries the name of being-for-itself.

21.138

Remark 1
The infinite – in the usual sense of the bad infinite – and the progression to
infinity, such as the ought, are the expression of a contradiction that pretends
to be itself a solution and an ultimate. This infinite is a first elevation of
sense representation above the finite to thought, but to a thought which, for
content, has only a nothing, that is, a non-existent explicitly posited as such:
it is a flight beyond restrictions that fails to gather itself together within
and is unable to bring the negative back to the positive. This unfulfilled
reflection has before it both the determinations of the true infinite (namely
the opposition of the finite and the infinite, and the unity of the finite
and the infinite) but fails to bring the two thoughts together; the thought
of one unavoidably brings the other along, but this reflection lets them
only alternate. The spectacle of this alternation, this infinite progression,
occurs wherever one remains fixated on the contradiction of the unity of
two determinations and of their opposition. The finite is the sublation of
itself; it holds its negation, the infinity, in itself: unity of the two. It is the
movement beyond the finite into the infinite as the beyond of the finite:
separation of the two. But over and beyond the infinite there is another
finite; the beyond, the infinite, holds finitude: unity of the two. But this

Existence

121

finite is also a negative of the infinite: separation of the two, and so forth. –
Thus, in the relation of causality, cause and effect are inseparable; a cause
that would have no effect is not a cause, just as an effect that had no
cause would no longer be effect. This relation yields, therefore, the infinite
progression of causes and effects; something is determined as cause, but,
as something finite (and it is finite just because of its separation from the
effect), it has itself a cause, that is, it is also effect; consequently, the same
thing that was determined as cause is also determined as effect (unity of
cause and effect); what is now determined as effect has in turn a cause,
that is, the cause is to be separated from its effect and to be posited as a
different something; this new cause is however itself only an effect (unity
of cause and effect); it has an other for its cause; separation of the two
determinations, and so forth, into infinity.
We can thus restate the progression in this more appropriate form. The
claim is made that the finite and the infinite are one unity. This is a false
claim that needs correction by its opposite: the two are absolutely different
and opposed. This claim is in turn to be corrected to the effect that the
two are inseparable; that in the one determination there lies the other by
virtue of the claim to unity; and so forth to infinity. – It is easy enough
to see into the nature of the infinite: one must recognize that the infinite
progression, the developed infinity of the understanding, is constituted by
the alternation of the two determinations, of the unity and the separation
of the two moments; and then further recognize that this unity and this
separation are inseparable.
The resolution of this contradiction is not the acknowledgment of the
equal correctness, and of the equal incorrectness, of both claims – this would
only be another shape of the still abiding contradiction – but the ideality of
both, in the sense that in their distinction, as reciprocal negations, they are
only moments. That monotonous alternation of the infinite progression
is in fact the negation of both their unity and their separation. What was
demonstrated above is just as much present in it de facto: namely, that
the finite, over and beyond itself, falls into the infinite, but that, over and
beyond this infinite, it equally finds itself born anew; hence, that it rejoins
itself there, as is also the case for the infinite – so that this same negation
of negation results in affirmation, a result that thereby proves itself to be
their truth and point of origin. In this being which is thus the ideality
of the distinct moments, the contradiction has not vanished abstractly,63
but is resolved and reconciled, and the thoughts, while left intact, are
63

i.e. by abstracting from the differences that give rise to the contradiction.

21.139

122

21.140

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

also brought together. Here we have, in a graphic example, the nature of
speculative thought displayed in its determining feature: it consists solely in
grasping the opposed moments in their unity. Inasmuch as each moment
shows, as a matter of fact, that it has its opposite in it, and that in this
opposite it rejoins itself, the affirmative truth is this internally self-moving
unity, the grasping together of both thoughts, their infinity – the reference
to oneself which is not immediate but infinite.
The essence of philosophy has often been located by those already adept
in the things of thought in the task of answering the question: How does the
infinite go forth out of itself and come to finitude? – This, as opinion would
have it, escapes conceptual comprehension. In the course of this exposition,
the infinite at whose concept we have arrived will further determine itself,
and the desideratum – how the infinite (if one can so express oneself ) comes
to finitude – will be manifested in it in the full manifold of forms. Here we
are considering this question only in its immediacy and in view of the just
mentioned sense which the infinite usually carries.
It is above all on the answer to this question that whether there is a philosophy is taken to depend, and people believe, while still professing willingness
to let the matter rest on it, that they also possess in the question itself a sort of
puzzle, an invincible talisman, that firmly secures them against the answer,
and consequently against philosophy and the attainment of it. In order to
understand questions, a certain education is required also in other subject
matters, and this is all the more the case for things philosophical if more of
an answer is to be had than that the question is an idle one. – It is fair to
expect in these questions, as is normally done, that the point at issue would
not depend on words but would rather be made intelligible through some
form or other of expression. Figurative expressions of sense representation
that are used in the question regarding the infinite, like “going forth” and
suchlike, arouse the suspicion that the question stemmed from the terrain
of vulgar representation, and that the answer is also expected to be in representations current in everyday life and in the shape of a sensuous simile.
Take being in general, instead of the infinite. The determining of it, its
having a negation or finitude in it, seems easier to comprehend. Being is
indeed the indeterminate, but it is not immediately said in it that it is the
opposite of anything determinate. The infinite, on the contrary, contains
this note expressly; it is the non-finite. The unity of the finite and the
infinite thus appears excluded from the start; incomplete reflection is most
stubbornly opposed to this unity for precisely this reason.
But it has been shown, and it is immediately evident without expanding
further on the determination of the finite and the infinite, that the infinite,

Existence

123

in the sense in which it is taken by that incomplete reflection, namely as
standing opposite the finite, has its other in it precisely because it stands
opposed to it, and is therefore already limited and itself finite. It is the
bad infinite. The answer to the question, “how does the infinite become
finite?,” is therefore this: There is not an infinite which is infinite beforehand,
and only afterwards does it find it necessary to become finite, to go forth
into finitude; the infinite is rather for itself just as much finite as infinite.
Inasmuch as the question assumes that the infinite is by itself on the one
side, and that the finite which has gone forth from it (or from wherever it
might have come) into the divide is truly real as thus separated from the
infinite, one should say rather that it is this divide which is conceptually
incomprehensible. Neither such a finite nor such an infinite has truth; that
which has no truth, however, cannot be conceptually grasped. Yet it must
be granted that they are conceptually comprehensible. To consider them
even as they are in representation with the determination of each implicit
in the other; to have a simple insight into this inseparability which is theirs,
means that we comprehend them conceptually. This inseparability is their
concept. – In the self-subsistence of that infinite and finite, the question
sets up a false content instead; it presupposes a false connection between
them. For this reason, the question is not to be answered, but the false
presuppositions contained in it, in effect the question itself, are rather
to be denied. By thus questioning the truth of such finite and infinite,
the standpoint is altered, and this change will turn the embarrassment
which the question was supposed to cause back on the question itself.
To the reflection from which the question originated, our own question
is something new, for that reflecting lacks the speculative interest that
would lead it to ascertain for its own sake, and before it draws connections
between determinations, whether such determinations are anything true
as presupposed. To the extent, however, that the untruth of that abstract
infinite is recognized, and of the finite which is equally supposed to stand
unmoved on its side, there is this to be said of the procession of the finite
out of the infinite: the infinite goes out of itself into the finite because, in
the way it is grasped as abstract unity, it has no truth in it, no standing;
and, conversely, the finite goes forth into the infinite for the same reason.
Or it is rather to be said that the infinite proceeded to finitude from all
eternity; that, just as much as pure being, it absolutely is not by itself alone,
without having its other in it.
The question how the infinite proceeds to the finite can harbor a further
presupposition still, namely that the infinite includes the finite within
itself, and consequently that it is the unity of itself and its other, so that the

21.141

21.142

124

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

difficulty has to do essentially with the separating, for this is in opposition
to the presupposed unity. On this presupposition, the opposition insisted
upon only assumes a different form; the unity and the distinguishing are
separated from each other and held isolated. If, however, the unity is not
taken abstractly and indeterminately, but rather, as in the presupposition,
as the determinate unity of the finite and the infinite, the distinguishing
of these two is also present in it. And this distinguishing is not one that
would also let them go loose, each subsisting separately, but it rather leaves
them in the unity as idealized. This unity of the infinite and the finite, and
the distinguishing of them, are inseparable, in the same way as the finite
and the infinite.

21.143

Remark 2
The claim that the finite is an idealization defines idealism. The idealism of
philosophy consists in nothing else than in the recognition that the finite is
not truly an existent. Every philosophy is essentially idealism or at least has
idealism for its principle, and the question then is only how far this principle
is carried out. This applies to philosophy just as much as to religion, for
religion also, no less than philosophy, will not admit finitude as a true being,
an ultimate, an absolute, or as something non-posited, uncreated, eternal.
The opposition between idealistic and realistic philosophy is therefore
without meaning. A philosophy that attributes to finite existence, as such,
true, ultimate, absolute being, does not deserve the name of philosophy.
The principles of ancient as well as more recent philosophies – whether
“water,” “matter,” or “atoms” – are universals, idealizations, not things as
given immediately, that is, in sensuous singularity. Not even the “water”
of Thales is that, for, although also empirical water, it is besides that the
in-itself or essence of all other things, and these things do not stand on their
own, self-grounded, but are posited on the basis of an other, of “water,”
that is, they are idealized. In thus calling the principle or the universal an
idealization as we have just done (and the concept, the idea, spirit, deserve
the name even more), and in saying then that the singular things of the
senses are idealizations in principle, or in their concept, and even more so
when sublated in the spirit, we must note, in passing, the same doublesidedness that transpired in the infinite, namely that an idealization is on
the one hand something concrete, a true existent, but, on the other hand,
that its moments are no less idealizations, sublated in it; in fact, however,
there is only one concrete whole from which the moments are inseparable.
By an idealization is normally meant the form of representation. Whatever is in any of my representations, whether in the concept, the idea,

Existence

125

the imagination, and so forth, goes by the name of idealization, so that
the “idealized” stands in general also for imaginary constructs – for representations that are not only distinguished from anything real but should
essentially not be taken as real. In point of fact, spirit is above all the true
idealist; in spirit, even as spirit senses and represents but still more as it
thinks and conceptualizes, the content is not real existence, as so called; in
the simplicity of the I, any such external being is only sublated, it is for
me, it is in me idealized. This subjective idealism, whether it is the unconscious idealism of consciousness in general or is consciously declared and
installed as principle, extends only to the form of representation according
to which a content is mine. In the systematized idealism of subjectivity,
this form is declared to be the only true form, one that excludes the form
of the objectivity or reality of that content, of its external existence. Such
an idealism is formal, since it does not take into consideration the content
of representation or thought, and therefore does not go past its finitude.
Nothing is lost by this idealism, both because the reality of this finite
content (the existence filled with finitude) is retained, and because, if one
abstracts from it, in itself nothing of much consequence is to be made of
it. Nor is anything gained by it, for the same reason that nothing is lost,
since the “I” remains representation, spirit still filled with the same content
of finitude. The opposition of the forms of subjectivity and objectivity
is of course itself one of finitudes; but the content, as taken up in sensation, intuition, or also in the more abstract element of representation and
thought, contains such finitudes in full, and these, by the exclusion of that
one mode of finitude alone (of the form of subjective and objective), are
still not done away with, and even less have they fallen off on their own.

c h a p ter 3
21.144

Being-for-itself

21.145

In being-for-itself, qualitative being is brought to completion; it is infinite
being; the being of the beginning is void of determination; existence is
sublated but only immediately sublated being; it thus contains, to begin
with, only the first negation, itself immediate; being is of course retained
as well, and the two are united in existence in simple unity; for this reason, however, each is in itself still unlike the other, and their unity is still
not posited. Existence is therefore the sphere of differentiation, of dualism, the domain of finitude. Determinateness is determinateness as such;
being which is relatively, not absolutely, determined. In being-for-itself,
the distinction between being and determinateness, or negation, is posited
and equalized. Quality, otherness, limit, as well as reality, in-itselfness,
ought, and so forth, are the incomplete configurations of negation in being
which are still based on the differentiation of the two. But since in finitude
negation has passed over into infinity, in the posited negation of negation,
negation is simple self-reference and in it, therefore, the equalization with
being – absolutely determinate being.
First, being-for-itself is immediately an existent-for-itself, the one.
Second, the one passes over into a multiplicity of ones – repulsion or the
otherness of the one which sublates itself into its ideality, attraction.
Third, we have the alternating determination of repulsion and attraction
in which the two sink into a state of equilibrium; and quality, driven to a
head in being-for-itself, passes over into quantity.
a. being-for-itself as such
The general concept of being-for-itself has come to light. The justification
for using the expression “being-for-itself” for that concept would depend on
showing that the representation associated with the expression corresponds
to the concept. So indeed it appears to do. We say that something is for itself
inasmuch as it sublates otherness, sublates its connection and community
126

Being-for-itself

127

with other, has rejected them by abstracting from them. The other is in
it only as something sublated, as its moment; being-for-itself consists in
having thus transcended limitation, its otherness; it consists in being, as
this negation, the infinite turning back into itself. – In representing to itself
an intended object which it feels, or intuits, and so forth, consciousness
already contains in itself as consciousness the determination of beingfor-itself; that is, it has in it the content of that object, which is thus
an idealization; even as it intuits, or in general becomes involved in the
negative of itself, in the other, it abides with itself. Being-for-itself is the
polemical, negative relating to the limiting other and, through this negation
of the other, is being-reflected-within-itself – even though, side by side with
this immanent turning back of consciousness and the ideality of its object,
the reality of this object is also retained, for the object is at the same time
known as an external existence. Consciousness is thus phenomenal,64 or
it is this dualism: on the one side, it knows an external object which is
other than it; on the other side, it is for-itself, has this intended object
in it as idealized, abides not only by this other but therein abides also
with itself. Self-consciousness, on the contrary, is being-for-itself brought to
completion and posited; the side of reference to another, to an external
object, is removed. Self-consciousness is thus the nearest example of the
presence of infinity – granted, of a still abstract infinity, but one which is
of a totally different, concrete determination than the being-for-itself in
general, whose infinity still has only qualitative determinateness.
a. Existence and being-for-itself
As already mentioned, being-for-itself is infinity that has sunk into simple
being; it is existence in so far as in the now posited form of the immediacy
of being the negative nature of infinity, which is the negation of negation,
is only as negation in general, as infinite qualitative determinateness. But
in such a determinateness, wherein it is existence, being is at once also
distinguished from this very being-for-itself which is such only as infinite
qualitative determinateness; nevertheless, existence is at the same time a
moment of being-for-itself, for the latter certainly contains being affected
by negation. So the determinateness which in existence as such is an other,
and a being-for-other, is bent back into the infinite unity of being-for-itself,
and the moment of existence is present in the being-for-itself as being-forone.
64

erscheinend.

21.146

128

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
b. Being-for-one

21.147

This moment gives expression to how the finite is in its unity with the
infinite or as an idealization. Being-for-itself does not have negation in it
as a determinateness or limit, and consequently also not as reference to
an existence other than it. Although this moment is now being designated
as being-for-one, there is yet nothing at hand for which it would be –
there is not the one of which it would be the moment. There is in fact
nothing of the sort yet fixed in being-for-itself; that for which something
(and there is no something here) would be, what the other side in general
should be, is likewise a moment, itself only being-for-one, not yet a one. –
What we have before us, therefore, is still an undistinguishedness of two
sides that may suggest themselves in the being-for-one; there is only one
being-for-another, and since this is only one being-for-another, it is also only
being-for-one; there is only the one ideality, of that for which or in which
there should be a determination as moment, and of that which should
be the moment in it. Being-for-one and being-for-itself do not therefore
constitute two genuine determinacies, each as against the other. Inasmuch
as the distinction is momentarily assumed and we speak of a-being-foritself, it is this very being-for-itself, as the sublated being of otherness,
that refers itself to itself as to the sublated other, is therefore for-one; in
its other it refers itself only to itself. An idealization is necessarily for-one,
but it is not for an other; the one, for which it is, is only itself. – The
“I,” therefore, spirit in general, or God, are idealizations, because they
are infinite; as existents which are for-themselves, however, they are not
ideationally different from that which is for-one. For if they were different,
they would be only immediate, or, more precisely, they would only be
existence and a being-for-another; for if the moment of being for-one did
not attach to them, it is not they themselves but an other that would be
that which is for them. God is therefore for himself, in so far he is himself
that which is for him.
Being-for-itself and being-for-one are not, therefore, diverse significations of ideality but essential, inseparable, moments of it.
Remark
The German expression for querying the quality of a thing, “Was für ein
Ding etwas sey,” [or, “What for a thing is this or that”], though strange at
first, reflectively brings out the moment here considered. This expression
is idealistic in origin, since it does not ask what this thing A might be for
another thing B, not what this human being might be for another human

Being-for-itself

129

being; it asks, rather, what this is for a thing, for a human being, so that this
“being-for-one” is at the same time taken back into this thing, into this
human being; or that which is and that for which it is are one and the same –
an identity, such as ideality must also be considered to be.
Ideality at first attaches to the sublated determinations as distinguished
from that in which they are sublated, which by contrast can be taken as
the real. The result is that the idealization is again one of the moments
and the real the other; ideality, however, consists in both determinations
being equally only for one and having only the value of a one, and this one
ideality, thus undifferentiated, is reality. In this sense, self-consciousness,
spirit, God, are each, as an infinite reference purely to itself, an idealization –
the “I” is for the “I,” both are the same thing, the “I” is named twice, but
in such a way that each of the two is for-one, ideally; spirit is only for
spirit, God only for God, and this unity alone is God, God as spirit. –
Self-consciousness, however, as consciousness, incurs the difference of itself
and an other – or of its ideality (in which it is representational) and of
its reality, since its representation has a determinate content which, as
non-sublated negativity, as existence, still has the side of being known.
However, to call thought, spirit, God, only an idealization, presupposes
the standpoint according to which finite existence counts as the real, and
idealization or the being-for-one has only a one-sided meaning.
The principle of idealism was stated in an earlier Remark65 where it
was said that in a philosophy all depends on how far this principle is
implemented. Regarding the manner of this implementation, one further
comment can still be made in connection with the categories that we are
considering now. This implementation depends first of all on whether
finite existence still remains standing on its own alongside the being-foritself, but, besides that, on whether the moment of the for-one, a relation of
idealization to itself as idealization, has already been posited in the infinite
itself. Thus the being of the Eleatics or the Spinozistic substance are only
the abstract negation of all determinateness, without ideality being posited
in them – in the case of Spinoza, as it will be further mentioned below,
infinity is only the absolute affirmation of a thing,66 consequently only the
unmoved unity; substance does not therefore ever attain the determination
of being-for-itself, even less so of subject and of spirit. The idealism of
the noble Malebranche is in itself more explicit. It contains the following
basic thoughts: because God includes within itself all eternal truths, the
65
66

Cf. above, 21.143.
Cf. Ethics, Part I, Prop. VIII, note 1. Hegel referred to this aspect of Spinoza earlier; cf. 21.101.

21.148

130

21.149

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

ideas and the perfections of all things, so that they are his and only his,
we see them only in him; God awakens our sensations of objects in us
through an action that has nothing of the sensuous, whereby we imagine
to ourselves that we gain of an intended object not only the idea depicting
its essence but also the sensation of its existence (De la recherche de la Verité,
Eclaircissement Sur la nature des idées etc.).67 Thus, like the eternal truths and
the ideas (essentialities) of things, the existence of these things is in God,
is an idealization, not an actual existence; even though, as our intended
objects, the same things are only for one. This moment of explicit and
concrete idealism, lacking in Spinoza, is present here, in absolute ideality
being determined as knowledge. Pure and profound as this idealism is,
these relations contain nevertheless, on the one hand, much which is still
indeterminate for thought and, on the other hand, a content which is at
the same time much too concrete (sin and redemption, and so forth, also
enter into them); the logical determination of infinity that would have to
be their foundation is not elaborated on its own, and as a result such a
noble and rich idealism, though indeed the product of pure speculative
spirit, is not yet the product of pure speculative thinking, the kind which
alone would truly give it a foundation.
Leibnizian idealism lies more within the confines of the abstract
concept. – The Leibnizian ideating being, the monad, is essentially an
idealization.68 Ideation is a being-for-itself in which the determinacies are
not limits and therefore not an existence but rather only moments. Ideation
is doubtless also a more concrete determination, but it has here no further
meaning than that of ideality, since for Leibniz even the things that lack
consciousness are representational, perceptual.69 In this system, therefore,
otherness is sublated; spirit and body or the monads in general are not an
other for each other, do not limit each other, have no effect on each other;
all relations based on an existence fall away in general. The manifold is
such only ideally and internally, the monad persists in it only as referred to
itself, alterations unfold within it and entail no references of the one monad
to others. What is taken in real determination to be an actually existent
reference of monads to each other is an independent, only simultaneous,
becoming which is enclosed in the being-for-itself of each. – That there is
a plurality of monads, that they are thereby determined as others, is not
67

68

Nicolas Malebranche, Oeuvres de Malebranche, vol. III, Recherche de la vérité: Eclaircissements,
ed. Geneviève Rodis-Lewis (Paris: Vrin, 1964), elucidation 10, p. 136. English trans. The Search after
Truth: Elucidations, trans. and ed. Thomas M. Lennon (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1997), p. 617.
69 Leibniz, Monadology, §14.
Leibniz, Monadology, §§1–4.

Being-for-itself

131

the affair of the monads but of a reflection external to them, of a third;
in themselves they are not others to each other; the being-for-itself is kept
pure, without the alongside of an existence.70 – But herein equally lies the
incompleteness of this system. The monads are such ideating beings only
in themselves or in God, who is the monad of monads, or also within the
system. Otherness is present in the same manner; it happens wherever one
wishes, in representation itself or according to how the third that considers
them as others, as many, is determined. The plurality of their existence is
only excluded, and that only momentarily, for the monads are posited as
the non-others that they are only through abstraction. If it is a third that
posits their otherness, so it is also a third that sublates this otherness; but
this whole movement that makes them idealizations falls outside them. It
may be pointed out to the contrary that this movement of thought happens itself only within an ideating monad. But the rejoinder must then
be that the very content of such a thought is within itself external to itself.
One proceeds immediately, without conceptualization (by means of the
image of creation), from the unity of the absolute ideality (the monad of
monads) over to the categories of the abstract plurality (void of references)
of existence, and from this plurality just as abstractly back to that unity.
Ideality, representing in general, remains something formal, as does also
representing raised to consciousness. Just as in Leibniz’s above-mentioned
fiction71 – that of a magnetic needle which, if it had consciousness, would
see its northerly direction as a determination of its freedom – consciousness
is thought only as a one-sided form indifferent to its determination and
content, so is the ideality in the monads a form that remains external to
their plurality. Ideality is supposed to be immanent in them, their nature is
to represent; but, on the one hand, they are in a relation of harmony, but a
harmony that does not fall within their determinate being and is therefore
pre-established;72 on the other hand, this existence of theirs is not grasped
as being-for-other, even less as ideality, but is rather determined only as
abstract plurality; the ideality of the plurality and its further determination
as harmony do not become immanent in the plurality itself, do not belong
to it.
Other forms of idealism, as for example the idealism of Kant and Fichte,
do not go beyond the ought and the infinite progress but remain in the
dualism of existence and being-for-itself.73 It is true that in these systems
the thing-in-itself or the principle of infinite resistance immediately enters
70
73

71 Cf. above, 21.122.
72 Leibniz, Monadology, §78.
Leibniz, Monadology, §§7–9.
Kant (1788) AK 5.122; Fichte, The Theory of Knowledge (1794), pp. 230–231, GA I.2, 239.

21.150

132

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

into the “I” and becomes something only for-it; but it proceeds from a
free otherness which perpetuates itself as negative being-in-itself. The “I” is
therefore indeed determined as idealization, as a-being-for-itself, as infinite
reference to itself; but the being-for-one is not completed to the point where
the beyond of that in-itself, or the direction to the beyond, vanishes.
c. The one

21.151

Being-for-itself is the simple unity of itself and its moments, of the
being for-one. There is only one determination present, the self-reference
itself of the sublating. The moments of being-for-itself have sunk into
an indifferentiation which is immediacy or being, but an immediacy that
is based on the negating posited as its determination. Being-for-itself is
thus an existent-for-itself, and, since in this immediacy its inner meaning
vanishes, it is the totally abstract limit of itself – the one.
Attention may be drawn in advance to the difficulties that lie ahead
in the exposition of the development of the one, and to the source of
these difficulties. The moments that constitute the concept of the one as
being-for-itself occur in it one outside the other; they are (1) negation in
general; (2) two negations that are, therefore, (3) the same, (4) absolutely
opposed; (5) self-reference, identity as such; (6) negative reference which
is nonetheless self-reference. These moments occur here apart because the
form of immediacy, of being, enters into the being-for-itself as existent-foritself; because of this immediacy, each moment is posited as a determination
existent on its own, and yet they are just as inseparable. Hence, of each
determination the opposite must equally be said; it is this contradiction
that causes the difficulty that goes with the abstract nature of the moments.
b. the one and the many
The one is the simple reference of being-for-itself to itself in which its
moments have fallen together – in which, therefore, being-for-itself has the
form of immediacy and its moments, therefore, are now there as existents.
As the self-reference of the negative, the one is a determining – and, as
self-reference, it is infinite self-determining. However, because of the present
immediacy, these distinctions are no longer only moments of one and the
same self-determination but are at the same time posited as existents. The
ideality of the being-for-itself as a totality thus turns at first into reality – a
reality, moreover, of the most fixed and abstract kind, as a one. In the one,
the being-for-itself is the posited unity of being and existence, as the absolute

Being-for-itself

133

union of the reference to another and the reference to itself; but also the
determinateness of being then enters into opposition to the determination
of the infinite negation, to self-determination, so that what the one is in
itself, it is that now only in it, and the negative consequently is an other
distinct from it. What shows itself to be present as distinct from the one is
the one’s own self-determining; its unity with itself, as thus distinct from
itself, is demoted to reference, and, as negative unity, it is negation of itself
as other, the excluding of the one as an other from itself, from the one.

21.152

a. The one within74
Within it, the one just is; this, its being, is not an existence, not a determination as reference to an other, not a constitution; it is rather its having
negated this circle of categories. The one is not capable, therefore, of
becoming any other; it is unalterable.
It is indeterminate, yet no longer like being; its indeterminateness is the
determinateness of self-reference, absolutely determined being; posited initselfness. As negation which, in accordance with its concept, is self-referring,
it has distinction in it: it directs away from itself towards another, but this
direction is immediately reversed, because, according to this moment of
self-determining, there is no other to which it would be addressed, and the
directing reverts back to itself.
In this simple immediacy, even the mediation of existence and ideality,
and with it all diversity and manifoldness, have vanished. In the one there is
nothing; this nothing, the abstraction of self-reference, is here distinguished
from the in-itselfness of the one; it is a posited nothing, for this in-itselfness
no longer has the simplicity of the something, but, as mediation, has
rather the determination of being concrete; taken in abstraction, it is
indeed identical with the one, but different from its determination. So this
nothing, posited as in the one, is the nothing as the void. – The void is thus
the quality of the one in its immediacy.
b. The one and the void
The one is the void as the abstract self-reference of negation. But the void,
as nothing, is absolutely diverse from the simple immediacy of the one,
from the being of the latter which is also affirmative, and because the two
stand in one single reference, namely to the one, their diversity is posited;
74

Das Eins an ihm selbst.

21.153

134

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

however, as distinct from the affirmative being, the nothing stands as void
outside the one as existent.
Being-for-itself, determined in this way as the one and the void, has
again acquired an existence. – The one and the void have their negative
self-reference as their common and simple terrain. The moments of beingfor-itself come out of this unity, become external to themselves; for through
the simple unity of the moments the determination of being comes into
play, and the unity itself thus withdraws to one side, is therefore lowered
to existence, and there it is confronted by its other determination standing
over against it, negation as such and likewise as the existence of the nothing,
as the void.

21.154

Remark
In this form of existence, the one is the stage of the category that made
its appearance among the ancients as the principle of atomism, according
to which the essence of things is the atom and the void (t¼ tomon or
t toma ka© t¼ cen¼n).75 When developed in this form, abstraction
has gained a greater determinateness than the being of Parmenides and
the becoming of Heraclitus. As high as this abstraction rises in making
this simple determinateness of the one and the void the principle of all
things, by reducing the manifold of the world to this simple opposition
and daring to derive knowledge of it from the latter, just as easy is it for
figurative reflection to picture atoms here and the void next to them. It is no
wonder, therefore, that the atomistic principle has at all times held its own;
the equally trivial and external relation of composition that must be added to
it to attain the semblance of concreteness and multiplicity, is just as popular
as the atoms themselves and the void. The one and the void are being-foritself, the highest qualitative in-itselfness that has sunk to the most complete
externality; immediacy, or the being of the one, since it is the negation of
all otherness, is posited as no longer determinable and alterable; and in the
presence of its absolute obduracy all determination, every manifold and
every conjunction, therefore remains irreducibly external reference.
With the earliest thinkers, however, the atomistic principle did not
remain in this externality but also had, besides its abstraction, a speculative
determination inasmuch as the void was recognized as the source of movement, and this entails quite a different connection of atom and void than the
mere juxtaposition and mutual indifference of these two determinations.
75

Hegel is referring here to Democritus and Leucippus. For Democritus, see Diels and Kranz, Vol. II,
68B9.

Being-for-itself

135

That the void is the source of movement does not have the trivial meaning that something can only move into an empty space and not into an
already occupied one, for in the latter it would find no room still left open;
understood in this way, the void would be only the presupposition or the
condition of movement, not its ground, and the movement itself would
be presupposed as already there while the essential point, its ground, is
forgotten. The view that the void constitutes the ground of movement
contains the more profound thought that the ground of becoming, of
unrest and self-movement, lies in the negative in general, which, in this
sense, is however to be taken as the true negativity of the infinite. – The
void is the ground of movement only as the negative reference of the one to its
negative, to the one, that is, to its own self posited, however, as determinate
existent.
For the rest, the other determinations of the ancients concerning the
shape of the atoms, their position, the direction of their movement, are
arbitrary and external enough; they therefore stand in direct contradiction
to the fundamental determination of the atom. Physics, with its molecules
and particles, suffers from its use of the atom, the principle of extreme
externality, and therefore from an extreme lack of the concept, as does also
the theory of state that starts from the singular will of individuals.
c. Many ones
Repulsion
The one and the void constitute the first existence of being-for-itself. Each
of these moments has negation for its determination, and is posited at the
same time as an existence. In accordance with this determination, the one
and the void are each the reference of negation to negation as of an other
to its other: the one is negation in the determination of being; the void,
negation in the determination of non-being. Essentially, however, the one
is only self-reference as referring negation, that is, it is itself the same as the
void outside it is supposed to be. Both are, however, also posited as each
an affirmative existence – the one as being-for-itself as such, the other as
indeterminate existence in general – and each as referring to the other as
to an other existence. Essentially, however, the being-for-itself of the one
is the ideality of the existence and of the other; it does not refer to an
other but only to itself. But inasmuch as the being-for-itself is fixed as the
one, as existent for itself, as immediately present, its negative reference to
itself is at the same time reference to an existent; and since the reference
is just as much negative, that to which the being-for-itself refers remains

21.155

136

21.156

21.157

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determined as an existence and as an other; as essentially self-reference, the
other is not indeterminate negation like the void, but is likewise a one. The
one is consequently a becoming of many ones.
Strictly speaking, however, this is not just a becoming; for becoming is
a transition of being into nothing; the one, by contrast, becomes only a
one. The one, as referred to, contains the negative as reference; it has this
reference, therefore, in it. Hence, instead of a becoming, the one’s own
immanent reference is, first, present; and, second, since this reference is
negative and the one is at the same time an existent, the one repels itself
from itself. This negative reference of the one to itself is repulsion.
This repulsion, as thus the positing of many ones but through the one
itself, is the one’s own coming-forth-from-itself, but to such outside it as
are themselves only ones. This is repulsion according to the concept, as it
exists implicitly in itself. The second repulsion is distinguished from it. It
is the one that first occurs to the representation of external reflection, not
as the generation of ones but only as the mutual holding off of ones which
are presupposed as already there. To be seen now is how the first repulsion
that exists in itself determines itself as the second, the external repulsion.
We must first establish the determinations that the many ones have as
such. The becoming of the many, or their being produced, immediately
vanishes as the product of a positing; what is produced are the ones, not
for another, but as infinitely referring to themselves. The one repels only
itself from itself; it does not come to be but it already is; that which is
represented as the repelled is equally a one, an existent; repelling and being
repelled applies in like manner to both, and makes no difference.
The ones are thus presupposed with respect to each other – posited through
the repulsion of the one from itself; pre-supposed, posited as non-posited;
their being-posited is sublated, they are existents with respect to each other,
such as refer only to themselves.
Thus plurality appears not as an otherness, but as a determination completely external to the one. The one, in repelling itself, remains reference to
itself, just like that which is taken as repelled at the start. That the ones are
other to one another, that they are brought together in the determinateness
of plurality, does not therefore concern the one. If the plurality were a
reference of the ones to one another, the ones would then limit each other
and would have the being-for-other affirmatively in them. Their connecting reference (and this they have through their unity which is in itself ),
as posited here, is determined as none; it is again the previously posited
void. This void is their limit, but an external limit in which they are not
supposed to be for one another. The limit is that in which the limited are

Being-for-itself

137

just as much as are not; but the void is determined as pure non-being, and
this alone constitutes the limit of the ones.
The repulsion of the one from itself is the making explicit of what the
one is implicitly in itself; but, thus laid out as one-outside-the-other, infinity
is here an infinity that has externalized itself, and this it has done through
the immediacy of the infinite, of the one. Infinity is just as much the simple
reference of the one to the one as, on the contrary, the one’s absolute lack
of reference; it is the former according to the simple affirmative reference
of the one to itself; it is the latter according to the same reference as
negative. Or again, the plurality of the ones is the one’s own positing of
the one; the one is nothing but the negative reference of the one to itself,
and this reference – hence the one itself – is the plural one. But equally,
plurality is utterly external to the one, for the one is precisely the sublating
of otherness; repulsion is its self-reference and simple equality with itself.
The plurality of the ones is infinity as a contradiction that unconstrainedly
produces itself.
Remark
Mention was previously made of Leibnizian idealism.76 It can here be
added that that idealism proceeded from the ideating monad, which is
determined as being-for-itself, only up to the repulsion just considered,
and indeed, only up to plurality as such in which the ones are each only
for itself, indifferent to the existence and the being-for-itself of the others,
or in which, quite in general, the others are not for the one. The monad
is for itself the entirely closed-in world; it needs none of the others; but
this inner manifoldness which it possesses in its ideating activity alters
nothing in its determination as being for itself. Leibnizian idealism takes
up plurality immediately as something given; it does not conceptualize it
as a repulsion of monads; it has plurality, therefore, only on the side of its
abstract externality. Atomism lacks the concept of ideality; it does not grasp
the one as containing in it the two moments of being-for-itself and beingfor-it; it does not grasp it, therefore, as idealized, but only as simple, dry,
being-for-itself. It does, however, go beyond mere indifferent plurality; the
atoms do come to a further determination with respect to each other even
though, if the truth be told, inconsequentially; whereas, on the contrary,
in that indifferent independence of the monads plurality remains as a rigid
fundamental determination, so that the reference connecting them falls only
in the monad of monads, or in the philosopher who contemplates them.
76

Cf. above, 21.149.

21.158

138

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
c. repulsion and attraction
a. Exclusion of the one

21.159

The many ones are each a being; their existence or their reference to
one another is a non-reference, it is external to them: the abstract void.
But they themselves are now this negative reference to themselves as to
existent others: the demonstrated contradiction, the infinity posited in the
immediacy of being. With this, repulsion now finds immediately before it
that which is repelled by it. In this determination, it is an excluding; the one
repels from itself only the many not generated by it, the ones not posited
by it. This repelling is mutual or from all sides – relative, limited by the
being of the ones.
Plurality is not at first posited otherness; limit is only the void, only that
in which the ones are not. But in the limit they also are; they are in the
void, or their repulsion is their common connecting reference.
This mutual repulsion is the posited existence of the many ones; it is not
their being-for-itself, in accordance with which they would be distinguished
as many only in a third, but is rather their own distinguishing which
preserves them. – They mutually negate themselves, posit one another as
being only for-one. But at the same time they negate this being only forone just as much; they repel the ideality that they have and are. – So the
moments which in ideality are absolutely united come apart. In its beingfor-itself, the one is also for-one; but this one, for which it is, is itself; its
distinguishing from itself is immediately sublated. But in the plurality the
distinguished one has a being; the being-for-one as has been determined
in exclusion is therefore a being-for-other. Each thus comes to be repelled
by an other, is sublated and made into a one which is not for itself but
for-one, and an other one at that.
The being-for-itself of the many ones thus shows itself to be their selfpreservation through the mediation of their mutual repulsion in which
they sublated themselves reciprocally and posit the others as mere beingfor-another. But the self-preservation consists at the same time in repelling
this ideality and positing the ones as not being for-an-other. This selfpreservation of the ones through their negative reference to one another is,
however, rather their dissolution.
The ones not only are but maintain themselves through their reciprocal exclusion. First, it is in their being, and indeed their being-in-itself as
contrasted with their reference to the other, that they should now have a
firm point of support for their diversity as against their being negated; this

Being-for-itself

139

in-itselfness rests on their being ones. But they all are this; in their being-initself, instead of having there their firm point of support for their diversity,
they are all the same. Second, their existence and their way of relating
to one another, that is, their positing themselves as one, is their reciprocal negating; this, however, is likewise one and the same determination of
all through which they therefore posit themselves as identical; just as, by
being in themselves the same, the ideality that should be posited in them
through others is their own, and they thus repel just as little. – According
to their being and positing, they are, consequently, only one affirmative
unity.
This consideration regarding the ones – that from either side of their
determination, whether they just are or refer to one another, they show
themselves to be only one and the same, indistinguishable – is a comparison
that belongs to us. – Also to be seen, therefore, is what is posited in them
in their mutual reference itself. – They are – this much is presupposed
in this reference – and they are only inasmuch as they negate themselves
reciprocally and at the same time keep away this ideality, their being
negated, from themselves, that is, they negate the reciprocal negating.
But they are only inasmuch as they negate, and so, since their reciprocal
negating is negated, their being is negated. To be sure, since they are,
nothing would be negated through this negating which for them is only
something external; this negating of the other rebounds off them, coming
their way only by striking their surface. And yet, they turn back upon
themselves only by negating the others; they are only as this mediation,
this turning back of theirs is their self-preservation and their being-foritself. Since their negating is ineffectual because of the resistance offered by
the others, whether as existents or as negating, they do not return back to
themselves, do not preserve themselves, and so are not.
It was previously remarked that the ones themselves are each a one like
any other.77 This is not just a matter of our connecting them by way of
reference, of bringing them together externally; repulsion is itself a referring;
the one that excludes the ones refers itself to them, to the ones, that is,
to itself. The negative relating of the ones to one another is consequently
only a coming-together-with-oneself. This identity in which their repelling
crosses over is the sublation of their diversity and externality which they
should have rather asserted with respect to each other by excluding each
other.
This self-positing-in-a-one of the many ones is attraction.
77

Cf. above, 21.159.

21.160

140

21.161

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Remark
Driven to the extreme of the one as being-for-itself, self-subsistence is an
abstract, formal self-subsistence that destroys itself. It is the ultimate, most
stubborn error, one which takes itself as the ultimate truth, whether it
assumes the more concrete form of abstract freedom, of pure “I,” and
further still of evil. It is the freedom which so misconceives itself as to
place its essence in this abstraction, and, in thus shutting itself up within
itself, flatters itself that it attains itself in all purity. This self-subsistence, to
determine it further, is the error of considering its own essence negatively
and of relating itself to it negatively. It is thus a negative relating to itself
which, while wanting to gain its own being, destroys it – and this, his
doing, is only the manifestation of the nullity of the doing. Reconciliation
is the recognition that that towards which the negative relating is directed
is rather its essence, and this is only in the desisting from the negativity of
its being-for-itself rather than in holding fast to it.
It is an ancient proposition that the one is many and especially that the
many is one. It should again be observed in this connection that, as expressed
in propositions, the truth of the one and the many appears in inadequate
form; such a truth is to be grasped and expressed only as a becoming, as a
process, a repulsion and attraction – not as being, in the way the latter is
posited in a proposition as inert unity. Earlier mention was made recalling
Plato’s dialectic in the Parmenides on the derivation of the many from
the one, specifically from the proposition: the one is.78 It is the internal
dialectic of the concept that has been expounded; it is easiest to grasp the
dialectic of the proposition, that the many is one, as external reflection;
and, inasmuch as the subject matter also, the many, is a mutual externality,
reflection may indeed be external here. This comparison of the many with
one another immediately shows that each is absolutely determined just as
any other; each is a one, each a one of many; each is by excluding the
others – so that they are absolutely the same; absolutely one determination
is present. This is a matter of fact, and all that needs to be done is simply to
grasp the fact. If in its stubbornness the understanding refuses to do it, it is
only because it also has distinction in mind, and rightly so; but distinction
is not left out because of that fact, as surely as the fact is no less there despite
distinction. One could, as it were, reassure the understanding concerning
this simple grasp of the fact of unity that distinction will also come in
again.
78

Cf. above, 21.87.

Being-for-itself

141

b. The one one of attraction
Repulsion is the fragmentation of the one, first into the many of which it
is the negative relating, since they presuppose each other as each existent;
it is only the ought of ideality; this ideality will, however, be realized in
attraction. Repulsion passes over into attraction, the many ones into one
one. Both, repulsion and attraction, are at first distinguished from each
other, repulsion as the reality of the ones, attraction as their posited ideality.
Attraction refers to repulsion by having it for a presupposition. Repulsion
delivers the material for attraction. If there were no ones, there would
be nothing to attract; the representation of continuing attraction, of the
consumption of the ones, presupposes an equally continuing generation
of the ones; the sense representation of spatial attraction gives continuity
to the flow of ones to be attracted; to replace the atoms that vanish at the
point of attraction, another multitude comes forth from the void, infinitely
if one so wishes. If attraction were represented as accomplished, that is,
the many as brought to the point of the one one, the result would be just
an inert one, no longer any attraction. The ideality immediately present in
attraction still also has in it the determination of the negation of itself, the
many ones to which it refers; attraction is inseparable from repulsion.
To attract pertains at first in equal measure to each of the many ones as
immediately present; none has advantage over an other; what would result
then is an equilibrium in the attraction, or more precisely, an equilibrium
in the attraction and the repulsion themselves, and an inert state of rest
without any ideality present there. But there can be no question here of
any such immediately present one taking precedence over another, for
this would presuppose a determinate distinction between them; attraction
is rather the positing of the given lack of distinction among the ones.
Attraction is itself the positing in the first place of a one distinct from other
ones; these are only the immediate ones that are to preserve themselves
through repulsion; through their posited negation, however, what proceeds
is the one of attraction which is therefore determined as the mediated one,
the one posited as one. The first ones, as immediate, do not in their ideality
return into themselves, but have this ideality each in another.
The one one is, however, ideality that has been realized, posited in the
one; it attracts through the mediation of repulsion; it contains in itself this
mediation as its determination. It thus does not swallow the attracted ones
within it as into one point, that is, does not sublate them abstractly. Since
it contains repulsion in its determination, the latter equally preserves the
ones as many within it; by its attracting, it musters, so to speak, something

21.162

142

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

before it, gains an area or a filling. Thus there is in it the unity of repulsion
and attraction in general.
c. The connection of repulsion and attraction

21.163

The difference of the one and the many has determined itself as a difference
of their mutual reference connecting them which breaks down into two,
repulsion and attraction, each of which stands at first outside the other
on its own, in such a way that the two are essentially joined together
nevertheless. Their still indeterminate unity must be brought out in greater
detail.
As the fundamental determination of the one, repulsion appears first, and
it appears as immediate, like its ones which are indeed generated by it and
yet are at the same time posited as immediate, and it is therefore indifferent
to the attraction which is added to it externally as thus presupposed. Rather,
attraction is not presupposed by repulsion: it is not supposed to have any
part in the positing and in the being of the latter, that is, as if repulsion
were not, already in it, the negation of itself, or the ones were not already
negated in it. In this way, we have repulsion in abstraction, by itself, and
attraction likewise holds out to the ones, as each an existent, the side of an
immediate existence which comes to them by itself as an other.
If we take mere repulsion in this way, for itself, it is then the dispersion
of the many ones in indeterminacy, outside the sphere of repulsion itself;
for repulsion is the negating of the connection of the many to one another;
lack of connection is their determination when abstractly taken. But repulsion is not just the void; the ones, although unconnected, do not repel
what constitutes their determination, do not exclude it. Although negative, repulsion is nonetheless essentially connection; the mutual repulsion
and flight is not a liberation from what is repelled and fled from; that which
is excluded still stands in connection with what is excluded from it. But this
moment of connection is attraction, which is thus within repulsion itself;
it is the negating of that abstract repulsion by which the ones would each
be an existent referring only to itself without mutual exclusion.
But in starting with the repulsion of the ones as immediately present
there, and with attraction consequently also posited as intruding on them
externally, the two, repulsion and attraction, are held apart as diverse
determinations despite their inseparability. But it has been established that
it is not just repulsion which is presupposed by attraction, but that there
equally is present also a reverse connection of repulsion to attraction, and
that repulsion no less has attraction for its presupposition.

Being-for-itself

143

As thus determined, they are inseparable, and at the same time each
is determined as an ought and a limitation with respect to the other.
Their ought is their abstract determinateness as each an existent in itself –
a determinateness, however, which is thereby directed beyond itself and
refers to the other. And so, through the mediation of the other, each is as
other; their self-subsistence consists in their being mutually posited in this
mediation as an other determining. – Thus, repulsion is the positing of the
many; attraction the positing of the one; this latter is equally the negation
of the many and the former the negation of the ideality of such a many in
the one; so that attraction too is attraction only through the mediation of
repulsion, just as repulsion is repulsion through the mediation of attraction.
In all this, however, the mediation of each with itself through the other is
in fact negated; each of the two determinations is its own self-mediation.
This will result from a closer examination of the two determinations and
will bring us back to the unity of their concept.
In the first place, that each presupposes itself, that in its presupposition
each refers only to itself, this is already present in the way the still relative
repulsion and attraction behave at first.
Relative repulsion is the mutual repulsion of many ones which are already
at hand, supposedly immediately given. But that there be many ones, this is
repulsion itself; any presupposition that it would have is only its own positing. Moreover, the determination of the being that would accrue to the ones
apart from their being posited – whereby they would already be – belongs
likewise to repulsion. Repelling is that through which the ones manifest
themselves and maintain themselves as ones; through which they are as
such. Their being is their repulsion itself, which is thus not some relative
existence against another other but relates itself throughout only to itself.
Attraction is the positing of the one as such, of the real one, with respect
to which the existence of the many is determined as only a vanishing
idealization. Attraction thus directly presupposes itself; it presupposes itself
in the determination namely, of the many ones to be an idealization, the
same ones which are otherwise supposed to have existence for themselves
and to repel others, including therefore any other that attracts. Against this
determination of repulsion, the ones do not attain ideality only through
the relation to attraction; on the contrary, the ideality is presupposed: it
is the ideality of the ones as an existent in itself, inasmuch as they, as ones
(including the one conceived as attracting), are not distinguished from one
another but are one and the same.
This self-presupposing of the two determinations, each for itself,
implies further that each contains within itself the other as moment.

21.164

144

21.165

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Self-presupposing in general is the positing of oneself in a one as the negative of oneself (repulsion), and what is presupposed in this positing is
the same as that which presupposes (attraction). That each is in itself only
a moment, this is the transition of each from itself into the other, the
negation of itself in the other and the positing of itself as the other of
itself. The one, as such, is thus a coming-out-of-itself; is itself only the
positing of itself as its other, as the many. And the many, for its part, is
only the falling back upon itself and the positing of itself as its other, as a
one, and is in this equally only the connecting of itself to itself, each continuing itself in its other. Therefore, the coming-out-of-itself (repulsion)
and the self-positing-as-one (attraction) are already inherently present as
undivided. But in the repulsion and attraction which are relative, that is,
which presuppose immediate, determinedly existent ones, it is posited that
the two are each, within it, this negation of itself, and consequently also the
continuity of itself in its other. The repulsion of the determinedly existent
ones is the self-preservation of the one through the mutual holding off of
the others, so that (1) the other ones are negated in it (this is the side of
its existence or of its being-for-another and is therefore attraction as the
ideality of the ones); and (2) the one is in itself, without reference to the
others (however, not only has the in-itself in general long since passed over
into being-for-itself; the one in itself, according to its determination, is
the coming to be of many). – The attraction of the existent ones is their
ideality and the positing of the one, and in this, as both the negating and
the producing of the one, attraction sublates itself, and as a positing within
it of the one, is the negative of itself: it is repulsion.
With this, the development of being-for-itself is completed and has
attained its result. In connecting itself to itself infinitely, that is, as the
posited negation of negation, the one is the mediation by which it repels
itself as its absolute (that is, abstract) otherness (the many) from itself, and
in thus negatively connecting itself to this, its non-being, it sublates it and is
in it precisely only the connection to itself. The one is only this becoming
in which the determination “it begins,” that is, its being posited as an
immediate existent, and equally that, as result, it has restored itself as the
one, that is, the equally immediate and exclusive one, have vanished; the
process which it is, posits and contains it from all sides only as something
sublated. The sublation, determined at first only as a relative sublating of
the connection to another existent, a connection which is therefore itself not
an indifferent repulsion and attraction, equally proves itself to pass over into
the infinite connection of mediation through the negation of the external
connection of immediate and determinate existents, and to have for result

Being-for-itself

145

precisely that becoming which, in the instability of its moments, is the
collapse, or rather the going-together-with-itself, into simple immediacy.
This being, according to the determination which it has now acquired, is
quantity.
If we briefly review the moments of this transition of quality into quantity,
we find that the qualitative has being and immediacy for its fundamental
determination, and the limit and the determinateness are in this immediacy
so identical with the being of something, that the something itself vanishes
along with its alteration; as thus posited, it is determined as finite. Because
of the immediacy of this unity in which the distinction has disappeared,
although it is implicitly present in the unity of being and nothing, the
distinction falls outside that unity as otherness in general. This reference to
the other contradicts the immediacy in which qualitative determinateness
is self-reference. This otherness is sublated in the infinity of the being-foritself, the being-for-itself that has realized the distinction implicitly present
in it in the negation of negation: has realized it as the one and the many
and as their connecting references, and has also elevated the qualitative to
true unity, that is, a unity which is no longer immediate but posited as
accordant with itself.
This unity is, therefore, (a) being, only as affirmative, that is, immediacy
self-mediated through the negation of negation: being is posited as a unity
permeating its determinacies, limits, etc., which are posited in it as sublated;
(b) existence: in this determination it is negation or determinateness as
moment of the affirmative being; yet this determinateness is no longer
immediate but reflected into itself, refers not to another but to itself;
absolutely-determined-being, absolute in-itselfness, the one; otherness as
such is itself being-for-itself; (g) being-for-itself : as that being which persists
across the determinateness and in which the one and even the beingdetermined-in-itself are posited as sublated. The one is simultaneously
determined as having gone beyond itself and as unity; the one, the absolutely
determined limit, is consequently posited as a limit which is none, a limit
which is in being but is indifferent to it.
Remark
Attraction and repulsion, as is well known, are usually regarded as forces.
We must now compare this determination of them, and the relations
connected with it, with the way we have just conceived them. – Regarded
as forces, they are treated as self-standing and therefore not as referring to
each other by nature, that is, not as each only a moment that should pass
over into its opposite but as each persisting instead in opposition to the

21.166

146

21.167

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

other. They are represented, moreover, as joining in a third, in matter – in
such a way, however, that this unification does not count as their truth but
each counts rather as a first, as an existent in and for itself: it is matter or the
determinations of matter which are rather posited and produced through
them. When it is said that matter has these two forces in itself, this unity
which they have in matter is understood as an association within which
they are at the same time presupposed to remain independent existents,
free of each other.
Kant famously constructed matter from the forces of repulsion and attraction
or at least, as he put it himself, displayed the metaphysical element of such a
construction.79 – It will not be without interest to examine this construction
more closely. This metaphysical exposition of a subject matter which not
only itself, but in its determinations, seemed to belong to experience is
remarkable in part because, as a conceptual experiment, it gave at least the
impetus for the modern philosophy of nature (a philosophy which does not
make nature the foundation of science as something given to perception
through the senses but discerns its determinations in the absolute concept);
in part also because that Kantian construction is still deeply entrenched
and held as a philosophical beginning and the foundation of physics.
Now it is true that, as it exists for the senses, matter is not a subject
of logic, no more than space and spatial determinations are. Nevertheless,
the forces of attraction and repulsion, when regarded as forces of sensuous
matter, also have for a foundation the pure determinations of the one and
the many here considered and their reciprocal connections, to which I
have given the names of “repulsion” and “attraction” because these were
the most readily available.
On closer inspection, Kant’s procedure in the deduction of matter from
these forces, which he calls a construction, does not deserve this name, unless
any kind of reflection, even analytical reflection, be called a construction.
And, to be sure, subsequent philosophers of nature have employed the
name “constructing” for even the shallowest ratiocination and the most
baseless concoction of unbridled imagination and thoughtless reflection,
and the so-called factors of attraction and repulsion have especially been
used as favorites everywhere.
For Kant’s procedure is at bottom analytical, not constructive. It presupposes the representation of matter and then asks which forces belong to
it in order to obtain its presupposed determinations. Thus, on the one
hand, he demands the force of attraction because through repulsion alone,
79

Kant (1786), AK 4.498.

Being-for-itself

147

without attraction, no matter could exist in fact (Metaphysical Foundations of
Natural Science, pp. 53ff.).80 On the other hand, he equally derives repulsion from matter, and gives as the reason for it that we represent matter
as impenetrable, since it is in this determination that matter presents itself
to the sense of touch through which it reveals itself to us. Consequently,
he proceeds, repulsion is directly thought in the concept of matter, for it
is immediately given together with it; attraction, by contrast, is added to
it by way of inferences. These inferences, however, also rest on what has
just been said, namely, that a matter that had merely repulsive force would
not exhaust what we mean by matter.81 – This is, as is lucidly clear, the
procedure of a cognition that reflects upon experience, begins by perceiving
determinations in appearance, then lays them down as a foundation and,
for a so-called explanation of them, assumes corresponding basic elements
or forces that supposedly produce those determinations of appearance.
As regards this distinction just mentioned in the way cognition finds
repulsion and attraction in matter, Kant further observes that the force of
attraction does not any the less belong to the concept of matter, “although it
is not contained in it.” Kant stresses these last words. But it is difficult to
see just where the distinction would lie, for a determination that belongs
to the concept of a fact must in truth be contained in it.82
What causes the difficulty and gives rise to this hollow subterfuge is that
from the start Kant one-sidedly attributes to the concept of matter only
the determination of impenetrability which we are supposed to perceive
by touch, for which reason the force of repulsion as the holding off of
an other from oneself is said to be given immediately. But then, if it is
further said that matter cannot be there without the force of attraction, this
claim is based on a representation of matter drawn from perception; the
determination of attraction must, therefore, also be met with in perception.
And one can well perceive that, besides its being-for-itself which sublates
the being-for-other (yields resistance), matter also possesses the existent’s
connection with itself; it possesses spatial extension and cohesion, and a very
stable cohesion indeed in rigidity and solidity. Physics explains that for
the tearing apart etc. of a body there is required a force which is stronger
than the reciprocal attraction of the body’s parts. From this observation
it is possible for reflection to infer attraction (or to assume it as given)
just as immediately as it did for repulsion. In fact, if we examine Kant’s
inferences on the basis of which the force of attraction is to be derived (the
80
81

Hegel’s pagination refers to the 1786 edition. Cf. Kant (1786), AK 4.497ff.
82 Kant (1786), AK 4.509.
Kant (1786), AK 4.509.

21.168

21.169

148

21.170

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

demonstration of the proposition that the possibility of matter requires a
force of attraction as the second fundamental force, loc. cit.),83 we find that
they contain nothing except that through mere repulsion matter would
not be spatial. In presupposing that matter fills space, one attributes to it
the continuity for which the force of attraction is assumed to be the base.
Now even if such a so-called construction of matter had at most analytical
merit, however diminished because of a flawed exposition, the thought on
which it is based, namely that matter must be made out to be from
these two opposing determinations as its fundamental forces, must always
be highly esteemed. Kant is primarily concerned to banish the ordinary
mechanistic ways of representation that stop at the one determination of
impenetrability, of existents that subsist point-like for themselves, and reduce
to something external the opposite determination, the internal connection
of matter or of a plurality of matters that are in turn regarded as particular
ones. These are ways of representation, as Kant says, that would not make
room for any other motive force except pressure and thrust, that is, except
through influence from outside.84 This externality of cognition presupposes
motion as always already externally present in matter; it does not occur to
thought to grasp it as something internal, to conceive it as itself in matter,
which for precisely that reason is assumed to be motionless and inert. This
standpoint has in view only ordinary mechanics, not immanent and free
motion. – While it is true that Kant sublates that externality by making
attraction a force of matter itself – the attraction which is the reciprocal
connections of matters inasmuch as these are assumed to be external to each
other, or the connection of matter in general in its self-external-being – still,
within matter, his two fundamental forces remain external, independent of
each other.
As null as is the independence attributed to these two forces from the
standpoint of the said cognition, just as null must any other would-be
fixed distinction made regarding their content show itself to be; for such
forces, when seen as they truly are in the way we have just done, are only
moments that pass over into each other. – I shall now consider these other
distinctions as Kant gives them.
Thus, he defines the force of attraction as a penetrative force in virtue
of which a matter can act on the parts of others even beyond the surface
of contact; the force of repulsion, on the contrary, as a surface force by
which matters can act on each other only in the shared surface of contact.
The reason given for supposing that this latter force is only a surface one
83

Kant (1786), AK 4.508.

84

Kant (1786), AK 4.510.

Being-for-itself

149

is as follows: “The parts in contact each limits the sphere of action of
another, and the force of repulsion cannot move any more distant part
except through the mediation of intervening parts; an immediate action
of one matter upon another across these intervening parts by forces of
expansion (this means here forces of repulsion) is impossible.” (Cf. ibid.,
Explanations and Additions, p. 67.)85
But the immediate comment here is that in assuming “nearer” or “more
distant” parts of matter the same distinction arises with respect to attraction,
namely, granted that a first atom acts upon a second, this second atom would
find itself between that first atom and a more distant third atom, and this
third atom would then most directly fall within the sphere of attraction of
the second atom lying closest to it between it and the first; the first atom
would not therefore exercise an immediate simple action upon the third; it
follows that the action of attraction would be just as mediated as that of
repulsion; further, the true penetration of the force of attraction would have
to consist only in this, that every part of matter is attractive in and for itself,
not that a certain number of them behaves passively and only one atom
actively. – But more to the point, with respect to the force of repulsion
itself, it must be observed that, in the cited passage, the parts are in contact
with each other, presumably in the state of compactness and continuity of a
ready matter which would not allow repulsion across itself. However, such a
compactness of matter in which the parts are in contact with each other, no
longer separated by the void, already presupposes that the force of repulsion
has been sublated; in keeping with the sensuous representation of repulsion
dominant here, we have to assume parts which, being in contact with each
other, do not repel each other. It therefore follows, quite tautologically, that
repulsion cannot have a place where its non-presence is being assumed. But
there is nothing to be gained from this for a determination of the force of
attraction. – However, if we reflect on what transpires, namely that parts
in contact with each other touch each other to the extent that they still
hold themselves apart, the implication is that the force of repulsion is not
just on the surface of matter but within the sphere that was supposed to
be only a sphere of attraction.
Kant further assumes that “through attraction matter only occupies a
space, without filling it” (ibid.) and “since matter does not fill space through
the force of attraction, the latter can act across empty space, for there is
no intervening matter to set limits to it.”86 – This distinction is of much
85
86

Hegel’s pagination refers to the 1786 edition. Kant (1786), AK 4.516.
Kant (1786), AK 4.516.

21.171

150

21.172

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the same nature as the one mentioned above where a determination is
supposed to belong to a subject without however being contained in it;87
here matter is supposed only to occupy a space but not fill it. So there we
have repulsion, if we stay at its first definition, according to which the ones
repel each other and only negatively (which means here, through empty
space) connect with each other. Here we have the force of attraction that
instead keeps space empty; it does not fill space by connecting the atoms,
that is, it keeps the atoms in reciprocal negative connection. – We see that
here Kant unconsciously runs into what is implied by the nature of the
fact; that he ascribes to the force of attraction precisely what in the first
definition he ascribed to the opposite force. While he was busy firming up
the distinction between the two forces, what happened is that the one force
crossed over into the other. – So for Kant matter is supposed to fill space
through repulsion and through it empty space, which allows for attractive
force, is consequently supposed to vanish. In fact, in sublating empty space,
repulsion sublates the negative connection of the atoms or the ones, that
is, their repulsion; that is, repulsion is determined as the opposite of itself.
Added to this blurring of distinctions there is the further confusion
that, as we remarked at the beginning, Kant’s presentation of the opposing
forces is analytical; matter, which should first be derived from its elements,
recurs through the whole exposition already set and constituted. The two
forces, surface and penetrative, are assumed by definition to be the motive
forces by virtue of which matters can be supposed act in one way or the
other. – They are conceived here, therefore, not as forces through which
matter would come to be in the first place but as forces through which
matter, already in place, would only be moved. But in so far as we are
speaking of forces through which different matters act upon one another
and are in motion, this is quite another thing than the determination and
the connection that such forces should have as moments of matter.
When further determined as centripetal and centrifugal, these forces
generate the same opposition as they do as attractive and repulsive forces.
They seem to harbor an essential distinction, since in their sphere there is
a “one” that stays fixed, a center, and with respect to it the other “ones”
do not behave as for themselves; the distinction between the two forces
can therefore be linked to this presupposed distinction between the single
“one” at the center and the other “ones” that do not stay fixed relatively
to it. But now, in so far as such forces are used for explanatory purposes
(in which function they are taken, as are also the forces of attraction and
87

Cf. above, 21.168.

Being-for-itself

151

repulsion, in inverse quantitative ratio, so that the one increases as the other
decreases), one should expect that the phenomenon of motion, for whose
explanation they were assumed, and the phenomenon of their inequality,
be precisely the result of them. But one need only take a look at the account
of a phenomenon based on the opposition of these forces (any will do; for
instance, the uneven speed of a planet in its orbit around its central body)
to become immediately aware of the confusion that reigns in it, and the
impossibility of sorting out the quantity of the two forces, with the result
that the one force which in the explanation is assumed to be decreasing
must always be taken just as well as increasing, and vice-versa. This is a
point which, to be made obvious, would need a lengthier exposition than
can be given here; but the minimum necessary will be addressed later in
connection with the inverse ratio.88
88

Cf. below, 21.314–318.

21.173

section ii

Magnitude (Quantity)

21.174

The difference between quantity and quality has been indicated. Quality
is the first, immediate determinateness. Quantity is the determinateness
that has become indifferent to being; a limit which is just as much no
limit; being-for-itself which is absolutely identical with being-for-another:
the repulsion of the many ones which is immediate non-repulsion, their
continuity.
Because that which exists for itself is now so posited that it does not
exclude its other but rather affirmatively continues in it, it is then otherness, inasmuch as existence surfaces again on this continuity and its determinateness is at the same time no longer simple self-reference, no longer
the immediate determinateness of the existent something, but is posited
as repelling itself from itself, as referring to itself in the determinateness
rather of an other existence (a being which exists for itself ); and since they
are at the same time indifferent limits, reflected into themselves and unconnected, determinateness is as such outside itself, an absolute externality and
a something just as external; such a limit, the indifference of the limit as
limit and the indifference of the something to the limit, constitutes the
quantitative determinateness of the something.
In the first place, we have to distinguish pure quantity from quantity
as determinate, from quantum. First, pure quantity is real being-for-itself
turned back into itself, with as yet no determinateness in it: a compact,
infinite unity which continues itself into itself.
Second, this quantity proceeds to determinateness, and this is posited
in it as a determinateness that at the same time is none, is only external. Quantity becomes quantum. Quantum is indifferent determinateness,
that is, one that transcends itself, negates itself; as this otherness of otherness, it lapses into infinite progress. Infinite quantum, however, is sublated
indifferent determinateness: it is the restoration of quality.
Third, quantum in qualitative form is quantitative ratio. Quantum transcends itself only in general; in the ratio, however, it transcends itself
into its otherness, in such a way that this otherness in which it has its
152

Magnitude (Quantity)

153

determination is at the same time posited, is another quantum. With this
we have quantum as turned back into itself and referring to itself as into
its otherness.
At the foundation of this relation there still lies the externality of quantum; it is indifferent quanta that relate themselves to each other, that is, they
have the reference that mutually connects them in this being-outside-itself.
The ratio is, therefore, only a formal unity of quality and quantity, and its
dialectic is its transition into their absolute unity, in measure.
Remark
In something, its limit is as quality essentially its determinateness. However,
if by limit we understand one which is quantitative and, for instance, a field
alters its limit in this sense, then the field remains a field just as before. If,
on the contrary, it is the qualitative limit of the field which is altered, what
is altered is the determinateness that makes the field a field, and the field
then becomes a meadow, a forest, and so on. – A shade of red, whether
brighter or paler, is always red; but if its quality alters, then it ceases to be
red and becomes blue, and so on. – The determination of magnitude as
quantum just defined (as having for foundation a permanent being which
is indifferent to its determinateness) is confirmed in every other example.
By the expression magnitude [or Größe in German], we understand
quantum as in the given examples, not quantity [Quantität]; essentially
for this reason this name drawn [in German] from a foreign language
[quantitas] must be used.
The definition of magnitude given in mathematics has likewise to do with
quantum. A magnitude is normally defined as something that allows for
increase or decrease. To increase, however, means to magnify the magnitude
of something, to decrease, to minimize it. We have here a difference of
magnitude as such from itself, as if it were magnitude that would allow
its magnitude to alter. The definition thus proves itself to be awkward, for
the very term is used in it that ought to be defined. To avoid using the
same term in the definition, the more or less, the magnifying or minimizing,
must be resolved into addition (an external affirmation, in keeping indeed
with the nature of quantum) or subtraction (an equally external negation).
The nature of alteration in quantum comes down in general to this external
mode of both reality and negation. In that imperfect expression, therefore,
one cannot fail to recognize the main point at issue, namely the indifference
of the alteration: the concept of alteration itself implies its own “more and
less,” its indifference towards itself.

21.175

21.176

c h a p ter 1

Quantity

a. pure quantity

21.177

Quantity is sublated being-for-itself. The repelling one that behaved only
negatively towards the excluded one, now that it has gone over in connection with it, behaves towards the other as identical to itself and has therefore lost its determination; being-for-itself has passed over into attraction.
The absolute obduracy of the one has melted away into this unity which,
however, as containing the one, is at the same time determined by the
repulsion residing in it; as unity of the self-externality, it is unity with itself.
Attraction is in this way the moment of continuity in quantity.
Continuity is therefore simple, self-same reference to itself unbroken by
any limit or exclusion – not, however, immediate unity but the unity of
ones which have existence for themselves. Still contained in it is the outsideone-another of plurality, though at the same time as something without
distinctions, unbroken. Plurality is posited in continuity as it implicitly is
in itself; the many are each what the others are, each is like the other, and the
plurality is, consequently, simple and undifferentiated equality. Continuity
is this moment of self-equality of the outsideness-of-one-another, the selfcontinuation of the different ones into the ones from which they are
distinguished.
In continuity, therefore, magnitude immediately possesses the moment
of discreteness – repulsion as now a moment in quantity. – Steady continuity1
is self-equality, but of many that do not become exclusive; it is repulsion
that first expands self-equality to continuity. Hence discreteness is, for its
part, a discreteness of confluents – of ones that do not have the void to
connect them, not the negative, but their own steady advance and, in the
many, do not interrupt this self-equality.
Quantity is the unity of these moments, of continuity and discreteness.
At first, however, it is this continuity in the form of one of them, of
1

Stetigkeit.

154

Quantity

155

continuity, as a result of the dialectic of the being-for-itself which has collapsed into the form of self-equal immediacy. Quantity is as such this simple
result in so far as the being-for-itself has not yet developed its moments and
has not posited them within it. – Quantity contains these moments at first
as being-for-itself posited in its truth. It was the determination of being-initself to be self-sublating self-reference, a perpetual coming-out-of-itself.
But what is repelled is itself; repulsion is thus a creative flowing away
from itself. On account of the sameness of what is repelled, this discerning
is unbroken continuity; and on account of the coming-out-of-itself, this
continuity is at the same time, without being broken off, a plurality – a
plurality which persists just as immediately in its equality with itself.
Remark 1
Pure quantity has as yet no limit nor is it as quantum yet. And even
inasmuch as it becomes quantum, it is not restricted by limit but consists
rather precisely in not being restricted by limit, in having the being-foritself as a sublated moment in itself. That discreteness is a moment in it can
be expressed by saying that quantity is in it the ubiquitous real possibility of
the one; that the one, conversely, is only simply as absolutely continuous.
To a representation not informed by the concept, continuity easily
becomes composition, that is to say, an external reciprocal connection of
ones in which the one is retained in its absolute obduracy and exclusiveness. But the one has shown itself to pass over into attraction in and for
itself, into its ideality; it has shown that continuity, consequently, is not
external to it but belongs to it and is grounded in its essence. But it is just
this externality of continuity for the ones to which atomism clings, and
representation has difficulty giving it up. – Mathematics, on the contrary,
rejects a metaphysics that would make time consist of points of time; space
in general, or the line in the first instance, of points of space; surface, of
lines; the whole space, of surfaces. It gives no credit to such discontinuous
ones. Even when it represents the magnitude of a surface, for instance, by
determining it as the sum of infinitely many lines, this discreteness counts
only as a momentary representation, for, since the space which such lines
are supposed to constitute still is a restricted one, the sublation of their
discreteness is already implicit in the infinity of the plurality.
It is this concept of pure quantity, as contrasted with a mere figurative
representation of it, that Spinoza, for whom the concept had special importance, has in mind when he speaks of quantity as follows (Ethics, Part I,
Proposition XV, note):

21.178

156

21.179

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Quantitas duobus a nobis concipitur, abstracte scilicet sive superficialiter,
prout nempe ipsam imaginamur; vel ut substantia, quod a solo intellectu fit.
Si itaque ad quantitatem attendimus, prout in imaginatione est, quod saepe et
facilius a nobis fit, reperietur finita, divisibilis et ex partibus conflata, si autem
ad ipsam, prout in intellectu est, attendimus, et eam, quatenus substantia est,
concipimus, quod difficillime fit, – infinita, unica et indivisibilis reperietur.
Quod omnibus, qui inter imaginationem et intellectum distinguere sciverint,
satis manifestum erit.2
If called for, more graphic examples of pure quantity can be drawn from
space and time, also from matter in general, from light, and so forth, even
from the “I” – provided that, as already noted, quantity is not understood
as quantum. Space, time, and the rest, are extensions, pluralities; they
are a going-out-of-self, a flowing that does not however pass over into
the opposite, into quality or the one, but, as this coming-out-of-self, are
rather a perennial self-producing of their unity. Space is this absolute beingoutside-itself that is equally absolutely unbroken, a being-other over and
over again which is self-identical; time is an absolute coming-out-of-itself,
the generation of a one, of a point in time, a now which is immediately its
coming-to-nothing and, again, the continuous coming-to-nothing of this
vanishing; so that this self-generation of non-being is just as much simple
equality and identity with itself.
As regards the matter of quantity, there is one among the seven still
extant propositions of Leibniz’s first dissertation, the second, which goes as
follows: Non omnimo improbabile est, materiam et quantitatem esse realiter
idem (page 1 of Part I of his works).3 – In fact, these concepts differ
only to the extent that quantity is a pure thought determination, whereas
matter is quantity in outer concrete existence. – The determination of pure
quantity extends to the “I” as well, for the “I” is an absolute becomingother, an infinite distancing or all-round repulsion that makes for the
negative freedom of the being-for-itself which, however, remains absolutely
simple continuity – the continuity of universality, of self-abiding-being
2

3

“Quantity is conceived by us in two modes, abstractly or superficially, as we imagine it; or as substance,
such as it is produced solely by the intellect. If we attend to quantity as it is in the imagination,
which we often and more easily do, it will be found to be finite, divisible, and compounded of parts;
but if we attend to it in accordance with the intellect, and we conceive of it as substance, which is
very difficult to do, it will be found to be infinite, one, and indivisible. This will be plain enough to
all, who know how to distinguish between the imagination and the intellect.”
“It is not altogether improbable that matter and quantity are in reality one and the same.” Hegel is
citing from the Dutens edition of Leibniz’s works, Gothofredi Guillelmi Leibnitii opera omnia (Geneva,
1768). Cf. Leibniz (1763, 1880), p. 26. Disputatio de principio individui, in Die philosophischen Schriften
von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, ed. C. J. Gerhardt (Berlin, 1875–1890), Vol. 4, p. 26.

Quantity

157

interrupted by infinitely manifold limits, by the content of sensations, of
intuitions, and so forth. – Those who resist taking multiplicity as a simple
unity and, besides this concept, namely that each of the many is the same
as every other, that is to say, that each is one of many (for at issue here is
not the many as further determined as green, red, and so on, but of the
many considered in-and-for-itself ) – those who besides this also require a
figurative representation of this unity, will find plenty of such representations
in those continua that exhibit the deduced concept of quantity in simple
intuition.
Remark 2
The dispute or the antinomy of the infinite divisibility of space, time, matter,
and so on, has its origin in the nature of quantity, that it is this simple
unity of discreteness and continuity.
This antinomy consists solely in the fact that discreteness must be maintained just as much as continuity. The one-sided claim of discreteness
yields infinite or absolute partition, hence an indivisible, as principle; the
one-sided claim of continuity yields infinite divisibility instead.
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason famously sets up four (cosmological)
antinomies, the second of which deals with the antithesis to which the
moments of quantity give rise.4
These Kantian antinomies will always remain an important part of
Kantian philosophy. They, above all, caused the downfall of previous metaphysics and can be regarded as a main transition to more recent philosophy.
For they were particularly instrumental in producing the conviction that
the categories of finitude are null on the side of content, and this is a more
correct approach than the formal approach of a subjective idealism for
which their only defect is that they are allegedly subjective, not in what
they are in themselves. However, despite its great service, Kant’s exposition of these antinomies is very imperfect, both because it is internally
awkward and eccentric and because of the inappropriateness of its result,
which presupposes that cognition has no other forms of thought than finite
categories. – In both respects, these antinomies deserve a more accurate
critique, one that more closely clarifies its standpoint and method, and also
extricates the main point at issue from the useless form into which it has
been forced.
I remark, to begin with, that Kant wanted to give a semblance of completeness to his four antinomies by means of a principle of division which he
4

For the following discussion, cf. A434/B462ff.

21.180

158

21.181

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

took from his schema of the categories. However, a more profound insight
into the antinomial or, more accurately, into the dialectical nature of reason reveals that every concept is a unity of opposite moments to which,
therefore, the form of antinomial assertions could be given. Becoming,
existence, and the rest, and every other concept, could thus each yield its
particular antinomy, and as many antinomies can therefore be devised as
there are concepts. – Ancient skepticism did not spare itself any effort in
pointing to this contradiction, the antinomy, in every concept which it
encountered in the sciences.
Further, Kant did not pick the antinomy from the concepts themselves,
but from the already concrete form of cosmological determinations. To
capture it pure, and to deal with it in its simple concept, the thought
determinations must not be taken as applied to, and entangled in, the
representation of the world, space, time, matter, and so on, but must
rather be considered purely in themselves, without this concrete material
which has no force or authority here, for the thought determinations alone
make up the essence and the ground of the antinomies.
Kant’s conception of the antinomies is that they “are not sophistic
artifices but contradictions reason must run up against.” This last is a
Kantian expression, and the view expressed is an important one. “As it
gains insight into the natural illusion of the antinomies, reason is indeed
no longer duped by it but is still deceived.”5 – The critical solution,
namely through the so-called transcendental ideality of the world of perception, has no other result than to make the so-called conflict into
something subjective wherein, of course, the same illusion still persists
just as undispelled as before. A true solution can only consist in that
two determinations, in being opposed and yet necessary to one and the
same concept, cannot have validity in their one-sidedness, each for itself,
but have truth rather only in their sublated being, in the unity of their
concept.
On closer inspection, the Kantian antinomies contain nothing more
than the wholly simple categorical assertion of each of the two opposed
moments of a determination, each on its own, isolated from the other. But
this simple categorical, or more appropriately assertorical, claim is then
enwrapped in a lopsided, disjointed scaffolding of argumentation that
allegedly elicits the semblance of proof while in fact hiding and rendering
unrecognizable the merely assertorical character of the claim, as closer
examination will show.
5

A421/B449.

Quantity

159

The relevant antinomy here concerns the so-called infinite divisibility
of matter, and rests on the opposition of the moments of continuity and
discreteness that the concept of quantity contains within itself.
As presented by Kant, the thesis in these antinomies goes like this:
“Every composite substance in the world consists of simple parts, and nothing
exists anywhere except the simple or what is composed of the simple.”6
Here the composite is contrasted with the simple, the atom, and, as
determination, takes second place to the unbroken or continuous. – The
substrate given to these abstractions, namely these substances in the world,
has no other meaning here than of things perceivable by the senses; it bears
no influence on the antinomy itself, and could just as well also be called
space or time. – Now since the thesis speaks only of composition instead of
continuity, by that fact it is really an analytical or tautological proposition.
That the composite is not one thing in and for itself but is something only
externally put together, that it consists of something other, is its immediate
determination. But this something other than the composite is the simple.
It is therefore a tautology to say that the composite is made up of the
simple. – To ask what something consists of is to require the production
of something else, the compounding of which constitutes that something. If
ink is said to consist of ink again, the meaning of the question regarding
the something else of which the ink consists is missed; the question is
not answered but is simply repeated. The further question would then be
whether that of which we speak is supposed to consist of something or not.
But, as such, a composite is just that, an aggregate made up of something
else. – If the simple which is said to be the other of the composite is taken
to be only a relatively simple which, for itself, is composite in turn, then
the question stands as before. Figurative representation has in view, say,
only this or that composite, to which this or that something might also be
assigned as its simple element, although for itself the latter is a composite.
But at issue here is the composite as such.
Regarding now the Kantian proof of the thesis, like all the Kantian proofs
of the remaining antinomial propositions, it takes an apagogic detour which
will prove quite superfluous.
“Assume,” so begins the proof, “that composite substances do not consist
of simple parts; then, if all composition is removed in thought, no composite
part remains and, since on the assumption just made there are no simple
parts, there is also no simple part, thus nothing at all; consequently no
substance would be given.”7
6

A434/B462.

7

A434/B462.

21.182

160

21.183

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

This conclusion is quite correct: if there is nothing but what is composite,
and one thinks away all that is composite, nothing at all is left. – One will
grant this. But one could spare oneself this tautological superfluity by
starting the proof directly with its conclusion, namely:
“Either it is impossible to remove all composition in thought, or, after
its removal, something must be left over that subsists without composition,
that is, the simple.”8
“In the first case, however, the composite would not for its part consist
of substances (because with these the composition is only an accidental relation
of substancesi which, without such relation, must subsist as beings persisting
on their own). – Now, since this case contradicts the presupposition, there
is left only the second, namely that any composition of substance in the
world consists of simple parts.”9
The very ground which is the main point and makes all that follows
superfluous is laid down, by the way, in a parenthesis. The dilemma is
this: either the composite persists or it does not and it is rather the simple
that persists. If the first is the case, namely the composite persists, then
what persists would not be substances, for composition is to these only an
accidental relation; but substances are what persists; therefore, what persists
is the simple.
Clearly the reason, because the composition is only an accidental relation
of substances, a relation which is therefore external to them and does not
concern the substances themselves, could have been immediately attached
as proof to the thesis that the composite substance consists of simple parts
without the apagogic detour. – If it is correct to say that the composition is
accidental, then the essence is surely the simple. However, this accidentality
on which everything depends is not proved but is assumed instead straight
out, indeed casually in parenthesis, as something which is self-evident or
irrelevant. True, it is self-evident that composition has the determination
of accidentality and externality; but if we are to deal here with only an
accidental aggregate instead of continuity, then it was not worth the effort
to construct an antinomy over it, or, more to the point, none could be
constructed; so the assertion that the parts are simple is then, as said, only
a tautology.
We thus find already given in the apagogical detour the very assertion
that should result from it. The proof can therefore be drawn more concisely
this way:
i
8

In addition to the redundancy of proof there is here also a redundancy of language – “because with
these” (i.e. the substances) and “the composite is only an accidental relation of substances.”
9 A434–436/B462–464.
A434/B462.

Quantity

161

Assume that substances do not consist of simple parts but are only composite. But now all composition can be removed in thought (for it is only
an accidental relation); therefore, after its removal, no substances would
be left over unless made up of simple parts. But we must have substances,
since we have assumed them; we cannot have everything disappear before
us but something must be left over, since we have presupposed something permanent that we call substance. This something must therefore be
simple.
For the sake of completeness, we also have to consider the conclusion
which runs as follows:
“From this it directly follows that the things of the world are all simple
beings; that composition is only an external state of them, and that reason
must think the elementary substances as simple beings.”10
Here we see the externality of composition, that is, its accidentality,
being adduced as the consequence after it had earlier been introduced parenthetically in the proof and made use of.
Kant strongly protests that with the conflicting propositions of the
antinomies he is not trying to trump up a trick, a proof of the kind (as it
is said) that lawyers produce.11 But the proof in question is not so much to
be accused of trickery as it is of useless and strained complexity that only
serves to conjure up the external form of a proof, thus to obscure the fact
that the alleged conclusion is, parenthetically, the nerve of the proof, that
there is no proof at all but only a presupposition.
The antithesis goes:
“No composite thing in the world consists of simple parts and nowhere in
the world exists something simple.”12
The proof is likewise spun in apagogic form and is just as faulty as the
previous one, though in a different way.13
“Assume,” it says, “that a composite thing such as substance consists of
simple parts. Because every external relation, and consequently also every
composition made of substances, is possible only in space, the composite
thing must consist of as many parts as the space that it occupies also consists
in. Now space consists not of simple parts but of spaces. Therefore each
part of the composite thing must occupy a space.”
“But the absolutely first parts of everything composite are simple.”
“Therefore the simple occupies a space.”

10
13

11 A430/B458.
12 A435/B463.
A436/B464, paraphrase.
For the texts immediately following, cf. A435/B463. Hegel is paraphrasing throughout.

21.184

21.185

162

21.186

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

“Now since every real thing that occupies a space holds within itself
a manifold of mutually external parts, is thereby composed, and indeed
of substances, it would follow that the simple is a composite substance –
which is self-contradictory.”
This proof can be called a whole nest (to use an expression elsewhere
found in Kant)14 of fallacious moves.
In the first place, the apagogical turn is a baseless illusion. For the
assumption that everything substantial is spatial, but that space does not
consist of simple parts, is a direct assertion which is made the immediate
ground of what is to be proved, and with it the whole proof is already
finished.
Next, this apagogical proof starts with the proposition, “every composition of substances is an external relation,” but then, oddly enough, it
immediately forgets it. For it goes on to argue that composition is only
possible in space; but that space does not consist of simple parts; that,
therefore, anything real that takes up a space is composite. But once composition has been assumed to be an external relation, just because of this
the spatiality itself (in which alone composition is allegedly possible) is for
the substances an external relation that is of no concern to them and does
not affect their nature, just like anything else that can yet be derived from
the determination of spatiality. For that very reason the substances ought
not to have been posited in space.
It is further presupposed that the space in which the substances have
been moved here does not consist of simple parts, since it is an intuition,
that is, according to the Kantian definition, a representation which can
only be given through one single object, and is not a so-called discursive
concept. – The widespread nonsense regarding intuition that has grown
out of this Kantian distinction between it and the concept is well known,
and, in an effort to spare oneself the labor of conceptual comprehension,
the value and the sphere of intuition have been extended to all cognition.
What is pertinent here is only this, that space, just like intuition itself, must
also be conceptualized if one wants to comprehend conceptually at all. And
thus the question arises whether space would not have to be conceptually
grasped as consisting of simple parts, even though as intuition it is simple
continuity, or whether space would not run into the same antinomy that
applied only to substance. In actual fact, if the antinomy is abstractly
framed, it applies, as we said,15 to quantity in general and thereby equally
to space and time.
14
15

A609/B637. Kant’s expression is directed at the cosmological proof of God’s existence.
Cf. above, 21.180.

Quantity

163

But since it is assumed in the proof that space does not consist of simple
parts, this should have been reason for not transposing the simple into
this element which is incompatible with it. – Then there is also the clash
between continuity of space and composition; the two are mixed together,
the former being surreptitiously substituted for the latter (which results in
the conclusion with a quaternio terminorum).16 In Kant, space explicitly
has the determination of being “one single space, its parts resting only on
limitations, so that they do not come before the one all-encompassing space,
as if they were parts of it from which a composition is possible” (Cr. of Pure
R. 2nd edn, p. 39).17 Continuity is quite rightly and unequivocally said
of space here, as opposed to any composition made of parts. On the other
hand, in the argument the transposing of substances into space is taken to
entail “a manifold of externally situated parts” and, more particularly, “a
composite thereby.”18 Yet, as quoted, the manner in which manifoldness
is present in space is explicitly supposed to exclude component parts that
antecede the composition and the unity of the space.
In the remark to the proof of the antithesis, another fundamental thesis
of critical philosophy is expressly brought in, namely that we have a concept
of bodies only as appearances; as such, however, they necessarily presuppose
space, which is the condition of the possibility of all external appearances. If
by substances only bodies are meant here, such as those which we see, feel,
taste, and so on, then, strictly speaking there is no question of what they
are in their concept; at issue are only sense perceptions. The proof of the
antithesis, therefore, should have been briefly this: our whole experience,
visual, tactile, and so on, shows us only what is composite; even the best
microscopes and the keenest knives have yet to let us hit upon anything
simple. Therefore, reason also should not expect to hit upon anything
simple.
If we then look into the opposition of this thesis and antithesis more
accurately, freeing their proofs of all idle superfluity and oddity, we find
that the proof of the antithesis, by transposing substances into space, dogmatically assumes continuity, just as the proof of the thesis, by assuming
composition as the mode of connection of anything substantial, dogmatically assumes the accidentality of this connection, and consequently that
substances are an absolute one. The whole antinomy thus comes down to
the separation of the two moments of quantity and the direct assertion
of the two, precisely as absolutely separated from each other. When considered from the standpoint of mere discreteness, substance, matter, space,
16
18

A syllogism with four terms.
Cf. A443/471.

17

A24–25/B39. Hegel is only paraphrasing.

21.187

164

21.188

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

time, and so on, are absolutely separate, their principle is the one. From the
standpoint of continuity, this one is sublated; parting remains divisibility;
it remains the possibility of parting, as possibility, without actually coming
to the atom. Now, even if we stay with these oppositions as just defined,
we see that the moment of atomicity lies in continuity itself, for continuity
is the possibility of parting. And the said partition, the discreteness, also
sublates every distinction of the ones (for the simple ones are each what
the other is); it thereby equally contains their sameness and thus their continuity. Since each of the two opposed sides contains its other within itself,
it follows that neither of these determinations, taken alone, has truth, but
only their unity does. This is the true dialectical consideration of them, as
well as the true result.
Infinitely more meaningful and more profound than this Kantian antinomy just considered are the dialectical examples of the ancient Eleatic
school, especially those dealing with movement, which are likewise based
on, and find their solution in, the concept of quantity.19 To consider them
here also would take us too far afield; they have to do with the concepts
of space and time and can be dealt with in the history of philosophy in
connection with them. – These examples do the greatest honor to the reason of their discoverers; they have the pure being of Parmenides for result,
for they exhibit in them the dissolution of all determinate being and are
thus in themselves the flux of Heraclitus. For this reason they also deserve
a more careful examination than the usual explanation that they are just
sophisms. This is an assertion that sticks to empirical perception in the
manner (which commonsense finds so illuminating) of a Diogenes who,
when a dialectician pointed out the contradiction inherent in movement,
is said not to have further strained his reason but, silently walking back and
forth, deferred to the witness of the eyes20 – a claim and refutation which
is surely easier to make than to let oneself be drawn into thoughts and pursue the complications to which thought itself leads (indeed, not far-flung
thought but the thought shaped in ordinary consciousness), resolving them
by thoughts alone.
The solution that Aristotle gives to these dialectical tropes is contained
in his truly speculative concepts of space, time, and movement, and merits
high praise. The most famous of his proofs rest on opposing infinite divisibility (imagined as if it were actually carried out and hence as equivalent
19
20

Cf. Aristotle, Physics, 239b5–240b7.
See Diogenes Laertius, Vitae philosophorum, Vol. 1, edited by Miroslav Marcovich (Stuttgart:
B. G. Teubner, 1999), book 6, §39; Lives of Eminent Philosophers, Vol. 2, translated by R. D.
Hicks (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965).

Quantity

165

to infinite partition, the atoms) to continuity, which applies just as well to
time as to space, so that the infinite, that is, abstract plurality is contained
in this continuity only in itself, as possibility. The actual as contrasted to
abstract plurality and also to abstract continuity is the concreteness of these,
space and time themselves, just as, in contrast to space and time, movement
and matter are the concrete in turn. What is abstract has being only in itself
or as possibility; it is only a moment of something real.21 Bayle, who in his
Dictionary (Article, “Zenon”) finds Aristotle’s solution to the dialectic of
Zeno “pitoyable,” does not understand what it means to say that matter is
infinitely divisible only as possibility; his retort is that, if matter were divisible in infinitum, it would actually contain an infinite aggregate of parts
and would be, therefore, not an infinite “en puissance,” but an infinite that
exists really and actually.22 – On the contrary, divisibility itself is already
only a possibility, not a concrete existing of parts, and plurality in general is
posited in continuity only as moment, as sublated. – Sharpness of understanding, in which Aristotle is also surely unsurpassed, does not suffice to
grasp and to pass judgment on his speculative concepts, no more than the
said crudeness of sense-representation suffices to refute Zeno’s argumentations. The understanding, however sharp, makes the mistake of holding
such thought-fictions, such abstractions as an infinite aggregate of parts,
to be a thing, something true and actual; but this sensuous consciousness
will not let itself be brought, beyond empirical content, to thoughts.
The Kantian resolution of the antinomy likewise consists only in supposing that reason should not overstep sense perception, and should take
appearance as it is.23 This solution ignores the content of the antinomy
itself; it does not get to the nature of the concept of the terms that make
it up, each of which, isolated by itself, is a nullity and in itself only the
transition into its other, quantity being their unity and, in that unity, their
truth.
b. continuous and discrete magnitude
1. Quantity contains the two moments of continuity and discreteness. It
is to be posited in both, in each as its determination. – It is already from
the start the immediate unity of the two, that is, quantity is itself posited at
21
22
23

Physics, 239b5–240b7.
Pierre Bayle, Dictionnaire historique et critique, 3rd edn (Rotterdam, 1720), Vol. 4, 2909, note F;
Slatkine Reprints (Geneva, 1969), Vol. 15, p. 39.
Cf. Critique of Pure Reason, A702/B730.

21.189

166

21.190

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

first only in one of the two determinations, that of continuity, and as such
is continuous magnitude.
Or continuity is indeed one of the moments of quantity which is brought
to completion only with the other, discreteness. But quantity is concrete
unity only in so far as it is the unity of distinct moments. These are to
be taken, therefore, also as distinct, without however resolving them again
into attraction and repulsion but, rather, as they truly are, each remaining
in its unity with the other, that is, remaining the whole. Continuity is only
the compact unity holding together as unity of the discrete; posited as such,
it is no longer only moment but the whole quantity: continuous magnitude.
2. Immediate quantity is continuous magnitude. Quantity, however, is
not as such an immediate; immediacy is a determinateness, the sublated
being of which is precisely quantity. Quantity is to be posited, therefore,
in the determinateness immanent to it, and this is the one. Quantity is
discrete magnitude.
Discreteness is, like continuity, a moment of quantity, but is itself also
the whole quantity just because it is a moment in it, the whole, and
therefore as distinct moment does not diverge from its unity with the
other moment. – Quantity is the outsideness-of-one-another as such, and
continuous magnitude is this outsideness-of-one-another onwardly positing itself without negation as an internally self-same connectedness. On
the other hand, discrete magnitude is this outsideness-of-one-another as
discontinuous, as broken off. With this aggregate of ones, however, the
aggregate of atom and void, repulsion in general, is not thereby reinstated.
Because discrete magnitude is quantity, its discreteness is itself continuous.
Such a continuity in the discrete consists in the ones being the same as
one another, or in that they have the same unity. Discrete magnitude is
therefore the one-outside-the-other of the many ones as of a same – not the
many ones in general, but posited rather as the many of a unity.
Remark
What is overlooked in the ordinary representations of continuous and
discrete magnitude is that each of these magnitudes has both moments
in it, continuity as well as discreteness, and that the distinction between
them depends solely on which of the two is the posited determinateness
and which is only implicit. Space, time, matter, and so on, are continuous
magnitudes in that they are repulsions from themselves, each a flowing
forth out of itself which is not, however, a going over, or a relating, to a
qualitatively other. They possess the absolute possibility that the one may
be posited in them anywhere. And this is not the empty possibility of a

Quantity

167

mere otherness (as when one says that it would be possible for a tree to
stand in the place of this stone). They contain in themselves, rather, the
principle of the one; it is one of the determinations constituting them.
Conversely, continuity is not to be overlooked in discrete magnitude;
this moment, as indicated, is the one as unity.
Continuous and discrete magnitudes can be regarded as species of quantity inasmuch as the latter is posited under the determinacies of its own
moments rather than under some external determinateness; the usual transition from genus to species allows external determinations to accrue to
the genus according to a principle of division external to it. Moreover,
continuous and discrete magnitudes are not yet quanta; they are quantity
itself in one of its two forms. They are called magnitudes in some sense
only, in so far as they have this in common with quantum – that they are
a determinateness in quantity.

21.191

c. the limiting of quantity
Discrete magnitude has, first, the one for its principle and, second, is a
plurality of ones; third, it is essentially continuous, it is the one as at the
same time sublated, as unity, the self-continuing as such in the discreteness
of the ones. Consequently, it is posited as one magnitude, and the “one”
is its determinateness – a “one” which, in this posited and determinate
existence, excludes, is a limit to the unity. Discrete magnitude as such is not
supposed to be immediately limited, but, when distinguished from continuous magnitude, it is an existence and a something, the determinateness
of which, and in it also the first negation and limit, is the “one.”
This limit, besides referring to the unity and being the moment of
negation in it, is also, as one, self-referred; thus it is enclosing, encompassing
limit. The limit here is not at first distinct from the something of its
existence, but, as one, is essentially this negative point itself. But the being
which is here limited is essentially as continuity, and in virtue of this
continuity it transcends the limit, transcends this one, and is indifferent to
it. Real, discrete quantity is thus one quantity, or quantum – quantity as
an existence and a something.
Since the one which is a limit encompasses within it the many ones
of discrete quantity, it posits them equally as sublated in it; it is a limit
to continuity simply as such and, consequently, the distinction between
continuous and discrete magnitude is here indifferent; or, more precisely,
it is a limit to the continuity of the one just as much as of the other; in this,
both pass over into being quanta.

21.192

21.193

ch a p ter 2

Quantum

Quantum, which in the first instance is quantity with a determinateness or
limit in general, in its complete determinateness is number. Second, quantum divides first into extensive quantum, in which limit is the limitation of a
determinately existent plurality; and then, inasmuch as the existence of this
plurality passes over into being-for-itself, into intensive quantum or degree.
This last is for-itself but also, as indifferent limit, equally outside itself. It thus
has its determinateness in an other. Third, as this posited contradiction of
being determined simply in itself yet having its determinateness outside
itself and pointing outside itself for it, quantum, as thus posited outside
itself within itself, passes over into quantitative infinity.
a. number

21.194

Quantity is quantum, or has a limit, both as continuous and discrete
magnitude. The distinction between these two species has here, in the first
instance, no significance.
As the sublated being-for-itself, quantity is already in and for itself
indifferent to its limit. But, equally, the limit or to be a quantum is not
thereby indifferent to quantity; for quantity contains within itself as its
own moment the absolute determinateness of the one, and this moment,
posited in the continuity or unity of quantity, is its limit, but a limit which
remains as the one that quantity in general has become.
This one is therefore the principle of quantum, but as the one of quantity.
For this reason it is, first, continuous, it is a unity; second, it is discrete,
a plurality (implicit in continuous magnitude or posited in discrete magnitude) of ones that have equality with one another, the said continuity,
the same unity. Third, this one is also the negation of the many ones as
a simple limit, an excluding of its otherness from itself, a determination
of itself in opposition to other quanta. The one is thus (a) self-referring,
(b) enclosing, and (g) other-excluding limit.
168

Quantum

169

Thus completely posited in these determinations, quantum is number.
The complete positedness lies in the existence of the limit as a plurality
and so in its being distinguished from the unity. Number appears for this
reason as a discrete magnitude, but in unity it has continuity as well. It is,
therefore, also quantum in complete determinateness, for in it the limit is
the determinate plurality that has the one, the absolutely determined, for
its principle. Continuity, in which the one is only implicitly present as a
sublated moment – posited as unity – is the form of the indeterminateness.
Quantum, only as such, is limited in general; its limit is its abstract,
simple determinateness. But as number, this limit is posited as in itself
manifold. It contains the many ones that make up its existence, but does
not contain them in an indeterminate manner, for the determinateness of
the limit falls rather in it; the limit excludes the existence of other ones,
that is, of other pluralities, and those which it encloses are a determinate
aggregate: they are the amount or the how many times24 with respect to
which, taken as discreteness in the way it is in number, the other is the
unit,25 the continuity of the amount. Amount and unit constitute the
moments of number.
Regarding amount, we must examine yet more closely how the many
ones in which it consists are in the limit. It is rightly said of amount that it
consists of the many, for the ones are not in it as sublated but are rather present
in it, only posited with the excluding limit to which they are indifferent.
But the limit is not indifferent to them. In the sphere of existence, the
limit was at first so placed in relation to existence that the latter was left on
this side of its limit, standing there as the affirmative, while the limit, the
negation, stood outside on the border of existence; similarly, with respect
to the many ones, their being truncated and the exclusion of the remaining
ones appears in them as a determination that falls outside the enclosed
ones. But it was found in that sphere of existence that the limit pervades
existence, that it extends so far as existence does, and that the something is
for this reason limited by its very determination, that is, is finite. – Now,
in the quantitative sphere, a number, say a hundred, is so represented that
only the hundredth unit brings to the many the limit that makes them a
hundred. In one respect this is correct; but, in another respect, none of the
ones in the hundred has precedence over any other, for they are only equal;
each is just as much the hundredth; they all thus belong to the limit that
makes the number a hundred; this number cannot dispense with any of
them for its determinateness; with respect to the hundredth, therefore, the
24

“amount or the how many times” = Anzahl.

25

die Einheit.

21.195

170

21.196

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

rest do not constitute a determinate existence which is in any way different
from it whether inside or outside the limit. Consequently, the number
is not a plurality over against the limiting one that encloses it, but itself
constitutes this delimitation which is a determinate quantum; the many
constitute a number, a one, a two, a ten, a hundred, etc.
Now, the limiting one is a discriminating determinateness, the distinguishing of a number from other numbers. But this distinguishing does
not become a qualitative determinateness; it remains rather quantitative,
falling only within the compass of comparing, of external reflection; as
one, number remains turned back onto itself and indifferent to others.
This indifference of number to others is its essential determination; it constitutes its being-determined-in-itself, but at the same time also its own
exteriority. – Number is thus a numerical one that is absolutely determined
but which has at the same time the form of simple immediacy, and to
which, therefore, the connecting reference to an other remains completely
external. Further, as numerical, the one possesses the determinateness (such
as consists in the reference to other) as a moment in it, in its distinction
of unit and amount; and amount is itself the plurality of the ones, that is,
this absolute exteriority is in the one itself. – This intrinsic contradiction
of number or of quantum in general is the quality of quantum, and the
contradiction will develop in the further determinations of this quality.
Remark 1
Spatial magnitude and numerical magnitude are usually regarded as two
species, in the sense that the former is as such just as much a determinate magnitude as the latter; their only difference, as is said, consists in
the diverse determinations of continuity and discreteness; but as quantum
they stand on the same level. In spatial magnitude geometry has, in general,
continuous magnitude for its subject matter while the subject matter of
arithmetic is discrete magnitude. However, with this disparity of subject
matters they also have an inequality in the manner and the completeness
of delimitation or determinateness. Spatial magnitude has only delimitation in general; when considered as an absolutely determined quantum, it
requires number. Geometry as such does not measure spatial figures – is
not an art of measuring – but only compares them. Even in its definitions,
the determinations are sometimes drawn from the equality of the sides and
angles, or from the equality of distance. The circle, for instance, does not
require number, for it is based solely on the equality of the distance of all its
possible points from a center point. These determinations, based on equality or inequality, are properly geometrical. But they are not sufficient, and

Quantum

171

for other figures such as the triangle or the quadrangle, number is required,
and number contains self-determinateness in its principle (the one) without the aid of an other and thus not through comparison. To be sure, in the
point spatial magnitude possesses the determinateness that corresponds to
the one; but this point, in being externalized, becomes an other, becomes
a line; because it is essentially a one which is only spatial, in connection it
becomes a continuity in which puncticity,26 self-determinateness, the one,
is sublated. To the extent that in self-externality the self-determinateness is
to be retained, the line must be represented as an aggregate of ones, and the
limit must receive the determination of many ones, that is, the magnitude
of the line, and of the other spatial determinations as well, must be taken
as number.
Arithmetic treats number and its figures, or, more accurately, it does
not treat them but rather operates with them. For number is indifferent,
inert determinateness, such as must therefore be activated and brought
into connection from outside. The modes of connection are the species of
calculation. These are performed in arithmetic one after the other, and it is
evident that each depends on the other even though the thread guiding their
progression is not brought out in arithmetic. However, the systematization
to which the textbooks are rightly entitled can easily be drawn from the
conceptual determination of number itself. These guiding determinations
will be briefly noted here.
Because of its principle, which is the one, number is in all instances an
external aggregate, simply an analytical figure without any inner connectedness. And because it is thus produced only externally, all calculation is
a generation of numbers, a counting or, more precisely, a summing up. Any
diversity in this external production that always simply repeats itself can
rest only on a difference in the numbers that are to be summed up; but
any such difference must itself be imported from elsewhere as an external
determination.
The qualitative difference that constitutes the determinateness of number is, as we have seen, that of unit and amount;27 every conceptual determinateness possible in the operations of calculation is reduced, therefore,
to these two. The difference, however, which accrues to numbers as quanta
is external identity and external distinction, equality and inequality, and
these are moments of reflection which we shall have to treat among the
determinations of essence under the heading of “difference.”28
26

Pünkticität.

27

Cf. above, 21.194.

28

Cf. 11.265ff.

21.197

172

21.198

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

We must also mention in advance that numbers can in general be
generated in two ways, either by combining or by separating combinations
already made; and, since both operations are performed with a species of
counting which is determined in one and the same way, to the combining
of numbers (an operation that can be called positive) there corresponds
the separating of them (which can be called a negative operation). But
the determination of the species of calculation itself is independent of this
opposition.
1. After these preliminaries, we proceed with the details of the modes of
calculation. The first generation of number is the combining of the many
as such, each of which is posited as only a one – numbering. Since the
ones are external to each other, they are pictured in a sense image, and
the operation by which number is generated is a reckoning on the finger
tips, dots, etc. What four is, or five, can only be indicated. Since the limit
is external, the breaking off point, how much is to be taken, is something
accidental, arbitrary. – The difference of amount and unit that emerges
in the progression of each species of calculation is the basis of a system of
numbers (dyadic, decadic, and so forth); any such system rests totally on
arbitrariness, on which amount is taken to count as the constant unit.
The numbers produced by counting are counted in turn, and, in thus
being immediately posited, they are still determined without any reference
connecting them to each other – indifferent to equality or inequality,
their relative magnitude accidental, and hence unequal in general. This
is addition. – We see that 7 and 5 make 12 by adding five more ones
to the seven, on our finger tips or in some other way; and the result is
then imprinted in memory by rote, for there is no internal constraint to
the procedure. Similarly, we know that 7 × 5 = 35 by counting off on
finger tips, etc. (by adding to one seven another seven and by repeating the
operation five times), and the result is equally memorized. The labor of
this counting, the ascertaining of the sums or the products, is relieved by
ready-made addition or multiplication tables which one has only to learn
by heart.
Kant regards the proposition, 7 + 5 = 12 as synthetic (in the Introduction
to the Critique of Pure Reason).29 “One should,” he says, “indeed think at
the start (of course!) that it is an analytical proposition, one that derives
from the concept of the sum of seven and five according to the principle of
contradiction.” The concept of the sum has no other meaning than this:
that these two numbers are requested to be combined and, indeed because
29

For the following, see B15–16.

Quantum

173

they are numbers, externally combined, that is, in a way that is conceptually
unconstrained or mechanically; that from seven one should go on counting
until the ones to be added (their amount being fixed at five) have been
exhausted; and the result carries the otherwise familiar name of twelve.
“However,” Kant continues, “if one considers the matter more closely, one
finds that the concept of the sum of seven and five contains nothing more
than the union of the two numbers into a single one, through which it is
not at all thought which this single number is that comprehends the two
of them”; “however much I might go on analyzing my concept of such a
possible sum, I shall still not run across the number twelve.” Of course, the
transition from the set task to the result has nothing to do with thinking the
sum or analyzing the concept. And Kant adds, “one must go outside these
concepts and enlist the aid of intuition, of five fingers, etc., thus adding to
the concept of seven the units of the five which is given in intuition.” Yes, five
is given in intuition, that is, it is an entity put together in an entirely external
fashion by the arbitrary repetition of the thought one; but seven is equally
not a concept: there are no concepts here to go outside of. The sum of 5
and 7 is the conceptually unconstrained joining of the two numbers; one
can call such a mechanical process of counting from seven onwards until
the five ones have been exhausted an adding, a synthesizing, exactly like
the counting from one onwards to five – a synthesizing, however, which is
wholly analytical in nature, for the combination is only an artifact in which
there is nothing, or to which nothing is added, which was not previously
there in external fashion. The postulate that 5 be added to 7 stands to the
postulate of counting in general in the same way as the postulate that a
straight line be extended stands to the postulate of drawing a line.
Just as vacuous as the expression “to synthesize,” is to say that this
synthesizing takes place a priori. Counting is of course not a determination
of the senses, which, according to Kant’s definition of intuition, is all
that is left over for the a posteriori, and it certainly is an affair conducted
on the basis of abstract intuition, that is, one which is determined by
the category of the one and where abstraction is made from all other sense
determinations and no less so also from concepts. The a priori is something
altogether all too vague; feeling, determined as drive, sense, and so on, has
in it the moment of the a priori, just as much as space and time, in the
concrete shapes of temporal and spatial existence, is determined a posteriori.
It can be added in this connection that Kant’s claim about the synthetic character of the principles of pure geometry is equally without solid
ground. He grants that several are really analytical, while giving as example in support of his claim that they are synthetic only the principle that

21.199

174

21.200

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the straight line is the shortest between two points. “For my concept of
straight contains nothing of magnitude but only a quality; the concept of
shortest is thus entirely added to it, and cannot be analytically derived
from the concept of the straight line; intuition must therefore be enlisted as
an aid, and only by means of it is the synthesis possible.”30 – Here too,
however, we are not dealing with the concept of straight in general but
with the straight line, and this latter is already something spatial, intuited.
The determination of the straight line (or, if one prefers, its concept) is
none other than that it is an absolutely simple line; that is, that in coming
outside of itself (the so-called movement of the point), it refers simply to
itself; that in being extended, no diversity of determination, no reference to
some other point or line outside it, is posited; it is simple, absolutely internally determined direction. This simplicity is indeed its quality, and if the
straight line seems difficult to define analytically, this is so precisely because
of its simplicity and self-referential character, whereas reflection looks for
determination first and foremost in a plurality, in a determining through
something else. But there is absolutely nothing inherently difficult in grasping this determination of simple internal extension, this absence of determination by another; Euclid’s definition contains nothing else than this
simplicity.31 – But now the transition of this quality to the quantitative
determination (“the shortest”) that allegedly constitutes the synthetic factor is in fact entirely analytical. As spatial, the line is quantity in general;
when said of the quantum, the simplest means the least, and when said
of line, it means the shortest. Geometry can accept these determinations as
a corollary to the definition; but Archimedes in his books on the sphere
and the cylinder (see Hauber’s Translation, p. 4)32 took the most advisable
course by introducing this determination of the straight line as an axiom,
in just as correct a sense as Euclid included the determination oncerning
parallel lines among the axioms, for the development of this determination into a definition would have also required determinations that do
not belong to spatiality immediately but are rather of a more abstract
qualitative character, like the simplicity and sameness of direction just
mentioned. These ancients gave even to their sciences a plastic character,
rigorously confining their exposition to the distinctive properties of their
material and thus excluding from it anything heterogeneous to it.
Kant’s concept of synthetic a priori judgments – the concept of terms
that are distinct and yet equally inseparable; of an identity which is within it
30
32

31 See Euclid, Elements, Book 1, Definition 4.
B16.
Hegel refers to a German translation of 1798. See GW 21.406 for details.

Quantum

175

an inseparable difference – belongs to what is great and imperishable in his
philosophy. To be sure, this concept is also equally present in intuition, for
it is the concept as such and everything is the concept implicitly; but the
determinations selected in those examples do not exhibit it. Number is an
identity, and counting the production of it, which is absolutely external,
a merely superficial synthesis, a unity of ones that are rather posited as
not inherently identical with each other, but external, each separate for
itself; the determination of the straight line of being the shortest between
two points is based on a moment of abstract, internally undifferentiated
identity.
I return from this digression to addition itself. The corresponding negative species of calculation, subtraction, is the equally entirely analytical
separation into numbers which, just as in addition, are determined relatively to one another only as unequal in general.
2. The next determination is the equality of the numbers that are to be
counted. Because of this equality, the numbers constitute one unity, and
there thus accrues to number the distinction of unit and amount. Multiplication is the task of counting up an amount of units that are themselves
each an amount. It is therefore immaterial which of two numbers is given
as unit and which as amount – whether one says four times three (where
four is the amount and three the unit), or, conversely, three times four. –
We have already indicated above that the original finding of the product is
done by simple counting,33 that is, by counting off on finger tips, etc.; the
subsequent ability to come up with the product straight away rests on the
collection of such products, on the multiplication table, and on learning it
by heart.
Division is the negative species of calculation with this same determination of difference. It is equally immaterial which of two factors, the divisor
or the quotient, is taken as unit or as amount. The divisor is determined as
unit and the quotient as amount whenever the stated task of the division is
to see how many times (the amount) a number (the unit) is contained in a
given number; conversely, the divisor is taken as amount and the quotient
as unit whenever the stated intent is to partition a number into a given
amount of equal parts and to find the magnitude of the part (of the unit).
3. The two numbers that are determined with respect to each other
as unit and amount still are, as numbers, immediate to each other and
are therefore unequal in general. The further equality is that of unit and
amount themselves, and, with this, the progression to the equality of the
33

Cf. above, 21.198.

21.201

176

21.202

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determinations inherent in the determination of number is completed. On
the basis of this complete equality, counting is the raising to a power (the
negative counterpart of this calculation is the extraction of a root), and this
raising to a power constitutes – in the first instance, as the squaring of a
number – the complete inherent determinateness of counting where (1) the
many numbers to be added are the same, and (2) their plurality or amount
is itself the same as the number which is posited a plurality of times, or
the unit. There otherwise are no other determinations in the concept of
number that could provide a difference; nor is there place for any further
equalizing of the difference inherent in number. To raise a number to
powers higher than the square is a formal continuation of the squaring –
both in the case of even exponents, where it is only a repetition of the
squaring, and in the case of the uneven, where inequality resurfaces; in the
simplest case of a cube, for instance, despite the formal equality of the new
factor with both the amount and the unit, the new factor is as unit unequal
as against the amount (the square, 3, against 3 times 3); and even more
so in the case of the cube of four, where the times by which the number
which is the unit is to be multiplied by itself, 3, differs from this very
number. – Here we have in themselves the determinations, amount and
unit, which, as the essential difference of the concept, are to be equalized
for the complete return to itself of the self-externalized concept.34 The
foregoing exposition also contains the reason why the solution of higher
equations must lie in their reduction to quadratics, and also why equations
with uneven exponents can only be formally determined and, exactly when
the roots are rational, these cannot otherwise be established than by means
of some imaginary expression, that is, by the opposite of what the roots are
and express. – It is clear from what has been said that the arithmetical square
alone contains a determinateness which is inherent to it and absolute; for
this reason the equations of higher formal powers must be reduced back to
it, just as in geometry the right-angled triangle contains a determinateness
absolutely inherent in it which is expounded in the Pythagorean theorem,
and for this reason all other geometrical figures must also be reduced to it
for their total determination.
34

In being differentiated as amount and unit, the concept of number goes out of itself (according to
the typically Hegelian image). These two determinations of amount and unity had to be shown
to be equal to each other and, therefore, each had to constitute the whole of number, before the
concept could assume control, so to speak, of its own determinateness and thus return into itself. So
far as the concept in general is concerned, in the determinations of amount and unit this movement
of externalization and return has been accomplished only in principle in the development of the
particular concept of number.

Quantum

177

An instruction that proceeds methodically based on a logically disciplined judgment treats powers before it treats proportions; these last do
follow upon the difference of unit and amount that constitutes the determination of the second species of calculation, but they proceed from the one
of the immediate quantum in which unit and amount are only moments;
the further determination of the one of quantum still remains external to
quantum itself. In ratio, number is no longer an immediate quantum; it
then has its determinateness as a mediation. This quantitative relation, the
ratio, will be considered later on.35
The step-by-step determination of the species of calculation that we
have just given cannot be said to be a philosophical treatment of them,
not an exposition of their inner meaning as it were, for it is not in fact an
immanent development of the concept. However, philosophy must know
how to distinguish what is by nature a self-external material; it must know
that, so far as this material goes, the concept can make its way forward
only externally, and its moments also can be only in the form peculiar
to their externality, as here equality and inequality. To distinguish the
spheres to which a specific form of the concept belongs, that is, in which
the concept is present in concrete existence, is an essential requirement
when philosophizing about real objects. This is to prevent ideas from
interfering with the peculiar nature of externality and accidentality, and
the ideas themselves, because of the disproportionateness of the material,
from being distorted and reduced to a formalism. Here, however, the
externality in which the moments of the concepts appear in this external
material, number, is the appropriate form; since these moments display
the subject matter in the conceptual form of the understanding which is
appropriate to it, and also, since they contain no demand for speculative
thought and therefore have the semblance of being easy, they deserve to be
employed in elementary textbooks.
Remark 2
It is well known that Pythagoras depicted rational relations or philosophemata in numbers,36 and in more recent times numbers and forms of their
relations, such as powers, etc., have again been used in philosophy for the
purpose of regulating thoughts or expressing them.37 – For pedagogical
purposes, number is regarded as the most suitable subject matter of inner
intuition and the operations of calculating numerical relations are taken
35
37

36 Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics 965b; 1978b.
Cf. below, 21.310ff.
Hegel has very likely Schelling in mind. But Bardili also, and Reinhold when a disciple of Bardili,
used pseudo-algebraic formulas to express their logical realism.

21.203

178

21.204

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

as the activity of spirit in which the latter visualizes its most characteristic
relations and, in general, the fundamental relations of essence. – How far
number can live up to this high esteem of its worth can be seen from the
concept of it just given.
We saw that number is the absolute determinateness of quantity, and
that its element is the difference which has become indifferent: implicit
determinateness which is posited at the same time as only entirely external. Arithmetic is an analytical science, since all the combinations and all
the differences that occur in its subject matter do not originate in it but
are imported into it entirely from outside. Arithmetic does not have any
object that might harbor within it such inner relations as would be concealed to knowledge at first, because they are not given in its immediate
representation, but are elicited only through the effort of cognition. Not
only does arithmetic not contain the concept and the intellectual task of
conceptualization that goes with it: it is the very opposite of the concept.
Here, because of the indifference of the combined to the combining – a
combining that lacks necessity – thought finds itself engaged in an activity
which is at the same time the utter externalization of itself, a tour de force in
which it moves in an element void of thought, drawing relations where there
is no capacity for necessary relations. The subject matter is the abstract
thought of externality itself.
As this thought of externality, number is at the same time the abstraction
from the manifold of the senses; it has retained nothing of the senses except
the abstract determination of externality itself, and in it the senses are thus
brought closest to thought. Number is the pure thought of thought’s own
externalization.
It may therefore occur to spirit, as it rises above the world of the senses
and recognizes its own essence, as it seeks an element for the pure representation of it, for the expression of its essence, before it grasps thought itself as
this element and wins the purely spiritual expression for its exposition, it
may occur to spirit to choose number, this inner, abstract externality, as the
element. For this reason we see number early in the history of science being
used for the expression of philosophemata. Number constitutes the final
stage in an imperfect grasp of the universal still encumbered by the senses.
The ancients were clearly aware that number stands midway between the
senses and thought. Aristotle cites Plato (Metaphys. I.5)38 as saying that the
mathematical determinations of things, being outside both the senses and
the ideas, stand in between them. They are distinguished from the senses by
38

987b, in fact in Chapter 6.

Quantum

179

being invisible (eternal) and unmoved; from the ideas, on the other hand,
by being a many and a like, whereas the idea is absolutely self-identical and
a one in itself. – A more thorough and more profound reflection on the
subject by Moderatus of Gades is cited in Malchi Vita Pythagoriæ (ed. Ritterhaus, pp. 30ff.).39 That the Pythagoreans hit on numbers he attributes
to the fact that they were still incapable of grasping fundamental ideas
and first principles clearly in reason, for these principles are difficult to
think and difficult to give expression to; numbers serve well in instruction
as signposts. In this among other things the Pythagoreans have imitated
the geometers who, unable to express what is corporeal in thoughts, use
figures and say “this is a triangle,” by which they do not mean, however, that the visible figure is to be taken as the triangle but that it only
represents the thought of the triangle. In this way did the Pythagoreans
express the thought of unity, of self-sameness and equality, and the ground
of congruence, of combination and the sustaining of everything, of the
self-identical, as a one, and so forth. – It is superfluous to remark that the
Pythagoreans did make the step from numerical to thought expression,
to the explicit categories of the like and unlike, of limit and infinity; and
even with respect to their numerical expressions, it is reported (ibid., in the
Remark to p. 31.1.5, from a life of Pythagoras by Photius, p. 722)40 that they
distinguished between the Monas and the one, taking the Monas as the
thought and the one as the number, and they likewise took the two as the
arithmetical indeterminate and the Dyas (for this is what it would surely
have to mean here) as the thought of the indeterminate. – These ancients at
the outset saw quite rightly the inadequacy of numerical forms for thought
determinations, and they just as rightly went on to demand for thought,
instead of that first expedient, the expression appropriate to it. This is
how much farther ahead they had come in their reflection than those who
nowadays consider it praiseworthy, indeed profoundly sound, to revert to
the helplessness of childhood and, in the place of thought determinations,
to reinstate numbers themselves and numerical determinations like powers, followed by the infinitely great, the infinitely small, one divided by
the infinite, and other such determinations, which are themselves often a
perverse mathematical formalism.
In connection with the just cited claim, that number stands between the
senses and thought,41 since it has in common with the former that it is in
itself the self-externality of the many, it must now be noted that this many
39
40

Moderatus of Gades (modern Cadiz) was a neo-Pythagorean active in the first century ad. For the
life of Pythagoras by Malchus, see GW 21.425.
41 Cf. above, 21.204.
See GW 21.425.

21.205

180

21.206

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is itself the sensuous as taken up in thought, the category of the internally
self-external that defines the sensuous. When more advanced thoughts,
thoughts that are concrete and truly thoughts, when what is alive and
active in a high degree and requires context in order to be comprehended,
when these are transposed into this element of externality, they turn into
dead, motionless determinations. The richer in determinateness and hence
in connections thoughts become, the more confused and also the more
arbitrary and meaningless becomes their representation in such forms as
numbers. The one, the two, the three, the four, Henas or Monas, Dyas,
Trias, Tetractys, still fall in the general vicinity of totally simple and abstract
concepts; but when numbers are extended to concrete relations, it is in
vain to try to maintain any approximation to the concept.
But that the determinations for the movement of the concept by which
alone the latter is concept would be designated as one, two, three, four, is
the hardest to expect of thought. For thought then moves in an element
which is opposite to it, where there are no connections; its labor is one
of derangement. The difficulty of this expectation, to understand that,
for instance, one is three and three is one, is due to the fact that one is
devoid of connections; it does not exhibit in it the determination by virtue
of which it passes over into its opposite, but is rather the very exclusion
and rejection of such a connection. Conversely, the understanding makes
use of this difficulty to debunk speculative truth (as it does, for instance,
with the truth laid down in the doctrine called the Trinity). It counts the
determinations of it that constitute one unity in order to expose them
as plain nonsense – which is to say, the understanding itself commits
the nonsense of making that which is pure reference42 into something
devoid of all relation. By the name “Trinity,” “tri-unity,” nobody expected
that one and number would be considered by the understanding as the
essential determinateness of the content. This name expresses contempt for
the understanding, which has nevertheless held fast to its conceit of clinging
to the one and number as such, standing by it against reason.
To take numbers and geometrical figures, as has often been done, as mere
symbols (the circle, for instance, of eternity; the triangle, of the Trinity) is,
on the one hand, harmless enough; but, on the other hand, it is foolish
to believe that more is thereby expressed than can be comprehended and
expressed by thought. As profound a wisdom, as profound a meaning may
lie in such symbols, and also in those that phantasy has created in the
mythologies of the peoples and in poetry in general (compared with which
42

Beziehung.

Quantum

181

the dull figures of geometry leave a lot to be desired anyway), it is still up to
thinking alone to extract this wisdom and bring it to light, a wisdom that is
only implicit in them, and not only in symbols but in nature and in spirit.
In symbols, the truth is still clouded and veiled by the sensuous, and only
in the form of thought does it become totally manifest to consciousness;
the meaning is only the thought itself.
Essentially, however, the perversity of enlisting mathematical categories
for injecting some determination into the method and the content of
philosophical science shows in the fact that, inasmuch as mathematical
formulas signify thoughts and conceptual distinctions, this meaning must
rather first be indicated, determined and justified in philosophy. In its
concrete sciences, philosophy must take its logical element from logic, not
from mathematics; it can only be an expedient of philosophical incapacity
to resort for the logical element of philosophy to the shapes which it assumes
in other sciences, many of which are only adumbrations of this element
and others even perversions of it. Besides, the mere application of such
borrowed formulas is an external operation; the application itself must be
preceded by the awareness of both their value and their meaning, and only
the consideration of thought, not any authority drawn from mathematics,
yields this awareness. Logic itself is this awareness regarding such formulas.
It strips them of their particular form, rendering it superfluous and useless;
it rectifies them and alone procures for them their justification, their sense
and value.
As for any supposed use that number and calculation might have for
basic pedagogical formation, it follows by itself from what has been said so
far. Number is not an object of the senses, and to be occupied with number
and numerical combinations is not the business of the senses; such an occupation, therefore, encourages spirit to engage in reflection and the inner
work of abstraction, and this is of great, though one-sided, importance. For,
on the other hand, since the basis of number is only an external, thoughtless difference, the occupation proceeds without a concept, mechanically.
The effort consists above all in holding on to something non-conceptual,
and in combining it non-conceptually. The content is the empty “one.” So
the solid nourishment of moral and spiritual life in its individual shapes
on which, as the noblest aliment, education should nurture the young
spirit, is to be ousted by this “one” which is void of content; when those
exercises are made the main subject and the main occupation, the only
possible outcome must be to dull the spirit and to empty it of both form
and content. Since calculation is so much of an external and therefore
mechanical business, it has been possible to manufacture machines that

21.207

21.208

182

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

perform arithmetical operations with complete accuracy. It is enough to
know this fact alone about the nature of calculation to decide on the merit
of the idea of making it the main instrument of the education of spirit, of
stretching spirit on the rack in order to perfect it as a machine.
b. extensive and intensive quantum
a. Their difference

21.209

1. We have seen that quantum has its determinateness as limit in amount. In
itself quantum is discrete, a plurality which does not have a being different
from its limit or its limit outside it. Quantum, thus with its limit which as
limit is a plurality, is extensive magnitude.
Extensive magnitude is to be distinguished from continuous magnitude;
its direct opposite is not the discrete, but the intensive magnitude. Extensive and intensive magnitudes are determinacies of the quantitative limit
itself, whereas quantum is identical with its limit; continuous and discrete
magnitudes are, on the contrary, determinations of magnitude in itself, that
is, of quantity as such, in so far as in quantum abstraction is made from
the limit. – Extensive magnitude has the moment of continuity in it and
in its limit, for its many is everywhere continuous; the limit as negation
appears, therefore, in this equality of the many as a limiting of the unity.
Continuous magnitude is quantity that continues without regard to any
limit, and in so far as it is represented with one such limit, the latter is
a limitation in general, without discreteness being posited in it. Determined
as only continuous magnitude, quantum is not yet determined for itself
because the magnitude lacks the one (in which the determinateness-foritself lies) and number. Similarly, a discrete magnitude is immediately only
a differentiated many in general which, if it were to have a limit as a many,
would be only an aggregate, that is, would be only indeterminately limited;
in order for quantum to be determinate, the many must be concentrated
into one and thereby be posited as identical with the limit. Continuous
and discrete magnitude, taken as quantum in general, have each posited in
it only one of the two sides by virtue of which quantum is fully determined
and a number. Taken immediately, this latter is extensive quantum – the
simple determinateness which is amount essentially, but the amount of one
and the same unit; extensive quantum is distinguished from number only
because in the latter the determinateness is explicitly posited as plurality.
2. However, the determinateness through number – how much there is
of something – does not require being distinguished from how much there

Quantum

183

is of something else, as if to the determinateness of one thing belonged
how much there is of it and how much there is of an other, for the
determinateness of magnitude as such is a limit determined for itself,
indifferent and simply self-referring; and in number this limit is posited
as enclosed within the one existing for itself: the externality that it has,
the reference to other, is inside it. Further, like the many in general, this
many of the limit is not internally unequal but continuous; each many is
what any other many is; consequently, the many as a many of existents
outside one another, or as discrete, does not constitute the determinateness
as such. Thus this many collapses for itself into its continuity and becomes
simple unity. – Amount is but a moment of number; but, as an aggregate
of numerical ones, it does not constitute the determinateness of number;
on the contrary, these ones as indifferent and self-external are sublated
in number whose being has turned back into itself; the externality that
constituted the ones of plurality vanishes in the one as the self-reference of
number.
The limit of quantum which, as extensive, had its existent determinateness as self-external number, thus passes over into simple determinateness.
In this simple determination of limit, quantum is intensive magnitude; and
the limit or the determinateness which is identical with quantum is now
also posited as simple: it is degree.
Degree is thus a determinate magnitude, a quantum, but at the same
time it is not an aggregate or several within itself; it is only a plurality;43
plurality is a severality that has gathered together into simple determination,
it is existence that has returned into being-for-itself. It is true that its
determinateness must be expressed by a number, which is the being of the
quantum as completely determined, but the number is not an amount or a
how many times but is rather a onefold, only a degree. When we speak of
10 or 20 degrees, the quantum which has that many degrees – the tenth,
the twentieth degree – is not the amount and sum of the degrees; if that
were the case, it would be an extensive quantum; it is rather only that one
degree, the tenth, the twentieth. It does contain the determinateness found
in the number ten or twenty, but not as several ones: the number is there
as a sublated amount, as a simple determinateness.
3. In number, quantum is posited in its complete determinateness; but
as intensive quantum, in the being-for-itself of number, it is posited as
it is according to its concept or implicitly in itself. For the form of selfreference which it has in degree is at the same time the externality of degree
43

Mehrheit; literally, “majority.”

21.210

21.211

184

21.212

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to itself. As extensive quantum, number is a numerical plurality and thus
has externality inside it. This externality, as plurality in general, collapses
into a state of undifferentiatedness and is sublated into the numerical
one, the self-reference of number. But quantum has its determinateness as
number; it contains this determinateness, as we have said, whether the latter
is posited in it or not.44 Degree, therefore, which as internally simple no
longer has this external otherness in it, has it outside it, and refers to it as to its
determinateness. A plurality external to it constitutes the determinateness
of the simple limit which the degree is for itself. In so far as in the extensive
quantum amount was supposed to be found within number, it was sublated
there; now, as thus sublated, amount is posited outside number. Number,
in being posited as a one, as self-reference reflected into itself, excludes from
itself the indifference and the externality of amount and is self-reference as
reference to an external through itself.
In this, quantum has the reality which is adequate to its concept. The
indifference of the determinateness constitutes its quality, that is, a determinateness which is in it as a determinateness external to itself. – Accordingly,
degree is a unitary quantitative determinateness among a plurality of such
intensities which, though diverse, each being only a simple reference to
itself, are at the same time in essential connection with each other, so
that each has its determinateness in this continuity with the others. This
reference connecting a degree through itself to its other makes ascent and
descent on the scale of degrees a continuous progress, a flow, which is
an uninterrupted and indivisible alteration; none of the “more or less”45
differentiated within it is separate from the others but each has its determinateness only in these others. As a self-referring quantitative determination,
each degree is indifferent towards the others; but, in itself, it equally refers
to this externality; it is what it is only through the intermediary of this
externality; in short, its reference to itself is not an indifferent reference to
externality but in this externality it possesses its quality.
b. Identity of extensive and intensive magnitude
Degree is not inherently external to itself. It is not, however, the indeterminate one, is not the principle of number as such which is not amount
44
45

In the preceding Remark.
Mehrern. Here and in what follows Hegel is playing on the root meaning of the German word
for “several” (mehrere) which is “more” (mehr). This wordplay is lost in English. I am using
circumlocutions in an attempt to retain it as much as possible.

Quantum

185

except negatively, that is, only in the sense of not being an amount. Intensive magnitude is at first a simple one of many “more or less”; there are several
degrees; but they are not determined either as a unitary one or as a more or
less but only as referring to each other as outside each other, or in the identity
of the one and the “more or less than.” Thus, although the several “more
or less” are as such indeed outside the unitary degree, the determinateness
of the latter lies nonetheless in its connection with them; the degree thus
contains amount. Just as twenty contains as extensive magnitude twenty
ones as discrete, the specific degree contains them as continuity, a continuity which simply is this determinate plurality; it is the twentieth degree, and
it is this twentieth degree only through the intermediate of this amount
which, as such, is outside it.
The determinateness of the intensive magnitude is to be considered,
therefore, from two sides. It is determined through other intensive quanta
and is continuous with its otherness, so that its determinateness consists
in this connection with it. Now, in so far as this determinateness is, first,
a simple determinateness, it is determined as against the other degrees; it
excludes them from itself and has its determinateness in this exclusion.
But, second, it is determined within; this it is in the amount as its amount,
not in the amount as excluded, or not in the amount of the other degrees.
The twentieth degree contains the twenty within itself; it is not only
determined as distinguished from the nineteenth, the twenty-first, etc.,
but its determinateness is rather its amount. But, inasmuch as the amount
is its own, and the determinateness is at the same time essentially as amount,
the degree is extensive quantum.
Extensive and intensive magnitude are, therefore, one and the same
determinateness of quantum; they are distinguished only inasmuch as the
one has the amount within and the other has the same without. Extensive
magnitude passes over into intensive magnitude because its many collapses
in and for itself into oneness and steps outside it. But, conversely, this simple
one has its determinateness only in the amount, its amount; indifferent to
the otherwise determined intensities, it has the externality of amount in it;
thus intensive magnitude is just as essentially extensive magnitude.
With this identity, the qualitative something comes on the scene; for
the identity is the unity that refers back to itself through the negation of
its distinct terms; these terms, however, make up the determinateness of
the existent magnitude. The something is a quantum, but its qualitative
existence is now posited as indifferent to it as it is in itself. One can speak
of quantum, number as such, etc., without any mention of a something as
their substrate. But the something, self-mediated by virtue of the negation

21.213

186

21.214

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of its determinations, now confronts these as existing for itself, and, since
it has a quantum, it confronts them as something which has an extensive
and intensive quantum. Its one determinateness which it has as quantum
is posited in the distinct moments of unity and amount; it is in itself not
only one and the same determinateness, but the positing of it in these
differences as extensive and intensive quantum is the return into this unity
which, as negative, is the something posited as indifferent to them.
Remark 1
As normally depicted in ordinary usage, extensive and intensive quantum
are distinguished as kinds of magnitudes, as if there were some objects
with only intensive and others with only extensive magnitude. But there
is now a philosophical science of nature in which plurality, the extensive
(as for instance in connection with the fundamental property of nature
to fill space, and in other instances as well), is converted into something
intensive, in the sense that intensity, as dynamism, is the true determination.
Density, for instance, or the specific filling of space, must be understood
as being essentially, not a certain aggregate and amount of material parts in
a quantum of space, but a certain degree of the force of the matter filling
space.46
There are two kinds of determinations to be distinguished in this context.
Two concepts are at play in this conversion, as it has been called, of the
mechanical into the dynamic way of looking at things:47 the concept of
self-subsisting parts that subsist outside one another and are only externally
bound together into a whole, and, different from this, the concept of force.
What is viewed on the one side as only an aggregate of mutually external
atoms is considered on the other side as the expression of a fundamental
simple force. – Now these relations of whole and parts, of force and its
expression, that come up for contrast here, do not belong in this place;
they will be considered later on.48 This much, however, can be pointed out
right away, namely that although the relation of force and its expression
that corresponds to the intensiveness of magnitude is indeed, vis-à-vis
the relation of whole and parts, the truer one, force is for that reason
46

47
48

Cf. F. W. J. Schelling, Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur (Leipzig, 1797, 2nd edn). English trans.
Ideas for a Philosophy of Nature, trans. E. H. Harris and Peter Heath (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1988), Book II, Chapter 5, p. 185: “Matter occupies a space, not through its mere
existence (for to assume this is to cut off all further enquiry, once and for all), but through an
inherent moving force, whereby the mechanical motion of matter first becomes possible.” Schelling
is developing an idea of Kant. Cf. Kant (1786) AK 4.496.
For Schelling’s critique of M. le Sage’s mechanical physics, see Ideen (1797), English trans., pp. 161ff.
Cf. 11.354–359.

Quantum

187

no less one-sided than intensiveness, and the expression (the externality of
extensiveness) just as inseparable from force, so that one and the same content
is equally present in the two forms of intensive and extensive magnitude.
The other determinateness that comes up here is the quantitative as such,
which, as extensive quantum, is sublated and transformed into degree, the
supposedly true determination; but it has been shown that degree contains
the former determinateness as well, so that the one form is essential to the
other; consequently, every existence exhibits its quantitative determination
no less as an extensive than as an intensive quantum.
Everything, to the extent that it appears in a quantitative determination,
therefore serves as an example of this. Even number necessarily has this
double form immediately in it. It is an amount, and therefore extensive
magnitude; but number is also a one, a ten, a hundred; and to this extent it
marks the transition to intensive magnitude, for in this unity the manifold
collapses into the simple. In itself, the one is extensive magnitude; it can be
represented as an arbitrary amount of parts. Thus the tenth, the hundredth,
is this simple, intensive magnitude that has its determinateness in the more
or less than a hundredth lying outside it, that is, in the extensive magnitude.
Number is a ten, a hundred, and at the same time the tenth, the hundredth,
in the system of numbers; both are the same determinateness.
In the circle the unit is called degree because every part of the circle has its
determinateness essentially in the many more outside it; it is determined as
the unit of only a fixed amount of these units. As a mere spatial magnitude,
the degree of the circle is only an ordinary number; considered as degree,
it is an intensive magnitude that has meaning only as determined through
the amount of degrees into which the circle is divided, just as a number
derives its meaning only in the number series.
The magnitude of a concrete object displays its two sides as extensive
and intensive in the double determinations of its existence, appearing in
one as something external and in the other as something internal. Thus,
for instance, a mass is as weight an extensive magnitude inasmuch as it
constitutes an amount of pounds, hundredweights, etc., but is an intensive
magnitude as it exerts a certain pressure; the magnitude of the pressure is a
simple magnitude, a degree, as determined in a scale of degrees of pressure.
As exerting pressure, the mass appears as a being-in-itself, a subject, to
which there accrues a distinctive intensive magnitude. – Conversely, that
which exerts this degree of pressure has the capacity of displacing a certain
amount of pounds, etc., and its magnitude is measured accordingly.
Or again, heat has a degree; this degree, whether the 10th, the 20th,
etc., is a simple sensation, something subjective. But this degree is equally

21.215

188

21.216

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

present as extensive magnitude, in the form of the expansion of some fluid
matter, of mercury in the thermometer, of air, sound, etc. A higher degree of
temperature finds expression in a longer mercury column, or in a narrower
clay cylinder; it warms up a larger space in the same way as a lower degree
warms up a smaller.
The higher a tone, the more intensive it is, and the greater is at the same
time the number of its vibrations; or a louder tone, to which a higher
degree of intensity is attributed, is audible in a larger space. – With a more
intensive color a larger surface can be colored in the same way as with
a weaker one; or again, something brighter (another kind of intensity) is
visible at a greater distance than something not as bright, etc.
Similarly in things spiritual, a high intensity of character, talent, genius, has
a comparably encompassing presence, far-reaching effect, and all-pervading
influence. The most profound concept has the most universal significance
and application.
Remark 2
Kant has made peculiar use of the determinateness of intensive quantum
by applying it to a metaphysical determination of the soul. In his critique
of the metaphysical propositions concerning the soul which he calls the
paralogisms of reason, he comes to a consideration of the syllogistic inference from the simplicity of the soul to its permanence. To this inference
he objects (Critique of Reason, 414) “that, even if we grant to the soul this
simple nature, namely, that it contains no manifold of [parts] outside one
another, and hence no extensive magnitude, one nevertheless cannot deny
to it, anymore than to any other existing thing, intensive magnitude, that
is, a degree of reality in regard to all its faculties, indeed to everything in
general that constitutes its existence, which might diminish by infinitely
many smaller degrees, and thus the alleged substance could be transformed
into nothing, although not by disintegration, but by a gradual remission
(remissio) of its powers; for even consciousness always has a degree, which can
always be diminished; consequently, so does the faculty of being conscious
of itself, and likewise with all other faculties.”49 In rational psychology,
such as was this abstract metaphysics, the soul was considered not as spirit
but as an immediate existent, as a soul-thing. Kant is therefore justified
in applying to it the category of quantum, just as “to any other existing
thing,” and, inasmuch as this existent is determined as simple, that of
49

B414. Guyer/Wood translation, with some modifications. Hegel adds the stresses and also drops
some parenthetical clauses.

Quantum

189

intensive quantum. Being does indeed belong to spirit, but of an intensity
entirely different from that of intensive quantum; it is an intensity, rather,
in which the form of merely immediate being and all its categories are
sublated. It should not have been just a matter of agreeing to the removal
of the category of extensive quantum, but of removing quantum as such.
The next step was to recognize how in the eternal nature of spirit there is
existence, consciousness, and finitude, how they proceed from it, without
spirit thereby becoming a thing.

21.217

c. Alteration of quantum
The difference between extensive and intensive quantum is indifferent to
the determinateness of quantum as quantum. But quantum is in general
determinateness posited as sublated: the indifferent limit, the determinateness which is just as much the negation of itself. In extensive quantum,
this difference is developed; but intensive magnitude is the existence of
this externality which quantum is in itself. The difference is posited as the
contradiction which it is in itself, of being a simple self-referring determinateness which is the negation of itself, of having its determinateness not
in it but in another quantum.
A quantum, according to its quality, is therefore in absolute continuity
with its externality, with its otherness. Consequently, not only can every
determinateness of magnitude be transcended, not only can it be altered:
that it must alter is now posited. The determination of magnitude continues
into its otherness in such a way that it has its being only in this continuity
with an other; it is not just a limit that exists but one that becomes.
The one is infinite or self-referring negation, and hence the repulsion of
itself from itself. Quantum is equally infinite, posited as the self-referring
negation; it repels itself from itself. But it is a determinate “one,” the
one which has passed over into existence and limit, thus the repulsion
of determinateness from itself, not the generation of something that is
like itself (as the repulsion of the one) but of its otherness; quantum is
now posited in it as sending itself 50 beyond itself. It consists in this, that it
increases or decreases; it is within it the externality of determinateness.
Thus quantum sends itself beyond itself; this other which it becomes
is at first itself a quantum, but a quantum which is not a static limit but
one that impels itself beyond itself. The limit which arises in this beyond
50

sich schicken.

21.218

190

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is therefore only one that again sublates itself and sends itself to a further
limit, and so on to infinity.
c. quantitative infinity
a. Its concept

21.219

Quantum alters and becomes another quantum; the further determination
of this alteration, that it goes on to infinity, lies in that it is positioned as
inherently self-contradictory. – Quantum becomes an other; but it continues
in its otherness; the other is therefore also a quantum. This latter, however,
is the other, not of a quantum, but of the quantum as such, the negative
of itself as a limited something, and hence its own unlimitedness, infinity.
Quantum is an ought; it implies that it be determined-for-itself, and this
being-determined-for-itself is rather the being determined in an other; and,
conversely, it is the being-determined in an other as sublated, is indifferent
subsisting-for-itself.
In this way, finitude and infinity each at once acquires within it a double
though opposite meaning. Quantum is finite, first, as limited in general;
second, as sending itself beyond itself, as being-determined in an other. On
the other hand, its infinity, is, first, the unlimitedness of quantum; second,
its being-turned-back-into-itself, the indifferent being-for-itself. If we now
compare these moments with each other, we find that the determination
of quantum’s finitude, its sending itself beyond itself into an other that
constitutes its determination, is equally the determination of the infinite;
the negation of limit is this same transcendence of determinateness, so that
in this negation, in the infinite, quantum has its final determinateness.
The other moment of infinity is the for-itself which is indifferent to the
limit; but the quantum itself is so limited, as to be indifferent with respect
to its limit, and hence with respect to other quanta and its “beyond.”
In quantum, finitude and infinity (the latter supposedly separate from
finitude, as bad infinity) each already possesses within it the moment of
the other.
The qualitative and quantitative infinite are distinguished inasmuch as
in the former the opposition of the finite and infinite is qualitative, and the
transition of the finite into the infinite, or the reference of each to the other,
is present only in the in-itself, in their concept. Qualitative determinateness
is immediate; it refers to otherness essentially as to a being which is other
than it; it is not posited as having its negation, its other, in it. By contrast,
magnitude is as such sublated determinateness; it is posited as being unlike

Quantum

191

and indifferent to itself, and hence as something alterable. The qualitative
finite and infinite, therefore, stand opposed to each other absolutely, that
is, abstractly; their unity is the inner connection underlying them; hence
the finite continues in its other only in itself, not in it. By contrast, in the
infinite in which the quantitative finite has its absolute determinateness,
this finite refers to itself in it. This, their mutual reference, is first displayed
in the quantitatively infinite process.

21.220

b. The quantitative infinite process
The process to infinity is in general the expression of contradiction, here,
of the contradiction contained in the quantitative finite or in quantum in
general. It is the reciprocal determination of the finite and the infinite that
came up for consideration in the sphere of the qualitative,51 with the difference that, as just indicated, in the sphere of quantity the limit inherently
sends itself beyond itself and continues there, and hence, conversely, the
quantitative infinite is also posited as having the quantum in it, for in its
externality quantum is itself; its externality belongs to its determination.
The infinite progress is now the expression of this contradiction, not the
resolution of it; however, because of the continuity of one determinateness
in the other, the progress gives rise to the semblance of a resolution in a
union of the two. As at first posited, such a progress is the task of attaining
the infinite but not the attainment of it; it is a perpetual generation of the
infinite, without the progress of ever getting beyond the quantum itself, and
without the infinite ever becoming something which is positively present.
It belongs to the concept of quantum to have a beyond of itself. This
beyond is, first, the abstract moment of the non-being of quantum; this
resolves itself in it; it thus refers to its beyond as to its infinity in accordance
with the qualitative moment of the opposition. But, second, quantum is
continuous with this beyond; it consists precisely in being the other of
itself, external to itself; this externality equally is, therefore, no more an
other than the quantum; the beyond or the infinite is thus itself a quantum.
The beyond is thus recalled from its flight and the infinite is attained. But
because the infinite, now become a “this-side,” is again a quantum, what
is posited is again only a new limit; this limit, as quantum, has also fled
again from itself, is as such beyond itself, and has repelled itself from itself
into its non-being, into its beyond, and as the quantum repels itself into
the beyond, so does the beyond perpetually become a quantum.
51

Cf. 21.218–219.

21.221

192

21.222

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

The continuity of quantum with its other brings about the conjunction
of the two in the expression of an infinitely great or infinitely small. Since
they both still have in them the determination of quantum, they remain
alterable and the absolute determinateness which would be a being-for-itself
is thus not attained. This being-outside-itself of the determination is posited
in the double infinity (posited in the relative opposition of the “more”
and the “less”) of the infinitely great and the infinitely small. In each, the
quantum is maintained in perpetual opposition to its beyond. No matter
how much the “great” is enlarged, it shrinks to insignificance; since it refers
to the infinite as to its non-being, the opposition is qualitative; the enlarged
quantum has gained nothing, therefore, from the infinite; the latter is its
nothing now just as before. Or again, the increase in the quantum is not
an approximation to the infinite, for the distinction between the quantum
and its infinity essentially has also the moment of being non-quantitative.
This moment is only the sharpened expression of the contradiction that the
quantum ought to be something great, that is, a quantum, and non-finite,
that is, not a quantum. – Equally, the infinitely small is, as something small,
a quantum and therefore remains absolutely, that is, qualitatively, too great
for the infinite and opposed to it. In both, there remains the contradiction
of the infinite progress which in them should have reached its goal.
This infinity, which persists in the determination of the beyond of
the finite, is to be characterized as the bad quantitative infinity. Like the
qualitatively bad infinity, it is the perpetual movement back and forth from
one side of the persistent contradiction to the other, from the limit to its
non-being, and from the latter back again to the other, the limit. To be
sure, the term to which the advance is made in the quantitative progress
is not an abstract “other” in general but a quantum which is explicitly
posited as different; but this quantum remains opposed to its negation in
the same way. Also the progress, therefore, is neither an advance nor a gain
but rather a repetition of one and the same move, a positing, a sublating,
and then again a positing and a sublating: an impotence of the negative
to which what it sublates continuously comes back by its very sublation of
it. The two, the positing and the sublation, are so bonded to each other
that they absolutely flee from each other and yet, in thus fleeing, they are
unable to part but rather become bonded in their very flight from each
other.
Remark 1
The bad infinity, especially in the form of the quantitative progress to
infinity – this uninterrupted flitting over limits which it is powerless to

Quantum

193

sublate, and the perpetual falling back into them – is commonly held to
be something sublime and a kind of divine service, just as in philosophy
it has been regarded as ultimate. This progress has often been exploited in
tirades which have been admired as sublime productions. In fact, however,
this modern sublimity does not enhance the object, which rather takes flight
from it, but bloats the subject who ingests such vast quantities. The poverty
of such an irreducibly subjective step by step elevation on the ladder of the
quantitative is betrayed by the admission that in that vain labor there is no
getting closer to the infinite goal – for the attainment of which, to be sure,
quite another line of attack is required.
Here are examples of tirades of the kind, which make manifest what this
elevation ultimately amounts to. Kant, for example, at the conclusion of the
Critique of Practical Reason, deems it as sublime “when the subject rises in
thought above the place it occupies in the world of the senses, and extends
its reach into an unbounded magnitude of worlds beyond worlds and
systems of systems and into the limitless times of their periodic motion,
their beginning and their continuance.52 – Imagination fails before this
progression into the immeasurably distant, where beyond the most distant
world there lies a still more distant one; behind the past, however far back
traced, a still more distant past; ahead of the future, however far down
projected, yet another future. Thought fails before this representation of
the immeasurable, just as in a dream, in which one relentlessly goes on and
on down a long corridor without seeing the end of it, and finishes with
falling or fainting.”53
This account, besides capturing all that there is to this quantitative
elevation in a wealth of pictorial imagery, deserves praise mainly because of
how truthfully it betrays the end result of this elevation: thought succumbs,
the upshot is falling and giddiness. What causes thought to succumb, what
produces the falling and the giddiness, is nothing else but the boredom
of this repetition that makes a limit disappear, come up again, and again
disappear, and so lets the rising and the perishing of the one for the other,
and of the one into the other, of the here into the there, and the there into
the here, perpetuate itself, only conveying the feeling of the impotence of
this infinite, this ought, which would want to be master of the finite but
cannot.

52
53

AK 5.162, a paraphrase more than a citation.
The critical editors say that this second part of the quote cannot be located with any precision in
Kant.

21.223

194

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Also Haller’s description of eternity, which Kant called horrifying,54 is
commonly the object of special admiration, but often for what is precisely
not the reason that constitutes its true merit:
I heap up giant numbers,
Pile millions on millions;
Eon upon eon and world upon world,
And when I am on that endless march
And dizzy on that terrifying height
I seek you again.
[The power of numbers, though multiplied a thousandfold,
Is still not even a fraction of you.]
I blot them out and there you are, complete, before me.55

21.224

In stressing the value of this heaping and piling of numbers and worlds as
a description of eternity, what is overlooked is that the poet himself declares
this so-called terrifying venture into the beyond as futile and hollow, and
he concludes that only by giving up this empty infinite progress will the
true infinite itself become present to him.
There have been astronomers who liked to flatter themselves about the
sublimity of their science on the ground that it deals with an immeasurable
multitude of stars, with immeasurable spaces and times within which the
already vast distances and periods that serve as their units, even when taken
many times over, shrink to insignificance. The shallow astonishment to
which they surrender themselves, their fatuous hopes of eventually traveling
in another life from star to star and in that immensity to make discoveries
of always the same kind of things, this they adduce as the main point of
excellence of their science – a science which is worthy of admiration rather,
not because of such quantitative infinitude but, to the contrary, because
of the relations of measure and the laws which reason recognizes in these
objects and which, in contrast to that other irrational infinitude, constitute
the rational infinite.
To the infinity connected with the external intuition of the senses, Kant
opposes the other infinity, the one which the individual attains when “he
returns to his invisible ‘I,’ and to all the terrors of fate and tyranny he
opposes the absolute freedom of his will, of a pure ‘I’; when, starting with
his immediate surroundings, he lets them vanish in his sight, and even
54
55

A613/B641. Cf. also Kant (1794), AK 8.327.
Albrecht, Baron von Haller (1708–1777), Swiss physiologist and poet, Imperfect Poem on Eternity
(1736). See Hallers Gedichte, ed. Ludwig Hirzel (Bibliothek alterer Schriftwerke der deutschen
Schweiz, 1882), Vol. 3, p. 151. The English translation is by Arnulf Zweig. The stress in the last line
is added by Hegel.

Quantum

195

what appears enduring, the worlds upon worlds, he lets collapse into ruins
until, alone, he recognizes himself as equal to himself.”56
The “I,” in this solitude, is indeed the attained beyond; it has come to
itself, is at home with itself, right here; the absolute negativity which in the
progression beyond the quantum of the senses was only in flight, is brought
in pure self-consciousness to affirmation and presence. But this pure “I,”
when held fixed in abstraction and empty of content, has existence in
general, the fullness of the natural and the spiritual universe, as a beyond
confronting it. The same contradiction reasserts itself that lies at the heart
of the infinite progress, namely of a being bent upon itself which is at the
same time outside itself, which refers to its other as to its non-being and in
this referring remains a longing: for the “I” has fixed itself, on the one side,
with its indigent and insufferable emptiness before it, and, on the other
side, with a fullness which in being negated is still present as its beyond.
Kant accompanies the mention of these two sublimes with the remark
“that wonder (for the first, the external) and reverence (for the second, the inner) do indeed excite research but cannot substitute for their
deficiency.”57 – Thus he declares those exaltations as being unsatisfying for
reason, for reason cannot stop at them and at the feelings associated with
them, nor can it let the beyond and the void be accepted as ultimate.
But it is above all in its application to morality that the infinite progression has been taken as an ultimate. The second opposition, just cited, of
finite and infinite in the shape of the manifold world and the “I” raised to
its freedom, is at first qualitative. As it determines itself, the “I” at the same
time determines nature and frees itself from it; it thereby refers itself to its
other through itself – refers to an other which, as external existence, is a
manifold and also something quantitative. The reference to the quantitative becomes itself quantitative; the negative reference of the “I” to it, its
power over the “not-I,” over the senses and external nature, is consequently
so represented that morality can and ought ever to enlarge while the power
of the senses ought ever to recede. The perfect adequacy of the will to the
moral law, however, is transposed to the unending progress to infinity, that
is, is represented as an absolutely unattainable beyond, and precisely this –
that it is unattainable – is supposed to be the source of true reliance and
just consolation. For morality ought to be a struggle, but this it cannot be
except on the assumption that the will is disproportionate to the law and
the law, therefore, becomes for it an irreducible beyond.58
56
57

The citation is very likely a conflation of several texts. But cf. Critique of Practical Reason, AK 5.161.
58 Hegel has both Kant and Fichte in mind.
Cf. AK 5.162.

21.225

196

21.226

21.227

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

In this opposition, the “I” and the “not-I,” or the will and the moral law
and nature and the sensuousness of the will, are presupposed as perfectly
self-subsistent and mutually indifferent. The pure will has its own law,
which is essentially connected with the senses; nature and the senses, for
their part, have their laws which neither stem from nor are conformable to
the will, nor are such that, although diverse from the will, would nonetheless be in essential connection with it, but are rather independently determined, finished and complete in themselves. The two are nevertheless both
moments of one and the same simple essence, of the “I”; the will is determined as the negative with respect to nature so that the will only is to the
extent that there is such a thing as a nature which is diverse from it and
which it sublates, but by which, in sublating it, it is touched and is itself
affected. Nature, also as the sensuous element of the human being, is a
self-subsistent system of laws indifferent to limitation through an other;
it preserves itself while being limited, comes in connection with the will
on its own terms and limits the will of the law just as much as this will
limits it. – It is by one single act that the will, in determining itself, sublates the otherness of a nature, and this otherness, in being posited with
a determinate existence, resists sublatedness and is not sublated. In the
infinite progression the contradiction at work here is not resolved but, to
the contrary, it is displayed as unresolved and unresolvable and is declared
to be such; the conflict of morality and sense is represented as an absolute
relation that exists in and for itself.
The powerlessness in mastering the qualitative opposition between the
finite and infinite and in grasping the idea of the true will which is substantial freedom, this powerlessness takes refuge in magnitude which it used as a
middle link, for magnitude is the qualitative as sublated, the distinction that
has become indifferent. But since the two members of the opposition still
remain in principle qualitatively different, by behaving as quanta in referring to each other they are rather each straight away posited as indifferent
to this alteration. Nature is determined through the “I,” the senses through
the will of the good; the alteration produced in the senses through the will
is only a quantitative distinction, one which leaves them be as they are.
In the more abstract exposition of the Kantian philosophy, or at least
of its principles, namely in Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre, the infinite progress
likewise constitutes the foundation and the ultimate.59 The first principle
in the exposition, “I = I,” is followed by a second which is independent
59

For the following, cf. Fichte, The Science of Knowledge (1794), §1, pp. 95ff., 104ff., 108ff.; GA I.2.258ff,
266ff., 270–272.

Quantum

197

of it, the opposition of the “not-I”; the connection between the two is right
away also assumed as a quantitative distinction, the “not-I” being partly
determined through the “I,” also partly not. The “not-I” thus continues in
it so that it remains opposed to its non-being as something non-sublated.
Starting from there, after the contradictions contained therein have been
developed in the system, the concluding result is the same relation that
made the beginning; the “not-I” remains an infinite shock,60 an absolute
other;61 its final reciprocal reference connecting it with the “I” is the infinite
progress, longing and striving – the same contradiction with which the
beginning was made.62
Because the quantitative is determinateness posited as sublated, it was
assumed that, by reducing opposition in general to a difference that is
only quantitative, much, or rather everything, had been gained for the
unity of the absolute, for this one substantiality.63 That all opposition is
only quantitative was for some time a fundamental principle of recent
philosophy; the opposed determinations have the same essence, the same
content; they are real sides of the opposition because each contains within
it both determinations, both factors of the opposition, though it is one
factor that predominates on the one side, and the other factor on the other
side; on the one side, one factor, some matter or activity, is present in
greater aggregate or in a stronger degree than in the other. To the extent that
different materials or activities are presupposed, the quantitative difference
rather confirms and completes their externality and indifference to each
other and to their unity. The difference of the absolute unity is supposed
to be only quantitative and, to be sure, the quantitative is the sublated
immediate determinateness, but one which is only incompletely negated:
it is still the first negation, not the infinite negation, not the negation of the
negation. – Also being and thought, in being represented as quantitative
determinations of the absolute substance, become as quanta completely
external to each other, without connections, just as it is the case at a lower
level for carbon, nitrogen, etc. It is a third, an external reflection, one that
abstracts from their difference and recognizes their inner unity, but one
that exists only in itself, not equally for itself. In fact, therefore, this unity
is represented only as a first immediate unity, or only as being which, in
60
62
63

61 Fichte, The Science of Knowledge (1794), §1, pp. 159ff.; GA I.2.355ff.
Anstoß.
Fichte, The Science of Knowledge (1794), §1, pp. 194–195; GA I.2.361.
The reference is to Schelling. Cf. Schelling, Darstellung meines Systems der Philosophie (1801, 1859),
see §23, Schellings Werke, ed. Manfred Schröter (München, 1927), Vol. 3, p. 19: “Between the subject
and the object there is no other difference possible than a quantitative one . . . Now since it is the same
absolute identity which is posited as subject and object, there is no qualitative difference.”

21.228

198

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

its quantitative difference, remains equal to itself but does not posit itself
through itself as equal; consequently, it is not conceptually grasped as the
negation of negation, as infinite unity. Only in the qualitative opposition
does the posited infinitude, the being-for-itself, come to the fore and the
quantitative determinateness itself, as we shall presently find out, pass over
into the qualitative.64

21.229

Remark 2
It was earlier remarked that the Kantian antinomies display the opposition
of the finite and infinite in a more concrete shape, applied to a more specific
substrate of representation.65 The antinomy that we were then considering
contained the opposition of qualitative finitude and infinitude. In another,
the first of the four cosmological antinomies, it is rather the quantitative
limit and the conflict associated with it which is the issue. Here is the place,
therefore, to undertake the examination of this antinomy.66
It concerns the limitation or non-limitation of the world in time and
space. – The antithesis could just as well be considered with respect to time
and space themselves, for whether time and space are relations of things
themselves or only forms of intuition instead makes no difference to the
antinomy of limitation or non-limitation in them.
A closer analysis of this antinomy will likewise show that both theses as
well as their proofs (which, like those previously considered, are conducted
apagogically) amount to nothing more than these two simple, opposed
claims: there is a limit, and, the limit must be transcended.
The thesis is:
“The world has a beginning in time, and in space it is also enclosed within
limits.”
One part of the proof, concerning time, assumes the opposite:
“For if one assumes that the world has no beginning in time, then up to
every given point in time an eternity has elapsed, and hence an infinite series
of states of things in the world, each following another, has passed by. But
now the infinity of a series consists precisely in that it can never be completed
through a successive synthesis. Therefore an infinitely elapsed world-series
is impossible, so a beginning of the world is a necessary condition of its
existence – which was to be proved.”67
The other part of the proof which concerns space also relies on time.
To traverse the parts of a spatially infinite world and hold them together
64
66
67

65 Cf. above, 21.180.
Cf. below, 21.235.
For the following, cf. A416/B454ff. Hegel often paraphrases rather than cites Kant’s text.
Guyer/Wood translation, with slight modifications. Stresses added by Hegel.

Quantum

199

would require an infinite time, and this time would have to be considered
as elapsed if the world is to be viewed in space not as in becoming but as
completely given. But it was shown of time in the first part of the proof
that it is impossible to assume an infinite time as elapsed.
But one sees at once that it was unnecessary to make the proof apagogical,
or even to conduct it at all, for the proof is itself directly based on the claim
which was to be proved. Namely, assumed is some or any given point
in time to which an eternity has elapsed (eternity has only the meager
meaning here of a bad temporal infinity). Now, a given point in time has
no other meaning than that of a determinate limit in time. In the proof,
therefore, a limit is presupposed to time which is actual; but that is just
what was to be proved. For the thesis is, that the world has a beginning in
time.
There is only this difference, that the assumed limit is a now which comes
at the end of a time just elapsed, whereas the now to be proved is at the
beginning of a future time. But this difference is unessential. The now is
assumed as the point at which an infinite series of successive states of things
is supposed to have flowed away in time, therefore to be an end, a qualitative
limit. If this now were considered as only a quantitative limit that flows on
and is there, not simply to be surpassed, but as itself self-surpassing, then
the infinite time series would not have flowed away in it but would go on
flowing, and so the nerve of the proof would fall. On the other hand, if the
temporal point is assumed to be the qualitative limit of the past, in which
case it is equally the beginning of a future – for each temporal point is in
itself the connection of the past and the future – then the point is also the
absolute, that is, abstract, beginning of that future, and this is what was to
be proved. It is irrelevant that there is already a past preceding its future at
this point; for the temporal point is a qualitative limit (and that it is to be
taken as qualitative rests on its determination of being completed, elapsed,
and therefore of not continuing), and so time is interrupted in it; the past
is then without connection to a future that could be called such only in
respect to it, and therefore, without this connection to a future, itself only
time in general, which has an absolute beginning. But if the future were to
stand in connection with the past (as indeed it does) through the now, the
given point of time, and in this way were determined as future, then this
point of time also, from the other side, would not be a limit; the infinite
time series would continue in what was called the future, and would not
be, as assumed, completed.
The truth is that time is pure quantity. The point which the proof uses,
and in which time is supposed to be interrupted, is rather the self-sublating

21.230

200

21.231

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

being-for-itself of the now. All that the proof does is to picture the time
limit which in the thesis is claimed to be absolute as a given point of time,
and straight away to assume it as completed, that is, as an abstract point –
a popular determination which sense-representation easily lets pass for a
limit, thus allowing as assumption in the proof what earlier had been put
forward as the thing to be proved.
The antithesis runs:
“The world has no beginning and no limits in space, but is infinite with
regard to both time and space.”
Here too the proof assumes the opposite:
“For suppose that it has a beginning. Since the beginning is an existence
preceded by a time in which the thing is not, there must be an antecedent
time in which the world was not, that is, an empty time. But now no arising
of any sort of thing is possible in an empty time, because no part of such
a time has, in itself, prior to another part, any distinguishing condition of
its existence rather than its non-existence. Thus many series of things may
begin in the world, but the world itself cannot have a beginning, and so is
infinite with respect to past time.”68
Like the others, this apagogical proof contains the direct and unproved
assertion of what is supposed to be proved. For it first assumes a beyond
of the existent world, an empty time; but it then goes on to continue the
existence of this world beyond itself into the empty time, sublates this time
thereby, and consequently extends the existence to infinity. The world is
an existence; the proof presupposes that this existence arises, and that its
arising has an antecedent condition in time. But the antithesis itself is just
this, that there is no unconditional existence, no absolute limit, but that
the existence of the world always demands an antecedent condition. What
was to be proved thus finds itself in the proof as assumption. – Further,
the condition is then sought in the empty time, and this is as much as
saying that it is assumed as temporal and consequently as existence, and as
something restricted. The general assumption, therefore, is that the world
presupposes as existence another conditioned existence in time – and so
on, therefore, to infinity.
The proof regarding the infinity of the world in space is the same. The
spatial finitude of the world is apagogically posited: “for it would then exist
in an empty unlimited space and would stand in relation to it; but such a
relation of the world to no object is a nothing.”69
68
69

Guyer/Wood translation, with slight modification. Hegel skips one clause of Kant’s text.
Kant’s text is much abbreviated.

Quantum

201

What was supposed to be proved is here, too, directly presupposed in
the proof. It is directly assumed that the spatially delimited world is to be
found in an empty space and that it stands in relation to this space, that is,
that there must have been a move transcending it – on the one hand, a move
into emptiness, into the beyond and the non-being of the world; but, on
the other hand, in order that the world remains in relation to that empty
space, that is, so that it continues in it, that beyond is to be represented as
filled with world-like existence. The infinity of the world in space which
is asserted in the antithesis is nothing else than, on the one hand, the
empty space, and, on the other, the relation of the world to it, that is to
say, its continuity into space or the filling of space. And this contradiction,
that time is simultaneously empty yet filled, is the infinite progression of
determinate existence. The contradiction itself, the relation of the world
to empty space, is made the foundation on which the proof rests.
The thesis and antithesis and their proofs produce nothing more, therefore, than the opposed claims, that a limit is, and that the limit is just as
much a sublated one; that the limit has a beyond with which it is however
connected and into which it must pass, but in which there arises, however,
another such limit, which is no limit.
The solution of these antinomies, as of those previously mentioned, is
transcendental, that is, it consists in the assertion of the ideality of space
and time as forms of intuition, by which is meant that the world does
not contradict itself within, is not something that sublates itself, but that
consciousness alone, in its intuition and in the connection of intuition to
understanding and reason, is rather the being which is self-contradictory.
It is an excessive tenderness for the world to keep contradiction away
from it, to transfer it to spirit instead, to reason, and to leave it there
unresolved. In fact, spirit is the one which is strong enough that it can
endure contradiction, but it is spirit again which knows how to resolve it.
But nowhere does the so-called world – call it the objective, real world, or,
in the manner of transcendental idealism, subjective intuition and sensecontent determined by the category of the understanding – nowhere,
however you call it, does it escape contradiction; but it is not capable of
enduring it and for that reason it is left to the mercy of the coming and
ceasing to be.
c. The infinity of quantum
The infinite quantum as infinitely great or infinitely small is itself, in itself,
the infinite progress; as great or small it is a quantum and at the same time

21.232

21.233

202

21.234

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the non-being of quantum. The infinitely great and the infinitely small are,
therefore, figurative representations which on closer inspection prove to be
but unsubstantial nebulous shadows. In the infinite progress, however, this
contradiction is explicitly present and with it that which constitutes the
nature of quantum which, as intensive magnitude, has attained its reality
and is now posited in its existence as it is in its concept. We must now consider
this identity.
Quantum is as degree simple, self-referred, and determined within it.
Because the otherness and the determinateness are sublated in it through
this simplicity, the determinateness is external to it; it has its determinateness outside it. This, its being-outside-itself, is at first the abstract non-being
of quantum in general, the bad infinity. But further, this non-being is also
a magnitude; quantum continues in its non-being, for it is precisely in
its externality that it has its determinateness, and this, its externality, is
itself therefore equally a quantum; the non-being of quantum, the infinity,
is thus limited, that is, this beyond is sublated, is itself determined as a
quantum which, consequently, in its negation is with itself.
But this is what quantum as such is in itself. For through its externality it
is precisely itself; the externality constitutes that in virtue of which quantum
is quantum, where it is with itself. In the infinite progress, therefore, the
concept of quantum is posited.
If we now first look at this progress in its abstract determinations as
they are displayed before us, what we find in it is the sublating of quantum,
but no less also of its beyond; what we find, therefore, is the negation of
quantum as well as the negation of this negation. Its truth is the unity of
these two negations in which the negations are, but as moments. – This
unity is the resolution of the contradiction of which the infinite progress
is the expression; its most immediate meaning, therefore, is that of the
restoration of the concept of magnitude, of being an indifferent or external
limit. On the subject of the infinite progress as such, the only reflection
which is usually made is that each quantum, however great or small, can
disappear, that it must be possible to transcend it – not, however, that
this sublating of the quantum, the beyond, the bad infinite itself, also
disappears.
Even the first sublating, the negation of quality as such whereby the
quantum is posited, is in itself the sublation of negation – quantum is
sublated qualitative limit, consequently sublated negation – but it is at the
same time only in itself; the sublating is posited as an existence, and its
negation is then fixed as the infinite, as the side beyond quantum, while the
latter remains on its side as an immediate; thus the infinite is determined

Quantum

203

only as first negation and it is in this way that it appears in the infinite
progress. But there is more to it, as has just been shown: there is the negation
of negation or what the infinite is in truth. And this we have just seen with
the restoration of the concept of quantum. Such a restoration means, in
the first place, that to the existence of the quantum there has accrued a
more precise determination. What we now have is quantum determined
according to its concept, and this quantum is different from the immediate
quantum: externality is now the opposite of itself, is posited as a moment of
magnitude; quantum, for its part, is posited as having its determinateness in
another quantum, through the intermediary of its non-being, of infinity,
that is, that it is qualitatively what it is. Yet this comparison of the concept
of quantum with its existence belongs more to our reflection, to a relation
which is not yet present here. The next determination, rather, which is
present here is that quantum has returned to quality, is from now on
qualitatively determined. For its defining property, its quality, is externality,
the indifference of the determinateness; and quantum is now posited rather
as being itself in its externality, of referring to itself therein, of being in
simple unity with itself, that is, of being qualitatively determined. – This
qualitative being is still more closely determined, namely as being-for-itself;
for the very self-reference which quantum has attained has proceeded from
mediation, from the negation of the negation. Quantum no longer has
infinity, the being-determined-for-itself, outside it, but in it.
The infinite, which in the infinite progress only has the empty meaning
of a non-being, of an unattained but sought beyond, is in fact nothing
other than quality. Quantum, as indifferent limit, surpasses itself into the
infinite; it thereby seeks nothing else than its being-determined-for-itself,
the qualitative moment which, however, is only an ought. Its indifference
towards the limit, and hence its lack of a determinateness which is an
existent-for-itself, its surpassing itself, is that which makes the quantum
what it is. This, its surpassing, is to be negated and quantum is to find in
infinity its absolute determinateness.
Quite generally: quantum is sublated quality; but quantum is infinite, it
surpasses itself, is the negation of itself; this, its surpassing, is therefore in
itself the negation of the negated quality, the restoration of it; and what is
posited is that the externality, which seemed to be a beyond, is determined
as quantum’s own moment.
Quantum is thus posited as repelled from itself, and with that there are
two quanta which are however sublated, only moments of one unity, and
this unity is the determinateness of quantum. – Quantum, self-referred as
indifferent limit and hence qualitatively posited, is the quantitative relation

21.235

21.236

204

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

or ratio. – In ratio quantum is external to itself, different from itself; this,
its externality, is the reference connecting a quantum to another quantum,
each quantum acquiring value only in this connection with its other; and
this reference constitutes the determinateness of the quantum which is this
unity. In this unity quantum possesses not an indifferent but a qualitative
determination; in this its externality has turned back into itself; it is in it
what it is.

21.237

Remark 1
The conceptual determination of the mathematical infinite
The mathematical infinite is of interest because of the expansion and the
significant new results which its introduction into mathematics has produced in it, but also because of the oddity that this science has to date still
been unable to justify its use conceptually (“concept” being taken here in a
strict sense). Ultimately, the justifications are made to rest on the correctness
of the results obtained with the help of this infinite as demonstrated on other
grounds, not on the clarity of the subject matter and of the operation by
which the results are obtained; indeed, the operation itself is even admitted
as incorrect.70
This alone is in and for itself a deplorable situation; this way of doing
things is unscientific. But there is a further disadvantage that goes with
it. As long as mathematics does not know the nature of its instrument by
failing to master the metaphysics and critique of the infinite, it cannot
determine the scope of its application and cannot secure itself against the
misuse of it.
But from a philosophical point of view the mathematical infinite is
important because underlying it, in fact, is the concept of the true infinite,
and this infinite stands much higher than the usual so-called metaphysical
infinite from which the objections against the other infinite, the mathematical, are made. The normal recourse that the science of mathematics
has against these objections is to deny the competence of metaphysics by
claiming that it has nothing to do with this science and that it need not
trouble itself with its concepts as long as it operates consistently with its
own principles. The task of mathematics is to consider what is true within
its own domain, not what is true in itself. Metaphysics, while objecting
to the mathematical infinite, is aware that it can neither deny nor upset
the brilliant results of its use, and mathematics, for its part, is aware that
70

Hegel is referring to the belief, common at the time, that calculus was based on approximations,
and that infinitesimal differences could ultimately be dropped without any significant error in the
results because of their minuteness.

Quantum

205

it is not clear about the metaphysics of its own concept and also, therefore, about the derivation of the procedures necessitated by the use of the
infinite.
If the only difficulty affecting mathematics came from the concept in
general, then mathematics could brush it aside without more ado since the
concept is more than just the statement of the essential determinacies of a
fact, that is, of its determinations according to the understanding, and, so
far as precision in such definitions goes, mathematics leaves nothing to be
desired: it is not a science that concerns itself with the concepts of its subject
matter and which would have to generate their content by developing the
concept, even if only by means of ratiocination. But mathematics finds in
the method of its infinite a major contradiction to the very method which is
specific to it and on which it rests as a science. For the infinitesimal calculus
permits, even requires, procedures which mathematics must absolutely
reject when operating with finite magnitudes, and at the same it treats its
infinite magnitudes as if they were finite quanta and insists on applying to
them the same procedures which are valid for these; a significant aspect of
the formation of this science has been its success in applying to transcendent
determinations and their treatment the form of ordinary calculus.
Mathematics shows that, despite the conflict inherent in its operations,
the results that it obtains through them wholly agree with those found by
the strictly mathematical method, namely the geometrical and analytical.
But, for one thing, this does not apply to all results; the purpose of introducing the infinite is not solely to shorten the ordinary procedure but to
achieve results unattainable through it. And for another, success does not by
itself justify the mode of procedure, and in infinitesimal calculus the method
is seen to be afflicted by a seeming inexactitude. After the finite magnitudes
have been increased by an infinitely small quantity, in the subsequent operation this quantity is partly retained and partly ignored. What is remarkable
about this procedure is that, despite the admitted inexactitude, the derived
result is one which is not just fairly close, or close enough that the difference
can be disregarded, but is, on the contrary, perfectly exact. In the operation
itself which precedes the result, however, one cannot dispense with the fiction of a something which is not quite null, yet is so inconsiderable that
it can be left out of account. But mathematical determinateness, as we
understand it, excludes the possibility of a greater or lesser degree of exactitude, just as in philosophy there can be no question of a greater or lesser
probability but of truth alone. Even if the method and use of the infinite
is justified by the success, it is nevertheless not so superfluous to ask for its
justification, so superfluous as it patently would be to ask, with respect to

21.238

206

21.239

21.240

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

one’s nose, for a proof of the right to use it. For to deal in proof is essential
to mathematical cognition, since it is scientific cognition; and even with
respect to results, the fact is that rigorous mathematical method does not
certify them all with success, which is an external piece of evidence anyway.
It is a worth the effort to take a closer look at the concept of the infinite
together with the most notable attempts at justifying its use and removing
the difficulty with which the method feels encumbered. The consideration
of these attempts at justifying and determining the mathematical infinite
which I shall undertake at some length in this Remark will at the same
time throw the best light on the nature of the true concept itself; it will
also show how there was an intimation of this concept in such attempts
and that it actually lay at their basis.
The usual definition of the mathematical infinite is that it is a magnitude
of which there is no greater (when it is defined as the infinitely great) or smaller
(when it is defined as the infinitely small), or, in the former case, which is
greater than, in the latter case smaller than, any given magnitude. – In this
definition the true concept is of course not expressed; what is expressed
is rather, as already remarked, the same contradiction which is present in
the infinite progression. But let us see what there is implicitly contained
in it. In mathematics, a magnitude is defined as something which can be
increased or diminished; in general, therefore, as an indifferent limit. Now
since the infinitely great or small is such that it can no longer be increased
or diminished, it is no longer in fact a quantum as such.
This consequence follows necessarily and directly. But it is this reflection,
that quantum is sublated (and in this Remark I call quantum what quantum
is as such, finite quantum), which is not commonly made, and is the source
of difficulty for ordinary thinking; for in so far as quantum is infinite and
therefore sublated, it requires being thought as something which is not a
quantum and yet retains its quantitative determinateness.
Kant did not find the said definition to accord with what one normally
means by an infinite whole. To cite his judgment:j “According to common
understanding, a magnitude is infinite if none greater than it (that is,
greater than the multiple of a given unit contained in it) is possible. Now
no multiple is the greatest, because one or more units can always be added
to it. [ . . . ] The infinite whole does not represent how great it is, hence this
concept is not the concept of a maximum (or minimum); rather, it thinks
only of the relation to an arbitrarily assumed unit, in respect of which it is
greater than any number. Depending on whether the unit is assumed to be
j

In the Remark to the Thesis of the First Cosmological Antinomy, in the Critique of Pure Reason.

Quantum

207

greater or smaller, the infinity would be greater or smaller; yet infinity, since
it consists merely in the relation to the given unit, would always remain the
same, even though in this way the absolute magnitude of the whole would
obviously not be cognized at all.”71
Kant objects to infinite wholes being regarded as a maximum, the completed aggregation of a given unit. The maximum or minimum as such still
appears as a quantum, an aggregate. This way of representing the infinite
cannot avert Kant’s conclusion that it leads to a greater or smaller infinite.
And in general, so long as the infinite is represented as a quantum, the
distinction between greater and smaller still applies to it. This criticism,
however, does not touch the concept of the true mathematical infinite, of
infinite non-indifference, for this is no longer a finite quantum.
Kant’s concept of the infinite, on the other hand, which he calls the
truly transcendental one, is “that the successive synthesis of unity in the
traversal of a quantum can never be completed.”72 So a quantum in general
is presupposed as given; this is supposed to be converted by the synthesizing
of the unit into an amount, a definite assignable quantum; but this process
of synthesis can never be completed. Clearly, what is expressed here is but a
progress to infinity, except that the progress is represented transcendentally,
that is, in fact subjectively and psychologically. True, in itself the quantum
is supposed to be completed, but transcendentally; that is to say, the only
determination which should arise in the subject that gives it a relation to a
unit is that of an incomplete quantum intrinsically affected by a beyond.
We still are, therefore, at the contradiction contained in magnitude, except
that it is now distributed between the object and the subject: limitedness
is assigned to the object, and to the subject the capacity to transcend over
and over again, in a bad infinite, any determinateness it grasps.
We said above that, on the contrary, the definition of the mathematical
infinite, precisely as it is used in higher analysis, corresponds to the concept
of the true infinite.73 Here is the place for a detailed comparison of the
two. – First to be said regarding the truly infinite quantum is that it
determines itself as infinite within; it is such because, as demonstrated,74
the finite quantum or the quantum as such and its beyond, the bad infinite,
are equally sublated. The sublated quantum has thus gone back into the
simplicity of self-reference, but not as the extensive quantum did when it
went over into the intensive quantum, by having its determinateness only
in itself, in an external multiplicity with respect to which it is nevertheless
71
72
73

Guyer/Wood, A430/B458–A432–460. The text is slightly modified by Hegel.
Guyer/Wood, A432/B460. Stresses added by Hegel.
74 Cf. above, 21.234; also GW 11, 153.
Cf. above, 21.237.

21.241

208

21.242

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

supposed to remain both indifferent and diverse. On the contrary, the
infinite quantum contains first the externality, and then the negation of
it, in it; it no longer is, therefore, just some finite quantum or other, no
longer a magnitude-determinateness which happens to have a determinate
existence as quantum; it is rather simple, and therefore only a moment; it
is a magnitude-determinateness in qualitative form; its infinity consists in
its being a qualitative determinateness. – As moment it is thus in essential
unity with its other; it is determined only through this, its other; that is, it
has meaning only with reference to something which stands related to it.
Outside this relation it is a nullity – just because quantum as such would
have to be indifferent to the relation and yet in the relation an immediate,
unmoved determination. In the relation, as only a moment, quantum is
not something indifferent, is not for itself; since it is at the same time a
quantitative determinateness, in the infinity which is being-for-itself it is
only as a being-for-one.
The concept of the infinite as abstractly expounded here will prove to be
the basis of the mathematical infinite, and the concept itself will be further
clarified as we consider the different stages in the expression of quantum
as moment of a ratio – from the lowest, where it is still also quantum as
such, to the highest, where it attains the meaning and the expression of a
properly infinite magnitude.
Let us then first take quantum in the relation in which it is a fractional
number. A fraction such as, for instance, 72 is not a quantum like 1, 2, 3,
and so on; to be sure, it is an ordinary finite number, but not an immediate
number like the whole numbers; rather, as a fraction it is determined
through the intermediary of two other numbers which stand to one another
as amount and unit, the unit being itself a determined amount. However,
if we abstract them from this close determination which they have to each
other, and consider them in the qualitative connection in which they are
here only according to what befalls them as quanta, then 2 and 7 are
indifferent quanta; but since they take their place here only as moments,
each a moment of the other and therefore of a third (the quantum which
is called the exponent), they at once count not as 2 and 7 but only as
determined with respect to each other. We can, therefore, just as well put 4
and 14 in their place, or 6 and 21, and so on to infinity. In this, they begin to
take on a qualitative character. Were they to count as mere quanta, 2 and 7
would then simply be 2 and 7 respectively; the 4, 14, 6, 21, and so on, would
be something simply different from them and, to the extent that they are
only immediate quanta, could not be entered in their place. But in so far
as 2 and 7 are not to be taken in the determinateness of such mere quanta,

Quantum

209

their indifferent limit is then sublated; to this extent, therefore, they have
the moment of infinity in them, for not only are they no longer 2 and
7, but their quantitative determinateness remains, although in qualitative
existence – namely, as the determinateness which they have in relation.
Their place can be taken by infinitely many others without the value of the
fraction being altered by the determinateness of the relation.
However, the representation of the infinite by a fractional number is still
imperfect, because the two sides of the fraction, 2 and 7, can be taken out
of the relation and are ordinary, immediate quanta; the connection which
makes them moments in a ratio affects them externally and immediately.
The connection itself is also an ordinary quantum, the exponent of the ratio.
The letters with which general arithmetic operates, the next universality
to which numbers are elevated, do not have a determinate numerical
value defining them; they are only general signs standing in for some
possible determinate value. The fraction ab seems to be, therefore, a more
suitable expression of the infinite, since a and b, taken apart outside their
connecting reference, remain indeterminate, lacking any particular value
of their own even when separated. – However, although these letters are
posited as indeterminate magnitudes, their meaning is still to be some finite
quantum or other. Therefore, since they are a universal representation, but
only of determinate number, their being in a ratio is likewise a matter of
indifference to them; outside the ratio, they retain the value of determinate
number.
If we look more closely at what is present in a ratio, we see that it
contains two determinations: first, that it is a quantum; but, second, that
this quantum is not immediate but contains rather qualitative opposition
within it, and since in this opposition it remains at the same time a
determinate and indifferent quantum, by returning from its otherness,
that is, the opposition, back into itself, it is also an infinite. These two
determinations are seen displayed in their distinctness in the following
well-known form.
1
, as 1 + a + a 2 + a 3
The fraction 72 can be expressed as 0.285714 . . . ; 1−a
and so on. As so expressed, it is an infinite series; the fraction itself is
called the sum or the finite expression of the series. If we compare the
two expressions, then the one, the infinite series, no longer represents the
fraction as a ratio but represents it in its aspect as a quantum which is an
aggregate of magnitudes which are added to each other, as an amount. –
That these magnitudes constituting the amount consist in turn of decimal
fractions, that is, themselves consist of ratios, is irrelevant here; for this
circumstance concerns the particular kind of unit of these magnitudes,

21.243

21.244

210

21.245

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

not these magnitudes as constituting the amount; likewise in the decimal
system an integer of more than one digit counts as one amount, and the
fact is ignored that it consists of products – a number, the number ten,
and their powers. Also of no consequence here is the fact that there are
fractions other than the 72 adduced as example which, when expressed as
decimal fractions, do not yield an infinite series; what is relevant is that
every fraction can be expressed as yielding an infinite series in a numerical
system based on another unit.
Now since in the infinite series that displays the fraction as amount the
ratio aspect of the latter disappears, so does also the aspect by which, as
just shown,75 it had infinity in it. But this infinity has entered in another
way, for the series is itself infinite.
Now, of what kind this infinity of the series would be is self-evident;
it is the bad infinity of progression. The series exhibits the contradiction
inherent in it of representing something which is a relation, and possesses
qualitative nature within it, as without relation, as a mere quantum, as
amount. The consequence is that there is something always lacking to the
amount expressed in the series, so that the posited amount must always be
gone beyond in order for the required determinateness to be attained. The
law of the progression is well known; it is implicit in the determination of
the quantum contained in the fraction and in the nature of the form in
which the fraction is supposed to be expressed. By pressing on with the series
the amount might well be made as precise as need be; nevertheless, what is
displayed through the series always remains an ought; the series is always
affected by a beyond which cannot be sublated, for the attempt to express
as an amount something which is based on a qualitative determinateness is
an abiding contradiction.
The inexactitude of which there is only a reflective shine in the true
mathematical infinite is actually present in this infinite series. These two
kinds of mathematical infinite are as little to be confused as the two kinds of
philosophical infinite. For the exposition of the true mathematical infinite,
the form of the series has been used from the beginning and of late it has
been invoked again. But it is not necessary for it. On the contrary, the
infinite of the infinite series is essentially different from it, as the sequel will
show. The infinite serial expression ranks even lower than the fractional
expression.
The fact is that the infinite series contains the bad infinite because what
the series is supposed to express remains an ought, and what it does express
75

Cf. above, 21.242.

Quantum

211

is encumbered by a beyond which does not go away, and it is diverse from
what it is supposed to express. It is infinite not because of the posited terms,
but because such terms are incomplete, since the other which belongs to
them essentially is beyond them; what the series actually contains (let the
terms posited be as many as one wishes) is only something finite, in the
strict sense of being posited as finite, that is, as something which is not what
it ought to be. On the other hand, what is called the finite expression of such
a series, or the sum of it, is without lack; it contains whole the value which
the series only seeks; the beyond is recalled from its flight; what it is and
what it ought to be are not separated but are the same.
More precisely, what distinguishes the two expressions is that in the
infinite series the negative lies outside its terms, and these have a valid
place in the series only as parts of the amount. By contrast, in the finite
expression which is a ratio the negative is immanent: it is the reciprocal
being-determined of the sides of the ratio, and this being-determined is
a being-turned-back into itself, self-referring unity as a negation of the
negation (both sides of the ratio are only as moments), and consequently
has the determination of infinity within itself. – Therefore, what is ordinarily
1
, is in fact a ratio, and this so-called
called the sum, like the 72 or the 1−a
finite expression is the true infinite expression. On the other hand, the infinite
series is in truth the sum; its purpose is to display what is in itself a ratio in
the form of a sum, and the existing terms of the series are not the terms of
a sum but of an aggregate. Furthermore, it is in fact the finite expression,
for it is incomplete as an aggregate, thus remaining essentially deficient.
According to that which is there in it at the moment, it is a determinate
quantum, but at the same time not quite what it ought to be; and also, what
is lacking from it is itself a determinate quantum, and this missing part is
in fact that in the series which is called the infinite – but according to its
only formal aspect of being something missing, a non-being; according to
its content, it is a finite quantum. Only that which is present in the series,
together with that which is missing from it, constitute the fraction, the
determinate quantum which the series ought to be yet is equally incapable
of being. – The word “infinite,” even in “infinite series,” is commonly taken
to mean something lofty and exalted; but this is a sort of superstition, the
superstition of the understanding, for we have just seen how it boils down
instead to a determination of deficiency.
We may further remark that the fact that there are infinite series that
cannot be summed is an external and accidental circumstance in so far
as the form of series as such is concerned. Such series contain a higher
kind of infinity than do those that can be summed – namely, they contain

21.246

212

21.247

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

incommensurability, or the impossibility of displaying as a quantum, even
if in the form of a fraction, the quantitative ratio that they contain; it
is their form as series which as such entails the determination of the bad
infinity present in the series which admits of being summed.
We find a like reversal of terms, as just noted in connection with the
fraction and the series associated with it, also when the mathematical infinite
(not the one just mentioned but the true infinite) is called the relative
infinite, whereas the ordinary metaphysical infinite, by which the abstract
bad infinite is understood, is called absolute. But in fact this metaphysical
infinite is the one which is rather merely relative, because the negation
which it expresses is in opposition to a limit only by persisting outside the
infinite, without being sublated by the latter; the mathematical infinite, on
the contrary, has in itself truly sublated the finite limit, for this limit is at
one with its beyond.
It is primarily in this sense, which shows that the so-called sum or finite
expression of an infinite series is the one to be regarded rather as the infinite
expression, that Spinoza contrasts the concept of the true infinity with that
of the bad, illustrating it with examples. This concept of Spinoza will best
be elucidated if I add what he says on the subject to my exposition so far.
He starts by defining the infinite as the absolute affirmation of the
concrete existence of any one nature, and the finite on the contrary as
determinateness, or negation.76 That is to say, the absolute affirmation of
a concrete existence is to be taken as its referring to itself, its not being
dependent on another; the finite is negation instead, a cessation in the
form of a reference to an other which begins outside it. Now the affirmation
of a concrete existence does not by any means exhaust the concept of
infinity; the full concept implies that the infinity is an affirmation, not as
immediate but only as restored through the reflection of the other into
itself, or as the negation of the negative. But for Spinoza substance and its
absolute unity has the form of an unmoved unity, that is, a unity which is
not self-mediated, a rigidity in which there is no place yet for the concept
of the negative unity of the self, of subjectivity.
The mathematical example with which he illustrates the true infinite
(Letter XXIX)77 is that of a space between two unequal circles, one of
which lies inside the other without touching it and without the two being
concentric. He apparently made a lot of this figure and the concept that
it illustrates, so much so as to make it the motto of his Ethics. – He
76
77

Ethics. Part I, Prop. VIII, Note I.
Cf. Letter XXIX (Gebhard’s XII), to Lewis Meyer, in which Spinoza first distinguishes between
types of infinites and then proceeds to illustrate them with examples (English trans., pp. 317–318).

Quantum

213

says: “Mathematicians conclude that the inequalities possible within such
a space are infinite, not because of the infinite multitude of parts, for the
magnitude of the space is determinate and limited, and I am capable of
positing larger or smaller such spaces, but because the nature of the matter
surpasses every determinateness.”78 – One can see that Spinoza rejects any
representation of the infinite that would make it an incomplete multitude
or series, and calls attention to the fact that here, in the space of the example, the infinite is not somewhere beyond, but is present and complete;
such a space is a limited one, but finite “because the nature of the subject
matter surpasses every determinateness”; because the magnitude determinations contained in it cannot be at the same time displayed as a quantum,
or, according to Kant’s already cited terminology,79 the synthesizing cannot
be brought to completion in a (discrete) quantum. – How in general the
opposition of continuous and discrete quantum leads to the infinite will be
explained in detail in a later Remark.80 – Spinoza calls the infinite of a
series the infinite of the imagination; the infinite as self-reference he calls
instead the infinite of thought or infinitum actu. For it is actu, infinite
in act, because complete and present within itself. Thus the series
0.285714 . . . or 1 + a + a 2 + a 3 . . . is the infinite merely of the imagination or a merely intended infinite, for it has no actuality, there is simply
1
is actually not only what
something missing to it. By contrast, 72 or 1−a
the series is in its presently given terms, but is, in addition, what the series
1
is equally a finite magnitude
lacks, what it only ought to be. The 72 or 1−a
like Spinoza’s space enclosed between the two circles, with its inequalities,
and can like this space be made larger or smaller. But there is no absurdity
that arises here of a larger or smaller infinite, for this quantum of the whole
does not concern the relation of its moments which is the nature of the fact,
that is, does not concern the qualitative determination of magnitude; as
for the infinite series, what is actually there is equally a finite quantum, but
with yet a deficit besides it. – The imagination on the contrary stops short
at the quantum as such without reflecting on the qualitative connection
which constitutes the ground of the occurring incommensurability.
The incommensurability which lies in Spinoza’s example encompasses
in general the functions of curved lines and is more accurately associated
with the infinite which mathematics has introduced in connection with
these functions, quite in general with the functions of variable magnitudes.
This infinite is the true mathematical, quantitative infinite which Spinoza
78
79

Spinoza, Letter XXIX (Gebhardt’s XII), to Lewis Meyer (English trans., pp. 321–322).
80 Cf. below, 21.299–301.
Cf. above, 21.240.

21.248

21.249

214

21.250

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

also had in mind. We must now discuss this determination with greater
precision.
First of all, with respect to the category of alterability which is held
as so important and which covers the magnitudes connected with those
functions, such magnitudes should not be assumed from the start to be
alterable in the sense in which the numbers 2 and 7 are in the fraction 72 ,
that is, because 4 and 14, 6 and 21, and other numbers ad infinitum, can
be put in their place without the value of the fraction being altered. This
applies even more to ab , where one can arbitrarily introduce any number
in the place of a and b without altering what ab is supposed to express. It
is now in the sense that an infinite, that is, an inexhaustible multitude of
numbers, can also be put in the place of the x and y of a function, that a and
b are magnitudes just as variable as these x and y. The expression “variable
magnitudes” is for this reason very vague and ill-chosen for magnitudedeterminations whose interest and manner of treatment lies in something
quite other than in their mere variability.
In order to make clear wherein lies the true determination of those
moments of a function which are the object of interest of higher analysis,
we must retrace our steps once more. In 72 or ab , the 2 and 7 are independent
determinate quanta and the connection is not essential to them; a and b
are likewise intended to represent quanta which remain as they are outside
the relation. Furthermore, 72 and ab are also a fixed quantum, a quotient;
the ratio constitutes an amount of which the denominator expresses the
unit and the numerator the amount of these units, or conversely; even if
4 and 14, and so on, are substituted for 2 and 7, the ratio also remains
the same as quantum.
But now, all this changes essentially, for instance,
2
in the function yx = p; here x and y carry indeed the meaning of possible
determinate quanta; however, not these x and y, but only x and y2 have
a determinate quotient. Therefore, not only are these sides of the ratio, x
and y, not determinate quanta, but their ratio also is not a fixed quantum
(and not in the sense in which it is not fixed in the case of a and b),
is not a fixed quotient but is absolutely variable as quantum. But this is
only to say that x is related not to y but to the square of y. The relation
of a magnitude to a power is not a quantum but an essentially qualitative
relation; the power-relation is the factor which is to be regarded as the
fundamental determination. – However, in the function of the straight
line, y = a x, xy = a is an ordinary fraction and quotient; this function is
therefore a function of variable magnitudes only formally, or x and y are
here what a and b are in ab : they are not in the determination in which
differential and integral calculus considers them. – Because of the special

Quantum

215

nature of the variable magnitudes in this mode of consideration, it would
have been fitting to have introduced a special name for them as well as
other symbols than the ones generally in use for the unknown quantities
in all the finite equations, determinate or indeterminate; for there is an
essential difference between them and such merely unknown quantities
which are in themselves perfectly determined quanta or a determinate
range of determinate quanta. – It is, moreover, because of a lack of insight
into the peculiar interest which motivates higher analysis, and caused
the need and the discovery of differential calculus, that functions of the
first degree, like the equation of the straight line, have independently been
included in the treatment of calculus. Contributing to this formalism is the
mistaken belief that the otherwise intrinsically valid demand that a method
be generalized can be satisfied by leaving out the specific determinateness
on which the original need is based, as if in this domain one treated only
variable magnitudes in general. We would have been spared indeed much
formalism in the consideration and the treatment of these matters if it had
been perceived that at issue here are not variable magnitudes as such, but
the determinations of powers.
But there is still another stage where the mathematical infinite manifests
its peculiar character. In an equation in which x and y are first posited
as determined by a power-relation, x and y as such are still supposed to
signify quanta; now this whole significance is entirely lost in the so-called
infinitesimal differences. dx, dy, are no longer quanta, nor should they
signify quanta, but have meaning only in connection, the meaning of mere
moments. They no longer are a something, the something taken as quantum,
nor are they finite differences; but neither are they nothing, not a null void
of determination. Outside their relation they are pure nullities; but they
are to be taken only as moments of the relation, as determinations of the
differential coefficient dd xy .
In this concept of the infinite, the quantum is truly made complete as a
qualitative existence; it is posited as actually infinite; it is not just sublated
as this or that quantum, but as quantum generally. But the quantitative
determinateness remains; it remains as the element of the quanta, as principle,
or, as has also been said, in their first concept.
It is this concept which has been the target of every attack made on
the fundamental determination of the mathematics of this infinite, that
is, of differential and integral calculus. Incorrect representations on the
part of mathematicians themselves were instrumental to this failure to
recognize the concept; but the disputes were mainly due to the incapacity
to justify the subject matter as concept. But mathematics, as remarked

21.251

216

21.252

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

above,81 cannot circumvent the concept here; for, as the mathematics of
the infinite, it does not restrict itself to the finite determinateness of its
objects (as pure mathematics does, which considers space and time and
their determinations only as finite, referring them to each other), but treats
any determination which it takes from pure mathematics by converting
it into an identity with its opposite – as when, for instance, it converts
a curved line into a straight one, the circle into a polygon, and so on.
The operations which mathematics allows itself as differential and integral
calculus are therefore in total contradiction with the nature of merely finite
determinations and their connections, and for this reason can find their
justification in the concept alone.
The mathematics of the infinite insisted that these quantitative determinations are vanishing magnitudes, that is, such that are no longer some
quantum or other, but that are not nothing either but still have a determinateness as against an other. Yet nothing is more evident than that there is
no such intermediate state, as it has been called, between being and nothing. – What there is to this objection and to this so-called intermediate
state has already been indicated above in connection with the category of
becoming, in Remark 4.82 At any rate, the unity of being and nothing is
not a state; a state would be a determination of being and nothing into
which these moments would have fallen as if by accident, as if prey to
a sickness externally induced by faulty thinking; rather, this middle and
unity, the vanishing, or equally the becoming, is alone the truth of being
and nothing.
It is further said that what is infinite is not comparable as a greater or
smaller; there cannot therefore be a relation of infinite to infinite according
to orders or dignities of the infinite, although we do find such distinctions
of infinitesimals in the science dedicated to them. – Underlying this already
mentioned objection83 is always the supposition that we should be dealing
here with quanta which are compared as quanta; and that when determinations are no longer quanta, they no longer have a relation to each other. But
the case is rather that that which exists only in relation is not a quantum;
quantum is a determination which should possess a perfectly indifferent
existence outside the relation it is in and be indifferent to its difference
from another quantum; the qualitative, on the contrary, is what it is only
in its distinction from an other. The infinite magnitudes of calculus are,
therefore, not only comparable, but exist only as terms of comparison, in
relation.
81

Cf. above, 21.237.

82

Cf. above, 21.90ff.

83

In the preceding page.

Quantum

217

Let me review the most important definitions of this infinite which have
been given in mathematics. It will become evident that the thought of the
fact underlying them accords with the concept developed here, but that
their originators failed to establish them as concept and in applying them
had again to employ expedients that go against their better thought.
This thought could not be more correctly determined than as Newton
stated it. I remove here those determinations which belong to the figurative representation of movement and velocity (from which especially
Newton derived the name of fluxions) because in them the thought does
not appear in its due abstract form but appears concrete, mixed with nonessential forms. Newton explains (Princ. Mathem. Phil. Nat., L. 1, Lemma
XI, Schol.)84 that by fluxions he understands not indivisibles (a form of
which earlier mathematicians, Cavalieri85 and others, availed themselves
and which contains the concept of a quantum which is determined in itself)
but vanishing divisibles; also, not sums and ratios of determined parts but
the limits (limites) of sums and ratios. It may be objected that vanishing
magnitudes do not have a final ratio, because any ratio before the magnitudes vanish cannot be the last, and, once vanished, there is no ratio any
more. But by the ratio of vanishing magnitudes is to be understood not
their ratio before or after they vanish, but the ratio with which they vanish
(quacum evanescunt). Likewise, the first ratio of incipient magnitudes is the
one with which they become.
The scientific method of the day only required that one define what one
means by an expression. But that by an expression one understands this
or that is, properly speaking, a subjective disposition or also a historical
demand which in no way indicates that such a concept is necessary in
and for itself and has internal truth. Nevertheless, what we have just
cited indicates that the concept advanced by Newton corresponds to our
exposition of the infinite quantity above,86 to the way it resulted from
the reflection of quantum into itself. Magnitudes are understood in their
vanishing, that is, as such magnitudes which are no longer quanta; also,
not ratios of determinate parts, but the limits of the ratio. The quanta taken
84

85

86

See Newton, Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, Book 1, Section 1, lemma XI, scholium.
In this reference, there is no mention of fluxions, but Newton does make the claim that Hegel refers
to, i.e., that he is working not with indivisibles but with vanishing divisibles. The “not sums and
ratios of determined parts but the limits of sums and ratios” is taken almost word for word from
this scholium.
Francesco Bonaventura Cavalieri (1598–1647), Jesuit and professor of mathematics at the University
of Bologna. Among his many works, the Geometria indivisibilium continuorum nova quadam ratione
promota (1635) anticipates basic ideas of integral calculus.
Cf. above, 21.234–236.

21.253

218

21.254

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

for themselves, the sides of the ratio, as well as the ratio itself in so far as
it would be a quantum, are supposed to have vanished; the limit of the
quantitative ratio is where the ratio is and is not; more precisely, where
the quantum has vanished and, consequently, the ratio is preserved only
as a qualitative ratio of quantity, and its sides, too, only as qualitative
moments of quantity. – Newton adds that from the fact that there are final
ratios of vanishing magnitudes, it is not to be concluded that there are final
magnitudes, indivisibles. For this would be again a leap from the abstract
ratio to such sides of it as would have a value for themselves outside their
connection in the ratio, as indivisibles, each something which would be a
one, devoid of any relation.
To ward off such a misunderstanding, he further reminds us that the
final ratios are not the ratios of final magnitudes, but are limits to which
the ratios of the limitlessly decreasing magnitudes come closer than any
given, that is, finite, difference without however overstepping them, for
then they would be nullities. – As we said, by final magnitudes one could
have understood indivisibles or ones. But the definition of the last ratio
excludes both the representation of “ones” that are indifferent and devoid of
relation and of the finite quantum. However, if the required determination
had been brought to the concept of a quantitative determination which
is purely a moment of the ratio, there would have been no need either
for the limitless decreasing into which Newton converts the quantum and
which only expresses the progress to infinity, or of the determination of
divisibility which no longer has any immediate meaning here.
As regards the preservation of the ratio in the vanishing of the quanta, it
has been said (in other places, as in Carnot, Réflexions sur la Métaphysique
du Calcul Infinitésimal)87 that, because of the law of continuity, the vanishing magnitudes still retain the ratio from which they derive, before they
disappear. – This way of representing the matter expresses its true nature,
provided that the continuity of the quantum is not understood to mean the
continuity which it has in the infinite progress where the quantum continues in its vanishing, in such a way that in its beyond only a finite quantum
arises again, a fresh term of the series: but the picture we have of a continuous
progress is always just that, of values traversed which are still finite quanta.
On the other hand, when the transition is made to the true infinite, what is
continuous is the ratio; and this ratio is so continuous and persistent that the
87

Lazare Carnot (1753–1823), French engineer, mathematician, military man, and politician who
pioneered the development of calculus. His Réflexions sur la métaphysique du calcul infinitésimal was
published in 1797. The place very likely alluded to by Hegel is §43.

Quantum

219

transition consists rather in just bringing it out in its purity, thus causing
any non-relational determination (that is, any quantum which is a side of
the ratio yet remains a quantum also when posited outside it) to vanish. –
This purification of the quantitative ratio is thus not unlike the grasping
of an empirical existence conceptually. The empirical existence is thereby
raised above itself, so that its concept contains the same determinations as it
does, but grasped in their essentiality and in the unity of the concept where
they have shed their indifferent, conceptually void presence.
Equally interesting is the other form of Newton’s exposition of the magnitudes under discussion, namely, as generative magnitudes or principles.88 A
generated magnitude (genita) is a product such as a quotient, root, rectangle,
square, or also the sides of rectangles or squares – quite in general, a finite
magnitude. “Considered in ceaseless motion and flux as either increasing or
decreasing, he classifies the momentary increments or decrements of such a
magnitude under the name of moments. These are not to be taken, however,
for particles of determinate magnitudes (particulæ finitæ). Such particles are
not themselves moments but magnitudes generated from moments. They
are to be understood, rather, as the incipient principles or beginnings of
finite magnitudes.”89 – Here the quantum is distinguished from itself: as a
product or an existent, and as it is in its becoming, in its beginning and in
principle, that is to say, as it is in its concept, or again (what here amounts
to the same thing), in its qualitative determination. In the latter meaning, the quantitative differences, the infinite increments or decrements, are
only moments – are only the end product, when the becoming no longer
is, has passed over into the indifference of existence and into externality, and this is a quantum. – Now, although the philosophy of the true
concept must acknowledge these determinations of the infinite adduced
with respect to increments and decrements, it must nevertheless be noted
that the forms themselves of these increments and decrements fall within
the category of the immediate quantum and of the continuous progress
associated with them, and that the representations of such increments, of
the growth, the increase of x by dx or i, and so on, are rather to be regarded
as the fundamental evil in these methods – the permanent obstacle to
extracting the determination of the qualitative moment of quantity from
the representation of the ordinary quantum.
Compared with the determinations just given, the representation of
infinitesimals also implied in “increment” and “decrement” leaves much
88
89

See Newton, Principia mathematica, Book 2, Section 2, lemma 2.
Hegel is not citing but simply reporting what Newton says. See note 88.

21.255

21.256

220

21.257

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to be desired. According to this way of figuratively representing them,
their nature is such that they may be ignored in comparison with finite
magnitudes, and not only they but also their higher orders as compared
with the lower, and even the products of several in comparison to a single
one. – With Leibniz especially great stress is given to this demand to ignore
the infinitesimals to which the previous discoverers of methods for dealing
with such magnitudes equally left themselves exposed. It is this demand
especially which has given calculus, together with a gain in facility, the
semblance of inexactitude and deliberate incorrectness in its operations. –
Wolff has tried to explain it in his customary way of popularizing things –
in effect, by polluting the concept and replacing it with false senserepresentations. What he does is to compare ignoring the infinitesimals
of higher orders as against the lower with the procedure of a surveyor who,
in measuring a mountain, is not any less accurate just because the wind has
in the meanwhile blown a speck of sand off from the top; or with ignoring
the height of houses or towers in the calculations of lunar eclipses (Element.
Mathes. Univ., Tom I. El. Analys. Math., P. II. C. I. s. Schol.).90
Even if common sense condescends to such inexactitude, geometricians
have on the contrary all rejected this way of representing things. It goes
without saying that in the science of mathematics there cannot be any
question of empirical exactitude. Mathematical measuring by the operations of calculus or by the constructions and proofs of geometry is totally
different from land-surveying, the measuring of empirical lines, figures,
and so on. Besides, as already pointed out,91 the analysts show by the comparison of a result obtained with strict geometrical procedure and with the
method of infinite differences that the result is one and the same in both
cases; that there is absolutely no place for a more or less in exactitude.
And it is self-evident that an absolutely exact result cannot come out of an
inexact procedure. Yet, despite all the protesting against the cited attempts
at justifying this ignoring of infinitesimals in calculus, the fact is that the
procedure itself of calculus cannot avoid it. And this is the difficulty towards
which the efforts of the analysts are directed: to comprehend where the
contradiction lies and to remove it.
It is especially relevant in this connection to cite Euler’s construal.
While adopting the general Newtonian definition, he insists that while
90

91

Christian Wolff, Elementa matheseos universæ (1742), in Gesammelte Werke, zweite Abteilung, Vol.
29, edited by J. E. Hofmann (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1968), pp. 545–6. English trans., A Treatise
of Algebra, with an Application of it to a Variety of Problems in Arithmetic, to Trigonometry, and Conic
Sections. Three Preliminary Treatises, trans. from the Latin by John Hanna (London, 1739).
Cf. above, 21.238.

Quantum

221

differential calculus should consider the ratios of the increments of a magnitude, the infinite differentiation is however to be considered, as such, as
wholly nil (Institut. Calc. Different. Part I. C. III).92 – How this is to be
understood transpires from the foregoing. The infinite difference is a nil
only of quantum, not a qualitative nil; rather, as the nil of quantum it is
a pure moment of the ratio alone. It is not the difference of a magnitude.
But, for that reason, on the one hand it is in principle inappropriate to
speak of those moments which are called infinitesimals also as increments
and decrements, and as differences. This definition implies that something
is added to, or is subtracted from, the initially given finite magnitude; that a
subtraction or an addition, an external arithmetical operation, takes place.
But the transition of the function of the variable magnitude into its differential is to be looked at as of a wholly different nature; that is to say,
as already discussed, it is to be considered as the reduction of the finite
function to the qualitative ratio of its quantitative determinations. – On
the other hand, the inappropriateness betrays itself the moment it is said
that the increments are by themselves nil, that only their ratios are being
considered, for a nil no longer has any determinateness at all. This exposition thus goes as far as the negative of the quantum, giving to it definite
expression, but fails to grasp this negative at the same time in its positive meaning as qualitative determinations of quantity which, if extracted
from the ratio and taken as quanta, would be only zeros. – Lagrange’s
judgment on how to represent limits or the final ratios (Théorie de fonct.
analyt., Introd.)93 is that, although it is easy enough to represent the ratio
between two magnitudes as long as the latter remain finite, as soon as the
terms of a ratio simultaneously become zero, the ratio fails to offer to the
understanding any clear and distinct concept. – Indeed, the understanding
must get past this merely negative side on which the terms of a ratio are
quantitatively a zero and grasp them positively as qualitative moments. –
But what Euler has to contribute in this matter (in the cited text, §84ff.) –
namely, that two so-called infinitesimals which are supposed to be nothing
but zeros stand nevertheless in reciprocal relation and, for this reason, other
symbols than the zero are used for them – this also can hardly be considered satisfactory. He tries to support his claim by distinguishing between
arithmetical and geometrical ratios: in the former, we look for differences;
92
93

Leonhard Euler (1707–1783), Swiss mathematician who contributed to calculus and topology and
was responsible for much of modern mathematical terminology and notation.
Joseph-Louis Lagrange (Giuseppe Lodovico Lagrangia, 1736–1812), Italian mathematician and
astronomer who succeeded Euler at Berlin and was then professor at the École polytechnique
in Paris. He made important contributions to analysis and number theory.

21.258

222

21.259

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

in the latter, for quotients; although the arithmetical ratio between two
zeros is an equality, such is not the case for the geometrical ratio. Thus,
if 2 : 1 = 0 : 0, then, because of the nature of a proportion, since the first
term is twice as great as the second, also the third is double the fourth; in
keeping with the proportion, 0 : 0 should therefore be taken as the ratio
of 2 : 1. – Even in common arithmetic, if n · 0 = 0; then, n : 1 = 0 : 0. –
But, just because 2 : 1 or n : 1 is a relation of quanta, there cannot be a
ratio, or an expression, of 0 : 0 corresponding to it.
I refrain from multiplying citations since the ones examined are enough
to show that the true concept of the infinite is indeed implied in them, but
that it has not been accurately brought to view and recognized. As a result,
as one proceeds to the operations of calculus, there is no chance that the true
conceptual determination would gain control, and what happens is rather
that the finite determinateness of quantity makes a return and the operation
cannot do without the figure of a quantum which is merely relatively small.
Calculus necessitates subjecting the so-called infinitesimals to the ordinary
arithmetical operations of addition and so on, which are based on the nature
of finite magnitudes; it therefore necessitates letting them momentarily
have the value of finite magnitudes and treating them as such. It is for
calculus to justify why, on the one hand, it brings those infinitesimals
down to this sphere, treating them as increments or differences, but then,
on the other hand, ignores them as quanta after it has just applied to them
the forms and the laws of finite magnitudes.
I shall now review the most salient points in the attempts by the geometricians to sidestep these difficulties.
The older analysts had few scruples in the matter, but the moderns
have directed their efforts especially towards bringing infinitesimal calculus
back to the evidence of a strictly geometrical method and towards attaining
in it the rigor of the proofs of the ancients (Lagrange’s expression)94 in
mathematics. But since its principle is of a higher nature than the principle
of mathematics, infinitesimal analysis quickly had to dispense with that
kind of evidence, just like philosophy which can make no claim to the
clarity which is the prerogative of the sciences of sensible things, e.g.
natural history, and like eating and drinking which are reckoned a business
more easily understood than thinking and conceptualizing. Accordingly,
we shall deal only with the efforts to attain the rigor of proof of the ancients.
94

Lagrange: See Joseph Louis Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, contenant les principes du
Calcul différentiel, dégagés de toute considération d’infiniment petits, d’évanouissans, de limites et de
fluxions, et réduits à l’analyse algébrique des quantités finies, 3rd edn (Paris, 1847), p. 6.

Quantum

223

Several authors have tried to dispense altogether with the concept of
the infinite, and without it to achieve the same results as seemed to be
bound up with its use. – Lagrange, for instance, refers to the method
that Landen95 discovered, saying of it that it is purely analytical; it does
not use infinitesimal differences but begins by introducing different values
of variable magnitudes which he then equates in what follows. Lagrange’s
opinion, incidentally, is that in this method the single advantage of differential calculus, simplicity of method and ease of operation, is lost. –
This is, indeed, a procedure that bears some similarities to the tangential
method which was Descartes’s starting point – about which, more later
on.96 Here we can note that this much is in general immediately evident:
that assuming different values of variable magnitudes and then equating
them belongs to another order of mathematical operation than does the
method of differential calculus; and that the peculiar nature of the simple
relation yet to be more closely discussed to which the actual, concrete
determination of this calculus reduces, namely the relation of the derived
function to the original, is not brought to view.
The earlier of the moderns, for instance Fermat, Barrow, and others,97
who were the first to make use of infinitesimals in the application which
was later developed into differential and integral calculus, and then Leibniz
also and his followers, and Euler as well, have always openly believed that
they were entitled to omit the products of infinitesimal differences, as well
as their higher powers, simply on the ground that they vanish relative to the
lower order. This alone is the ground on which they rest the fundamental
principle, namely the determination of that which is the differential of
a product or of a power, for the whole theoretical teaching reduces to this.
The rest is partly mechanism of development, partly application, in which
however, as we shall have to see later, the higher or rather the whole interest
in fact lies.98 – For the point now at issue we only need to cite here what
is elementary, that the first principle concerning curves is assumed on
the same ground of insignificance, namely the principle that the elements
of curves, the increments of the abscissa and the ordinate, are related to
each other as subtangent and ordinate; that for the purpose of obtaining
95
96
97

98

John Landen (1719–1790), English mathematician. Cf. Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques,
p. 4.
Cf. below, 21.287–288.
Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665), French lawyer and mathematician. Isaac Barrow (1630–1677), English
classical scholar, theologian, and mathematician. He was the teacher of Isaac Newton. According
to the critical editors, Hegel derives his information from Carnot’s Réflexions sur la métaphysique du
calcul infinitésimal (1797).
Cf. below, 21.273–299.

21.260

224

21.261

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

similar triangles, the arc that forms the third side of a triangle to the two
increments of the triangle (once rightly called characteristic) is regarded as
a straight line, as part of the tangent and therefore as the one increment
which reaches the tangent. On the one hand, such assumptions raise those
determinations above the nature of finite magnitude; on the other hand,
a method which is only valid for finite magnitudes, and which allows
no room for ignoring anything on the ground of insignificance, is being
applied to moments now called infinitesimal. With such a procedure, the
difficulty with which the method is burdened remains in all its starkness.
We must cite here a remarkable procedure of Newton (Princ. Math.
Phil. Natu. Lib. II, Lemma II, Propos. VII)99 – the invention of an ingenious device for circumventing the arithmetical incorrect omission of the
products of infinite differences or of their higher orders in finding the
differentials. This is how he finds the differential of the product, from
which the differentials of the quotients, the powers, and so on, can easily
be derived. The product of x and y, when each is taken as decreased by half
of its infinitesimal difference, becomes:
xy −

yd x
d xd y
xd y
−
+
2
2
4

But if x and y are made to increase by an equal amount, it becomes:
xy +

yd x
d xd y
xd y
+
+
2
2
4

Now, subtract the first product from the second, and the remainder is
y d x + xd y , a remainder that is the surplus of the increase by a whole dx
and dy, for this increase is the difference between the two products; it is,
therefore, the differential of xy. – Clearly, in this operation the term which
is the cause of the main difficulty, the product of the two infinitesimal differences, dxdy, cancels itself out. However, despite the name of Newton, it
must be said that such an operation, although very elementary, is incorrect.
It is not true that:

 



dy
dx
dy
dx
y+
− x−
y−
x+
2
2
2
2
= (x + d x) (y + d y ) − x y
99

See Newton, Principia mathematica, Book 2, Section 2, lemma 2.

Quantum

225

Only the need to give a foundation to the fluxional calculus, given its
importance, could have brought Newton to deceive himself about such a
proof.
Other forms which Newton employed in the derivation of differentials are bound up with concrete meanings, all referring to movement,
of the elements and their powers. – In connection with the use of the
serial form which is of course the signature of his method, it is all too
tempting to say that it is always in someone’s power to assume as exact
a magnitude as one needs by the addition of further terms, and that the
omitted terms are relatively insignificant, the result being quite in general
only an approximation; it is all too tempting in order not to believe that
here also Newton would have been satisfied with the same justification
for omitting the higher powers which, by his method of solving equations
of higher degree by approximation, arise in the given equations from the
substitution of any established but still inexact value – namely, on the
crude ground that they are small. See Lagrange, Equations Numériques,
p. 125.100
The error into which Newton fell in solving a problem by the omission
of essential higher powers, an error which gave his opponents the occasion
for a triumph of their method over his, and of which Lagrange has traced
the true origin in his recent investigations (Théorie des fonct. Analyt., 3rd
P., Ch. IV),101 is indicative of the formalism and the uncertainty which
still prevailed in the use of that instrument. Lagrange shows that Newton
fell into his error because he ignored the term of the series containing
the power on which the specific task depended. Newton had kept to the
formal, superficial principle of omitting terms because of their relative
smallness.– For example, it is well known that in mechanics a determinate
meaning is assigned to the terms of the series in which the function of a
movement is developed, so that the first term or the first function refers
to the moment of velocity, the second to the accelerating force, and the
third to the resistance of forces. Here, then, the terms of the series are not
to be seen as parts of a sum, but as qualitative moments of a conceptual
whole. In this way, the omission of the remaining terms acquires a completely different meaning than their omission on the ground of their relative

100
101

See Joseph Louis Lagrange, Traité de la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés, avec
des notes sur plusieurs points de la théorie des équations algébriques, 3rd edn (Paris, 1826), note 5, §1.
Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, Part 3, Chapter 4.

21.262

226
21.263

21.264

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

smallness.k The error in Newton’s solution was in ignoring, not the terms
of the series only as parts of a sum, but the term containing the qualitative
determination on which all depends.
In this example, the procedure is made to depend on the qualitative
meaning. In this connection the general assertion can at once be made that
the whole difficulty of the principle would be set aside if, instead of the
formalism of defining the differential simply by the problem that gives
its name to it (the problem, that is, of the difference in general between
a function and its variation after its variable magnitudes have received an
increment), the qualitative meaning of this principle were stated and the
operation were made to depend on it. In this sense the differential of xn
is demonstratively wholly exhausted by the first term of the series which
results from the expansion of (x + d x)n . So, that the rest of the terms are
ignored is not on account of their relative smallness; there is no supposition
here of an inexactitude, of a fault or error which would be compensated for
k

Both views are found simply side by side in the application by Lagrange of the theory of the
function to mechanics in the chapter on rectilinear motion (Théorie des fonct. 3rd P. Ch. I, art 4).102
The traversed space, considered as the function of the elapsed time, gives the equation x = f t;
this equation, expanded as f (t + ϕ), gives:
ϕ 2 
f t + and so on.
2
Therefore, the space traversed in the elapsed time is represented in the formula:
f t + ϕ f t +

= ϕ f t +

ϕ 2 
ϕ 3 
f t+
f t + and so on
2
2·3

The motion by means of which the space is traversed is (it is said) therefore – i.e. because the
analytical development yields several, in fact infinitely many terms – composed of various partial
motions, of which the spaces corresponding to the time will be:
ϕ f  t,

102

ϕ 2  ϕ 3 
f t,
f t, and so on.
2
2·3

The first partial motion is, in known motion, the formally uniform motion with a velocity
determined by f  t; the second, the uniformly accelerated velocity derived from an accelerated
force which is proportional to f  t. “Now since the remaining terms do not refer to any known
simple motion, it is not necessary to take them particularly into consideration, and we shall show
that it is possible to abstract from them in determining the motion at the beginning of the point in
time.” This is now shown, but, of course, only by equating the series whose terms were all part of
the determination of the magnitude of the space traversed in that time with the equation, given in
art. 3, of the motion of a falling body, x = a t + bt 2 , in which only these two terms are present.
But this equation has itself received the form that it has by presupposing the explanation given
for the resulting terms by means of analysis; this presupposition is that the uniformly accelerating
motion is composed of a formally uniform motion continued with the velocity attained in the
preceding period of time, and of an increment (the a in s = a t 2 , i.e. the empirical coefficient)
which is ascribed to the force of gravity – a distinction which has absolutely no concrete existence
or foundation in the nature of the matter itself, but is only the expression, in false physical form,
of the results of the assumed analytical treatment.
See Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, Part 3, Chapter 1, §4.

Quantum

227

and corrected by another error – a view on which Carnot especially relies
for justifying the ordinary method of the infinitesimal calculus.103 Since at
issue here is a relation and not a sum, the differential is completely given by
the first term; and where there is the need of further terms, of differentials of
higher orders, their determination does not involve the continuation of a
series as sum, but the repetition rather of one and the same relation, the only
one wanted and the one which is, therefore, already completely determined
in the first term. The need for the form of a series, its summation and all
that goes with it, must then be totally separated from this interest of the
relation.
The explanations which Carnot offers concerning the method of
infinitesimal magnitudes contain the most limpid and most clearly
expounded exposition of the upshot of the preceding reflections. However, when the transition is made to the actual operations of calculus, the
usual representations about the infinite smallness of the omitted terms with
respect to the others more or less creep in again.104 Carnot justifies the
method rather because, as a matter of fact, its results are the correct ones,
and because of the benefits which the introduction of incomplete equations
(as he calls them, that is, those in which this arithmetically incorrect omission has taken place) brings to the simplification and the abbreviating of
calculus.
Lagrange has famously taken up Newton’s original method again, that
of the series, in an effort to rise above the difficulties inherent in the representation of the infinitely small, as well as in the method of the first
and final ratios and limits. Of his functional calculus, of which the other
advantages in the matter of precision, abstraction and generality, are sufficiently known, this much alone need be said for present purposes, namely
that he rests his case on the fundamental principle that the difference,
without becoming zero, can be taken to be so small that each term of the series
exceeds in magnitude the sum of the following terms.105 – In this method, too,
the start is made from the categories of increment and from the difference
of the function, the variable magnitude of which receives the increment
(whence the troublesome series) from the original function. Also in the
sequel, the terms of the series to be omitted come in for consideration
only as constituting a sum, and the reason for omitting them is assumed in
the relativity of their quantum. Here too, therefore, on the one hand the
omission is not brought back to the standpoint which prevails in some of
103
104
105

See Lazare Carnot, Réflexions sur la métaphysique du calcul infinitésimal (Paris, 1797), §§9ff.
See Carnot, Réflexions, §§30f.
See Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, Part 1, Chapter 1, §6.

21.265

228

21.266

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the applications where (as was noted above)106 the terms of the series are
supposed to have a determinate qualitative meaning, and terms are disregarded, not because they are insignificant in magnitude, but because they
are qualitatively insignificant; on the other hand, the omission itself ceases
to have any place in the essential standpoint which, as regards the so-called
differential coefficient, acquires a specifically prominent position only with
Lagrange, in the so-called application of the calculus – a point which will
be discussed in detail in the following Remark.
The general qualitative character of the form of magnitude here under
discussion, as demonstrated in what in that form is called the infinitesimal,
is most immediately found in the category of limit of the ratio referred
to above107 and, when carried out in calculus, has received the stamp
of a method of its own. Of Lagrange’s two criticisms of this method –
that it lacks ease of application, and that the expression limit carries no
determinate idea – we shall take up only the second here, in order to
examine more closely what is being said about its analytical meaning.
Now the conception of limit does indeed imply the stated true category of
the qualitatively determined relation of variable magnitudes, for the forms
of it which occur, dx and dy, are supposed to be taken simply as only
moments of dd xy , and dd xy itself ought to be regarded as one single indivisible
symbol. That the mechanism of calculus thereby loses, particularly in
its application, the advantage derived from the sides of the differential
coefficient being separated from each other, this we shall disregard here.
Now the limit in question should be the limit of a given function; it assigns
a certain value with reference to this function as determined by the manner
of derivation. However, the mere category of limit takes us no further than
we have gone in this Remark, namely to show that the infinitely small
which in the differential calculus occurs as dx and dy does not have the
merely negative, empty meaning of a non-finite, non-given magnitude (as
when one speaks of an “infinite multitude,” of an “ad infinitum,” and the
like), but has the specific meaning of a qualitative determinateness of the
quantitative,108 of a relational moment109 as such. But the category still has
no relation to that which is a given function, is not itself involved in the
treatment of it or in any use that might be made in it of that determination;
so, also the conception of limit, held to its demonstrated meaning, leads
nowhere. Nevertheless, the very expression “limit” entails that it is the
limit of something, that is, that it expresses a certain value which lies in
106
108

107 Cf. above, 21.253.
Cf. above, 21.262.
qualitative Bestimmheit des Quantitativen.

109

Verhältnißmoment.

Quantum

229

the function of a variable magnitude; and we must see how it behaves in
this concrete role. – It is supposed to be the limit of the ratio between the
two increments by which the two variable magnitudes connected in an
equation (one of which is regarded as a function of the other) are assumed
to increase; the increment is taken here as undetermined, in general, and
to this extent no use is made of the infinitely small. But the procedure
by which this limit is found carries with it the same inconsistencies as in
the other methods. The procedure is as follows: if y = f x, then, when
y becomes y + k, f x is supposed to change into f x + ph + q h 2 + r h 3
and so on; thus k = ph + q h 2 and so on, and hk = p + q h + r h 2 and so
on. Now if k and h vanish, so vanishes also the other side of the equation,
with the exception of p which would now be the limit of the ratio of the
two increments. One can see that although h, as quantum, is posited = 0,
k
is not for that reason taken at the same time to be 00 but is rather still
h
supposed to remain a ratio. Now the advantage that the conception of limit
supposedly affords is that it circumvents the inconsistency entailed here; for
p is, at the same time, supposed to be not the actual ratio (which would be 00 )
but only that determinate value which the ratio can infinitely approximate,
that is, can get so near to it that the difference would be smaller than any that
might be given. The exact meaning of approximation, as regards that which
is supposed to be in reciprocal approximation, will be considered later.110 –
However, that a quantitative difference which, by definition, not only
can be, but ought to be, smaller than any given, is no longer quantitative;
this is self-evident, as evident as anything can be in mathematics; but
then we have gone past dd xy = 00 . If, to the contrary, dd xy = p, that is,
it is assumed as a determinate quantitative ratio as it is in fact, then,
conversely, the presupposition that h = 0 is compromised, and this is a
presupposition on the basis of which alone hk = p is found. And should
it be granted that hk = 0 (in which case, h being = 0, k is also in fact =
0 by entailment, for the increment from k to y occurs only on condition
that there is an increment h), the question then to be asked is what p, which
is definitely a determinate quantitative value, might possibly be. To this
there is at once an obvious answer, simple and to the point, namely that p
is a coefficient and that it is the product of some derivation or other – the
first function, derived in some determinate way, of an original function. If
one is satisfied with this, as Lagrange in effect was, then the general part
of the science of differential calculus, and immediately this form of it that
110

Cf. below, 21.268–269.

21.267

230

21.268

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

goes under the name of theory of limits, would be rid of the increments, rid
also of their infinite or arbitrary smallness, and of the difficulty of again
doing away with the rest of the terms of a series other than the first, or
rather other than just the coefficient of the first, terms which inevitably
present themselves upon the introduction of those increments; purged, in
addition, also of all that goes with them, of the formal categories, above
all of that of the infinite, of the infinite approximation, and likewise of the
here still empty categories of continuous magnitudel which, like striving,
becoming, occasion of a variation, are otherwise deemed necessary. But it
would then be required to show what meaning and value p would still have,
besides the determination (meager but quite adequate for the theory) that
it is nothing but a function derived from the expansion of a binomial,
that is, to show what place and which use it has in the context of other
mathematical requisites. This will be the subject of Remark 2. – But first,
we shall follow up here with an analysis of the confusion brought about
by the just documented widespread use of the figurative representation of
approximation in comprehending the true, qualitative determinateness of
the relation which was our original concern.
It has been shown that the so-called infinitesimals express the vanishing
of the sides of the ratio as quanta, and that the remainder is their quantitative relation purely determined in qualitative fashion;112 the qualitative
relation does not get lost, far from it; it is rather precisely that which results
from the conversion of finite into infinite magnitudes. In this, as we have
seen, is where the whole nature of the matter consists. – Thus, what vanishes in the final ratio is, e.g., the quanta of the abscissa and the ordinate;
but the sides of the ratio essentially remain: the one side, the element of
l

111
112

The category of continuous or fluent magnitude comes in with the consideration of the external and
empirical variation of the magnitudes which, in an equation, are referred to each other as each the
function of the other. But in science, where the object of differential calculus is a certain relation
(usually expressed by the differential coefficient), and its determinateness may just as well be called
a law, the mere continuity of magnitude is something alien to this specific determinateness, and
in any case an abstract and here empty category, for it says absolutely nothing concerning the
law of continuity. – The extreme of formalism into which one can be misled in these matters
can be seen from the penetrating general exposition by my respected colleague, Prof. Dirksen, of
the fundamental determinations used in the deduction of differential calculus. This exposition
is appended to his critique of a number of works concerning this science and can be found in
Jahrb. f. wissensch. Kritik, 1827, Nr. 153ff. The following definition is cited on p. 1251: “A continuous
magnitude, a continuum, is any magnitude thought of as in the state of becoming, so that this
becoming occurs not by leaps but by an uninterrupted progression.”111 But this is surely a tautology,
the same as the definitum.
Enno Heeren Dirksen (1788–1851), professor of mathematics at Berlin, Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik, 153–160 (1827), column 1251.
Cf. above, 21.253.

Quantum

231

the ordinate; the other, the element of the abscissa. When we represent one
ordinate as infinitely approximating another, the previously differentiated
ordinate passes over into another ordinate, and the previously differentiated abscissa passes over into another abscissa; but essentially the ordinate
does not pass over into the abscissa or the abscissa into the ordinate. The
element of the ordinate – to continue with this instance of variable magnitudes – is not in the difference between one ordinate and another ordinate,
but is rather the difference itself, or the qualitative determination of the
magnitude of the ordinate as against the element of the abscissa; the principle
of one variable magnitude as against that of another is in the relation of the
one to the other. The difference, in so far as it no longer is the difference of
finite magnitudes, has ceased to be a manifold in itself; it has collapsed into
simple intensity, into the determinateness of the one qualitative moment
of a ratio against the other.
This is how the matter stands, but its nature is obscured because what
we have just called the “element” of, for instance, the ordinate, is grasped as
difference or increment in such a way that it is only the difference between
the quantum of one ordinate and the quantum of another ordinate. As a
result, limit does not have here the meaning of ratio; it only stands for the
final value to which another magnitude of equal kind can come as close
as one will and still be differentiated from it, the final ratio being a ratio
of equality. The infinite difference is thus the fluctuation of a difference
between one quantum and another quantum, and in this representation
the qualitative nature which makes dx essentially not a ratio determination
relative to x, but to dx, is overlooked. dx2 is made to vanish relative to
dx, but even more does dx vanish relative to x, and this means in truth
that it has a relation only to dy. – In expositions of this kind, it is the
geometricians especially whose constant concern is to conceptualize the
approximation of a magnitude to its limit, and who insist on stressing
this aspect of the difference of quantum from quantum, that it is not
a difference and yet it is. But all the same, approximation is by itself a
category that says nothing and conceptualizes nothing; the fact is that dx
has already left approximation behind; it is neither “close” nor “closer”;
and as for the meaning of “infinitely close,” it is the negation of “being
close” and “approximation.”
Now because the increments or the infinitesimals have thus been viewed
only from the standpoint of the quantum that vanishes in them, and only as
limits of this quantum, they have also been grasped as unrelated moments.
From this would follow that it is allowed in the final ratio to posit, say,
the abscissa and the ordinate, or also the sine, cosine, tangent, versed

21.269

232

21.270

21.271

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

sine, or what have you, as equal to each other: but this is an inadmissible
position. – The inadmissibility seems especially to hold when an arc is
treated like a tangent, for the arc, too, is surely incommensurable with the
straight line: its element is, from the start, of another quality than the
element of the straight line. Squaring the circle, taking a part of the arc,
however infinitely small, to be a part of the tangent and thus to treat it as
a straight line seems even more absurd and inadmissible than confusing
abscissa, ordinate, versed sine, cosine, etc. – However, there is an essential
difference between this way of treating the arc and the confusion that we
have decried. The procedure here is justified because in the triangle which
has as its sides the element of an arc and the element of its abscissa and
ordinate, the relation is the same as if that element of the arc were the
element of a straight line, of the tangent; the angles which constitute the
essential relation, that is, that which remains to these elements when their
respective finite magnitudes are abstracted from, are the same. – This can
also be expressed by saying that straight lines, when infinitely small, have
passed over into curved lines; that their relation in their infinity is a relation
of curves. Since the straight line is by definition the shortest distance between
two points, its difference from the curved line is based on the determination
of amount, on the smaller number of what is differentiable in this distance,
a determination, therefore, of a quantum. But this determination vanishes
in the line when it is taken as an intensive magnitude, as infinite moment,
as element, and so does also its difference from the curved line which rested
simply on a difference of quantum. – As infinite, therefore, the straight line
and the arc no longer retain any quantitative relation and consequently, by
virtue of the assumed definition, also no qualitative difference from each
other either; on the contrary, the one passes over into the other.
Similar to the equating of heterogeneous determinations, but at the same
time different from it, is the assumption that infinitely small parts of a same
whole are equal to each other. By itself this assumption is indeterminate
and completely indifferent, but when applied to an object which is internally heterogeneous, that is, constrained by an essentially non-uniform
quantitative determination, it produces the peculiar reversal contained in
that proposition of higher mechanics according to which infinitely small
parts of a curve are traversed in equal and infinitely small times in uniform motion, where this is said of a motion in which, in equal finite (that
is, concretely existing) parts of time, finite (that is, concretely existing)
unequal parts of the curve are traversed – that is, is said of a motion
which exists concretely as non-uniform and is assumed to be such. This
proposition is the expression in words of what an analytical term – such

Quantum

233

as is obtained by the already cited expansion of the formula of a motion
which is non-uniform but otherwise conforms to law113 – is supposed to
mean. Earlier mathematicians sought to express the results of the newly
invented infinitesimal calculus (which, after all, always had to do with concrete objects) in words and propositions, and to exhibit them in concrete
geometrical constructions, basically to use them as theorems in the ordinary method of proof. The terms of the mathematical formula into which
analysis transposed the magnitudes of the object, of motion for instance,
were invested there with an objective meaning, such as of velocity, force of
acceleration, etc., and in virtue of this meaning the terms were supposed to
yield correct propositions, physical laws, and also, in conformity with the
analytical connectedness, their objective links and relations. For instance,
the specific velocity that obtains in a uniformly accelerating motion is proportional to the times, but in addition there is always an increment that
accrues to the velocity from the force of gravity. In the modern analytical
form of mechanics, such propositions are advanced simply as the results of
calculus, without worrying whether they have by themselves, within them,
a real sense, that is, one that would correspond to concrete existence, and
without bothering with a proof for it. The difficulty of conceptualizing
the link between such determinations when taken in this real sense just
mentioned, as for instance the transition from absolutely uniform velocity
to uniformly accelerated velocity, is deemed to be completely circumvented
by the analytical treatment in which the link is a simple result of the authority henceforth reigning of the operations of calculus. It is now declared a
triumph of science that merely by means of calculus, it can discover laws
that transcend experience, that is, propositions regarding concrete existence
which have no existence. But in the earlier, still naı̈ve time of infinitesimal
calculus, the aim was to give to such determinations and propositions as
were represented in geometrical figures a real sense of their own, to make
them plausible and to apply them in this sense to the proof of the main
propositions concerned. (See Newton’s proof of his fundamental propositions of the theory of gravitation in Princ. mathem. naturalis, lib. I. Sec. II.
Prop. I, compared with Schubert’s Astronomy, 1st edn, Book III, §20, where
it is admitted that things are not exactly as Newton assumed them – that
is, at the very point which is the nerve of the proof.)114
113
114

Cf. above, 21.262–263, footnote.
Hegel’s reference to Newton is from Principia mathematica, Book 1, Section 2, Proposition 1. His
second reference is to Friedrich Theodor Schubert (1758–1825), Theoretische Astronomie, Vol. 3,
Physische Astronomie (St. Petersburg, 1798).

21.272

234

21.273

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

It cannot be denied that, especially with the aid of the fog of the infinitely
small, much has been accepted as proof in this field for no other reason
except that the result had already always been known to be true and the
proof, deliberately devised to reach that result, created at least the illusion
of a scaffolding of proof – an illusion which was still preferred to mere belief
or to knowledge from experience. I personally make no scruples about
regarding this affectation as nothing more than sleight of hand and logical
charlatanism, and I extend this judgment to Newton’s proofs as well, those
especially which fall within the purview of the present discussion and for
which Newton has been extolled to the skies above Kepler, because he
has established mathematically what the latter had discovered by experience
alone.
The empty scaffolding of such proofs was erected in order to prove
physical laws. But mathematics is in principle incapable of demonstrating
the quantitative determinations of physics, for these determinations are
laws based on the qualitative nature of its elements; it cannot, for the
simple reason that this science is not philosophy, does not proceed from
the concept, and therefore anything qualitative which cannot be derived
lemmatically from experience falls outside its sphere. It is for mathematics
a point of honor that all its propositions ought to be rigorously proved,
and this made it forget its limits; it seemed an offense to this honor that
experience would be acknowledged as alone the source and sole proof of
propositions of experience. Consciousness has gained in sophistication since
then, but as long as it is not clear about the distinction between what can
be proved mathematically and what can only be taken from elsewhere,
between the mere terms of an analytical expansion and things that exist
physically, scientific culture will lack rigor and purity. – Undoubtedly, this
scaffolding of Newtonian proof will be subject to the same justice as was
Newton’s other baseless artifact, his construct of optical experiments and the
conclusions bound to them. Applied mathematics is still full of a like brew
of experience and reflection; but just as part after part of Newtonian optics
has already for some time begun to be ignored by science as a matter of fact
(though the rest is inconsistently allowed to stand despite the consequent
contradiction), so it is also a fact that a part of those pseudo-proofs has
already naturally fallen into oblivion or have been replaced by others.
Remark 2
The purpose of differential calculus deduced from its application
In the previous Remark, we considered the conceptual nature of the
infinitesimal which is used in differential calculus as well as the reason

Quantum

235

for introducing it in that calculus; both are abstract determinations and
therefore also intrinsically easy. Its so-called application, however, presents
more serious difficulties, but also the more interesting side. The elements
of this side will be the subject of the present Remark. – The whole method
of the differential calculus is covered by the proposition, d x n = nx n−1 d x,
fx
= P , that is, is equal to the coefficient of the first term of the
or f (x+1)−
i
binomial x + d , x + i, raised to the power of dx or i. There is no need to
learn anything further; the derivation of the subsequent forms, of the differential of a product, of an exponential magnitude, and so forth, follows
mechanically; in a short time, half an hour or so, one can be in possession
of the whole theory, and with the finding of the differential, the converse
or the finding from the differential of the original function is equally given.
What takes longer is the endeavor to see, to grasp conceptually, how it is
that, after easily managing analytically, that is, purely arithmetically, one
condition of the task, namely the finding of the said coefficient by the expansion of the function of the variable after the latter has received the form of
a binomial by the addition of an increment – how, after this part of the
task, the other condition, namely the omission of the remaining terms of the
series except the first, can also be correct. If the coefficient alone were all
that is necessary, then, once this is determined, all that concerns the theory
would be taken care of in less than half an hour, as we said; the omission
of the further terms of the series would present no difficulty – far from
it, for such terms, as terms of the series (their determination as second,
third, etc., function is already absolved with the determination of the first),
would not come into question at all since they are of no relevance.
We may begin by remarking that the method of differential calculus
has all the markings of not having been invented and developed for its
own sake. Not only is it not grounded for itself as any other form of
analysis; what is more is that the arbitrary direct omission of terms that
have resulted from the development of a function, despite the fact that this
whole development is taken to belong fully to the matter at hand – which is
considered to be the difference between the developed function of a variable,
after this has been given the form of a binomial, and the original function –
that this omission totally contradicts every mathematical principle. The
need to proceed in this way, as well as the lack of internal justification for
the procedure, immediately suggest that the origin and foundation must
lie elsewhere. It happens also in other sciences that what is presumed at
the start to be the primitive element from which the propositions of a
science will have to be derived, is in fact not self-evident but proves rather
to have its cause and justification in what follows. The course of events in

21.274

236

21.275

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the history of the differential calculus makes it clear that it originated in the
various so-called tangential methods, its subject matter in ingenious devices
as it were; it was only later, when its method was extended to other subject
matters, that the nature of this method came in for conscious reflection
and formalization, and the attempt was made to raise its abstract formulas
to principles.
We have shown that the conceptual determinateness of the so-called
infinitesimal is the qualitative determinateness of the quantity of such
quanta as are first posited in relation to each other. Attached to this there
came the empirical undertaking of discovering this conceptual determinateness in such descriptions or definitions of the infinitesimal as are found of
it when taken as an infinitely small difference or the like. – This was done
in the interest of abstract conceptual determinateness as such. The next
question would be about the nature of the transition to mathematical formulation and application. To this end we must first examine the theoretical
side further, the conceptual determinateness, and this is a task which will
prove to be not altogether unfruitful even by itself; we must then consider
the relation of this theoretical side to its application, and show in the case
of both, inasmuch as it is relevant here, that the general conclusions are
adequate to both the purpose of differential calculus and the method by
which it realizes it.
First, we must remember that the specifically mathematical form of the
concept now at issue has already been given in passing. The qualitative
determinateness of quantity is first exhibited in the quantitative relation as
such; however, already in the demonstration of the various so-called kinds
of reckoning (see the relevant Remark),115 it was anticipated that it would
be in the relation of powers (still to be considered in its proper place)116
that number, by the equating of the moments of its concept (unity and
amount), is posited as having turned back into itself, and that, as such,
it would receive the element of infinity, of being-for-itself, that is, of
being determined through itself. Thus, as already indicated, the explicitly
qualitative determinateness of magnitude is essentially connected with
the determinations of powers, and since differential calculus specifically
operates with qualitative forms of magnitudes, the mathematical subject
matter that specifically belongs to it must be the treatment of forms of
powers; it is also the whole range of problems, together with their solutions,
for the sake of which differential calculus is employed, which shows that
its interest lies solely in the treatment of determinations of powers as such.
115

Cf. above, 21.196.

116

Cf. below, 21.318ff.

Quantum

237

This is an important opening position. It at once puts in the forefront
something determinate instead of the merely formal categories of variable,
continuous or infinite magnitudes, or even only of functions in general. Yet
it is still too general, for there are other operations that deal equally with
powers. The raising to a power, the extraction of a root; also the treatment
of exponential magnitudes and logarithms, of series, of equations of higher
powers: the interest and the effort of all these operations lie solely in
relations based on powers. Undoubtedly, together they constitute a system
of the treatment of powers; but which of the various relations in which
the determinations of powers may be put is the proper subject matter and
interest of differential calculus, this is to be ascertained from the differential
calculus itself, that is, from its so-called applications. These constitute in
fact the core of the matter, the actual procedure in the mathematical
solution of a certain group of problems; this procedure came earlier than
any theory or general part and was called an application later, only in
connection with the then created theory, the intention of which was in
part to draw up its general method for the procedure, but in part also
to find principles for it, that is, a justification. We have shown in the
preceding Remark117 the futility of searching for principles that would
effectively resolve the contradiction patent in the current conceptions of
the method of calculus. We have shown this futility instead of excusing
it or of hiding it on the pretext that what is necessary for mathematical
practice is however out of consideration here, or, what amounts to the same
thing, with the possibility of an infinite or arbitrary approximation to the
infinite or the like nonsense. These principles and all the fuss made on
their behalf, if the general method of this real part of mathematics called
differential calculus were abstracted differently than it has been done so
far, would turn out to be indeed just as superfluous as they are inherently
defective and irrevocably contradictory.
If we investigate what is distinctive about differential calculus by the
simple inventory of what there is in this part of mathematics, we find the
following as the subject matter:
(a) Equations in which any number of magnitudes (here we need simply
confine ourselves to two) are combined into one determinate whole in such
a way that, first, the equations themselves derive their determinateness
from empirical magnitudes which are their fixed limits, and also from the
kind of link which they have with these limits and with each other as is
generally the case in an equation; but since there is only one equation for
117

Cf. above, 21.260–268.

21.276

238

21.277

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

both magnitudes (and relatively more equations for more magnitudes, but
always less than the number of the magnitudes), these equations belong
to the class of indeterminate equations; and, second, one feature of the
determinateness of these magnitudes (or of one of them at least) is that
these magnitudes occur in the equation with a power higher than the first
power.
A few observations in this regard are in order here. The first is that
the magnitudes in the first of the above two headings exclusively have
the character of such variables as occur in the problems of indeterminate
analysis. Their value is indeterminate, but if a completely determinate
value accrues to one of them from elsewhere, that is, a numerical value,
then the other also becomes determinate, so that one is a function of the
other. For the specific magnitudes here at issue, therefore, the categories
of variables magnitudes, of functions and the like, are merely formal, as
we said earlier,118 because they are still too general to contain the kind of
specificity to which the whole interest of differential calculus is directed,
nor can this specificity be developed out of it analytically; they are as such
simple, insignificant, easy determinations that are rendered difficult by
importing into them that which is not in them, in order then to derive
it from them, namely the specific determination of differential calculus. –
Then, as regards the so-called constant, it should be noted that it is at
first an indifferent empirical magnitude determining the variables merely
with respect to their empirical quantum, as a limit of their minimum
and their maximum; but the nature of the link connecting the constants
to the variables is itself one factor defining the particular function which
these magnitudes are. But, conversely, the constants themselves are also
functions; for instance, inasmuch as a straight line carries the meaning of
being
the parameter of a parable, this, its meaning, is that it is the function
y2
;
as
in the expansion of a binomial generally, the constant which is the
x
coefficient of the first term of the expansion is the sum of the roots, the
coefficient of the second term is the sum of their products in twos, and so
on; hence these constants are here in general functions of the roots. Where,
in integral calculus, the constant is determined from the given formula,
it is to that extent treated as a function of that formula. We shall further
consider these coefficients later on, but in another determination than that
of functions, their concrete meaning being the real point of interest.119
Now the essential difference between variables as considered in differential calculus and as they are in indeterminate problems lies in what has
118

Cf. above, 21.275.

119

Cf. below, 21.281–282.

Quantum

239

just been said, namely that at least one of those magnitudes, or also all of
them, is in a power higher than that of one, though it is again a matter of
indifference whether they are all of the same higher power or of unequal
powers; the indeterminateness specific to them consists solely in this, that
in such a relation of power they are functions of one another. The alteration
of the variables is thus qualitatively determined, and consequently continuous, and this continuity (itself again only the formal general category
of an identity) of a determinateness preserved unaltered in the alteration
has its determinate meaning here, solely in the power-relation which does
not have a quantum for its exponent and constitutes the non-quantitative,
permanent determinateness of the ratio of the variables. It is therefore also
to be noted, this time against another form of formalism, that the first
power is a power only in relation to higher powers; by itself, x is just an
indeterminate quantum. Thus there is no point in differentiating for their
own sake the equations y = a x + b (the equation of the straight line), or
s = ct (that of absolutely uniform velocity); if from y + a x, or also from
y = a x + b, we obtain a = dd xy , or dd st = c from s = ct, then a = xy is
equally the determination of the tangent, or st = c the determination of
simple velocity. This last is expounded as dd xy in the context of what is said
to be the expansion of uniformly accelerated motion; but that there would
occur in the system a moment of simple, absolutely uniform velocity, that
is, one not determined by the higher power of one of the moments of the
motion, this, as remarked earlier,120 is itself an empty assumption based
solely on the routine of the method. Since the method has its inception
in the representation of the increment which the variable is supposed to
sustain, then of course a variable which is only a function of the first power
can also sustain an increment; now, if in order to find the differential we
have to subtract the difference of the second equation thus produced from
the one given, the emptiness of the operation becomes obvious, for the
so-called increment is the same for all the alterable terms themselves.
(b) We have identified the nature of the equation which we want to
treat; now we must declare the interest that motivates our treatment of it.
This consideration can only yield known results, especially in the form
in which they are found in Lagrange’s version; but in my exposition I
have restricted myself to basic elements in order to eliminate from it any
heterogeneous material otherwise mixed with it. – The patent basis for
the treatment of an equation of this kind is that the power is taken to be
a relation inside itself, a system of relational determinations. We said earlier
120

Cf. above, 21.271.

21.278

240
21.279

21.280

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

that power is number which has attained a state at which it determines its
own alteration; its moments, unity and amount, are identical – perfectly
identical, as previously demonstrated, first of all in the square, and (a
point of no consequence here) formally identical in the higher powers.121
Now, since as number the power is an aggregate (even if one prefers the
expression “magnitude” because of its greater generality, in itself power
still is always a number) and is also presented as a sum, it can be directly
broken up internally into an arbitrary grouping of numbers that have no
other determination with respect to each other and to the sum except
that together they equal the latter. But the power can also be divided
into a sum of distinct terms determined by the form of the power. If the
power is taken as sum, then its radical number, the root, is also taken as
a sum – arbitrarily, after repeated division, the manifoldness as something
indifferent, empirically quantitative. The sum which is supposed to be the
root, reduced to its simple determinateness, that is, its true generality, is
the binomial; any other increase of the terms is a mere repetition of the
same determination and, therefore, something empty.m What matters here
is only the qualitative determinateness of the terms which result from the
raising to a power of the root taken as sum, a determinateness which lies
solely in the alteration which the potentiation is. Consequently, these terms
are wholly functions of the potentiation and of the power. Now this exposition
of number as the sum of an aggregate of terms which are the functions of the
potentiation, added to the interest in finding the form of such functions
and also this sum from the aggregate of the terms, in so far as this find
must depend on that form alone – this, as we know, constitutes the special
theory of series. But it is essential here that we distinguish another source
of interest, namely the relation of the underlying magnitude (of which the
determinateness, since it is a complex, that is, an equation here, includes in
itself a power) to the functions of the raising of it to a power. This relation,
taken in total abstraction from the just mentioned interest of the sum, will
prove to be the only intended point of view of differential calculus which
is in fact realized by the science.
But we must first add one more determination to what has been said,
or, better, remove one which is there. For we have said that the power
m

121

It pertains to the formalism of the universality to which analysis necessarily lays claim that instead
of taking (a + b)n for the expansion of powers, (a + b + c + d . . . )n is the expression used, as is
also done in many other places. Such a form is to be regarded as, so to speak, a coquettish show
of universality, for the matter itself is exhausted in the binomial. It is through the expansion of the
binomial that the law is found, and the law is the true universality, not the external, merely empty
repetition of it, which is all that a + b + c + d . . . produces.
Cf. above, 21.201–202.

Quantum

241

enters into the variable determination of a magnitude which is regarded as
a sum inside itself, in fact a system of terms in so far as these are functions
of the raising to a power, and that the root is also thereby regarded as
a sum, in the simply determined form of a binomial: x n = (y + z)n =
(y + ny n−1 z + · · ·). This exposition was all right for the expansion of the
power, that is, for obtaining the functions of its being raised to a power
from the sum as such; but the issue here is not a sum as such or the series
arising from it, but only the connection to be taken from the sum. All that
remains after the plus of a sum as sum is abstracted from is, on the one
hand, the connection as such of the magnitudes and, on the other hand, all
that is needed for finding the functions of the expansion of the power. But
that connection is already determined by the fact that the object here is
an equation, y m = a x n , already a complex of several (variable) magnitudes
which contains a power determination of them. In this complex, each
of these magnitudes is posited simply as connected with the others, as a
function of the other magnitudes – each carrying, as one could say, a
plus in it. This plus determination is given to them by their character as
functions of one another, but precisely for this reason the determination is
totally indeterminate, is not an increase or an increment or the like. Yet even
this abstract point of view could be left out of account; we can quite simply
stop at the point where, since in the equation the variables are given as
reciprocal functions in a determinateness which thus contains a relation of
power, also the functions of the raising to a power of each are now compared
with each other, and these second functions are determined by nothing else
except the potentiating itself. At the start, to convert an equation of the
powers of its variables into a relation of the functions of its expansion can be
said to be a matter of choice or a possibility; only some further purpose, need
or use, has to step in to indicate the usefulness of such a transformation; the
transposition was occasioned by its usefulness alone. When we began just
now with the exposition, in a magnitude which is taken as an internally
differentiated sum, of these potentiating-determinations, this served only
in part to indicate of which kind such functions were; in part, it was the
way of finding them.
What we have here is an adaptation for the purpose of differential
calculus of the usual analytical form of development: an increment, dx, i,
is assigned to the variable, and then the power of the binomial is expanded
by the terms of the series belonging to it. But the so-called increment is
supposed to be not a quantum, only a form, the whole value of which
is that it assists in the development; it is admitted (notably by Euler and
Lagrange, and in the representation of limit earlier cited) that what is

21.281

242

21.282

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

wanted are only the resulting power determinations of the variables, the
so-called coefficients, namely of the increment and its powers, according to
which the series is ordered and to which the different coefficients belong. It
may be noted in this connection that since an increment with no quantum
is being assumed here only for the sake of the development, it would
have been more suitable to take 1 (the unit) for that purpose, for that
increment constantly recurs as a factor in the development, and the factor
of one fulfills precisely the purpose of having an increment without any
quantitative determinateness or alteration being posited thereby; whereas
dx, burdened as it is by the false representation of a quantitative difference,
and other signs such as i, burdened for their part by a show of generality
that is here pointless, always have the semblance and the pretension of a
quantum and its powers; and the pretension, despite its being just that,
brings with it the trouble of removing and omitting what is pretended. In
order to retain the form of a series expanded on the basis of powers, the
designations of the exponents as indices could just as well be attached to
the one. But in any case, abstraction must be made from the series and
the determination which the coefficients have according to the place they
occupy in it; the relation between all of them is the same; the second
function is derived from the first in exactly the same manner as this is
derived from the original, and for any function counted second, the one
derived first is again the original. But the essential point of interest is not in
the series, but solely in the determination of the power that results from the
expansion, as related to the magnitude which for the power determination
is immediate. Therefore, instead of defining it as the coefficient of the first
term of the development (for a term is designated as the first with reference
to the others that follow it in the series, but any such power as that of an
increment, like the series itself, has no place here), the plain expression,
“derived function of a power,” or the just said, “function of the raising of
a magnitude to a power,” would be preferable; these are expressions which
presuppose that the derivation is a development falling within a power.
Now if the strictly mathematical beginning in this part of the analytic is
nothing more than the finding of the function determined by the expansion
of the power, the next question is what to do with this relation thus
obtained; where does it have an application and use; in effect, for what
purpose are such functions sought. It is because of relations in concrete
objects which allow reduction to those abstract, analytical functions, that
differential calculus has become the source of great interest.
But as regards the question of the application, this much follows directly
from the nature of the fact itself, because of the form which the moments of

Quantum

243

a power assume as demonstrated, without having to infer it from individual
cases of the application itself. Namely, the development of the magnitudes
of the powers that yields the functions of their potentiation entails at first,
abstraction made of a more precise determination, simply the reduction
of their magnitude to the next lower power. This applicability of this
operation is to be found, therefore, in connection with objects in which
there is likewise present such a difference of power determinations. Thus, if
we reflect on the properties of space, we find that space has three dimensions
which, in order to distinguish them from the abstract differences of height,
length, and breadth, we can call concrete. They are, namely, line, plane,
and total space. And if we take them in their simplest form and with
reference to self-determination and consequently to analytical dimensions,
we then have straight line, plane surface, and surface as square and as
cube. The straight line has an empirical quantum, but with the plane there
enters the qualitative element, the power determination. More detailed
considerations, e.g. that the case extends to plane curves, we can leave
undiscussed, for we are concerned primarily with the distinction in general.
It is here that the need also arises to pass from a higher power to a lower, and
vice-versa, when, for instance, linear determinations are to be derived from
given equations of the plane, etc., or vice-versa. – The motion, further, in
connection with which we have to consider the quantitative relation of
the space traversed to the time elapsed in traversing it, assumes the various
determinations of a simply uniform motion, a uniformly accelerated one,
and one which is alternatively uniformly accelerated and uniformly retarded
(motion that turns back upon itself ); inasmuch as these various species of
motion are expressed in accordance with the quantitative relation of their
moments, of space and time, we have for them equations of various power
determinations, and inasmuch as the need arises to determine one species
of motion, or also of spatial magnitudes to which a species of motion
is associated, from another species of motion, such an operation likewise
entails the transition from one power-function to another, whether higher
or lower. – These two examples will suffice for the purpose for which they
were adduced.
The semblance of arbitrariness to which differential calculus gives rise
in the course of its applications would already be brought under control by
a consciousness of the nature of the areas in which an application can be
made, of the particular need for the application and the condition under
which it is made. But now, it is also within these same areas that one gets
to know between which terms of a mathematical problem such a relation
occurs as is properly posited by differential calculus. It must be noted first

21.283

244

21.284

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of all that two relations are at issue here. The operation of lowering the
degree of an equation, considered according to the derivative functions of its
variables, yields a result which in itself no longer truly is an equation but is a
relation; it is this relation which is the subject matter of differential calculus
proper. Also given with it, secondly, is the relation of the higher power
determination itself (the original equation) to the lower (the derivative).
This second relation we must leave aside for the time being; it will prove
to be the subject matter of integral calculus.
Let us start by considering the first relation, and, for the determination
of the moment in which the interest of the operation lies (the moment
to be derived from the so-called application), let us take the simplest
example, that of curves defined by an equation of the second power. As
we know, the relation of the coordinates is directly given by the equation
in a power form. From the fundamental determination there follow the
determinations of the other straight lines linked to the coordinates, the
tangent, subtangent, normal, and so on. But the equations between these
lines and the coordinates are linear equations; the wholes, of which these
lines are determined as parts, are right-angled triangles formed by straight
lines. The transition from the original equation in power form to these
linear equations involves now the said transition from the original function,
that is, one which is an equation, to the derived function, which is a relation,
specifically, between certain lines contained in the curve. The problem is
to find the link between the relation of these lines and the equation of the
curve.
It is not without historical interest to remark this much, that the first
discoverers only knew how to report their findings in a wholly empirical
manner without being able to give an account of the operation, which
remained something completely external. I shall limit myself in this regard
to citing Barrow, Newton’s teacher. In his Lect. Opt. et Geom., where he
deals with problems of higher geometry according to the method of the
indivisibles (a method which at first diverges from what is most characteristic of differential calculus), he also gives an account of his procedure for
determining the tangents “because,” as he says, “his friends so urged him”
(Lect. X).122 One must read for oneself how he sets up his problem to have
a proper idea of this procedure; it is formulated wholly as an external rule,
in the same style as was once, in the schoolbooks of arithmetic, the “rule of
three,” or better still the so-called “test of nine” for the four operations. He
122

See Isaac Barrow, Lectiones geometricae: In quibus (praesertim) generalia curvarum symptomata
declarantur (London, 1672), lecture 10, §14. The text is available in Early English Books online.

Quantum

245

draws the tiny lines which were later called the increments in the triangle
characteristic of a curve and then gives the instruction, as a mere rule, to
eliminate as superfluous the terms which, as a result of the expansion of
the equations, turn up as the powers of such increments or as products
(etenim isti termini nihilum valebunt);123 similarly to omit the terms which
contain magnitudes only determined by the original equation (the subsequent subtraction of the original equation from the one construed with
the increments), and finally to substitute, for the increment of the ordinate,
the ordinate itself, and, for the increment of the abscissa, the subtangent. The
procedure, if one may say so, could not be laid out in a more schoolmasterly form; the last substitution is the assumption of the proportionality
of the increments of the ordinate and abscissa to the ordinate and subtangent which in the ordinary differential method is made the basis for
the determination of the tangent; in Barrow’s rule, this assumption stands
out in all its naı̈ve nakedness. A simple way of determining the subtangent was found. Roberval’s and Fermat’s artifices follow a similar course;
the method for finding maximal and minimal values from which Fermat
started rests on the same basis and the same procedure.124 To find so-called
methods, that is, rules of that kind, was the obsession of the time, and also
to make a secret of them, which was not only easy but in one respect also
necessary, for the very reason that made it easy – because the inventors
had found only an empirical, external rule, not a method, that is, nothing
derived from recognized principles. Leibniz was indebted for such so-called
methods to his contemporaries, and Newton also was indebted to them,
even though he received them directly from his teacher; by generalizing
their form and range of application, they opened up new paths for the
sciences, but in this they also felt the need to wrest the procedure free
of the shape of external rules; they sought to give to it the necessary
justification.
If we now analyze the method more closely, this is how it actually
proceeds. First, the power determinations (understood, of the variables)
contained in the equation are reduced to their first functions. But the
value of the terms of the equation is thereby altered; there is no equation
left, therefore, but what has arisen is instead only a relation between the
first function of one variable and the first function of the other; instead of
p x = y 2 , we have p : 2y ; or instead of 2a x − x 2 = y 2 , we have a − x : y ,
123
124

Because these terms have no value.
Cf. note 97 above. Gilles Personne de Roberval (1602–1675), French mathematician who developed
powerful methods for the study of integration.

21.285

246

21.286

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which it later became common to designate as the relation dd xy . The equation is that of a curve, whereas this relation which is totally dependent
on it and is derived from it (above, according to a mere rule), is a linear
relation with which certain lines are in proportion; p : 2y or a − x : y are
themselves relations of straight lines of the curve, the coordinates and the
parameters. However, with all this, nothing is as yet known. The point of
interest is to know, regarding other lines connected with the curve, whether
that derived linear relation applies to them – to find out the equality of two
relations. – Second, this is therefore the question: which are the straight
lines determined by the nature of the curve? which stand in this relation? –
But this is what was known already, namely that a relation obtained in this
way is the relation of the ordinate to the subtangent. This the ancients
had found out in an ingenious geometrical manner; what the moderns
have discovered is the empirical procedure for setting up the equation
of the curve in such a way that it will yield the first relation of which
it was already known that it is equal to a relation containing the line to
be determined (here the subtangent). Now, on the one hand, the setting up of this equation – the differentiation – has been methodically
conceived and methodically executed; on the other hand, the imaginary
increments of the coordinates, and the imaginary characteristic triangle
formed by them and an equally imaginary increment of the tangent, were
invented in order to present the proportionality of the ratio (which was
obtained by lowering the degree of the equation) to the ratio of the ordinate and the subtangent, not as something just picked up empirically from
something already known, but as demonstrated. However, in the external
form that the cited rules assume, this already known something proves
to be, everywhere and unmistakably, the sole occasion and justification
for the assumption of, respectively, the characteristic triangle and the said
proportionality.
Lagrange was the one who did away with this pretense and pursued the
genuinely scientific way. It is to his method that we owe the insight into the
decisive point, for it consists in separating the two transitions required for
the solution of the problem and in proving each by treating it by itself. The
one side of this solution (inasmuch as, for the sake of detailing the steps
involved, we restrict ourselves to the elementary example of the problem
of finding the subtangent), the theoretical or general part, namely how to
find the first function from the given equation of the curve, has its own
internal rule: this part yields a linear relation, hence a relation of straight
lines that occur in the system defined by the curve. The other part of the
solution now consists in finding the lines in the curve that enter into such

Quantum

247

a relation. And this is now done in a direct manner (Théorie des Fonct.
Anal. II P. II, Chap.),125 that is, without the characteristic triangle, which
means without assuming infinitely small arcs, ordinates, and abscissas, and
without attributing to these the determinations of dy and dx, that is, of the
sides of that relation, and at the same time immediately the meaning of the
equality of this relation with the ordinate and the subtangent themselves.126
A line (like a point also) obtains determination only in so far as it constitutes
the side of a triangle, and the determination of a point also lies in that.
This, I may mention in passing, is the fundamental proposition of analytical
geometry from which the coordinates of that science are derived, just as
from it the parallelogram of forces is derived in mechanics (it amounts
to the same thing), for which reason the many efforts to find a proof
for it are quite superfluous. – The subtangent is now posited as the side
of a triangle, the other sides of which are the ordinate and the tangent
connected to it. The equation of the latter, as a straight line, is p = aq
(adding +b is needless, but is done only out of fondness for generality); the
determination of the ratio qp falls within a, the coefficient of q which is the
respective first function of the equation but may simply be considered as
a = qp , and this is, as we said, the essential determination of the straight line
applied to the curve as tangent. Since now, further, the first function of the
equation of the curve is taken to be equally the determination of a straight
line; and since p, the one coordinate of the first straight line, and y, the
ordinate of the curve, are assumed to be the same – we assume, therefore,
that the point at which the first straight line taken as the tangent touching
the curve is equally the starting point of the straight line determined by the
function of the curve – then all comes down to showing that this second
straight line is congruent with the first, that is, is a tangent; or, algebraically
expressed, that since y = f x and p = F q , assuming that y = p and
hence f x = F q , also f  x = F  q . Now, that the straight line applied as
tangent and the straight line determined from the equation by way of its
first function coincide, that this last is also tangent, this is demonstrated
with the aid of the increment i of the abscissa and the increment of the
ordinate determined by the expansion of the function. Here also, therefore,
the infamous increment steps in. However, how it is here introduced for the
purpose just stated, and how the function is expanded with its aid, must be
distinguished from the earlier mentioned use of the increment in finding
125
126

See Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, Part 2, Chapter 2, §§5, 6.
“ . . . und zugleich unmittelbar die Bedeutung der Gleichheit desselben [i.e. the relation] mit der
Ordinate und Subtangente selbst zu geben.”

21.287

248

21.288

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the differential equation and in the characteristic triangle. Its use here is
both justified and necessary; it falls within the parameter of geometry, for
it is of the definition of a tangent as such that between it and the curve
with which it has a point in common, no other straight line can be drawn
which also passes through this same point. For, as thus determined, the
quality of tangent or non-tangent is reduced to a quantitative difference:
the tangent is the line to which, with respect to the determination here at
issue, the greater smallness accrues. This seemingly only relative smallness
contains nothing empirical whatever, that is, nothing that depends on a
quantum as such; it is posited as qualitative by the nature of the formula,
whenever the difference of the moment on which the magnitude to be
compared depends is a difference of power; since this difference comes
down to i and i 2 , and i (which after all is supposed to signify a number)
is then to be represented as a fraction, i 2 is in and for itself smaller than i,
so that even the representation of an arbitrary magnitude in which i might
be taken is here superfluous and in fact out of place. Precisely for this
reason the demonstration of the greater smallness has nothing to do with
something infinitely small, for which there is thus no need to bring it in here
at all.
Even if only for its beauty and its well-deserved but nowadays forgotten
merit, I must also mention Descartes’s tangential method; it has, at any
rate, a bearing on the nature of equations regarding which yet one more
remark is to be made. Descartes expounds this independent method, in
which the required linear determination is likewise found from the same
derivative function, in his geometry, a seminal work in other ways as well
(liv. II, p. 357 ss. Oeuvres compl. Ed. Cousin Tom V).127 It is here that
he taught the great basis of the nature of equations and their geometrical
construction, and of the application of analysis, which he thereby greatly
expanded in scope, to geometry. The problem takes with him the form
of a task, of drawing straight lines perpendicularly to given points on a
curve in order in this way to determine the subtangent, etc. One can
understand his satisfaction at a discovery which met the one object of
universal scientific interest at the time; and it was so purely geometrical
that it vastly surpassed the merely rule-bound method of his rivals cited
above. As he expressed it there: “J’ose dire que c’est ceci le problème le plus utile
et le plus général, non seulement que je sache, mais même que j’aie jaimais désiré
127

The work referred to by Hegel is Descartes’s Oeuvres complètes, Volume 5, edited by Victor Cousin
(Paris: F.G. Levrault, 1824). For an English version, see The Geometry of René Descartes, trans. David
Eugene Smith and Marcia L. Latham (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1952), pp. 95ff.

Quantum

249

de savoir en géometrie.”128 – He bases his solution on the analytical equation
of the right-angled triangle formed by (1) the ordinate of the point on the
curve to which the required straight line in the problem should be drawn
perpendicularly; (2) by this same straight line (the normal); (3) by that part
of the axis cut off by the ordinate and the normal (the subnormal). Now
from the known equation of a curve, the value of either the ordinate or
the abscissa is substituted in the equation of this triangle, the result being
an equation of the second degree (and Descartes shows how even curves
of which the equations are of higher degrees reduce to this) in which only
one of the variables still occurs, indeed as a square and in the first power.
This is a quadratic equation which makes its first appearance as a so-called
impure equation. Descartes now observes that if the point assumed on the
curve is imagined as at the intersection of the curve and a circle, this circle
will cut the curve at yet another point, and the result for the two unequal
xs thus produced will be two equations with the same constants and of the
same form, or else only one equation with unequal values of x. But there
will be only one equation for the one triangle in which the hypotenuse is
perpendicular to the curve (the normal) – as we can imagine if we let the
two intersection points of curve and circle coincide, and the circle therefore
touch the curve. With that, however, the circumstance which makes for
the unequal roots of the x or y of the quadratic equation also falls away.
But now, in a quadratic equation of two equal roots the coefficient of the
term containing the unknown in the first power is double the single root,
and this now yields an equation for obtaining the desired determinations.
This procedure is indeed the brilliant stroke of a truly analytical mind.
The merely asserted proportionality of the subtangent and the ordinate
with the alleged infinitely small so-called increments of the abscissa and
the ordinate pale in comparison.
The final equation obtained in this way, in which the coefficient of the
second term of the quadratic equation is equated with the double root
or the unknown, is the same as is obtained by the method of differential
calculus. The differentiation of x 2 − a x − b = 0 gives the new equation
2x − a = 0, or x 3 − p x − q = 0 gives 3x 2 − p = 0. Of course, the point
can be made here that it is not by any means self-evident that such a
derivative equation is also correct. Only a ratio, as remarked above,129 results
from an equation of two variables which, just because they are variables,
do not lose their character as unknowns, for the simple reason that, by
128
129

Ibid. “I dare say that this problem is the most useful and the most general not only that I know,
but that I have ever desired to resolve in geometry.” The Geometry of René Descartes, p. 95.
Cf. above, 21.285.

21.289

250

21.290

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

substituting the functions of power-raising for the powers themselves, the
value of the two terms of the equation are altered, and whether an equation
still obtains between the two terms in their thus altered value is still per se
unknown. All that the equation dd xy expresses is that p is a ratio, and there is
no otherwise real meaning to ascribe to dd xy . But it is equally still unknown
of this ratio = p to what other ratio it is equal; it is only the equation,
the proportionality, that gives a value and meaning to it. – Just as we said
that this meaning, then a matter of application, is taken from elsewhere,
empirically,130 so with respect to the equations now at issue which are
derived by differentiation, it is from elsewhere that we must know whether
they have equal roots in order to find out whether the equation obtained
is still correct. This is a circumstance, however, which the textbooks fail to
bring to explicit notice; it is of course eliminated when an equation of one
unknown, reduced to zero, is straight away equated with y, with the result,
mind you, that by differentiation only a ratio, a dd xy , is obtained. Of course,
the calculus of functions should deal with the functions of power-raising
while differential calculus with differentials; but it by no means follows
from this as a matter of course that the magnitudes of which we take
the differentials or functions of power-raising would themselves also have
to be only functions of other magnitudes. Besides, in the theoretical part,
where it is shown how to derive the differentials, that is, the functions of
power-raising, there is still no indication that the magnitudes which we
learn to manipulate in such a derivation are supposed to be themselves the
functions of other magnitudes.
Regarding the omission of the constant in differentiation, attention can
further be drawn to the fact that the meaning of the omission here is
that it makes no difference to the determination of the roots if these are
equal, for this determination is exhausted by the coefficients of the second
term of the equation. As in the cited example of Descartes, the constant
is itself the square of the roots, which can therefore be determined by the
constant as well as the coefficients – the constant being no less than the
coefficients simply the function of the roots of the equation. In the usual
exposition, the omission of the so-called constants which are linked to the
other terms only by the plus and minus signs results from the mechanism
of the procedure by which, in order to find the differential of a compound
expression, an increment is assigned only to the variables, and the expression
thereby formed is subtracted from the original. Nothing is said regarding
130

Cf. above, 21.283.

Quantum

251

the meaning of the constants and of their omission, the extent to which
they are themselves functions and, as such, do or do not serve any purpose.
In connection with the omission of the constants, a similar comment
can be made regarding the names of differentiation and integration as
was earlier made regarding the expressions “finite” and “infinite,” namely
that the term says the opposite of what is intended.131 “To differentiate”
indicates the positing of differences, whereas by being differentiated an
equation is in fact reduced to fewer dimensions; with the omission of the
constant a moment of determinateness is taken away; as we said,132 the
roots of the variables are made equal, their difference therefore sublated. In
integration, by contrast, the constant must be added back in again; the
equation is thereby integrated, but, note well, only in the sense that the
previously sublated differentiation of the roots is restored, what was posited
as equal is differentiated again. – The ordinary expression contributes
to the obfuscation of the essential nature of the matter by directing the
focus of attention to what is in fact subordinate, even alien to it – on the
one hand, to the infinitely small difference, the increment, and the like;
on the other hand, to the mere difference in general between the given
and the derived function, without any indication of their specific, that is,
qualitative, distinction.
Another important area in which differential calculus is employed is
mechanics. The meaning of the various power functions that result from
the elementary equations of its subject matter, motion, has already been
adumbrated in passing.133 I shall now take it up directly. The equation,
that is, the mathematical expression, for plain uniform motion (c = st
or s = ct, where the spaces traversed are proportional to the elapsed times
according to an empirical unit c which is the magnitude of the velocity)
offers no scope for differentiation; the coefficient c is already fully determined and known, and no further expansion of powers is admissible. –
We called attention earlier to how s = a t 2 , the equation of the motion
of a falling body, is analyzed:134 the first term of the analysis, dd st = 2a t, is
translated into language and accordingly into concrete existence to mean
that we must suppose a term of a sum (a conception which we have long
since abandoned), a term which is a part of the motion, specifically, that
it falls on the side of the force of inertia, that is, of absolutely uniform
velocity, with the result that in infinitely small parts of time the motion
is uniform, but in the finite parts, that is, in those actually existent, it is
131
133

132 Cf. above, 21.289.
Cf. above, 21.246.
134 Cf. above, 21.262–263, footnote.
Cf. above, 21.262–263, footnote.

21.291

252

21.292

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

uneven. To be sure, f s = 2a t; and the meaning of a and of t is known
and so, too, that the determination of the uniform velocity of a motion
is thereby being posited: since a = ts2 , 2at is simply equal to 2st . But with
that, absolutely nothing new is known. Only the false assumption that 2at
is a part of the motion as a sum gives the false semblance of a physical
proposition. The factor itself, a, the empirical unit (a quantum as such) is
attributed to gravity. If the category of the force of gravity is used, then
it ought rather to be said that the whole, s = a t 2 , is the effect of gravity, or, better, the law of it. – The same goes for the proposition derived
from dd st = 2a t, that if gravity ceased to act, then the body would attain
with the velocity reached at the end of its fall twice the distance it had
traversed, in the same period of time as the fall. – Here too we find an
unsound metaphysics; the end of the fall, or the end of a time-period in
which the body has fallen, is itself still a period of time; if it were not a
time-period, then rest would be assumed and therefore no velocity; velocity
can only be calculated according to the distance traversed in a period of
time, not at its end. – And if now finally an application of differential
calculus is made in other physical fields where there is no motion, as for
example in the behavior of light (apart from what is called its propagation
in space) or in determining magnitudes with reference to colors, and the
first function of a quadratic function is here also called a velocity, then this
must be regarded an even more inadmissible formalism, a fiction of actual
existence. –
We find the motion represented by the equation s = a t 2 , says
Lagrange,135 in the experience of falling bodies; the next simplest motion
would be one of the equation s = ct 3 , but no such motion is found in
nature; we do not know what the coefficient c might mean. Although that
might well be so, there is a motion nevertheless of which the equation
is s 3 = a t 2 (this is Kepler’s law of the motion of the bodies of the solar
t
, etc.,
system), and what the meaning here of the first derived function, 2a
3s 2
might be, and the further direct manipulation of this equation by differentiation, the development of the laws and the determinations of the absolute
motion from this starting point – all this must on the contrary appear indeed
as an interesting problem, an opportunity for analysis to display its worth
at its most brilliant.
Thus the application of differential calculus to the elementary equations
of motion is not by itself of any real interest; the formal interest comes from
135

See Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, Part 3, Chapter 1, §2.

Quantum

253

the general mechanism of calculus. But this dissection of motion takes on
another meaning in connection with the determination of its trajectory. If
this trajectory is a curve and its equation contains higher powers, then there
is need of transitions from the rectilinear functions, which are the functions
of power-raising, to the powers themselves, and since such functions are
to be obtained by eliminating from the original equation of motion the
factor of time which is contained in it, this factor is at the same time to
be reduced to the lower functions of expansion from which those linear
equations can be obtained. Here we are led to where the interest of the
other part of calculus lies.
The aim of the foregoing has been to highlight the simple, specific
nature of differential calculus by defining it, and to demonstrate it in some
elementary examples. Its nature has been found to consist in this, that
the coefficient of the term of the expansion, the so-called first function, is
obtained from an equation of power-functions, and the relation which this
first function represents is demonstrated in moments of the concrete subject
matter, and these moments are themselves determined by the equation
thereby obtained between the two relations. We must equally consider in
brief, regarding integral calculus, what can be learned of its specific, concrete
nature from the application of its principle. Taking stock of this calculus is
already made simpler and more accurate by the fact that we no longer take
it as the method of summation from which it got its name in opposition
to differential calculus, in which the increment is taken to be the essential
ingredient, and which gave to it the semblance of being essentially linked
to the form of a series. – The task of this calculus is on the face of it
just as theoretical, or rather formalistic, as that of differential calculus,
although, as is well known, it is the converse of the latter. Here we begin
with a function considered as derived, as the coefficient of the first term
resulting from the expansion of an equation as yet however unknown, and
the original power-function is to be derived from it; the function which in
the natural order of expansion would have to be considered as original is
here derived, and the one previously considered as derived is here the one
given, or in general the one to start with. Now the formal details of this
operation seem to have already been attended to by differential calculus,
where the transition from the original to the expansion-function, and the
relation of the one to the other, is established in general. Here, although in
order to set up the function which is the starting point, or again, in order
to effect the transition from it to the original, recourse must necessarily be
made in many cases to the serial form, it is important nevertheless to keep

21.293

254

21.294

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

in mind that, as such, this form has nothing directly to do with the proper
principle of integration.
Now it is in view of the formalism of its operation that the other part
of the task of calculus appears as the application of the operation. This is
itself now the task, namely to find the meaning, in the above mentioned
sense, of the original function (the one considered as first by the given
function) of a particular object. It might seem that this doctrine, too, was
in principle already settled in differential calculus, except for a further
circumstance that comes into the picture and will not let the matter rest
so simply. For by finding out that in this calculus the linear relation is
obtained through the first function of the equation, we also know that the
integration of this relation yields the equation of the curve in the relation
of abscissa and ordinate; or, if the equation for the area enclosed by the
curve were given, then, regarding the meaning of the first function of this
equation, we should have already learned from differential calculus that
such a function displays the ordinate as a function of the abscissa, and
therefore the equation of the curve.
But now, all comes down to determining which of the moments of the
object is given in the equation itself; for analytical manipulation can only
start from what is given and then pass on to the determination of the rest
of the object. For instance, what is given in the equation of the curve is
not the equation of an area enclosed by that curve, nor of some supposed
body arising from its rotation, nor again of an arc of the curve, but only
the relation of the abscissa and ordinate. Consequently, the transitions
from those determinations to this equation itself cannot yet be handled
in differential calculus; it is reserved for integral calculus to find these
relations.
But further, it has been shown that the differentiation of an equation of
several variables yields the expansion-power or the differential coefficient
not as an equation but only as a ratio;136 the problem then is to find in
the moments of the given object a second ratio which is equal to this ratio
which is the derived function. By contrast, the object of integral calculus
is the relation itself of the original function to the derived function which
is here presumed given, and the task is to assign in the object of the
first given function the meaning of the original function yet to be found.
Or rather, since this meaning (say, the area enclosed by a curve or the
rectification of a curve represented as rectilinear) is already declared to be
136

Cf. above, 21.265.

Quantum

255

the problem, the task is to show that such a determination is found by an
original function; also to show which of the moments of the object is the
one that must be assumed for the present purpose, as the initial (derivative)
function.
Now the usual method makes things easy for itself by representing
the difference as one of infinitely small elements. Thus for the squaring
of curves, an infinitely small rectangle, a product of the ordinate in the
element (that is, the infinitely small segment) of the abscissa, is taken for
the trapezium which has as one of its sides the infinitely small arc opposite
that infinitely small segment of the abscissa; the product is then integrated
in the sense that the integral is said to give the sum of the infinitely small
trapezia or the surface of which the determination is being sought, namely
the finite magnitude of this element of the area. In the usual method, a
right-angled triangle is likewise formed from the infinitely small elements
of an arc and the corresponding ordinate and abscissa – a triangle in
which the square of the arc is said to equal the sum of the squaring of
both the other two elements, their integration yielding the arc as a finite
quantity.
This procedure presupposes the general discovery on which this field of
analysis rests, in this case inasmuch as the squared curve, or the rectified
curve, etc., stands to a certain function given by the equation of the curve
in the relation of the so-called original function to the derivative. The point
is to know, granted that a certain part of a mathematical object (say, a
curve) is the derived function, which other part of the same object is
expressed by the corresponding original function. It is known that when
the function of the ordinate given by the equation of the curve is taken as the
derived function, the corresponding original function is the quantitative
expression of the area of the curve cut off by this ordinate; that when
a certain tangential determination is considered the derivative function,
its original function expresses the length of the arc that belongs to this
tangential determination, etc. However, that these relations – the one, of
an original function to the derived; the other, of the magnitudes of two
parts or circumstances of the mathematical object – that these constitute a
proportion, the method that employs the infinitely small and operates with
it mechanically spares itself the trouble of recognizing and demonstrating
it. The true merit of mathematical acumen is that, from results already
known elsewhere, it has found that certain sides of a mathematical object
stand to each other in the relationship of original and derived function,
and it has found which sides these are.

21.295

256

21.296

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Of these two functions, the derivative or, as has been defined, the function of power-raising, is the one in this calculus which is the given, relative
to the original which is to be found from it by integration. This derived
function, however, is not immediately given, nor is it by itself already
given which part or determination of the mathematical object should be
considered as the derived function in order that, by reducing it to the
original, the other part or determination whose magnitude is being sought
in the problem might be found. For the purpose of this problem, the usual
method begins, as we said,137 simply by representing as infinitely small
certain parts of the object, in the form of derived functions determinable
by differentiation from the originally given equation of the object in general (like the infinitely small abscissæ and ordinates in the rectification of
a curve); from these parts it then takes those which can in some way be
linked by elementary mathematics with the matter of the problem, likewise
represented as infinitely small (in our example, the arc), and by virtue of
this connection, once these parts are known, that part is also determined of
which the problem was to find the magnitude. Thus, for the rectification
of curves, the three mentioned infinitely small parts of the object are linked
together in the equation of the right-angled triangle, while for the squaring
of curves the ordinate is linked with the infinitely small abscissa to form a
product, since in general arithmetic an area is assumed to be the product
of lines. The transition from such so-called elements of the area, the arc,
etc. to the magnitudes of the area, the arc, etc. as such, passes then only for
the ascent from the infinite to the finite expression, or to the sum of the
infinitely many elements of which the required magnitude is supposed to
consist.
It is therefore only superficially that one can say that the problem of
integral calculus is only the albeit more difficult converse of the problem of
differential calculus. The real interest of integral calculus is directed rather
exclusively at the reciprocal relation in concrete objects of original and
derivative function.
Also in this part of calculus Lagrange did not try just to smooth over the
difficulty of the problems at hand with direct assumptions.138 Here, too, it
will help to elucidate the nature of the issue if we give the essence of his
method with the help of a few examples. The task of this method is still the
same: to prove that between particular elements of a mathematical whole,
e.g. a curve, a relation of original to derived function obtains. But now,
in this field the proof cannot go through directly simply by virtue of the
137

Cf. above, 21.284.

138

Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, Part 2, §27.

Quantum

257

nature of the relation at issue, for the latter connects elements within the
mathematical object which are qualitatively different – curves with straight
lines, linear dimensions and their functions with plane or plane dimensions
and their functions, etc. The required determination can only be taken,
therefore, as the mean between a greater and a lesser. With this, of course, the
form of an increment with a plus or minus naturally comes into play again,
and Lagrange’s vigorous “développons” can be heard again; but we have
already pointed out how the increments have here only arithmetical, finite
meaning.139 From the expansion of that condition, that the magnitude
to be determined be greater than the one easily determinable limit and
smaller than the other, it is then deduced that, e.g. the function of the
ordinate is the derived first function with respect to the function of the
area.
Lagrange’s exposition of the rectification of curves, since it proceeds from
the principle of Archimedes, involves the translation of the Archimedean
method into the principle of modern analysis, and this affords us an
insight into the inner, the true meaning, of an endeavor which in the
other method is carried out mechanically.140 The mode of procedure is
necessarily analogous to the one just given. But Archimedes’ principle,
that the arc of a curve is greater than its chord and smaller than the sum
of the two tangents drawn at the endpoints of the arc and contained
between these two points and the point of their intersection, does not yield
any direct equation. Its translation into modern analytical form consists in
the invention of an expression which is per se a simple fundamental equation, whereas in the earlier form the principle simply postulates alternating
ad infinitum between terms each time determined as too great and too
small, the successive advance only yielding new terms which are still too
great and too small, albeit between always narrowing limits. On the basis
of this formalism of the infinitely small, the equation d z 2 = d x 2 + d y 2
is formulated without further ado. Lagrange’s exposition, on the contrary,
starting from this same basis, demonstrates that the length of the arc is the
original function with respect to a derived function, the characteristic term
of which is itself a function coming from the relation of a derived function
to the original function of the ordinate.
The fact that the representation of the infinitely small occurs in the
method of Archimedes, just as later in Kepler’s treatment of stereometric
objects,141 has been adduced as authority for the employment of the
139
141

140 Lagrange, Théorie des fonctions analytiques, Part 2, §29.
Cf. above, 21.287.
Johannes Kepler, Nova stereometria doliorum vinariorum (The Stereometry of Wine Barrels, 1615),
Part I, Theorem III, where Kepler refers to Archimedes’ use of indirect proof to deal with

21.297

258

21.298

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

infinitely small in differential calculus, without any thought being given
to its distinctive particularities. The infinitely small signifies in the first
instance the negation of the quantum as such, that is, of the so-called finite
expression, of the completed determinateness that quantum as such possesses. Similarly, in the subsequent renowned methods of Valerius142 and
Cavalieri143 among others, methods which are based on the treatment of the
relations of geometrical objects, the fundamental principle is that the quantum of the terms treated at the moment only in relation must, as such, be left
out of account for this purpose, and the terms themselves be taken as nonquantitative. But, for one thing, these methods all fail to recognize, and to
bring to notice, the affirmation that hides behind the merely negative determination. This is the affirmation which we saw earlier144 in abstract form
as the qualitative determinateness of quantity and, in more determined
form, as the qualitative determinateness found in the relation of powers.
And also, since this same relation of powers contains in turn an aggregate
of more precisely determined relations such as that of a power and its
expansion function, these relations also would have in turn to be based on,
and derived from, the general and negative determination of still the same
infinitesimal. Now, in Lagrange’s exposition just cited, the determinate
moment of affirmation implicit in Archimedes’ method of developing the
problem is made explicit, with the result that a procedure otherwise affected
by a limitless progression is given its due limit. The greatness of the modern
discovery in itself and in its capacity to solve hitherto intractable problems,
and to handle in simpler fashion those previously soluble, is to be laid solely
in the discovery of the relation of the original to the so-called derivative
functions and of those parts of a mathematical whole which stand in such a
relation.
These excursions may suffice for the purpose of highlighting what is
distinctive about the relation of magnitudes which is the subject matter of the particular kind of calculus under discussion. It was possible
to limit them to simple problems and the methods of solving them; nor
would it have been expedient for the conceptual work which was our only
concern here, or within this author’s competency, to go over the whole

142
143
144

“multi multa,” “multitudes of multitude,” in Gesammelte Werke, Band IX, Mathematische Schriften
(Munich, 1960), p. 15.
Lucas Valerius (†1618) extended the doctrine of the center of gravity to solid bodies.
Cavalieri, Geometria indivisibilium continuorum nova (1635); Exercitationes geometricæ sex (Bologna,
1647).
Cf. above, 21.275.

Quantum

259

compass of the so-called application of differential and integral calculus, to reduce all their problems and their solutions to the principle on
which, as we have inductively shown, that application rests, and thereby
to complete this inductive work itself. But what was said has sufficiently
demonstrated that just as for each specific form of calculating there corresponds as subject matter a corresponding particular determinateness or
relation of magnitude – such a relation as constitutes addition, multiplication, the raising to powers and the extraction of roots, the operations
with logarithms, series, etc. – the same is the case for differential and integral calculus; for the object specific to the latter, the most suitable name
might be that of the relation between a function of powers and the function of its expansion or potentiation, because it is the closest to what an
insight into the nature of the subject matter suggests. Of course calculus
makes use quite in general of logarithms, of circular functions and series,
especially in order to render more tractable expressions devised for the
required operations of deriving the original functions from the functions
of expansion, but it uses them in the same way as it uses the operations involved in the other relations of magnitude, such as addition, etc.
Calculus, whether differential or integral, has indeed a more specialized
interest in common with the form of series, namely that of determining
the functions of expansion which in the series are called coefficients of the
terms; but whereas the interest of calculus only extends to the relation of the
original function to the closest coefficient of its expansion, the aim of
the series is to display as a sum aggregates of terms ordered according
to the powers fitted with those coefficients. The infinite of the infinite
series, the indeterminate expression of the negativity of the quantum in
general, has nothing in common with the affirmative determination present
in the infinite of calculus. The same is the case for the infinitesimal, the
increment by means of which the expansion happens in the form of a
series: it is only an external means for that expansion, and its so-called
infinity either has only the meaning of such a means or has none at all.
The series, since in fact it is not what is being sought, brings with it a de
trop which then creates the otherwise superfluous trouble of eliminating
it. The method of Lagrange has again privileged this form of series, and
is therefore burdened by that trouble, even though it is by virtue of that
method that the true character of what is called the application is brought
out in the latter, for it directly demonstrates, without imposing the forms
of dx, dy, etc., unto the objects, to which part of these objects the determinateness of the derived function (function of expansion) belongs. And

21.299

260

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

it transpires thereby that the form of series is not what is truly at issue
here.n

21.300

Remark 3
Further forms associated with the qualitative determinateness of magnitude
The affirmative meaning of the infinitesimal of differential calculus is
that it is the qualitative determinateness of magnitude, and, regarding this
determinateness, we have shown in particular that it is present in this
calculus not only as a power determinateness in general, but as specifically
determining the relation of a function of powers to the power of the
expansion. This qualitative determinateness is also present, however, in
another weaker form, so to speak, and this form, together with the use of
the infinitesimal associated with it and the meaning that the latter has in
this use, will be the subject of the present Remark.
Before we proceed, however, it should be recalled at this juncture that the
different power determinations first come in from the analytical side, that
they are there merely formal and totally homogeneous, that they signify
numerical magnitudes which, as such, are not qualitatively differentiated
from each other. It is in the application to spatial objects that the analytical
relation fully shows itself in its qualitative determinateness as the transition
from linear to plane determinations, from the determinations of straight
n

145
146

In the already cited critique (Jahrb. für wissensch. Krit. II, Vol. 1827, Nr. 155, 6ff.),145 are to be
found interesting opinions of a learned specialist in the subject, Herr Spehr.146 They are quoted
from his Neue Principien des Fluentencalculs (Braunschweig, 1826), and concern a matter which has
contributed substantially to the issue of obscurities and unscientific claims in differential calculus;
moreover, they accord with what we have said concerning the general orientation of the theory of this
calculus. To quote: “Purely arithmetical investigations – admittedly those which more than all other
have direct bearing on differential calculus – have not been separated from this calculus proper.
Indeed, they have even been taken, as by Lagrange, for what is of the essence of the calculus while
calculus itself has been regarded as only the application of them. These arithmetical investigations
include the rules of differentiation, the derivation of Taylor’s theorems, and so on, even the various
methods of integration. But the case is quite the reverse, for it is these applications that make up the
subject matter of differential calculus proper, which presupposes all those arithmetical developments
and operations from analysis.” – We have shown how, with Lagrange, the separation of the socalled application from the procedure of the general part which takes its start from the series serves
precisely to bring to light the proper subject of differential calculus. However, it is strange that the
author, despite entertaining the interesting view that it is precisely the so-called applications that
constitute the subject matter of differential calculus proper, would then himself divagate (ibid.)
into the formalistic metaphysics of continuous magnitudes, becoming, flow, etc., and would want to
add new ballast to old. These determinations are formal, in the sense that they are only general
categories which fail to give precisely that which is specific to the subject matter. But this is what was
to be recognized in, and be abstracted from, the concrete propositions, the applications.
Cf. above, 21.267, Hegel’s footnote.
Friedrich Wilhelm Spehr (1799–1833), mathematician and cartographer in Braunschweig, best
known for his Vollständiger Lehrbegriff der reinen Kombinationslehre (1824).

Quantum

261

line to those of curves, etc. This application also brings in train that
the spatial objects which are given in the form of continuous magnitudes
in accordance with their nature will be taken discretely, the plane as an
aggregate of lines, the line as an aggregate of points, etc. The sole interest
of this dissolution is to determine the points and the lines into which
the lines and the planes have respectively been resolved in order to be
able, starting from this determination, to proceed analytically, that is, in
truly arithmetical fashion; for the sought magnitude determinations these
starting points are the elements from which the function and the equation
for the concrete, that is, the continuous, magnitude are to be derived. For
the problems where the use of this procedure is of special interest, it is
requisite that the element which is the starting point be self-determined,
in contrast with the indirect procedure which can start only with limits
and seek between them the self-determined element which is its goal.
But if it is only the law of progressively determining magnitudes without
however ever possibly attaining the required perfect, that is, the so-called
finite, determination, then in both methods the result amounts to the
same thing. To Kepler is ascribed the honor of first having thought of
that reversal of procedure and of having made the discrete the starting
point. His explanation of how he understands the first proposition of
Archimedes’ cyclometry conveys this quite simply.147 This proposition, as
we know, is that the circle is equal to a right-angle triangle, one side of
which enclosing the right angle equals the diameter of the circle and the
other its circumference. Since Kepler takes this proposition to mean that
the periphery of the circle has as many parts as it has points, that is, infinitely
many, each of which can be regarded as the base of an isosceles triangle,
he thereby gives expression to the resolution of the continuous into the
form of the discrete. The expression “infinite” which occurs here is still far
removed from the meaning which it is supposed to assume in differential
calculus. – Now when a determinateness, a function, has been found for
such discrete elements, these should be summed up further, as essentially
elements of the continuous. But since a sum of points will not yield a
line, nor a sum of lines a surface, the points are straight away taken as
already linear, just as the lines are taken as two-dimensional. But again,
since linear elements ought not to be lines yet, which they would be if they
were taken as quantum, they are represented as infinitely small. The discrete
is only capable of an external combination in which the moments retain the
meaning of discrete units; the only transition analytically made from these
147

See note 141, above.

21.301

262

21.302

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

units is to their sum; nor is there a geometrical transition from point to line,
or from line to surface, etc.; therefore the element which is determined as
a point or a line is also given, together also with this determination, the
quality of being as point linear or as line two-dimensional, in order that
their sum would indeed become, as the sum of tiny lines, a line, and, as
the sum of tiny planes, a plane.
It is the need to get hold of this moment of qualitative transition and
for this reason to have recourse to the infinitely small that must be regarded
as the source of all the representations which, though meant to smooth
out every difficulty, are themselves the greatest difficulty. But to dispense
with these aids, it would have had to be possible to show that contained
even in the analytical procedure, which otherwise appears as a mere summation, there is in fact already a multiplication. But a fresh assumption
is trotted out at this juncture which provides the basis for this application of arithmetical relations to geometrical figures. The assumption is
that arithmetical multiplication is also for the geometrical determination
a transition to a higher dimension, that the arithmetical multiplication of
magnitudes spatially determined as lines is at the same time a promotion of
the linear to the status of two-dimensional determination; three times four
linear feet gives twelve linear feet, but three linear feet times four linear feet
gives twelve plane-feet, that is, square-feet, since the unit in both factors,
as discrete quanta, is the same. The multiplication of lines by lines appears
at first sight to make no sense, for multiplication has to do simply with
numbers, that is, it is an alteration of elements totally homogeneous with
that into which they are altered, with the product, only the quantity alters.
In contrast to this alteration, what has been called the multiplication of
a line as such by a line (it has been named ductus lineæ in lineam, like
the ductus plani in planum; there is also the ductus puncti in lineam) is
an alteration not merely of magnitude, but of magnitude as a qualitative
determination of spatiality, of dimensionality; the transition of the line into
plane is to be understood as the self-externalization of the line, just as the
self-externalization of the point is a line and the self-externalization of the
plane a whole space. This is the same as representing the motion of the
point as being the line, and so on; but since motion entails time determination, it is more likely to appear in this way of representing it as merely
accidental, an external alteration of state, whereas what is to be captured is
the conceptual determination as expressed by self-externalization, that is,
the qualitative alteration which, arithmetically, is the multiplication of unit
(the point, etc.) by amount (the line, etc.). – It may also be remarked here
that in the case of the self-externalization of the plane, which would appear

Quantum

263

as a multiplying of surface by surface, there seems to emerge a difference
of arithmetical and geometrical products, for that self-externalization, as
ductus plani in planum, would arithmetically give a multiplication of a
two-dimensional factor by another factor equally two-dimensional, and
hence a product of four dimensions which, however, is reduced to three
in geometrical determination. For its part, since number has the one as
its principle, it yields the fixed determination for the external, quantitative element; but the product of its operation is to that extent formal.
3 · 3, taken as a numerical determination, when it reproduces itself, yields
3 · 3 × 3 · 3. However, the same magnitude, taken as the determination of a
plane, in reproducing itself is held back at 3 · 3 · 3, because space, imagined
as a movement of transcendence which starts from the point, the limit
which is only abstract, attains its true limit as concrete determinateness in
the third dimension, starting from the line. The difference just referred to
could prove relevant in the context of free motion, where the one side, the
spatial, is subject to geometrical determination (according to Kepler’s law,
x 3 : t 2 ), and the other side, the temporal, to arithmetical determination.
How the qualitative moment being considered here differs from the
subject of the previous Remark, should now be self-evident without further comment. In the earlier Remark, the qualitative moment lay in the
determinateness of the powers; here it is the same as the infinitesimal,
except only as a factor arithmetically related to product, or as point to line,
line to plane, etc. The qualitative transition to be made from the discrete,
into which the continuous magnitude is imagined to be resolved, to the
continuous is now effected as a process of summing.
But that in fact the alleged mere summation contains in itself a multiplication, therefore the transition from the linear to the two-dimensional
determination, appears in the simplest form in the way in which, for
instance, it is shown that the area of a trapezium is equal to the product
of the sum of the two opposite parallel lines and half the height. This
height is represented as being only the amount of an aggregate of discrete
magnitudes which must be summed up. These magnitudes are lines lying
parallel between the two parallels limiting them. There are infinitely many
of them, for they are supposed to make up the plane. And yet they are lines,
and therefore, in order to be two-dimensional, they must at the same time
be posited with negation. In order to escape the difficulty of a sum of lines
supposedly yielding a plane, the lines are assumed as planes from the start
but also as infinitely thin, for they derive their determination solely from
the linear character of the parallel limits of the trapezium. As parallel and
bounded by the other pair of rectilinear sides of the trapezium, they can

21.303

264

21.304

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

be represented as the terms of a uniformly differentiated but in principle
indeterminate arithmetical progression whose first and last terms are the
two limiting parallels. The sum of such a series, as we know, is the product
of these parallels and half the amount of the terms. This last quantum is
called “amount” simply and solely with reference to the representation of
infinitely many lines; it is the determinateness as the magnitude in general
of a continuous – the height. It is clear that what is called a “sum” is at
the same time a ductus lineæ in lineam, the multiplying of the linear by the
linear which is, according to the above determination,148 the emergence of
two-dimensionality. In the simplest case now of any rectangle in general, a
b, each of the two factors is a simple magnitude; but already in the other
still elementary example of the trapezium, only one factor is simple as
one half of the height. The other factor is determined by a progression;
it is still something linear, but its determinateness as magnitude is more
complex; in so far as it can be expressed by a series, the task of summing it
is called analytical, that is, arithmetical; but the geometrical moment in it
is the multiplication, and this is the qualitative moment of transition from
the dimension of line to that of plane; the one factor has been taken as
discrete only for the arithmetical determination of the other; by itself, like
the other, it is the magnitude of something linear.
But the method of representing planes as sums of lines is also commonly
employed where no multiplication as such is being performed in view of
the result. This is the case when the task is to give the magnitude in the
equation not as quantum but as a proportion. There is, for instance, a
well-known way of showing that the area of a circle bears the same relation
to the area of an ellipse, the major axis of which is the diameter of the
circle, as the major axis does to the minor axis, by taking each of these
areas as the sum of the ordinates pertaining to it; each ordinate of the ellipse
stands to the corresponding ordinate of the circle as the minor axis stands
to the major; therefore, it is concluded, also the sums of the ordinates, that
is, the areas, stand in equal proportion. Those who would avoid in this
connection the representation of areas or planes as a sum of lines resort
to the usual, quite superfluous ad hoc aid of making the ordinates into
trapezia of infinitely small width; since the equation is only a proportion,
only one of the two linear elements of the area enters the comparison.
The other element, the abscissa axis, is assumed equal in the ellipse and
the circle – therefore, as a factor of arithmetical magnitude-determination,
equal to 1 – and the proportion is, consequently, totally dependent only
148

Cf. above, 21.301.

Quantum

265

on the relation of the one determining moment. The two dimensions are
necessary to the representation of a plane; the determination of magnitude,
however, as is to be given in this proportion, extends only to the one
moment. Therefore, to yield to the representation, or to try to improve
it by adding the representation of sum to this one moment, is in truth a
failure to recognize what mathematical determinateness is all about.
The foregoing discussion contains also the criterion for Cavalieri’s
method of indivisibles referred to above149 – a method which the criterion also justifies and one that does not need the recourse to the infinitely
small. These indivisibles are lines when Cavelieri considers a plane, or
squares and circles when he considers a pyramid or a cone, etc. He calls the
base line or base plane assumed as determined the regula; it is the constant
and, with reference to a series, its first or last term; the indivisibles are
regarded as parallel to it, therefore in equal determination with respect to
the figure. Now Cavalieri’s general fundamental proposition is that (Exerc.
Geometr. VI; in the later work, Exerc. I, p. 6) “all figures, plane as well as
solid, are proportionate to all their indivisibles, these being compared with
each other collectively and, if there happens to be in them some common
proportion, distributively.”150 For this purpose, he compares in figures of
equal base line and height the proportions between the lines drawn parallel
to the base and equidistant from it; all such lines of a figure have one and the
same determination and constitute its whole content. In this way Cavalieri
proves, for example, also the elementary proposition that parallelograms
of equal height are proportional to their base; any two lines drawn in the
two figures at equal distance from the base and parallel to it are in the
same proportion as the bases, and so too, therefore, are the whole figures.
In fact, the lines do not constitute the content of the figure as continuous
but constitute it only in so far as they are arithmetically determinable; the
linear figure is the element of the content and through it alone must the
determinateness of the latter be grasped.
With this we are led to reflect on a difference regarding where to place
the determinateness of a figure, whether it is constructed, like the height of
the figure here, or whether it is the external limit. In so far as it is an external
limit, then one concedes that the continuity of the figure follows upon, so
to speak, the equality or the proportion of the limit; e.g. the equality of
congruent figures rests on the fact that the boundaries, the limiting lines,
coincide. But in parallelograms of equal height and base, only this last
determinateness is an external limit; the height on which the second main
149

Cf. above, 21.253.

150

Cavalieri, Exercitationes geometricæ sex (1647), p. 6.

21.305

266

21.306

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determination of the figures rests, the proportion of the two, and not the parallelism as such, brings a second principle of determination to the external
limits. Euclid’s proof of the equality of parallelograms that have the same
height and base reduces them to triangles, to externally limited continuous figures. In Cavalieri’s proof, first of all concerning the proportionality
of parallelograms, the limit is simply a determinateness of magnitude as
such, which is explicated as taken at every pair of lines drawn at the same
distance from each other in both figures. These lines, equal or in equal
proportion to the base, taken collectively, yield the figures that stand in
equal proportion. The image of an aggregate of lines is incompatible with
the continuity of the figure; consideration of the lines alone fully exhausts
the determinateness which is at issue. Cavalieri has a standard reply to the
supposed difficulty, that the representation of indivisibles requires the
comparison of lines or planes which are infinite in number (Geom. Lib. II,
Prop. I, schol.).151 He rightly points out that he is not comparing the number of such lines or planes, which we do not know (that is, it is rather an
empty representation, as just remarked,152 introduced as prop), but only the
magnitude, that is, the quantitative determinateness as such which is equal
to the space occupied by these lines; because this space is enclosed within
limits, its magnitude is also enclosed within these limits; the continuous is
nothing other than the indivisibles themselves, he says; if it were anything
apart from them, it would not be comparable; but it would be absurd to
say that bounded continuous figures are not comparable with each other.
One can see that Cavalieri’s intention is to distinguish what belongs
to the external existence of the continuous from that in which its determinateness lies and which alone must be stressed when comparing it or
devising theorems about it. The categories which he used for this purpose,
namely the continuous as composed of, or consisting in, indivisibles, and the
like, are admittedly not satisfactory, for implied in them is the claim to
an intuition of the continuous or, as already said, of its external existence;
instead of saying “that the continuous is nothing other than the indivisibles
themselves,”153 it would have been more correct to say, and consequently
also self-explanatory, that the determinateness of the magnitude of the continuous is none other than that of the indivisibles themselves. – Cavalieri is
not comfortable with the dubious consequence drawn by the schools from
the representation of the continuous as made up of indivisibles, namely
that there is a greater and smaller infinite; he expressly states further in the
151
152

See Cavalieri, Geometria indivisibilibus continuorum nova (1635). Book 2, Proposition 1, scholium.
153 Cf. 21.305, note 151 above.
Cf. above, 21.304.

Quantum

267

treatise (Geom. Lib. VII, Pref.)154 that he is in no way forced by his method
of proof to represent the continuous as made up of indivisibles; continuous
figures only follow the proportion of the indivisibles. He says that he did not
take up the aggregate of indivisibles in the way they seem to end up in
the determination of the infinite, for the sake of an infinite heap of lines
or planes; he took them rather because of the way they are constituted, for
the specific nature of limitedness that they have in them. Nevertheless, in
order to remove this stumbling block, he does not spare himself the trouble
of demonstrating the main propositions of his geometry, in the seventh
book specially added for this purpose, in a way that remains free of any
admixture of infinity. – This way reduces the proofs to the just cited usual
form of congruence of figures, that is, as we remarked, to the representation
of determinateness as external spatial limit.155
A further remark that can be made here concerning this form of congruence is that it is no more than, so to speak, a childish aid for the intuition
of the senses. In the elementary propositions concerning the triangles, two
such triangles are represented side by side; on the assumption that, of the
six parts of each, three in the one triangle are equal to the corresponding
three in the other, it is shown that the two triangles are congruent, that
is, that in each the remaining three parts are equal to the corresponding
remaining three in the other – because by virtue of the equality of the first
three parts the two triangles cover each other. In more abstract terms, all that
this equality of corresponding pairs of parts in the two triangles amounts
to is that there is just one single triangle in which three parts are assumed
as already determined, whence follows the determinateness of the remaining
three parts. The determinateness of the one triangle is thus demonstrated
to be completed with the three parts assumed; for the determinateness as
such the remaining three parts are therefore a superfluity – the superfluity of
sensible existence, that is, of the intuition of continuity. When the matter is
expressed in these terms, the qualitative determinateness stands out in its
distinction from what is given to intuition, from the whole as continuous
in itself; congruity does not let this distinction show through.
As we have observed,156 a new circumstance comes into play in the case of
parallel lines and parallelograms: on the one hand the equality of the angles
only, and on the other the height of the figures from which the external
limits of the latter (the sides of the parallelograms) are distinct. There is an
ambiguity here as to whether in these figures, besides the determinateness
of the side which is one external limit, the base, we should take as the other
154

Ibid.

155

Cf. above, 21.305.

156

Cf. above, 21.304.

21.307

268

21.308

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

external limit the other side of the parallelogram or the height instead. In
the case of two parallelograms that have the same base and height, but
one is rectangular whereas the other has two angles sharply acute and the
opposite two very obtuse accordingly, intuitively the latter figure can easily
appear greater than the former, for intuitively its given longer side is taken
to be the determinant one and, as in Cavalieri’s figurative method, the planes
are compared according to the aggregate of parallel lines intersecting them;
the longer side could be seen as offering the possibility of more lines than
the vertical side of the rectangle does. This intuitive ambiguity, however,
is no argument against Cavalieri’s method, for the aggregate of parallel
lines imagined in the two parallelograms for the purpose of comparison
equally presupposes the equidistance of the lines from each other or from
the base, from which it follows that the height, and not the other side of
the parallelogram, is the other determining moment. The situation changes
again, however, when the two parallelograms being compared are of equal
height and equal base but do not lie on one plane and make different angles
with a third plane. Here the parallel cross-sections that arise when the third
plane is imagined cutting across the parallelograms in parallel motions are
no longer equidistant from each other and the two planes are unequal.
Cavalieri is very careful to call attention to this difference which he defines
as one between transitus rectus and transitus obliquus of the indivisibles (in
Exercit. I, n. XIIff., and already in Geometr. 1.II),157 thus staying at the
source any superficial misunderstanding which could arise at this juncture.
I remember Barrow citing in his above mentioned work (Lect. Geom. II,
p. 21)158 an objection of Taquet159 – an astute geometer who was also
working at this time on new methods – bearing on precisely this subject.
This Barrow is the one who also used the method of the indivisibles, though
already adulterated by the assumption (which he passed on to his pupil
Newton and to other contemporary mathematicians, Leibniz included)
that a curvilinear triangle, like the so-called characteristic triangle, and a
rectilinear triangle can be said to be equal if both are infinite, that is, very
small. The difficulty raised by Taquet likewise concerns the question of
which line, in the calculation of conic and spherical surfaces, should be
taken as the determining factor in a method based on the application of
the discrete. Taquet’s objection to the method of the indivisibles is that
in the calculation of conic and spheric surfaces, the triangle of the cone
is represented according to this atomistic method as made up of straight
157
159

158 Cf. above, 21.284.
See Cavalieri, Exercitationes geometricæ sex, §§15–17.
Andrew Taquet (1611–1660), Jesuit mathematician at Antwerp.

Quantum

269

lines, parallel to the base and perpendicular to the axis, which are at the
same time the radii of the circles of which the surface of the cone consists.
If now this surface is defined as the sum of the circumferences, and this
sum is determined from the number of the radii of these circumferences,
that is, from the length of the axis and the height of the cone, then such
a result would contradict the truth which Archimedes has taught and
demonstrated. To this objection of Taquet, Barrow’s response is that, for
determining the surface, it is not the axis but the side of the triangle of the
cone that must be taken as the line the revolution of which generates the
surface, and this line – not the axis – must therefore be taken as determining
the magnitude for the aggregate of the circumferences.
Objections or uncertainties of this kind have their origin solely in the
vagueness of the representation used for the infinite aggregate of points of
which the line, or of lines of which the plane, etc., supposedly consists; it
is this representation which obscures the essence of the determinateness,
whether of the lines or the planes. – It was the aim of these Remarks to bring
attention to the affirmative determinations of the category of the infinitesimal which, in the various uses made of this category in mathematics, remain
in the background so to speak, and to extract them from the nebulosity in
which they are shrouded when that category is kept at a merely negative
level of determination. In infinite series, as in Archimedes’ cyclometry, the
infinite means no more than that, if the law of the progression of the series
is known, but the so-called finite, that is, the arithmetical expression, is not
given, the reduction of the arc to the straight line cannot be carried out; this
incommensurability is their qualitative difference. Likewise the qualitative
difference between the discrete and the continuous contains in general a
negative determination which makes them appear incommensurable: it
thus introduces the infinite, in the sense that the continuous which is now
to be taken as discrete no longer is supposed to have, as continuous, any
quantum. The continuous, which arithmetically is to be taken as product,
is thereby posited as discrete in itself, that is to say, is broken down into
the elements which are its factors; its magnitude-determinateness lies in
these factors, and they, precisely by virtue of being factors or elements,
are of a lower dimension and, as the determinateness of power goes, of a
lower power than the magnitude of which they are the elements or factors.
This difference appears arithmetically as merely quantitative, a difference
of the root or the power, of whatever degree they might be; however, if
the expression does not go further than just the quantitative sphere as such
(for example, a : a2 or d a 2 = 2a : a 2 = 2 : a ; or for the law of gravity,
t : at2 ), it then yields the ratios 1 : a, 2 : a, 1 : at, which say nothing

21.309

270

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

whatsoever; as against their merely quantitative determination, the sides
would have to be held apart by the qualitative meaning differentiating
them, as s : at2 , the magnitude being thereby spoken of as a quality, as
a function of the magnitude of another quality. Here then, we are only
conscious of the quantitative determinateness, and it is easy enough, in its
own way, to operate with it. Nor is there anything terrible in multiplying
the magnitude of a line by the magnitude of another line. However, the
multiplication of these magnitudes yields at the same time the qualitative
alteration of the transition of line into plane, and to this extent a negative
determination comes into play. It is this determination that occasions the
difficulty, a difficulty which can be resolved by an insight into its peculiarity
and the simple nature of the matter, but which, when the attempt is made
to eliminate it by the aid of the infinite, only degenerates unresolved into
confusion.

c h a p ter 3

Ratio or the quantitative relation160

The infinity of quantum has been determined up to the point where it is
the negative beyond of quantum, a beyond which quantum, however, has
within it. This beyond is the qualitative moment in general. The infinite
quantum, as the unity of the two moments, of the quantitative and the
qualitative determinateness, is in the first instance ratio.
In ratio, quantum no longer has a merely indifferent determinateness but
is qualitatively determined as simply referring to its beyond. It continues
in its beyond, and this beyond is at first just an other quantum. Essentially,
however, the two do not refer to each other as external quanta but each
rather possesses its determinateness in this reference to the other. In this, in
their otherness, they have thus returned into themselves; what each is,
that it is in its other; the other constitutes the determinateness of each. –
The quantum’s self-transcendence does not now mean, therefore, that
quantum has simply changed either into some other or into its abstract
other, into its abstract beyond, but that there, in the other, it has attained
its determinateness; in its other, which is an other quantum, it finds itself.
The quality of quantum, its conceptual determinateness, is its externality
as such, and in ratio quantum is now posited as having its determinateness
in this externality, in another quantum – as being in its beyond what it is.
It is quanta that stand to each other in the connection that has now come
on the scene. This connection is itself also a magnitude; quantum is not only
in relation, but is itself posited as relation; it is a quantum as such that has
that qualitative determinateness in itself. So, as relation (as ratio), quantum
gives expression to itself as self-enclosed totality and to its indifference to
limit by containing the externality of its being-determined in itself: in this
externality it is only referred back to itself and is thus infinite within.
Ratio in general is:
1. direct ratio. In this, the qualitative moment does not yet emerge explicitly
as such; in no other way except still as quantum is quantum posited
160

das quantitative Verhältnis.

271

21.310

21.311

272

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

as having its determinateness in its externality. – In itself, however, the
quantitative relation is the contradiction of externality and self-reference,
the persistence of quanta and their negation. Such a contradiction next
sublates itself:
2. first inasmuch as in indirect or inverse ratio the negation of each of
the quanta is as such co-posited in the alteration of the other, and the
variability of the direct ratio is itself posited;
3. but in the ratio of powers, the unity, which in its difference refers back
to itself, proves to be a simple self-production of the quantum; this
qualitative moment itself, finally posited in a simple determination and
as identical with the quantum, becomes measure.
– About the nature of the following ratios, much was anticipated in
the preceding remarks concerning the infinity of quantity, that is, the
qualitative moment in it; it only remains to analyze, therefore, the abstract
concept of this ratio.
a. the direct ratio

21.312

1. In the ratio which, as immediate, is direct, the determinateness of each
quantum lies in the reciprocal determinateness of the other. There is only
one determinateness or limit of both – one which is itself a quantum, namely
the exponent of the ratio.
2. The exponent is some quantum or other; however, in referring itself
to itself in the otherness which it has within it, it is only a qualitatively
determined quantum, for its difference, its beyond and otherness, is in
it. This difference in the quantum is the difference of unit and amount –
the unit, which is the being-determined-for-itself; the amount, which is
the indifferent fluctuation of determinateness, the external indifference of
quantum. Unit and amount were at first the moments of quantum; now,
in the ratio, in quantum as realized so far, each of its moments appears as a
quantum on its own and as determinations of the existence of the quantum,
as delimitations against the otherwise external, indifferent determinateness
of magnitude.
The exponent is this difference as simple determinateness, that is, it
has the meaning of both determinations immediately in it. First, it is a
quantum and thus an amount. If the one side of the ratio which is taken as
unit is expressed in a numerical one, and has only the value of one, then the
other, the amount, is the quantum of the exponent itself. Second, it is simple
determinateness as the qualitative moment of the sides of the ratio. When
the quantum of the one side is determined, the other is also determined

Ratio or the quantitative relation

273

by the exponent and it is a matter of total indifference how the first is
determined; it no longer has any meaning as a quantum determined for
itself but can just as well be any other quantum without thereby altering the
determinateness of the ratio, which rests solely on the exponent. The one
side which is taken as unit always remains unit however great it becomes,
and the other, however great it too thereby becomes, must remain the same
amount of that unit.
3. Accordingly, the two truly constitute only one quantum; the one side
has only the value of unit with respect to the other, not of an amount; and
the other only that of amount. According to their conceptual determinateness,
therefore, they are themselves not complete quanta. But this incompleteness
is in them a negation, and it is so not because of their general variability,
according to which one of them (any of the two) can assume all possible
magnitudes, but because they are so determined that, as one is altered, the
other is increased or decreased in corresponding measure. This means that,
as indicated, only one of them, the unit, is altered as quantum; the other
side, the amount, remains the same quantum of units, and the first side too
retains the value of a unit, however much it is altered as quantum. Each side
is thus only one of the two moments of quantum, and the self-subsistence
which is their proper characteristic is in principle negated; in this qualitative
combination they are to be posited as negative with respect to each other.
The exponent ought to be the complete quantum, since the determinations of both sides come together in it; but in fact, even as quotient the
exponent only has the value of amount, or of unit. There is nothing available for determining which of the two sides of the relation would have to
be taken as the unit or as the amount; if one side, quantum B, is measured
against quantum A as unit, then the quotient C is the amount of such
units; but if A is itself taken as amount, the quotient C is the unit which is
required by the amount A for the quantum B. As exponent, therefore, this
quotient is not posited for what it ought to be, namely the determinant
of the ratio, or the ratio’s qualitative unity. It is posited as such only to
the extent that its value is that of the unity of the two moments, of unit
and amount. And since these two sides, as quanta, are indeed present as
they should be in the explicated quantum, in the ratio, but at the same
time have the value, which is specific to them as the sides of the ratio, of
being incomplete quanta and of counting only as one of those qualitative
moments, they are to be posited with this negation qualifying them. Thus
there arises a more real ratio, one more in accordance with its definition,
one in which the exponent has the meaning of the product of the sides. In
this determinateness, it is the inverse ratio.

21.313

21.314

274

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
b. the inverse ratio

21.315

1. The ratio as now before us is the sublated direct ratio. It was an immediate
relation and therefore not yet truly determinate; henceforth, the newly
introduced determinateness gives the exponent the value of a product, the
unity of unit and amount. In immediacy, as we have just seen, it was
possible for the exponent to be indifferently taken as unit or amount.
Moreover, it also was only a quantum in general and therefore an amount
by choice. One side was the unit, and this was to be taken as a numerical
one with respect to which the other side would be a fixed amount and at
the same time the exponent. The quality of the latter, therefore, was only
that this quantum is taken as fixed, or rather that the constant only has the
meaning of quantum.
Now in the inverse ratio, the exponent is as quantum likewise immediate,
a quantum or other which is assumed as fixed. But to the one of the
other quantum in the ratio, this quantum is not a fixed amount; the ratio,
previously taken as fixed, is now posited instead as alterable; if another
quantum is taken as the unit of the one side, the other side now no longer
remains the same amount of units of the first side. In direct ratio, this unit
is only the common element of both sides; as such, it continues into the
other side, the amount; the amount itself, or the exponent, is by itself
indifferent to the unit.
But as the determinateness of the ratio now is, the amount as such alters
relative to the unit with respect to which it makes up the other side of the
ratio; whenever another quantum is taken as the unit, that amount alters.
Consequently, although the exponent is still only an immediate quantum
and only arbitrarily assumed as fixed, it does not remain fixed in the side of
the ratio: rather this side, and with it the direct ratio of the sides, is alterable.
In the ratio now before us, the exponent as the determining quantum is
thus posited as negative towards itself as a quantum of the ratio, and hence
as qualitative, as limit; the result is that the qualitative moment distinctly
comes to the fore for itself as against the quantitative moment. – In the
direct ratio, the alteration of the two sides is only the one alteration of the
quantum from which the unity which is the common element is taken; by as
much, therefore, as the one side is increased or decreased, so also is the other;
the ratio itself is indifferent to this alteration and the alteration external
to the ratio. In the indirect ratio, on the contrary, although still arbitrary
according to the moment of quantitative indifference, the alteration is
contained within the ratio, and its arbitrary quantitative extension is limited
by the negative determinateness of the exponent as by a limit.

Ratio or the quantitative relation

275

2. We must now consider this qualitative nature of the indirect ratio more
closely, as it is realized, and sort out the entanglement of the affirmative
and the negative moments that are contained in it. – Quantum is posited
as being quantum qualitatively, that is, as self-determining, as displaying
its limit within it. Accordingly, first, it is an immediate magnitude as simple
determinateness; it is the whole as existent, an affirmative quantum. But,
second, this immediate determinateness is at the same time limit; for that
purpose it is distinguished into two quanta which are at first the other of
each other; but as the qualitative determinateness of these quanta, and as
a determinateness which is moreover complete, quantum is the unity of
the unit and the amount, a product of which the two are the factors. Thus
on the one hand the exponent of their ratio is in them identical with itself
and is their affirmative moment by which they are quanta; on the other
hand, as the negation posited in them, it is in them the unity according
to which each, at first an immediate and limited quantum in general, is at
the same time so limited as to be only implicitly in itself identical with its
other. Third, the exponent as the simple determinateness is the negative
unity of this differentiation of it into the two quanta, and the limit of their
reciprocal limiting.
In accordance with these determinations, the two moments limit themselves inside the exponent and each is the negative of the other, for the
exponent is their determinate unity; the one moment becomes as many
times smaller as the other becomes greater; each possesses a magnitude of
its own to the extent that this magnitude is in it that of their other, that
is, is the magnitude that the other lacks. The magnitude of each in this
way continues into the other negatively; how much it is in amount, that
much it sublates in the other as amount and is what it is only through
this negation or limit which is posited in it by the other. In this way,
each contains the other as well, and is proportioned to it, for each is supposed to be only that quantum which the other is not; the magnitude of
the other is indispensable to the value of each, and therefore inseparable
from it.
This continuity of each in the other constitutes the moment of unity
through which the two magnitudes stand in relation – the moment of
the one determinateness, of the simple limit which is the exponent. This
unity, the whole, constitutes the in-itself of each from which their given
magnitude is distinct: this is the magnitude according to which each is
only to the extent that it takes from the other a part of their common
in-itself which is the whole. But each can take from the other only as much
as will make it equal to this in-itself; it has its maximum in the exponent

276
21.316

21.317

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which, in accordance with the stated second determination, is the limit of
the reciprocal delimitation. And since each is a moment of the ratio only
to the extent that it limits the other and is thereby limited by it, it loses
this, its determination, by making itself equal to its in-itself; in this loss,
the other magnitude will not only become a zero, but itself vanishes, for
what it ought to be is not just a quantum but what it is as such a quantum,
namely only the moment of a ratio. Thus each side is the contradiction
between the determination as its in-itself, that is, as the unity of the whole
which is the exponent, and the determination as the moment of a ratio;
this contradiction is infinity again, in a new form peculiar to it.
The exponent is the limit of the sides of its ratio, within which limit
the sides increase and decrease proportionately to each other; but they
cannot become equal to this exponent because of the latter’s affirmative
determinateness as quantum. Thus, as the limit of their reciprocal limiting,
the exponent is (a) their beyond which they infinitely approximate but can
never attain. This infinity in which the sides approximate their beyond is
the bad infinity of the infinite progression; it is an infinity which is itself
finite, that finds its restriction in its opposite, in the finitude of each side
and of the exponent itself, and for this reason is only approximation. But
(b) the bad infinite is equally posited here as what it is in truth, namely
the negative moment in general, in accordance with which the exponent
is the simple limit as against the distinct quanta of the ratio: it is the initself to which, as the absolutely alterable, the finitude of the quanta is
referred, but which, as the quanta’s negation, remains absolutely different
from them. This infinite, which the quanta can only approximate, is then
equally found affirmatively present on their side: the simple quantum of
the exponent. In it is attained the beyond with which the sides of the
ratio are burdened; it is in itself the unity of the two or, consequently,
in itself the other side of each side; for each side has only as much value
as the other does not have; its whole determinateness thus rests in the
other, and this, their being-in-itself, is as affirmative infinity simply the
exponent.
3. With this, however, we have the transition of the inverse ratio into
a determination other than the one it had at first. This consisted in the
fact that the quantum is immediate but at the same time so connected to
an other that the greater it is, the smaller is the other, that it is what it is
by virtue of negatively relating to the other; also, a third magnitude is the
common restriction on this alteration in magnitude that the two quanta
undergo. This reciprocal alteration, as contrasted to the fixed qualitative

Ratio or the quantitative relation

277

limit, is here their distinctive property; they have the determination of
alterable magnitudes for which that fixed limit is an infinite beyond.
But the determinations that have emerged and which we now have to
sum up are not only that this infinite beyond is at the same time some
present finite quantum or other, but that its fixity – which makes it with
respect to the quantitative moment the infinite beyond that it is, and
which is the qualitative moment of being only as abstract self-reference –
has developed itself as a mediation of itself with itself in its other, the
finite moments of the relation. The general point is that the whole is as
such the limit of the reciprocal limiting of the two terms, and that the
negation of the negation (and consequently infinity, the affirmative selfrelation) is therefore posited. The more particular point is that, as product,
the exponent already implicitly is already the unity of unit and amount,
whereas each of these two terms is only one of two moments, and for
this reason the exponent encloses them in itself and in them it implicitly
refers itself to itself. But in the inverse ratio the difference has developed
into the externality of quantitative being, and the qualitative being is not
only something fixed, nor does it simply enclose the two moments of the
ratio immediately in it, but in the externally existent otherness it rejoins itself.
It is this determination that stands out as a result in the moments we
have seen. The exponent, namely, is found to be the implicit being whose
moments are realized in quanta and in their generalized alterability. The
indifference of the magnitudes of these moments in the course of their
alteration displays itself as an infinite progression, the basis of which is
that in their indifference their determinateness is to have their value each
in the value of the other. Thus, (a) according to the affirmative side of
their quantum, the determinateness of the moments is that each is in itself
the whole of the exponent; equally, (b) they have the magnitude of the
exponent for their negative moment, for their reciprocal limiting; their
limit is that of the exponent. The fact that such moments do not have
any other immanent limit, any fixed immediacy, is posited in the infinite
progression of their existence and in their limitation, in the negation of
every particular value. This is, accordingly, the negation of the externality
of the exponent which is displayed in them, and the exponent – itself
equally a quantum as such and also expanded into quanta – is thereby
posited as preserving itself in the negation of the indifferent subsistence of
the moments, as rejoining itself, and thus as the determining factor in this
movement of self-surpassing.
The ratio is hereby determined as the ratio of powers.

21.318

278

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
c. the ratio of powers

21.319

1. Quantum, in positing itself as self-identical in its otherness and in
determining its own movement of self-surpassing, has come to be a beingfor-itself. As such a qualitative totality, in positing itself as developed, it
has for its moments the conceptual determinations of number: the unit
and the amount. This last, amount, is in the inverse ratio still an aggregate
which is not determined as amount by the unit itself but from elsewhere,
by a third determinate aggregate; but now it is posited as determined only
by the unit. This is the case in the ratio of powers where the unit, which in
it is amount, is at the same time the amount as against itself as unit. The
otherness, the amount of units, is the unit itself. The power is an aggregate
of units, each of which is this aggregate itself. The quantum, as indifferent
determinateness, changes; but inasmuch as the alteration is the raising to a
power, the otherness of the quantum is determined purely by itself. – The
quantum is thus posited in the power as having returned into itself; it is
immediately itself and also its otherness.
The exponent of this ratio is no longer an immediate quantum, as in the
direct ratio and also in the inverse ratio. In the ratio of powers, the exponent
is of an entirely qualitative nature; it is this simple determinateness: that the
amount is the unit itself, that the quantum is self-identical in its otherness.
And the side of its quantitative nature is to be found in this: that the limit or
negation is not an immediate existent, but that existence is posited rather
as continuing in its otherness. For the truth of quality is precisely to be
quantity, or immediate determinateness as sublated.
2. The ratio of powers appears at first as an external alteration to which a
given quantum is subjected; but it has a closer connection with the concept
of quantum, namely, that in the existence into which the quantum has
developed in the ratio of powers, quantum has attained that concept, has
realized its concept to the fullest. The ratio of powers is the display of
what the quantum is implicitly in itself; it expresses its determinateness
of quantum or the quality by which it is distinguished from another.
Quantum is indifferent determinateness posited as sublated, that is to say,
determinateness as limit, one which is just as much no determinateness,
which continues in its otherness and in it, therefore, remains identical
with itself. Thus is quantum posited in the ratio of powers: its otherness,
the surpassing of itself in another quantum, as determined through the
quantum itself.
If we compare the progressive realization of quantum in the preceding
ratios, we find that quantum’s quality of being the difference of itself from

Ratio or the quantitative relation

279

itself is simply this: that it is a ratio. As the direct ratio, quantum is this
posited difference only in the first instance or immediately, so that the selfreference which it has as exponent, in contrast to its differences, counts
only as the fixity of an amount of the unit. In the inverse ratio, as negatively
determined, quantum is a relating of itself to itself (to itself as to its negation
in which, however, it has its value); as an affirmative self-reference, it is an
exponent which, as quantum, is only implicitly in itself the determinant of
its moments. But in the ratio of powers quantum is present in the difference
as a difference of itself from itself. This externality of determinateness is the
quality of quantum and is thus posited, in conformity to the concept
of quantum, as quantum’s own determining, as its reference to itself, its
quality.
3. By being thus posited as it is in conformity to its concept, quantum
has passed over into another determination; or, as we can also say, its
determination is now also as the determinateness, the in-itself also as existence.
It is quantum in so far as the externality or the indifference of its determining
(as we say, it is that which can be increased or decreased) is simply accepted
and immediately posited; it has become the other of itself, namely quality,
in so far as that same externality is now posited as mediated by quantum
itself and hence as a moment of quantum, so that in that very externality
quantum refers itself to itself – is being as quality.
At first quantity as such thus appears in opposition to quality; but
quantity is itself a quality, self-referring determinateness as such, distinct
from the determinateness which is its other, from quality as such. Except
that quantity is not only a quality, but the truth of quality itself is quantity,
and quality has demonstrated itself as passing over into it. Quantity, in
its truth, is instead the externality which has returned into itself, which is
no longer indifferent. Thus is quantity quality itself, in such a way that
outside this determination quality as such would yet not be anything at
all. – For the totality to be posited, a double transition is required, not
only the transition of one determinateness into the other, but equally the
transition of this other into the first, its going back into it. Through the
first transition, the identity of the two is present at first only in itself:
quality is contained in quantity, but the latter still is only a one-sided
determinateness. Conversely, that quantity is equally contained in quality,
that it is equally also only as sublated, this results in the second transition,
the going back into the first determinateness. This remark regarding the
necessity of the double transition is everywhere of great importance for
scientific method.

21.320

280

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

21.321

Quantum is henceforth no longer an indifferent or external determination but is sublated as such, and it is a quality and that by virtue of which
anything is what it is; the truth of quantum is to be measure.

21.322

Remark
We explained above, in the Remarks concerning the quantitative infinite,161
that the difficulties associated with it have their origin in the qualitative moment that asserts itself in the sphere of the quantitative. We also
explained how it is the qualitative moment of the ratio of powers which
is particularly involved in a multitude of new starts and false starts; and
we showed that the failure which chiefly stands in the way of a grasp
of the concept of this infinite is that one stops short at just its negative
determination as the negation of quantum, and fails to proceed to its
simple affirmative determination as qualitative. – We now have only one
more remark left to make. It concerns the intrusion of quantitative forms
into the pure qualitative forms of thought that has occurred in philosophy. The ratio of powers especially has recently been applied to conceptual
determinations. Thus the concept has been called “the first power” in its
immediacy; “the second power” in its otherness or difference, in the existence of its moments; and “the third power” in its turning back to itself or as
totality.162 – It immediately occurs against this usage that power, as so used,
is a category that essentially belongs to quantum and has no conceptual
connection to the potentia, dÅnamiv, of Aristotle. The ratio of powers indeed
expresses determinateness in the truth that it has attained as difference –
but difference as found in the particular concept of quantum, not as it is
in the concept as such. Quantum contains the negativity that belongs to
the nature of the concept but not as in any way already posited in the
determination which is specific to it; so far as the concept is concerned,
the differences of quantum are superficial determinations; they are still far
from being determined as they are in the concept. It was in the infancy
of philosophical thinking that numbers were used, as by Pythagoras, to
designate universal essential differences, and for this purpose, first power,
second power, etc., have no advantage over numbers. This was a preliminary stage in the process of comprehension by pure thought; only after
Pythagoras were the determinations of thought themselves discovered, that
is, they were explicitly brought to consciousness. But to step back in this
process to number determinations is the symptom of a thought that senses
161
162

These are the remarks at the end of the preceding chapter.
Hegel is clearly referring to Schelling and his disciples, and to Bardili as well.

Ratio or the quantitative relation

281

its incapacity and, in an effort to stand up to the contemporary philosophical culture which is accustomed to thought determinations, now adds the
comedy of pretending that its weakness is something new and superior, a
step forward.
There is nothing much to be said against the symbolic use of the language
of “power,” no more than there is against the use of numbers or any
other kind of symbols for concepts. But there is also everything to be
said against it as there is against any system of symbols that pretends to
convey pure conceptual or philosophical determinations. Philosophy has
no need of any such aid, either from the world of the senses, or from the
representations of the imagination, or also from spheres which belong to its
own realm but are subordinated, and whose determinations are therefore
unsuited to higher circles and to the whole. This last is universally the case
when the categories of finitude are applied to the infinite; the common
determinations of force, or substantiality, cause and effect, and so on, are
likewise only symbols when expressing, for instance, living or spiritual
relations; that is, they are to them untrue determinations, and all the
less true to them, or to speculative relations in general, are the quantum
powers or the numerical powers. – If one is to use numbers, powers,
the mathematical infinite, and the like, not as symbols but as forms of
philosophical determinations and consequently as themselves philosophical
forms, then one must start by defining their philosophical meaning, that
is, their conceptual determinateness. But the moment this is done, they
become superfluous designations, for the determinateness of the concept
is its own designation, and this alone is the one which is both correct and
fitting. The use of those forms is, therefore, nothing more than a convenient
means for sparing oneself the task of grasping the determinations of the
concept, of specifying and justifying them.

section iii

Measure

21.323

21.324

Abstractly expressed, quality and quantity are in measure united. Being
as such is the immediate equality of determinateness with itself. This
immediacy of determinateness has sublated itself. Quantity is being that
has returned to itself in such a way that it is a simple self-equality indifferent
to determinateness. But this indifference is only the externality of having
the determinateness not in itself but in an other. As third, we now have the
externality that refers itself to itself; as self-reference, it is at the same time
sublated externality and carries the difference from itself in it – a difference
which, as externality, is the quantitative moment, and, as taken back into
itself, the qualitative.
Since among the categories of transcendental idealism modality comes
after quantity and quality, with relation inserted in between,1 this is an
appropriate place to say something about it. In transcendental idealism,
this category has the meaning that it is the connection of the subject matter
to thought. As understood by that idealism, thought is as such essentially
external to the thing-in-itself. Hence, inasmuch as the other categories have
the transcendental determination of belonging only to consciousness, but
as its objective moment, so modality, which is the category of the connection
to the subject, possesses the determination of reflection in itself in a relative
sense,2 that is to say, the objectivity which is granted to the other categories
is lacking in those of modality; these, according to Kant’s words, do not add
1
2

A80/B109.
relativ. One sentence in the 1812 edition of this introduction to “measure” which is not included
in the present, otherwise much enlarged 1832 version of the same text may help to explain Hegel’s
meaning. “On one side here [of thought], only pure externality is contained, for the connection
to thought which could be the moment of reflection into itself is here rather the externality itself”
(11, 189.17–20). That is to say, in Transcendental Idealism the return of thought from the subject
matter (Gegenstand) back to itself which would constitute its truth is only relative, i.e. still subjective,
for the object from which the return is made remains an empty externality which is indicated only at
a distance. The objectivity (Objectivität) attained is still subjective. In this respect, there is an affinity
between Transcendental Idealism and Spinoza’s thought which Hegel then goes on to consider.

282

Measure

283

in the least to the concept as a determination of the object but only express
its relation to the faculty of cognition (Cr. of Pure R., 2nd edn, pp. 99,
266).3 – The categories which Kant groups under modality – possibility,
actuality, and necessity – will come up later in their proper place.4 Kant did
not apply the form of triplicity – an infinitely important form even though
with him it occurred only as a formal spark of light – to the genera of his
categories (to quantity, quality, etc.), but only to their species to which he
also gave the name of genera. He was therefore unable to hit upon the third
to quality and quantity.
With Spinoza, the mode is likewise the third after substance and
attribute;5 Spinoza defines it as the affections of substance, or as that which
is in another through which it is also comprehended. In this way of conceiving it, this third is externality as such; as has already been mentioned,6
with Spinoza generally, the rigidity of substance lacks the turning back into
itself.
The remark just made extends to any of the systems of pantheism which
thought has in one way or other produced. Being, the one, substance, the
infinite, essence, is the first; opposite this abstraction is the second which
can be mustered in an equally abstract form, as is habitually done as the
next step in any purely formalistic thinking, namely all determinateness
generally taken as the mere finite, the mere accidental, the transitory, the
extraneous and unessential, etc. But the bond connecting this second with
the first is too invasive for the second not to be not equally grasped with
the first; thus with Spinoza the attribute is the whole of substance, though
as comprehended by the understanding, which is itself a restriction of
substance or mode; and so the mode, the insubstantial as such which can
be grasped only through an other, constitutes the opposite extreme of
substance, the third. Also Indian pantheism, taken abstractly, has attained
in its monstrous fantasies this refinement which runs like a moderating
thread across its excesses as its one point of interest – namely that Brahma,
the one of abstract thought, progresses through the shape of Vishnu,
particularly in the form of Krishna, to the third, Shiva. The determination
of this third is that of mode, alteration, coming-to-be and passing-away;
it is the field of externality in general. This Indian trinity has tempted
a comparison with the Christian, and one must indeed acknowledge a
common element in them. But it is essential to be aware of the difference
3
5
6

4 Cf. 11.389ff., below.
A74/B99; A219/B266ff.
Cf. Ethics, Definition IV which follows after the definition of “substance” and “attribute.” English
trans., p. 45.
Cf. above, 21.247.

21.325

284

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

that separates them. It is not just that this difference is infinite but that the
true infinity makes the difference. The determination of the Indian third
principle is that it is the dispersal of the substantial unity into its opposite,
not its turning back to itself – a spiritual void rather, not spirit. In the true
trinity, there is not only unity but unification; the syllogism is brought
to a unity which is full of content and actual, a unity which in its totally
concrete determination is spirit. The principle of the mode and of alteration
does not, of course, exclude unity altogether. In Spinozism, for instance,
precisely the mode is as such untrue while substance alone is what truly is;
everything is supposed to be reduced to substance, and this is then a sinking
of all content into an only formal unity void of content. As for Shiva, it too
is again the great whole, not distinct from Brahma, from Brahma itself, that
is, the distinction and the determinateness just disappear without being
preserved, without being sublated, and the unity does not become concrete
unity, nor is the diremption reconciled. The supreme goal of the human
being, relegated as he is to the sphere of coming-to-be and passing-away,
of modality in general, is to sink into unconsciousness, into unity with
Brahma, annihilation; the Buddhist Nirvana, Nibbana, etc., is the same.
Now although the mode is as such abstract externality, indifference
to qualitative as well as quantitative determinations, and nothing in the
essence should depend on the external, the unessential, it is nevertheless
conceded that in the many all depends on the how;7 but this is to concede
that the mode itself essentially belongs to the substance of a thing, a very
indefinite connection but one which at least implies that the externality of
the mode is not all that abstract an externality after all.8
Here the mode has the definite meaning of being measure. The Spinozistic mode, just like the Indian principle of alteration, is the measureless.
The Greeks were aware that everything has a measure. Parmenides himself
introduces necessity after abstract being, as the ancient limit which is imposed
on all.9 And this awareness, although still vague, is the beginning of a much
higher concept than is contained in substance and in the distinction of the
mode from it. –
Measure in its more developed, more reflected form is necessity. Fate,
Nemesis, ultimately comes down to a determination of measure. Whatever
7
8

9

Art und Weise: both Art and Weise can be translations of the Latin modus or “mode.”
This paragraph does not appear in the 1812 edition. It is part of the much enlarged 1832 text. It is
especially important because it signals a clarification in Hegel’s own mind regarding the new objective
meaning that the modal categories assume when “measure” is understood as a yet undeveloped form
of “mode.” See the translator’s Introduction.
See Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Diels/Kranz, Vol. 2, 28B8.

Measure

285

renders itself beyond the pale, becomes too great, too high, is brought
down to the other extreme of being reduced to nothing, so that the mean
of measure, the medium, is restored. – That the Absolute, God, is the
measure of all things, is not a stronger statement of pantheism than the
definition, “the Absolute, God, is being,” but is infinitely truer. – Measure
is indeed an external way of things, a more or less, but one which is as at
the same time reflected into itself, not merely an indifferent and external
determinateness but one which exists in itself; thus it is the concrete truth
of being. For this reason the nations have revered in it the presence of
something inviolable and sacred.
Already present in measure is the idea of essence, namely of being selfidentical in the immediacy of being determined, so that this immediacy is
reduced through the self-identity to something mediated, just as the selfidentity is equally mediated only through this externality, but the mediation
is one with itself: this is reflection, the moments of which indeed are, but
in this being are absolutely nothing but moments of their negative unity.
In measure, the qualitative element is quantitative; the determinateness or
the difference is indifferent and therefore a difference which is none; it is
sublated and this quantitativeness,10 as an immanent turning back in which
it is qualitative, constitutes the being-in-and-for-itself which is essence. But
measure is essence only implicitly in itself or in its concept; this concept of
measure is not yet posited. Measure is as such still the existent unity of the
qualitative and the quantitative element; its moments are an existence, a
quality and some quanta of this quality which, in themselves, are indeed
only indivisible, but do not yet have the meaning of this reflected determination. In the development of measure, these moments are differentiated
but at the same time referred to each other, so that the identity which they
are in themselves becomes their connection explicitly, that is, is posited. The
meaning of this development is the realization of measure in which the
latter posits itself in relation to itself and consequently as moment as well;
through this mediation, measure is determined as sublated; its immediacy
as well as that of its moments disappears; these moments are reflected and
thus measure, having disclosed what it is according to its concept, has
passed over into essence.
Measure is at first the immediate unity of the qualitative and the quantitative element, so that it is,
first, a quantum that has qualitative meaning and is as measure. As
so implicitly determined in itself, its further determination is that the
10

Quantitativität.

21.326

21.327

286

21.328

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

difference of its moments, of its qualitatively and quantitatively determined
being, is disclosed in it. These moments further determine themselves into
wholes of measure which as such are self-subsistent, and, inasmuch as they
refer to each other essentially, measure becomes,
second, a ratio of specific quanta, each an independent measure. But
their self-subsistence also rests essentially on a quantitative relation and a
difference of magnitude, and so the self-subsistence becomes a transition
of one measure into another. The result is that measure collapses into the
measureless. – But this beyond of measure is the negativity of measure only
in itself; thus,
third, the indifference of the determinations of measure is thereby posited,
and measure (real measure because of the negativity contained within it)
is posited as an inverse ratio of measures which, as self-subsistent qualities,
essentially rest on only their quantity and their negative reference to each
other, and consequently prove to be only moments of their truly selfsubsistent unity. This unity is the reflection-into-itself of each and the
positing of them; it is essence.
The development of measure, which we have attempted in what follows,
is among the most difficult of subject matters. Starting with immediate,
external measure, it would have to proceed, on the one hand, to the further
abstract determination of the quantitative aspect of natural things (of a
mathematics of nature); on the other side, it would have to indicate the
link between this determination of measure and the qualitative aspect of
those things – at least in general, for the detailed demonstration of the
link between the qualitative and the quantitative aspects as they originate
in the concept of a concrete object belongs to the particular science of
the concrete (examples of which, concerning the law of falling bodies and
the free movement of the heavens, will be found in the Encyclopedia of the
Philosophical Sciences).11 We may remark quite in general in this connection
that the different forms in which measure is realized also belong to different
spheres of natural reality. The complete, abstract indifference of developed
measure, that is, of its laws, can only be found in the sphere of mechanism
where concrete corporeity is only abstract matter itself; the qualitative
differences of this matter are of an essentially quantitative nature; space
and time are nothing but pure externalities, and the aggregates of matters,
the masses, the intensity of weight, are determinations which are just as
external and have their proper determinateness in the quantitative element.
On the other hand, in physical things but even more so in the organic, this
11

3rd edn, §267 and 270, Remark.

Measure

287

quantitative determinateness of abstract materiality is already disturbed by
the multiplicity and consequently the conflict of qualities. And the thus
ensuing conflict is not just one of qualities as such, but measure itself
is subordinated here to higher relations and its immanent development is
reduced rather to the simple form of immediate measure. The limbs of
the animal organism have a measure which, as a simple quantum, stands
in a ratio to the other quanta of the other limbs; the proportions of the
human body are the fixed ratios of such quanta, and the science of nature
still has far to go in discovering anything about the link that connects
these magnitudes with the organic functions on which they are entirely
dependent. But the closest example of the reduction of an immanent
measure to a merely externally determined magnitude is motion. In the
heavenly bodies, motion is free motion, one which is only determined
by the concept from which alone, consequently, its magnitudes equally
depend (see above); but in the organic body this free motion is reduced
to one which is arbitrary or mechanically regular, that is, to one which is
totally abstract and formal.
And in the realm of spirit there is even less of a characteristic, free
development of measure to be found. For instance, it is obvious that a
republican constitution like the Athenian, or an aristocratic constitution
mixed with democracy, is possible only in a state of a certain size; it is also
obvious that in civil society the multitudes of individuals who belong to
the different occupations stand in a certain ratio to each other. But none
of this yields either laws of measures or typical forms of it. In the spiritual
realm as such there are indeed distinctions of intensity of character, strength
of imagination, sensations, representations, and so on; but in determining
them one cannot go past this indefinite duo of “strength” and “weakness.”
To see how lame and totally empty ultimately turn out to be the socalled laws which have been established for the relation of strength and
weakness in sensations, representations, and so on, one need only look at
the psychologies that busy themselves with just such matters.

c h a p ter 1
21.329

Specific quantity

Qualitative quantity is,
first, an immediate, specific quantum; and this quantum,
second, in relating itself to another, becomes a quantitative specifying, a
sublating of the indifferent quantum. This measure is to this extent a rule
and contains the two moments of measure as different; namely, the quantitative determinateness and the external quantum as existing in themselves.
In this difference, however, the two sides become qualities, and the rule
becomes a relation of the two; measure presents itself thereby,
third, as a relation of qualities that have one single measure at first – a
measure, however, which further specifies itself in itself into a difference of
measures.
a. the specific quantum

21.330

1. Measure is the simple self-reference of quantum, its own determinateness
in itself; quantum is thus qualitative. At first, as an immediate measure
it is an immediate quantum and hence some specific quantum; equally
immediate is the quality that belongs to it; it is some specific quality or
other. – Thus quantum, as this no longer indifferent limit but as selfreferring externality, is itself quality and, although distinguished from it,
it does not extend past it, just as quality does not extend past quantum.
Quantum is thus the determinateness that has returned into simple selfequality – which is at one with determinate existence just as determinate
existence is at one with it.
If a proposition is to be made of the determination just obtained, it
could be expressed thus: “Whatever is, has a measure.” Every existence has
a magnitude, and this magnitude belongs to the very nature of a something;
it constitutes its determinate nature and its in-itself. The something is not
indifferent to this magnitude, as if, were the latter to alter, it would remain
the same; rather the alteration of the magnitude alters its quality. As measure
288

Specific quantity

289

the quantum has ceased to be a limit which is none; it is from now on the
determination of a thing, so that, were the latter to exceed or fall short of
this quantum, it would perish. –
A measure, in the usual sense of a standard, is a quantum which is
arbitrarily assumed as the unit determinate in itself as against an external
amount. Of course, such a unit can in fact also be determinate in itself,
like a foot or some such other original measure; to the extent, however,
that it is used as the measuring standard for other things, it is with respect
to them only an external measure, not their original measure. – Thus the
diameter of the earth or the length of a pendulum may be taken as a
specific quantum on their own account. But the choice of a fraction of the
earth’s diameter or of the pendulum’s length, and this last under which
degree of latitude, for use as a standard of measure is arbitrary. And for
other things such a standard is something even more external. These have
further specified the universal specific quantum in some particular way, and
they have thereby been made into particular things. It is therefore foolish
to speak of a natural standard of things. Anyway, a universal standard
is meant for use only as an external comparison of things, and in this
superficial sense of universal standard it is quite a matter of indifference
what is used for the purpose. It is not meant to be a fundamental measure
in the sense that in it the natural measures of particular things would be
displayed and recognized, according to a rule, as the specifications of one
universal measure, the measure of the things’s universal body. But without
this meaning the sole interest and significance of an absolute standard of
measure is that of something common, and any such standard is a universal
not in itself but only by convention.
Immediate measure is a simple determination of magnitude as, for example, the size of organic beings, of their limbs, and so forth. But any concrete
existent has the size required for being what it is, and for having existence
in the first place. – As a quantum, the existent is an indifferent magnitude
open to external determination and capable of fluctuating increases and
decreases. As a measure, however, it is at the same time distinct from itself
as quantum, itself as such an indifferent determination, and is a restriction
on that indifferent fluctuation of a limit.
Since in the existence of anything the quantitative determinateness is
thus twofold, in the sense that quality is tied to it and yet the quantity
can fluctuate without prejudice to quality – so the demise of anything that
has a measure occurs through the alteration of its quantum. On the one
hand, the demise appears unexpected, inasmuch as there can be alteration
in the quantum without the measure and the quality being altered; but, on

21.331

290

21.332

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the other hand, it is made into something quite simple to grasp by means
namely of the concept of gradualness. It is easy to turn to this category for
visualizing or “explaining” the disappearance of a quality or of a something,
for it gives the impression that one can witness this disappearance as if
before one’s eyes: since the quantum is posited as the external limit which
is by nature alterable, the alteration (of quantum only) then follows by
itself. But in fact nothing is thereby explained, for the alteration is at the
same time essentially the transition of one quality into another, or the more
abstract transition of one existence into a non-existence, and therein lies
another determination than just gradualness, which is only a decrease or
increase, and the one-sided holding fast to magnitude.
2. The ancients had already taken notice of this coincidence, that an
alteration which appears to be only quantitative suddenly changes into a
qualitative one, and they used popular examples to illustrate the inconsistencies that arise when such a coincidence is not understood. Two such
examples go under the familiar names of “the bald” and “the heap.” They
are elenchi, that is, according to Aristotle’s explanation, two ways in which
one is compelled to say the opposite of what one has previously asserted.12
The question was put: does the plucking of one hair from someone’s head
or from a horse’s tail produce baldness, or does a heap cease to be a heap if
one grain is removed? The expected answer can safely be conceded, for the
removal amounts to a merely quantitative difference, and an insignificant
one at that. And so one hair is removed, one grain, and this is repeated
with only one hair and one grain being removed each time the answer is
conceded. At last the qualitative alteration is revealed: the head or the tail
is bald; the heap has vanished. In conceding the answer, it was not only
the repetition that was each time forgotten, but also that the individually
insignificant quantities (like the individually insignificant disbursements
from a patrimony) add up, and the sum constitutes the qualitative whole,
so that at the end this whole has vanished: the head is bald, the purse is
empty.
The embarrassment, the contradiction, produced by the result, is not
anything sophistic in the usual sense of the word, as if the contradiction
were a pretense. The mistake is committed by the assumed interlocutor
(that is, our ordinary consciousness), and that is of assuming a quantity to
be only an indifferent limit, that is, of taking it in the narrowly defined
sense of a quantity. But this assumption is confounded by the truth to
which it is brought, namely that quantity is a moment of measure and
12

See Aristotle, Sophistical Refutations, 164b 27–165a 2.

Specific quantity

291

is linked to quality; refuted is the one-sided stubborn adherence to the
abstract determinateness of quantum. – Also those elenchi are, therefore,
not anything frivolous or pedantic but basically correct: they attest to a
mind which has an interest in the phenomena that come with thinking.
Quantum, when it is taken as indifferent limit, is the side from which
an existence is unsuspectedly attacked and laid low. It is the cunning of
the concept that it would seize on an existence from this side where its
quality does not seem to come into play – and it does it so well that the
aggrandizement of a State or of a patrimony, etc., which will bring about
the misfortune of the State or the owner, even appears at first to be their
good fortune.
3. Measure is in its immediacy an ordinary quality of a specific magnitude appropriate to it. Now there is also the distinction between the
side according to which quantum is an indifferent limit that can fluctuate
without the quality altering and the other side according to which it is
qualitative and specific. Both sides are the magnitude determinations of
one and the same thing; but because of the original immediacy of measure,
this distinction too is to be taken as immediate, and accordingly the two
sides each also have a diverse concrete existence. The concrete existence of
measure, which is the side of magnitude determinate in itself, then behaves
towards the concrete existence of the alterable external side by sublating
the indifference of the latter; this is a specifying of measure.

b. specifying measure
First, this measure is a rule, a measure external to the mere quantum.
Second, it is a specific quantity determining the external quantum.
Third, the two sides, both as qualities of specific quantitative determinacy,
relate to one another as one measure.
a. The rule
The rule, or the standard which we have just mentioned, is in the first
instance as a magnitude which is determinate in itself and is a unit with
respect to a quantum of a particular concrete existence: this is a quantum
with a concrete existence which is other than the something of the rule –
is measured by the latter, that is, is determined as the amount of the said
unit. This comparison is an external act, and the unit itself is an arbitrary
magnitude which can in turn be posited as an amount (the foot as an

21.333

292

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

amount of inches). But measure is not only an external rule; as a specific
measure its intrinsic nature is that it relates to its other which is a quantum.
b. Specifying measure

21.334

Measure is a specific determining of the external magnitude, that is, of the
indifferent magnitude which is now posited in the measuring something by
some other concrete existence in general.13 The something of the measure is
indeed itself a quantum, but with the difference that it is the qualitative side
determining the merely indifferent, external quantum. It has intrinsically
this side of being-for-other to which the fluctuation in size belongs. The
immanent measuring is a quality of the something, and this something
is confronted by the same quality in another something; in the latter,
however, the quality is at first relative, with a measureless quantum in
general as against the something determined as measuring.14
Inasmuch as a something has an internal measure, an alteration of the
magnitude of its quality comes to it from outside, and the something
does not take on the arithmetical aggregate of the alteration. Its measure
reacts against it, behaves towards the aggregate as an intensive measure and
assimilates it in a way typically its own; it alters the externally imposed
alteration, makes something else out of this quantum and demonstrates
through this specifying function that in this externality it is for-itself. – This
specifically assimilated aggregate is itself a quantum which is also dependent
on the other, that is, on the other aggregate which is only external to it.
The specified aggregate is therefore also alterable, but is not for that reason
a quantum as such but the external quantum as specified in a constant
manner. Measure thus has its determinate existence as a ratio, and its
specificity is in general the exponent of this ratio.
In intensive and extensive quantum, as we saw when considering these
determinations,15 it is the same quantum which is present, once in the
form of intensity and again in the form of extension. In this difference the
underlying quantum does not suffer any alteration; the difference is only
an external form. In the specifying measure, on the contrary, the quantum
13

14
15

“measuring something” = Etwas des Maßes (literally: “the something of the measure”). For example,
“temperature” is the specifying measure of the otherwise indifferent magnitude of “water.” The
latter is specified as “hot” or “cold” to some degree or other – “hot” and “cold” being the “the
measuring something.” But this specification is done according to that same measure as specified
in some other magnitude (i.e. “some other concrete existence in general”; for instance, “mercury”).
i.e. each measure, as a concrete “something” (“feet,” “inches,” etc.), is in principle measurable by
some other measure which is, however, left indeterminate.
Cf. above, 21.213.

Specific quantity

293

is taken in one instance in its immediate magnitude, but through the
exponent of the ratio it is taken in a second instance in another amount.
The exponent which constitutes the element of specificity can appear
at first to be a fixed quantum, as a quotient of the ratio between the
external and the qualitatively determined quantum. But it would then be
nothing more than an external quantum whereas by the exponent we are to
understand here nothing but the qualitative moment itself that specifies the
quantum as such. The only strictly immanent qualitative determination of
the quantum is (as we saw earlier)16 that of the exponent, and it must be such
an exponential determination which now constitutes the ratio and which,
as the internally existent determination, comes to confront the quantum as
externally constituted. The principle of this quantum is the numerical one
which constitutes its internal determinateness: the mode of connection of
this numerical one is external, and the alteration which is determined only
through the nature of the immediate quantum as such consists essentially
in the addition of one such numerical one and then another and so forth.
As the external quantum alters in arithmetical progression in this way, the
specifying reaction of the qualitative nature produces another series which
refers to the first, increases and decreases with it, not however in a ratio
determined by a numerical exponent but in a ratio which is numerically
incommensurable, in the manner of a power determination.
Remark
To cite an example, temperature is a quality in which these two sides of
external and specified quantum are distinguished. As a quantum the temperature is external and is also, indeed, the temperature of a body as a
general medium, and it is assumed that its alteration runs on the scale of
an arithmetical progression, increasing or decreasing uniformly. But in fact
the temperature is differently assimilated by the different particular bodies
found at that temperature, for since these bodies determine the externally
received temperature through their immanent measure, the change in temperature of any of them does not correspond in a direct ratio to that of
the medium or any other among them. Different bodies compared at one
and the same temperature give the numerical ratios of their specific heats,
of their thermal capacities. But such thermal capacities of bodies vary at
diverse temperatures, and associated with the variation is the appearance
of an alteration in specific shape. In the increase or decrease of temperature
16

Cf. above, 21.275, 318–320.

21.335

21.336

294

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

there is thus manifested a particular specification. The ratio of the temperature, represented as external, to the temperature of a particular body which
is at the same time dependent on that temperature, does not have a fixed
ratio exponent; the increase or decrease of this heat does not proceed uniformly with the increase or decrease of the external heat. – A temperature
is being assumed here which is absolutely external, of which the alteration
would be merely external or purely quantitative. But the temperature is
itself the temperature of air or some other specific temperature. The ratio,
therefore, if looked at more closely, would properly have to be taken not as
the ratio of a merely quantitative quantum to a qualifying quantum, but
of two specific quanta. And this is how the specifying ratio is now further
determined: the moments of measure are not only the sides of one and
the same quality, one side quantitative and the other side qualifying the
quantum, but consist rather in the relation of two qualities which are in
themselves measures.
c. Relation of the two sides as qualities

21.337

1. The qualitative side of the quantum, in itself determined, exists only
as a reference to the external quantitative side; as specifying the latter, it
is a sublating of its externality through which quantum as such is. This
qualitative side thus has a quantum for the presupposition from which it
starts. But this quantum is also qualitatively distinguished from quality,
and this difference between the two must now be posited in the immediacy
of being in general which still characterizes measure. The two sides thus
stand to each other in a qualitative respect, each a qualitative existence for
itself, and the one side that was at first only an internally indeterminate
formal quantum is the quantum of a something and of its quality, and,
just as their reciprocal reference is now determined as measure in general,
so too is the specific magnitude of these qualities. These qualities stand
in relation to each other according to a determination of measure. This
determination is their exponent, but they are already implicitly connected
to each other in the being-for-itself of measure: the quantum is in its double
being external quantum and specific quantum, so that each of the distinct
quantities has this double determination in it and is at the same time
inextricably interwoven with the other; it is in this way alone that the
qualities are determined. They are not, therefore, a determinate being in
general existing for each other but are rather posited as indivisible, and the
specific magnitude tied to them is a qualitative unity – one determination
of measure in which they are implicitly bound together in accordance with

Specific quantity

295

their concept. Measure is thus the immanent quantitative relating of two
qualities to each other.
2. In measure we have the essential determination of variable magnitude,
for measure is sublated quantum – quantum, therefore, no longer as that
which it ought to be in order to be quantum, but quantum as quantum
and as something other besides. This other is the qualitative element and,
as we have established, is nothing else than the relation of powers of the
quantum. In immediate measure, this variability is not yet posited; it
is just one single quantum or other to which a quality is attached. In the
specifying of measure (the preceding determination), which is an alteration
of the merely external quantum by the qualitative moment, what is posited
is the distinctness of two determinate magnitudes and hence in general the
plurality of measures in one common, external quantum. And it is in this
differentiation of the quantum from itself that the latter shows itself for the
first time to be a real measure, for it appears as a being which is one and the
same (e.g. the constant temperature of the medium) and at the same time of
diversified and indeed quantitative existence (in the various temperatures of
the bodies found in the medium). This differentiation of quantum into the
diverse qualities – the different bodies – yields a further form of measure,
one in which the two sides relate to each other as qualitatively determined
quanta, and this can be called the realized measure.
Magnitude, simply as such, is alterable, for its determinateness is a limit
which at the same time is none; the alteration only affects, therefore, a
particular quantum in place of which another is posited. But the genuine
alteration is that of the quantum as such. Here we have the determination, interesting when so understood, of the variable magnitude of higher
mathematics in which we neither need to stop short at the formal determination of alteration or variability in general nor introduce any other
determination except the simple determination of the concept by which
the other of the quantum is only the qualitative. The genuine determination,
therefore, of real variable magnitude is that it is qualitative, that is, as we
have sufficiently shown, that it is determined by a ratio of powers. Posited
in this variable magnitude is that quantum has no value as such but only
as determined in conformity with its other, that is, qualitatively.
The two sides in this relating have, in keeping with their abstract side as
qualitites in general, some particular meaning or other, for instance, space
and time. Taken at first simply as determinacies of magnitude in their
ratio of measure, one of them is the amount which increases and decreases
in external arithmetical progression; the other is an amount specifically
determined by the other amount, which for it is the unit. If each of these

21.338

296

21.339

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

two sides were only a particular quality in general, there would be no
way of distinguishing which of them is to be taken with respect to their
determination of magnitude as merely externally quantitative and which as
varying in quantitative specification. If they are related, for instance, as root
and square, it is indifferent which is regarded as increasing or decreasing
in merely external arithmetical progression, and which on the contrary has
its specific determination in this quantum.
But the two qualities are not indeterminate in their difference, for they
are the moments of measure and the qualification of the latter ought to
rest on them. The closest determinateness of the qualitites themselves
is, of the one, the extensive, that it is an externality within; and of the
other, the intensive, that it exists in itself or is the negative as against the
other. Accordingly, amount is the quantitative moment that pertains to the
former, and unit the one that pertains to the latter; in simple direct ratio,
the former is to be taken as the dividend and the latter as the divisor; in
specifying ratio, the former as the power or the becoming-other and the
latter as the root. Inasmuch as we still count here, that is, we reflect on the
external quantum (which is thus the totally accidental determinateness of
magnitude which we call empirical), and accordingly also equally take the
alteration as advancing in external arithmetical progression, then this falls
on the side of the unit, the intensive quality; the external extensive side, by
contrast, is to be represented as altering in the specified series. But the direct
ratio (like velocity as such, st ) is reduced here to a formal determination
which has no concrete existence but belongs rather only to the abstraction
of reflection; and even though in the ratio of root and square (as in s = at2 ),
the root is to be taken as an empirical quantum varying in an arithmetical
progression, the other side as specified instead, the higher realization of
the qualification of the quantitative moment, one which would be more
in keeping with the concept, is this: that both sides are related in higher
determinations of powers (as in s3 = at2 ).
Remark
The discussion here regarding the connection in measure between the
qualitative nature of an existence and its quantitative determination has
its application in the already cited example of motion, first of all in the
fact that in velocity, as the direct ratio of traversed space and the elapsed
time, the magnitude of time is taken as denominator and that of space
as numerator. If velocity is as such only a ratio of the space and time
of a motion, it is then indifferent which of the two moments should be
considered as the numerator and which as the unit. But space, like weight

Specific quantity

297

in specific gravity, is an external, real whole as such, and hence amount;
time, like volume, is on the contrary the ideal, the negative, the side of
unity. – But the more important ratio, the one essential to the point at issue
here, is the one that holds in free motion – in the first instance in the still
conditioned motion of a falling body, where the quantitative values of time
and space are reciprocally determined as root and square respectively; and
then in the absolutely free motion of the celestial bodies, where the period
of revolution and the distance17 are reciprocally determined, the one as one
power lower than the other, as square and cube respectively. Fundamental
relations of this kind rest on the nature of the related qualities, of space
and time, and on the way they stand connected, whether their motion
is mechanical (that is, unfree or not determined by the concept of its
moments), or is the motion of a falling body (that is, conditionally free),
or the absolutely free motion of the heavens. These kinds of motion as well
as their laws rest on the development of the concept of their moments,
space and time, for these qualities prove as such, in themselves or in their
concept, to be indivisible, and their quantitative relation, the being-for-itself
of measure, is only one measure-determination.
Regarding the absolute relations of measure, it should be noted that the
Mathematics of Nature, if at all worthy of the name of science, would have to
be essentially the science of measure – a science to which much has indeed
been contributed empirically, but still preciously little scientifically, that is,
philosophically. Mathematical principles of natural philosophy, as Newton
called his work,18 if they are to live up to this title in a deeper sense than
Newton and those of the entire Baconian lineage of philosophy did, would
have to contain things of quite a different nature in order to shed some
light on these regions, still dark yet eminently worthy of attention. – It is a
great service to discover the empirical numbers of nature, e.g. the distances
of the planets from each other; but an infinitely greater service would be
to make the empirical quanta disappear by raising them to a universal form
of quantitative determinations in which they become the moments of law
or of measure – immortal services which, for instance, Galilei achieved for
the motion of falling bodies and Kepler for the movement of the celestial
bodies. These men have proven the laws they have discovered by showing
that the full compass of the singular things of perception conform to
them. But a still higher proof of these laws must be demanded – nothing
less, namely, than of knowing their quantitative determinations from the
qualities or determinate concepts connected in them (such as space and
17

From the center.

18

i.e. Philsophiæ naturalis principia mathematica.

21.340

298

21.341

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

time). Of this kind of proof there is still no trace in the cited mathematical
principles of natural philosophy, as also there is none in subsequent works
of the same kind. It has already been remarked – in connection with the
semblance of mathematical proofs of certain natural relations, a semblance
based on the misuse of the infinitely small19 – that the attempt to conduct
any such proof on a truly mathematical basis, that is, neither empirically
nor conceptually, is an absurd undertaking. Proofs of this kind presuppose
their theorems and even the laws to be proved from experience; what they
manage to accomplish amounts to this, that they reduce such theorems
and such laws to abstract expressions and convenient formulas. A better
informed day will come when the entire and truly real merit that will be
attributed to Newton in these matters as against Kepler – once the sham
scaffolding of proofs has been cast aside, undoubtedly because of a clearer
awareness of what mathematics can deliver and has delivered – will be
restricted to Newton’s said transformation of Kepler’s formulao and to his
albeit still incipient introduction of analysis.
c. the being-for-itself in measure

21.342

1. In the form of specified measure just considered, the quantitative moment
of each side is qualitatively determined (both in the ratio of powers); they
are thus moments of one measure-determinateness of qualitative nature.
Here, however, the qualities are still posited immediately, only as diverse;
they are not related in the manner of their quantitative determinacies, that
is, that outside their relation they would have neither meaning nor existence,
as is the case for the quantitative determinacies as a ratio of powers. The
qualitative moment thus disguises itself as specifying, not itself, but the
determinateness of magnitude. Only within the latter is it posited; for
itself it is instead immediate quality as such which, besides the fact that it
posits the magnitude as non-indifferent, and besides its connection with
its other, still has existence subsisting on its own. Thus space and time,
outside that specification which their quantitative determinateness obtains
in the motion of falling bodies or in the absolutely free motion, both have
the value of space in general and time in general, space subsisting on its
own outside and without the duration of time, and time flowing on its
own independently of space.
o
19

See Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, Remark at §270, concerning the transformation of
3
Kepler’s TS 2 into Newton’s S 2 · TS2 , inasmuch as the fraction TS2 is called the force of gravity.
Cf. above, 21.272.

Specific quantity

299

This immediacy of the qualitative moment as against its specific measurerelation is, however, equally bound up with a quantitative immediacy and
with the indifference to this same measure-relation of the quantitative element in it; the immediate quality also has only an immediate quantum. For
that reason, the specific measure also has a side of an at first external alteration which advances in merely arithmetical progression undisturbed by it
and in which falls the external and hence merely empirical determination
of magnitude. Quality and quantum, even as they extend outside measure,
are at the same time connected with it; the immediacy is a moment of
their belonging to measure. Thus the immediate qualities also belong to
measure, are likewise connected and stand in a ratio which, outside the
specified one of power determination, is itself only a direct ratio and an
immediate measure. This conclusion and its consequences must now be
indicated.
2. Although the immediately determined quantum is as a moment of
measure otherwise implicitly grounded in a conceptual nexus, in connection with specific measure it is, as such, externally given. But the immediacy
which is thereby posited is the negation of the determination of qualitative
measure; the same immediacy was shown just now on the sides of the determination of measure which appeared for that reason to be self-subsisting
qualities. Such a negation and the return to immediate quantitative determinateness are present in the qualitatively determined relation because a
relation of distinct terms entails as such the connection of such terms in
one determinateness, and here, in the quantitative sphere, in distinction
from the determination of the relation, this determinateness is a quantum.
As the negation of the distinct, qualitatively determined sides, this exponent is a being-for-itself, an absolutely determined being, but is so only
in itself; as existence, it is a simple immediate quantum, the quotient or
exponent of a ratio between the sides of measure which is taken as direct; as
such, however, it appears in the quantitative side of measure as an empirical
unit. – In the motion of falling bodies, the spaces traversed are proportional
to the square of the elapsed time, s = at2 . This is a specifically determinate
ratio, one between space and time; the other, the direct ratio, would pertain to space and time as mutually indifferent qualities; it is supposed
to be the ratio of the space traversed to the first moment of time. The
same coefficient, a, remains in all the succeeding time-points – the unit
of the amount, determined for its part by the specifying measure, being
an ordinary quantum. This unit counts at the same time as the exponent
of that direct ratio which pertains to the merely imagined, the bad, that is,
the reflectively formal velocity which is not specifically determined by the

21.343

300

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

concept. Such a velocity does not have concrete existence here, no more
than does the one previously mentioned which is supposed to pertain to a
falling body at the end of a moment of time. That velocity is ascribed to
the first temporal moment in the fall, but this so-called temporal moment
is itself only an assumed unit which has no existence as such an atomic
point. The beginning of the motion (its alleged smallness would make
no difference) is straight away a magnitude, and one which is specified
by the law of falling bodies. The said empirical quantum is attributed to
the force of gravity, and this force thus has itself no connection with the
specification at hand (the determinateness of powers), that is, with the
determinateness characteristic of measure. The immediate moment, that
in the motion of falling bodies the amount of some fifteen spatial units
which are assumed as feet enter into one unit of time (call it a second, the
so-called first unit), is an immediate measure, just like the size of human
limbs, the distances and diameters of planets, etc. The determination of
such measures falls elsewhere than within the qualitative determination of
measure, here of the law itself of falling bodies. On what such numbers
depend, these merely immediate and therefore empirical appearances of a
measure – on this the concrete sciences have yet to give us any information.
Here we are only concerned with this conceptual determination, namely
that in any determination of measure the empirical coefficient constitutes
the being-for-itself, but only the moment of the being-for-itself, in so far
as it is in principle and therefore as immediate. The other moment is the
development of this being-for-itself, the specific measure-determinateness
of the sides. – According to this second moment, in the ratio expressing
the motion of falling bodies (this motion that is still half conditioned and
half free) gravity is to be regarded as a force of nature. Its ratio is thus
determined by the nature of time and space, and the said specification –
the ratio of powers – therefore falls in it; the other moment mentioned
above, the simple direct ratio, expresses only a mechanical relation of time
and space, a reflectively formal velocity externally produced and externally
determined.
3. Measure has now taken on the determination of being a specified
quantitative relation, one which, as qualitative, has within it the usual
external quantum; but this quantum is not a quantum in general but
essentially the determining moment of the relation as such; it is thus an
exponent and, because of the immediacy now of its determinateness, an
invariable exponent, consequently an exponent of the already mentioned
direct ratio of the same qualities whose reciprocal quantitative relation is
at the same time specifically determined by the ratio. In the example of

Specific quantity

301

measure that we have used, that of the motion of falling bodies, this direct
ratio is, as it were, anticipated and assumed as given, but, as remarked, in
this motion it still does not have concrete existence. – However, that matter
is now realized – in that its sides are both measures, one distinguished as
immediate and external and the other as internally specified, while measure
itself is the unity of the two – this constitutes a further determination. As
the unity of its two sides, measure contains the relation in which the magnitudes, by virtue of the nature of the qualities, are posited as determined
and non-indifferent; its determinateness, therefore, is entirely immanent
and self-subsisting, and has at the same time collapsed into the being-foritself of an immediate quantum, the exponent of a direct ratio. In this the
self-determination of measure is negated, for in this immediate quantum,
its other, measure has a final self-existent determinateness; conversely, the
immediate measure which ought to be internally qualitative assumes truly
qualitative determinateness only in that other. This negative unity is real
being-for-itself, the category of a something which is the unity of qualities in a
relation of measure – a complete self-subsistence. The two resulting diverse
relations also immediately yield a twofold existence, or, more precisely,
that self-subsisting whole, as a being that exists for itself, is as such in itself
a repulsion into distinct self-subsisting somethings whose qualitative nature
and subsistence (materiality) lies in their determinateness of measure.

21.344

ch a p ter 2
21.345

21.346

Real measure

Measure is now determined as a connection of measures that make up the
quality of distinct self-subsisting somethings, or, in more common language, things. The relations of measures just considered belong to abstract
qualities like space and time; further examples of these now to be considered
are specific gravity and then chemical properties, that is, determinations
of concrete material existence. Space and time are also moments of these
measures, but are now subordinated to other determinations and no longer
behave relative to one another only according to their own conceptual
determination. In the case of sound, for instance, the time within which a
certain number of vibrations occur, the spatial width and thickness of the
sounding body, are moments of its determination. But the magnitudes of
such idealized moments are externally determined; they no longer assume
the form of a ratio of powers but relate in the usual direct way, and harmony is reduced to the strictly external simplicity of numbers in relations
which are most easy to grasp; they therefore afford a satisfaction which is
the exclusive reserve of the senses, for there is nothing there of representation, imagery, thought, or the like, that would satisfy spirit. Since the sides
which now constitute the relation of measure are themselves measures, but
at the same time real somethings, their measures are, in the first instance,
immediate measures, and the relations in them direct relations. We now
have to examine the further determination of the relation of such relations.
Measure, now real measure, is as follows.
First, it is the independent measure of a type of body, a measure which
relates to other measures and, in thus relating to them, specifies them as
well as their self-subsistent materiality. This specification, as an external
connecting reference to many others in general, produces other relations,
and consequently other measures; the specific self-subsistence, for its part,
does not remain fixed in one direct relation but passes over into specific
determinacies, and this is a series of measures.
302

Real measure

303

Second, the direct relations that thus result are in themselves determinate
and exclusive measures (elective affinities).20 But because they are at the
same time only quantitatively different from one another, what we have
is a progression of relations which is in part merely external, but is also
interrupted by qualitative relations, forming a nodal line of specifically selfsubsisting things.
Third, what emerges in this progression for measure, however, is the
measureless: the measureless in general and more specifically the infinitude
of measure in which the mutually exclusive forms of self-subsistence are one
with each other, and anything self-subsistent comes to stand in negative
reference to itself.
a. the relation of independent measures
By measures we no longer mean now merely immediate measures, but
measures that are self-subsistent because they become within themselves
relations which are specified, and in this being-for-itself they are thus a
something, things that are physical and at first material.
(a) However, the whole, which is a relation of such measures is at first
itself immediate. Thus the two sides, which are as such independent
measures, have their subsistence in things external to each other, and
are posited in combination externally.
(b) But the self-subsistent materialities are what they qualitatively are only
in virtue of the quantitative determination that they have as measures,
and are posited in virtue of this same quantitative connection with
others as non-indifferent from them (the so-called affinity); they are the
members of a series of such quantitative relations.
(c) This indifferent multifarious relating concludes at the same time by
cutting itself off as an exclusive being-for-itself – the so-called elective
affinity.
a. Combination of two measures
As a measure relation, something is in itself determined by quanta to
which further qualities accrue; the something is the connection of such
qualities. One of them is the something’s in-itselfness, according to which
20

This is a term which was introduced around the middle of the eighteenth century to describe the
tendency of chemical species to combine with some substances in preference to others. Goethe
popularized the term by extending its meaning to include human relations, in his novella Elective
Affinities (1809).

21.347

304

21.348

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

it is something that exists for itself, something material (a weight, if taken
intensively; or, taken extensively, an aggregate of parts); the other is however
the externality of this itselfness (something abstract and idealized, space).
These qualities are quantitatively determined, and their mutual relation
is what constitutes the qualitative nature of the material something – the
ratio of weight to volume, the specifically determined gravity. The volume,
the idealized element, is the one to be taken as unit, whereas the intensive
aspect, which in quantitative determinateness and in comparison with
the other appears as extensive magnitude, that is, an aggregate of ones
existing for themselves, is the amount. – The purely qualitative relating of
the two determinacies of magnitude in a ratio of powers has disappeared,
because with the self-subsistence of the being-for-itself (the material being)
immediacy has come back, and in this immediacy the determinateness
of magnitude is a quantum whose relation to the other side is likewise
determined in the ordinary exponent of a direct ratio.
This exponent is the specific quantum of the something, but it is an
immediate quantum and this is determined – as is also the specific nature
of the something – only in being compared with other exponents of like
ratios. The exponent constitutes the specific way in which the something is
determined in itself, the inner measure characteristic of it; but since this,
the something’s measure, rests on a quantum, it is also an external and
indifferent determinateness, and the something, despite its inner determination as measure, is for this reason subject to alteration. The other to
which it can relate as alterable is not an aggregate of matters, not a quantum
in general; on the contrary, against these it holds out its specific intrinsic
determination of being; rather, it is a quantum which is at the same time
it too the exponent of such a specific ratio. Take two things of different
inner measure that stand connected and enter into composition, say, two
metals of different specific gravity. (In what way the two must otherwise
be homogeneous in nature in order for the composition to be possible, e.g.
that we cannot be speaking here of a metal combining with water, this is not
at issue here). – Now, on the one hand each of the two measures preserves
itself in the alteration they will incur because of the externality of quantum,
for each is a measure; but, on the other hand, this self-preservation is itself
a negative relating to the quantum, a specification of it, and, since this
quantum is the exponent of the ratio of measure, the self-preservation is
an alteration of the measure itself and indeed a reciprocal specification.
According to its merely quantitative determination, the compound
would be the mere sum of the two magnitudes of the one quality and
the two magnitudes of the other quality, e.g. the sum of the two weights

Real measure

305

and the two volumes in a compound of two matters of different specific
weights, so that not only would the weight of the mixture remain equal to
the said sum but also the space which the mixture occupies would remain
equal to the sum of the two spaces. But only the weight of the mixture is
found to be in fact the sum of the weights present prior to combination;
the side capable of addition is the one which, as the one existing for itself,
has attained stability of being and consequently a permanent immediate
quantum – the weight of matter, or, what amounts to the same thing from
a quantitative standpoint, the aggregate of material parts. Alteration falls
instead in the exponents, for they are the expression of the qualitative side
of the compound, of its being-for-itself as relations of measure, and, since
the quantum as such is subject to accidental alteration by an increase which
is summed, this being-for-itself proves at the same time to be a negating
factor with respect to this externality. Since this immanent determining of
the quantitative element cannot appear, as we have seen, in the weight, it
turns up in the other quality which is the idealized side of the relation.
It might be surprising to sense-perception that, upon the mixing of two
specifically diverse materials, what results is an alteration of the total volume, normally a diminution of it, for it is space which gives stability to
matters otherwise existing outside one another. But this stability, in face of
the negativity which is in the being-for-itself, is that which has no existence
in itself, is the alterable as such. In this manner, space is posited as what it
is in truth, an idealization.
But then, not only is one of the qualitative sides posited as alterable but
measure itself, and so also the qualitative determinateness of the something
which is based on it, has shown itself not to be something stable within
but, like quantum in general, to have its determinateness in other measurerelations.
b. Measure as a series of measure-relations
1. If something united with an other were what it is only by virtue of
simple qualitative determination, and the same also applied to the other,
then the two would only sublate themselves in being compounded. But
when something is in itself a measure-relation, it is independent yet at
the same time capable of union with another which is also in itself a
measure-relation. For in being sublated in union, each preserves itself
through the permanence of its quantitative indifference and it behaves as
the specifying moment of a new measure-relation. Its quality is enveloped
in the quantitative element; it is therefore equally indifferent towards the

21.349

306

21.350

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

other measure, continuing in it and in the newly formed measure. The
exponent of the new measure is itself only some quantum or other, an
external determinateness, and its indifference is displayed by the fact that
the specifically determined something runs, with other such measures, into
precisely the same kind of neutralizations of reciprocal measure-relations;
the specific property of the something is not expressed in the one measurerelation alone which is formed by it and another something.
2. This combination with a plurality of others which are in themselves likewise measures yields different ratios that therefore have different
exponents. The measure which is independent has the exponent of its
being-determined-in-itself only in the comparison with other measures;
neutrality with the others constitutes, however, its real comparison with
them; it is its comparison with them through itself. The exponents of these
ratios are however diverse, and the independent measure consequently displays its qualitative exponent as the series of these different amounts of which
it is the unit – a series of specific ways of relating to others. As one immediate quantum, the qualitative exponent expresses one single relation. The
independent measure truly differentiates itself in the characteristic series of
exponents which it, taken as a unit, forms with other equally independent
measures; for each of these measures, also brought in connection with
any other and taken as a unit, forms another series. – The relation of
such series among themselves now constitutes the qualitative aspect of the
independent measure.
Now inasmuch as this independent measure produces a series of exponents with a series of such independent measures, it appears at first, when
compared with another independent measure outside this series itself, that
it is differentiated from it by virtue of the fact that this other independent measure produces another series of exponents with the same measures
opposite to it. But in this way these two independent measures would not
be comparable – not in so far as each is regarded as a unit with respect to
its exponents, and the two series thus resulting on the basis of this connection of unit and exponents do not differ in any determinate way. The two
measures which, as independent, are supposed to be compared, are at first
differentiated from each other only as quanta; in order that their ratio be
determined, the ratio requires a unit which exists for itself and is common
to both. This determinate unit is to be sought, as shown, only where the
specific existence of the two independent measures to be compared is to
be found, namely in the ratio which the exponents of the ratio of the
series have to each other. But this ratio of the exponents is itself a unit
existing for itself and in fact determinate only in so far as the members of

Real measure

307

the series have it as a constant ratio between them; in that way it can be
their common unit. In it alone, therefore, lies the possibility of comparing
the two independent measures which were assumed not to neutralize each
other but to be rather reciprocally indifferent. Each, taken by itself outside
the comparison, is the unit of the ratios that it establishes with the opposite
members: these are the amounts relative to this unit and hence represent
the series of exponents. But conversely, this series is the unit for the two
independent measures which when compared with each other are as quanta
to each other; as such they are themselves different amounts of their just
indicated unit.
But further, the measures which together with the two or rather indefinitely many reciprocally opposing and contrasting measures yield the series
of the exponents of the ratio of these same measures, are equally independent in themselves; each is a specific something with its own relevant
measure-relation. To this extent, they are similarly to be taken each as a
unit so that they have a series of exponents in the two or rather the indeterminate plurality of measures, which are first named and compared only
among themselves, and these exponents are the comparative numbers of
precisely these named measures; conversely, the comparative numbers of
the independent measures now taken singly are similarly the series of the
exponents for the members of the first series. In this way, both sides are
a series in which, first, each number is simply a unit with respect to the
opposite series in which it has its specifically determined being as a series
of exponents; second, each number is itself one of the exponents for each
member of the opposite series; and, third, it is a comparative number for
the rest of the numbers of its series and, as such an amount which belongs
to it also as an exponent, it has its unit, determined for itself, in the opposite
series.
3. In this relation there is a return to the mode in which quantum was
posited as existing for itself, namely as degree, as being simple and yet having
the magnitude of its determinateness in a quantum that exists outside it,
one which is a circle of quanta. In measure, however, this externality is not
merely a quantum and a circle of quanta, but a series of numerical ratios, and
it is in the entirety of these that the being-determined-for-itself of measure
lies. Just as it is the case in the being-for-itself of quantum as degree, the
nature of the independent measure has turned into this self-externality.
Its self-reference is at first an immediate relation, and by that very fact its
indifference to an other lies only in the quantum. Hence its qualitative
side falls in this externality, and its relating to the other becomes that which
constitutes the specific determination of this independent measure. Such a

21.351

308

21.352

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determination thus consists solely in the quantitative mode of this relating,
and this mode is determined just as much by the other as by the measure
itself, and this other is a series of quanta while the measure, for its part,
is one such quantum. But this connection in which two specific measures
specify themselves in a third thing (the exponent) further entails that, in
the exponent, the one measure has not gone over into the other; that there
is not, therefore, only one negation, but that in the connection the two
measures are rather each negatively posited, and since each preserves itself
in it indifferently, their negation is itself also negated. This, their qualitative
unity, is thus an exclusive unit existing for itself. It is only in this moment
of exclusion that the exponents, at first comparative numbers, first gain
in them the determinateness truly specifying them reciprocally and their
difference thus becomes of qualitative nature. But such a difference has a
quantitative basis: first, the independent measure relates to a plurality of its
qualitatively other side only because in this relating it is at the same time
indifferent; second, this neutral connection is in virtue of its quantitative
basis not only alteration but is now posited as a negation of the negation
and as exclusive unit. Consequently, the affinity of an independent measure
with the plurality of measures of the other side is no longer an indifferent
connection but an elective affinity.
c. Elective affinity
The expression elective affinity used here refers to a chemical relation, as
also do the preceding neutrality and affinity. For in the chemical sphere
a matter receives its specific determinateness essentially in the connection
with its other; it exists concretely only as this non-indifference. Moreover,
this specific connection is bound up with quantity and is at the same
time not only a connection with a single other, but with a series of such
non-indifferent matters standing over and against it; combinations with
this series rest on a so-called affinity with every member of the series, even
though in this indifference each member excludes every other. We now
have to consider this connection of opposite determinations. – But it is
not just in the chemical sphere that specificity is exhibited in a circle of
combinations; the meaning of a single note also depends on its relation
to, and combination with, another note and a series of other notes; the
harmony or disharmony in such a circle of combinations constitutes its
qualitative nature which is at the same time based on quantitative ratios
that form a series of exponents, and the ratios of the two specific ratios
is what each of the combined notes is within it. The single note is the

Real measure

309

keynote of a system, but at the same time also one member in the system
of every other note. The harmonies are exclusive elective affinities whose
characteristic quality, however, equally dissolves again in the externality of
a mere quantitative progression. – Where to find, however, the principle
of a measure for such affinities which among others and against others
(whether chemical or musical or whatever) are elective affinities, on this
more will be said in the following Remark in connection with chemical
affinity; but this is a question of a higher order which is very closely bound
up with the specific nature of what is strictly qualitative and belongs to
particular parts of the concrete science of nature.
Inasmuch as the member of a series has its qualitative unity in the way it
relates to the whole of an opposite series, the members of which differ from
each other only by virtue of the quantum required for being neutralized
with that member, the more specific determinateness in this manifold affinity is likewise only quantitative. In elective affinity which is an exclusive,
qualitative connection, the relating escapes this quantitative difference. The
next determination which offers itself is this: that in accordance with the
difference in the number, hence the extensive magnitudes, of the members
of one side required for the neutralization of a member in another side, the
elective affinity of this member would be directed to the members of the
first series with all of which it has affinity. Thus transformed, the exclusion
that would thereby be established in the form of a firmer bonding against
other possibilities of combination would appear in a proportionally greater
intensity, in keeping with the previously demonstrated identity of the forms
of extensive and intensive magnitude,21 inasmuch as the determinateness
of magnitude is in both one and the same. However, this sudden conversion of the one-sided form of extensive magnitude also into its other, the
intensive form, changes nothing in so far as the nature of the fundamental
determination is concerned, which is one and the same quantum. In fact,
therefore, no exclusiveness would thereby be posited, but instead of one
single bonding a combination of any number of members could just as
well take place, provided that the portions of such members entering into
the combination corresponded to the required quantum proportionately
to the ratios between them.
But the combination which we have also called neutralization is not only
the form of intensity; the exponent is essentially a determination of measure
and, as such, exclusive. On this side of exclusive relating, numbers have lost
their continuity and their tendency to combine; their relating is one of more
21

Cf. above, 21.212.

21.353

310

21.354

21.355

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

or less, and this acquires a negative character; and the advantage that one
exponent has over another does not remain confined to the determinateness
of magnitude. Also equally present is the other side which makes it again
a matter of indifference to a moment of measure whether it receives its
neutralizing quantum from several opposite moments, from each according
to the determinateness that specifies it as against an other; the exclusive,
negative relating is at the same time vulnerable to this incursion of the
quantitative side. – What is posited here is thus the sudden conversion
of an indifferent, merely quantitative relating into a qualitative one, and
conversely the transition of a specifically determinate being into merely
external relation – a series of relations, sometimes of a merely quantitative
nature, sometimes specific relations and measures.
Remark
Chemical matters are the most characteristic examples of such measures,
which are moments of measure and receive their determination solely in
relating to other moments. Acids and alkalis or bases generally appear to
be things which are immediately determined in themselves; but they are
rather incomplete elements of bodies, components which in concreto do
not truly exist for themselves but for which to exist is to sublate their
isolated subsistence by binding with some other component. Further, the
difference in virtue of which they are self-subsistent consists not in this
immediate quality but in the quantitative mode of the relating. For that
difference is not restricted to the chemical opposition of acid and alkali (or
base) in general but is specified rather in a measure of saturation; it consists
in the specific way the matters that neutralize each other are quantitatively
determined. This quantity determination as defined by saturation constitutes the qualitative nature of a matter; it makes it into what it is for
itself, and the number expressing it is essentially one of several exponents
for an opposite unit. – A matter of this kind has a so-called affinity with
another. If this connection remained of a purely qualitative nature, then,
like the connection between the magnetic or the electrical poles, the one
determinateness would be only the negative of the other, and the two sides
would simultaneously show themselves not to be indifferent to each other.
But since the connection is also of a quantitative nature, each of these
matters is capable of neutralizing itself with any of several matters and is
not restricted to the one to which it stands opposed. The relation is not just
between acid and alkali (or base), but between acids and alkalis (or bases).
They do momentarily acquire distinctive character according as one acid,
for instance, requires more of an alkali in order to achieve saturation with

Real measure

311

it than another; but the evidence that they have self-subsistent existence
for themselves lies in the relation between the affinities, which is exclusive,
one showing that it has a preference over another in that one acid can
as such bond with any alkali, and conversely. Thus the chief difference
between two acids depends on whether it has a closer affinity to one base
than another, that is, whether it has a so-called elective affinity with it.
According to the law which has been found to govern the chemical
affinities of acids and alkalis, when two neutral solutions are mixed and
the result is a separation followed by two new compounds, these products
are likewise neutral. It follows from this that the amounts of two alkali
bases required for the saturation of an acid must be in the same ratio for the
saturation of another acid; in general, granted an alkali as unit, if the series
of numerical ratios in which various acids saturate it is established, then this
series is the same for any other alkali, except that the various alkalis are to
be taken in different relative amounts – and these amounts, for their part,
again form an equally stable series of exponents for each of their opposite
acids, for they stand to each in just the same ratio as to any other. – Fischer
was the first to extract these series in their simplicity from the works of
Richter (see his notes to the translation of Berthollet’s treatise on the laws
of affinity in chemistry, p. 232, and Berthollet’s Statique chimique, Part I,
p. 134ff.).22 – Since these works, our knowledge of the numerical ratios
of mixtures of chemical elements has been greatly extended in all directions, and to want to review it here would be a digression, all the more so
because this empirical and in part also only hypothetical expansion does
not exceed the original conceptual framework. We may however add a few
comments concerning the categories used, as well as concerning the views
on chemical affinity itself and its connection with quantitative determination, and the attempt to base the affinity on specifically determined physical
qualities.
It is well known that Berthollet modified the broad conception of elective affinity by the concept of the effectiveness of a chemical mass. It is worth
noting that this modification does not have any effect on the quantitative
22

Ernst Gottfried Fischer (1754–1831?), professor of physics at Berlin and translator in 1802 of Claude
Berthollet’s Recherches sur les lois de l’affinité. He summarized the results of Richter’s observations
by expounding them in tables in his notes to the translation.
Jeremiah Benjamin Richter (1762–1807), assessor of mines and chemist in Berlin. He is responsible for establishing the law of definite proportions (stoicheiometry), which was instrumental in
formulating the theory of atoms. He first published his views in three volumes, Stochiometrie oder
Meßkunst chemischer Elemente (1792–1794).
Claude Louis Berthollet (1748–1822), one of the founders of the École polytechnique and Professor
at the École normale supérieure de Paris. He expounded his view on chemical affinities in two
volumes, Recherches sur les lois de l’affinité (1802) and Essai de statique chimique (1803).

21.356

312

21.357

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

ratios of the chemical laws of saturation but weakens the qualitative
moment of exclusive elective affinity as such to the point of sublating
it. If two acids and one alkali react, and the one acid of which it is said that
it has a greater affinity with the alkali is also present in a quantum sufficient
to saturate the quantum of the base, then according to the concept of elective affinity this is the only saturation that results; the other acid remains
quite ineffective, excluded from the neutral bonding. According to the
concept of the effectiveness of a chemical mass, on the contrary, each acid
is effective in a proportion established on the basis of their given amounts
and their saturating capacity or so-called affinity. Berthollet’s investigations
have identified the more detailed circumstances under which the effectiveness of the chemical masses is sublated and one acid (the one with the
stronger affinity) seems to drive out the other (with the weaker affinity)
and to shut out its effect, thus to behave in the sense of elective affinity.
Berthollet has shown that it is circumstances such as the strength of cohesion, the insolubility in water of the compounded salts, which condition
the occurrence of this shutting out, not the qualitative nature of the agents
as such, and the effect of these circumstances can in turn be sublated by
other circumstances, as for instance by temperature. With the removal of
the circumstances, the effectiveness of the chemical mass proceeds unimpeded and what appeared as a purely qualitative exclusion, an elective
affinity, proves to rest on only external modifications.
It is Berzelius especially who should be heard further on this subject.23
But in his Textbook of Chemistry he fails to present anything original or more
determinate on the matter. Berthollet’s views are taken up and repeated
word by word, only outfitted with a metaphysics typical of uncritical
reflection, and all that we are thus offered for closer inspection is just the
categories of this metaphysics. The theory departs from experience and does
both, fabricates sense-representations such as are not given in experience
itself and applies thought determinations, in either case exposing itself
to logical criticism. On this score, we want to take a look at what it
says about the theory in the Textbook itself (Vol. III, Section I, Wöhler’s
translation, pp. 82ff.).24 We now read there “that one must imagine that in
a uniformly mixed liquid each atom of the dissolved body is surrounded by
an equal number of atoms of the solvent; and if several substances are jointly
23

24

Jöns Jakob Berzelius (1779–1848), Swedish chemist responsible for the introduction of modern
chemical notation. After being appointed professor at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm (1807),
he published a three-volume Textbook of Chemistry (1808–1828).
See Jöns Jakob Berzelius, Lehrbuch der Chemie, Vol. 3, translated by F. Wöhler (Dresden, 1827),
pp. 82–83.

Real measure

313

dissolved, they must share among them the intervening spaces between the
atoms of the solvent, so that, granted a uniform mixture of the liquid, a
symmetry is produced in the disposition of the atoms in such a way that
all the atoms of each individual body find themselves uniformly disposed
with reference to the atoms of the other bodies; it could therefore be said
that the solution is characterized by the symmetry in the position of the
atoms, and the combination by the fixed proportions.” The claim is then
elucidated by the example of the compounds precipitated from a solution
of copper chloride when sulphuric acid is added to it. But surely the
example does not demonstrate that atoms exist; or that a number of atoms
of the dissolved bodies surround the atoms of the fluid, the free atoms of
both acids positioning themselves around those that remain in combination
(with copper oxide); or that there is actually a symmetry in their position
and disposition or, for that matter, that there are intervening spaces between
atoms – least of all, that the dissolved substances share among them these
intervening spaces between the atoms of the solvent. This would mean
that the loose atoms take up their position where the solvent is not – for
the intervening spaces in the solvent are spaces void of it – consequently
that the dissolved substances are not in the solvent but outside it – even
though they surround and besiege it or are surrounded and besieged by
it – and of course that they are not dissolved by it. One fails to see,
therefore, why one would have to entertain such representations which are
not evident in experience, are essentially contradictory on the face of it,
and remain uncorroborated otherwise. Corroboration could come only by
a consideration of these representations themselves, that is, by metaphysics,
which is logic; but logic does not confirm them any more than experience
does – on the contrary! And Berzelius does admit what was also said above,
that Berthollet’s propositions are not opposed to the theory of determinate
proportions. He of course adds that they are also not opposed to the views
of corpuscular theory, that is, to the just mentioned images of atoms, of
the filling of the intervening spaces in the solvent by the atoms of the solid
bodies, and so on. But these are a baseless metaphysics that has essentially
nothing to do with the propositions of saturation as such.
The essential point expressed by the laws of saturation thus concerns
only the amount of units themselves quantitative (not atoms), the units of
a body with which the quantitative unit (equally not an atom) of another
body chemically different from the first is neutralized; the difference consists in these different proportions alone. When Berzelius, then, despite
the fact that his whole theory of proportions is only a determination of
amounts, nevertheless speaks of degrees of affinity (e.g., p. 86) in explaining

21.358

314

21.359

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Berthollet’s chemical mass as the sum of the degree of affinity resulting from
the given quantity of the active body, whereas Berthollet is more consistent
in using the expression capacité de saturation, he thereby himself lapses
into the form of intensive magnitude. But this is the form characteristic
of the so-called dynamic philosophy which he earlier calls “the speculative
philosophy of certain German schools” (p. 29, loc. cit.) and vehemently
rejects in favor of the superb “corpuscular theory.” Of this dynamic philosophy he states in the same passage that it assumes that the elements
interpenetrate one another in their chemical union, and that the neutralization consists in this reciprocal interpenetration; this means nothing else
than that the chemically different particles that stand opposite as aggregate merge into the simplicity of an intensive magnitude, something also
attested by the diminution of volume. In the corpuscular theory, on the
contrary, the chemically bonded atoms are also supposed to be retained in
the intervening spaces, that is, outside each other (juxtaposition); in this
relationship, which is one of only extensive magnitude, of never ending
aggregation, degree of affinity has no meaning. Still in the same place, when
it is said that for the dynamic viewpoint the phenomena of determinate
proportions were quite an unforeseen event, the answer would be that
this is only an external, historical circumstance, were it not that Richter’s
stoicheiometric series were already known to Berthollet from Fischer’s summary and were cited in the first edition of this Logic25 where the nullity of
the categories on which the old as well as the would-be new corpuscular
theory rest is demonstrated. But Berzelius is wrong in believing that on
“the dynamic view” the phenomena of specific proportions “would have
remained forever unknown” – meaning that that view is incompatible
with the determinateness of proportions. This determinateness is in all
cases only one of magnitude, whether in an extensive or an intensive form,
so that, regardless of how much he stands by the first of these forms, that
of aggregation, even Berzelius himself uses the representation of degrees of
affinity.
Since the affinity is thereby reduced to a quantitative distinction, it is
sublated as elective affinity; but the moment of exclusivity present in it is
traced back to circumstances, that is, to determinations that appear to be
external to the affinity, to cohesion, to the insolubility of the compounds
produced, and so on. Some comparison can be drawn here with the treatment of the effect of gravity on the moving pendulum. The pendulum
necessarily comes to a state of rest because of the direct effect of gravity, yet
25

Cf. GW 11, 213.

Real measure

315

this same effect is taken as due to the concomitant external circumstance
of air resistance, thread, etc., and is ascribed to friction alone instead of
gravity. – Here, so far as the nature of the qualitative element present in
elective affinity goes, it makes no difference whether this element appears
in the form of circumstances conditioning it, and is so interpreted. A new
order begins with the qualitative element as such, the specifying of which
is no longer just a quantitative distinction.
Accordingly, although there is a well-established and precise difference
between chemical affinity in a series of quantitative ratios and elective
affinity as an emerging qualitative determinateness, the behavior of which
in no way coincides with the order of that series, this difference has again
been thrown into utter confusion by the way in which chemical behavior
has in recent times been combined with electrical behavior, and the hope of
explaining from this supposedly profounder principle the most important
of relations, that of measure, has been wholly disappointed. Inasmuch as
this theory in which the phenomena of electricity and of chemism are fully
identified deals with things physical and not just with ratios of magnitude,
we need not consider it here in close detail; we only have to bring it up
inasmuch as it confuses the principle for differentiating the determinations
of magnitude. The theory deserves to be called shallow, for shallowness
consists in taking different things as identical by omitting their difference.
As for affinity, since the theory identifies chemical with electrical processes,
these last including the phenomena of fire and light, it is reduced “to the
neutralization of opposite electricities.” It is almost comical to find the
identification itself of electricity and chemism stated as follows (loc. cit.,
p. 63): “the electrical phenomena indeed explain the effect of bodies at a
greater or lesser distance, their attraction before union (that is, a behavior
which is not yet chemical), as well as the fire(?) resulting from this union,
but they yield no information regarding what causes the union of bodies
which persists with so great a strength after the removal of the state of
electrical polarization”; that is, the theory informs us that electricity is the
cause of chemical behavior but gives us no information regarding what is
chemical in the chemical process. – The chemical difference being reduced
to the opposition between positive and negative electricity, the difference
in affinity between the agents falling on either side is determined as the
order of two series of electro-positive and electro-negative bodies. What
is already being overlooked in this overall identification of electricity and
chemism is that electricity in general, and its neutralization, is a transient
phenomenon, one that remains external to the quality of bodies, whereas
chemical action, and especially its neutralization, is directed to and alters

21.360

316

21.361

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the whole qualitative nature of the bodies. Equally transient in electricity
is its opposition of positive and negative – so unstable that it is subject
to the slightest external circumstances and can in no way be compared to
the determinateness and stability of the opposition of acids to metals, for
example, and so forth. The volatility that can occur in chemical behavior
because of extremely violent influences, e.g. because of raised temperature,
is not comparable to the superficiality of electrical opposition. And the
further difference inside the series of each of the two sides, between a
more or less positive or a more or less negative disposition, is just as
entirely uncertain as it is entirely unconfirmed. Yet it is from these series
of bodies (Berzelius, loc. cit., p. 64ff.), “in accordance with their electrical
dispositions,” that “we can expect the electro-chemical system which is best
suited to yield an idea of chemistry.” But how these series which are only
alleged here are in fact constituted, regarding this point it is added on p. 67
“that such is approximately the order of these bodies, but so little research
has been done into this matter that nothing altogether certain can yet be
ascertained regarding this relative order.” – Both, the numerical ratios (first
made by Richter) of the series of affinities as well as the highly interesting
reduction established by Berzelius of the combinations of two bodies to
the simplicity of a few quantitative ratios, are totally independent of that
supposed electrochemical concoction. If the experimental procedure has
been the right guiding star in the theory of proportions and the extension it
has won on all sides since Richter, then all the more does the mixture of these
great discoveries contrast with the wasteland of the so-called corpuscular
theory, which lies outside the path of experience; only this forsaking, at the
start, of the principle of experience could have motivated taking up again
the notion, already advanced earlier especially by Ritter,26 of establishing
fixed orders of electro-positive and electro-negative bodies which would
have chemical meaning at the same time.
The assumption of a basis for chemical affinity in the opposition of
electro-positive and electro-negative bodies, even if such an opposition
had more to recommend it factually than it does, reveals its nullity even
experimentally, and this then leads to further inconsistency. It is admitted
on p. 73 (loc. cit.)27 that two so-called electro-negative bodies such as
sulphur and oxygen combine in a much more intimate way than, for
26

27

Johann Wilhelm Ritter (1776–1810), born in Silesia, later in life professor at the Bavarian Academy
of Science and a member of the Munich Academy of Science. Among his accomplishments, he
discovered ultraviolet radiation and formulated the basic concepts of electrolysis and electroplating.
Hegel is referring to his textbook, Das elektrische System der Körper. Ein Versuch (Leipzig, 1805).
Hegel is referring to Berzelius’s textbook of chemistry.

Real measure

317

instance, oxygen and copper, although the latter is electro-positive. The
basis for the affinity founded on the general opposition of negative and
positive electricity must here give way, therefore, to a mere “more or less”
within one and the same series of electrical determinateness. From this it
is concluded that the affinity of bodies does not therefore depend solely
on their specific unipolarity (it does not matter with which hypothesis
this determination is associated; it applies here only for the “either” of the
positive and the “or” of the negative); the affinity must in essence be derived
from the intensity of their polarity in general. Here the consideration of
affinity thus broaches the relation of elective affinity, which is our principal
interest; let us now see how it fares. It is immediately granted (loc. cit., p. 73)
that the degree of this polarity, if it does not exist only in our imagination,
seems not to be a constant quantity but to depend rather very much on
temperature. Accordingly, the upshot is not only that every chemical effect
is fundamentally an electrical phenomenon, but also that what seems to be
the effect of the so-called elective affinity is produced only by an electrical
polarity which in certain bodies is found to be stronger than in others.
The conclusion then after so many twists and turns of hypotheses is that
we have not gone past the category of greater intensity, which is the same
formal determination as elective affinity in general; and since the latter is
made to rest on a greater intensity of electrical polarity, it does not take
us a whit closer to a physical basis. But even what is here supposed to be
determined as a greater specific intensity is later reduced to just the already
cited modifications which Berthollet demonstrated.
Berzelius’s merit and fame because of his theory of proportions which has
been extended to all chemical relations ought not by themselves to stand
in the way of criticizing the poverty of the theory; but a more pressing
reason for doing so must be the circumstance that the merit which one
side of a science deserves (such as Newton’s) normally lends authority to
a whole unfounded structure of bad categories associated with it, and it
is precisely this metaphysics which is proclaimed and circulated with the
greatest pretension.
Besides the forms of measure-relation connected with chemical and
effective affinity, others could also be considered with respect to quantities
which are qualitatively specified into a system. Chemical bodies form a
system of relations with respect to saturation; the saturation itself rests
on the determinate proportion in which the two reciprocal amounts bind
together, each with a particular material concrete existence as against the
other. But there are also measure-relations, the moments of which are
indivisible and cannot be displayed as existing each on its own, each

21.362

318

21.363

21.364

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

different from the other. These are what we called earlier28 the immediate
independent measures and are attested in the specific weights of the bodies. –
They are inside the bodies a ratio of weight to volume; the exponent of the
ratio, which defines the difference between one specific weight and another,
is a determinate quantum only by way of comparison, and this is a relation
which is external to the bodies, founded on external reflection and not on a
body’s typical qualitative way of relating to an opposite concrete existence.
The task would be to make out the exponents of the ratios of the series
of specific gravities as a system governed by a rule specifying an otherwise
merely arithmetical plurality as a series of harmonic nodes. – The same
demand would apply to the discovery of the series of the chemical affinities
already mentioned. But science still has far to go before reaching this goal,
just as far as would be required to collect the numbers of the distances of
the planets within the solar system into a system of measure.
Although the specific gravities do not seem at first to stand in any
qualitative relation to one another, they nonetheless likewise enter into
qualitative connection. When bodies bond chemically, even if only as
amalgams or synsomates, there is likewise evidence of a neutralization of
specific gravities. We earlier29 called attention to the phenomenon that
the volume of a mixture, even of materials which truly remain chemically
indifferent to each other, is not the same as the sum of the volumes prior to
the mixture. In the mixture, the quantum of the specific gravity with which
the materials entered into connection is reciprocally modified, and this is
evidence that they relate to each other qualitatively. Here the quantum of
the specific gravities is expressed not merely as a fixed comparative number,
but as a numerical ratio which is variable; and the exponents of the mixtures
yield series of measures which are governed by some other principle than the
numerical ratios of the specific gravities bonded together. The exponents of
these ratios are not exclusive determinations of measure; their progression
is continuous but holds within it a specifying law which is different from
the reflectively formal progression of the ratios in which the amounts are
combined and makes the former progression incommensurable with the
latter.
b. nodal lines of measure-relations
The last determination of the measure-relation was that, as specific, it is
exclusive; exclusiveness accrues to neutrality as a negative unity of the distinct moments. For this unity existing for itself, for this elective affinity, no
28

Cf. above, 21.346.

29

Cf. above, 21.349.

Real measure

319

further principle has become available specifying its connection with other
neutralities; the specification resides only in the quantitative determination
of affinity in general, according to which it is specific amounts that neutralize themselves and consequently stand opposed to other relative elective
affinities of their moments. But further, because the basic determination is
quantitative, the exclusive elective affinity continues also into these opposite
neutralities, and this continuity is not just an external comparative connection of the different ratios of the neutralities but the neutrality, as such, has
an element of separability in it, for it is as self-subsisting somethings that
the moments from whose union it has come to be enter into connection
with one or the other of the opposite series: they enter into the connection
indifferently, even though they combine in different specific determinate
amounts. This measure, internally based on such a relation, is for this reason affected by an indifference of its own; it is something which is external
within and alterable in its reference to itself.
This self-reference of the measure-relation differs from the externality and
alterability which belong to its quantitative side. In contrast to these, its
self-reference is an existent qualitative foundation – a permanent, material
substrate which, since it is also the continuity of the measure with itself
in its externality, would have to contain in its quality the said principle of
specification of this externality.
Now in more developed form, as external to itself in its being-for-itself,
the exclusive measure repels itself from itself and posits itself both as another
merely quantitative relation and as another relation which is as such at the
same time another measure; it is determined as in itself a specifying unity
which produces measure-relations within itself. These relations differ from
affinities of the kind mentioned above in which an independent measure
relates itself to independent measures of another quality and to a series of
these. They occur in one and the same substrate within the same moments
of the neutrality; the self-repelling measure takes on the determination of
other only qualitatively diverse relations, and these relations likewise form
affinities and measures, alternating with those that remain only quantitative
diversities. They form in this way a nodal line of measures on a scale of
more and less.
Here we have a measure-relation, a self-subsistent reality qualitatively
distinguished from others. Such a being-for-itself, since it essentially is at
the same time a relation of quanta, is open to externality and quantitative
alteration; it has a margin within which it remains indifferent to this
alteration and does not alter its quality. But there comes a point in the
quantitative alteration at which this quality alters and the quantum shows

21.365

320

21.366

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

itself to be specifying, so that the altered quantitative relation is suddenly
turned into a measure and thereby into a new quality, a new something.
The relation that has now replaced the first is determined by the latter, both
because of the qualitative sameness of the moments which are in affinity and
because of the quantitative continuity. But since the distinction falls on the
side of this quantitative moment, the new something stands indifferently
related to the preceding one; the difference between the two is the external
one of quantum. The new something has not therefore emerged out of the
preceding one; it has emerged rather immediately from itself, that is, from
the internal specifying unity which has not yet entered into existence. –
The new quality or the new something is subjected to the same progression
of alteration, and so on, into infinity.
Inasmuch as the advance from a quality proceeds in the steady continuity of quantity, the ratios approaching the one qualifying point are
distinguished, quantitatively considered, by a more or less. In this respect,
the alteration is a gradual one. But the gradualness concerns merely the
externality of the alteration, not its qualitative moment; the preceding
quantitative relation, though infinitely near to the succeeding one, is still
another qualitative existence. From the qualitative side, therefore, the gradual, merely quantitative progression which has no limits in itself, is absolutely interrupted; and since in its merely quantitative connection the
newly emerging quality is with respect to the vanishing one an indeterminate other, one which is indifferent to it, the transition is a leap; the two
are posited as wholly external to each other. – It is a favorite practice to
try to make an alteration conceptually comprehensible by the gradualness of
the transition leading up to it; but gradualness is rather alteration precisely
as merely indifferent, the opposite of a qualitative alteration. Rather, in
gradualness the connecting link between two realities – be they states or
self-subsistent things – is sublated, what is posited is that neither reality is
the limit of the other, but that each is absolutely external to the other. Thus,
the very point necessary for the conceptual comprehension of the alteration
is missed, although little enough is required for that purpose.
Remark
The system of natural numbers already exhibits a nodal line of qualitative
moments which issue in a merely external progression. In one respect, this
progression is a merely quantitative running back and forth, a constant
adding and subtracting, each number standing in the same arithmetical
relation to the one preceding or following it as this last stands to the one
preceding or following it in turn, and so on. But the numbers that thus

Real measure

321

arise also stand to the others that either precede or follow them in some
specific relation, whether as a multiple of one of them expressed in the form
of a whole number, or as a power or root. – In the quantitatively measured
scale of musical relations, a quantum30 gives rise to a relation of harmony
in the progression of notes without that quantum having on the scale any
other relation to the preceding and the succeeding ones than these have in
turn to those preceding and following them. The notes that follow seem
increasingly to recede from the keynote, or numbers to become just other
numbers in their arithmetical advance. Yet a turning back suddenly breaks
out, a surprising accord for which there was no qualitative preparation in
what immediately went before, but which appears rather to be an actio in
distans, a connecting reference to something far removed. The succession
of merely indifferent relations which neither alter the preceding specific
reality nor otherwise form any such reality, is suddenly interrupted; and
while from the standpoint of quantity the succession proceeds in the same
manner, a specific relation breaks in through a leap.
Nodes and leaps of this kind occur in chemical combinations as the proportions in the mixtures are progressively altered; at certain points on the
scale of mixtures, two materials yield products that exhibit particular qualities. These products do not differ by a mere more or less; nor are they
already present at the proportions closest to their nodal points perhaps
in an only weaker degree; the bonding rather occurs at just these points.
For instance, oxygen and nitrogen yield in combination different oxides
of nitrogen and different nitric acids exhibiting essentially different qualities only at specific mixture-proportions, without any specific bonding
occurring in between. – Metal oxides, e.g. the lead oxides, are formed at
certain quantitative points of oxidation and are distinguished by colors and
other qualities. They do not pass into one another gradually; the proportions lying in between those nodal points yield nothing neutral, no specific
existence. A combination which specifically depends on a measure-relation
occurs without having passed through the in-between stages and displaying
qualities characteristically its own. – Or take water. As it alters in temperature, it does not become just more or less warm, but passes through the
states of solid, liquid, and vapor; and these different states do not occur
gradually, but, on the contrary, even the otherwise merely gradual increase
in temperature is interrupted and inhibited at these points: the irruption
of another state is a leap. – Every birth and every death, far from being a
30

Quantum.

21.367

322
21.368

21.369

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

protracted gradualness, is rather its breaking off and a leap from quantitative into qualitative alteration.
Natura non facit saltum, as the saying goes; and ordinary thinking,
when confronted by a coming-to-be or a passing-away, believes that it has
comprehended it conceptually by representing it, as we said,31 as a gradual
emerging or vanishing. But we have seen32 that the alterations of being
in general are not only the passing over of a magnitude into another
magnitude, but the transition from the qualitative into the quantitative
and contrariwise, a becoming-other that interrupts gradualness and stands
over against the preceding existence as something qualitatively other. Water,
in cooling, does not become hard a bit at a time, as if it became first like a
porridge and would then gradually harden to the consistency of ice, but is
hard all at once; it can persist in fluid state even at freezing temperature if
it stands still, but then the least disturbance brings it to the state of solid.
The belief that coming-to-be is gradual is based on imagining that what
comes to be is already present to the senses or is in principle actual, only so
small that it still escapes perception. And so too for the gradual vanishing
of something, what is imagined is that the non-being or the other which is
to take its place is likewise there, but is not yet detectable – is there, not in
the sense that this other is in itself contained in the present other, but that
it exists there, only undetectably. In this way, coming-to-be and vanishing
are in principle done away with, or the existence which something has in
principle, still undisplayed, before actually existing is transformed into a
smallness of eternal existence, and the essential conceptual difference into a
difference of mere magnitude. – Explaining coming-to-be and vanishing
from the gradualness of alteration suffers from the tediousness typical of
any tautology; the coming-to-be and the vanishing are presupposed as
ready-made beforehand and the alteration is reduced to the mere mutation
of an external difference, and in this way the change becomes in fact only
a tautology. The difficulty confronting an intellect intent on this kind of
explanation lies in the qualitative transition from a something into its other
in general and into its opposite – a difficulty which the intellect meets by
pretending that identity and alteration are the indifferent external identity
and alteration of the quantitative sphere.
In moral matters, inasmuch as they are treated in the sphere of being,
there occurs the same transition of the quantitative into the qualitative;
different qualities appear to be based on a difference of magnitude. It is by
a more and less that the measure of frivolous delinquence is overstepped
31

Cf. above, 21.365–366.

32

Cf. above, 21.320.

Real measure

323

and something entirely different comes irresistibly the scene, namely crime
which makes right into wrong and virtue into vice. – Thus states, too,
acquire through their quantitative difference, other things being assumed
equal, a different qualitative character. The laws and the constitution of
a state alter in character whenever its territory and the number of its
citizens expand. A state has its own measure of magnitude and, if this
measure is trespassed, it irresistibly disintegrates internally under the same
constitution which, when with just different proportions, was the source
of its good fortune and strength.
c. the measureless
The exclusive measure, even in its realized being-for-itself, remains affected
by the moment of quantitative existence and is therefore susceptible to the
movement up and down the quantum scale of varying ratios. Something,
or a quality, based on such a ratio is driven beyond itself into the measureless,
collapsing under the mere mutation of its magnitude. Magnitude is that
constitutional aspect where an existence can be caught up in an apparently
harmless entanglement and be destroyed by it.
The abstract measureless is the quantum in general inasmuch as it lacks
internal order and is only indifferent determinateness which does not alter
measure. In the nodal lines of measures this determinateness is at the
same time posited as specifying; the abstract measureless sublates itself
into qualitative determinateness; the new measure-relation into which the
original passes over is measureless with respect to the latter but, in it,
it equally is a quality that exists for itself; what is thus posited is the
alternation of specific existences with one another and equally of them
with relations that still remain merely quantitative – an alternation ad
infinitum. Therefore, present in this transition is both the negation of the
specific relations and the negation of the quantitative progression; this is the
infinite existing for itself. – In the sphere of existence, the qualitative infinite
was the irruption of the infinite into the finite, the immediate transition
and vanishing of the “this here” into its “beyond there.” In contrast to
it, the quantitative infinite is in its very determinateness the continuity
of quantum, its continuing beyond itself. The qualitatively finite becomes
infinite; the quantitatively finite is its beyond in it: it points beyond itself. But
this infinite of the specification of measure posits both the qualitative and the
quantitative as each sublating itself into the other, and it thereby posits their
first immediate unity, which is measure in general, as returned into itself
and consequently as itself posited. The transition of the qualitative, of one

21.370

324

21.371

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

specific concrete existence into another, is such that what happens is only
an alteration of magnitude determinateness; the alteration of the qualitative
as such into the qualitative is thus posited as an external and indifferent
alteration, as a coming together with itself; the quantitative, for its part,
sublates itself by suddenly turning into the qualitative, that is, a being
which is determined in-and-for-itself. This unity which thus continues
in itself in its alternating measures is the self-subsistent matter that truly
persists, the fact.
What we have here is (a) one and the same substantial matter which
is posited as the perennial substrate of its differentiations. This detaching
of being from its determinateness already begins in quantum in general;
something is great indifferently as against the determinateness it has. In
measure, the persisting matter is itself already in itself the unity of the
qualitative and the quantitative – the two moments into which the general
sphere of being is distinguished, each as the beyond of the other; in this
way the perennial substrate begins to possess in it the determination of an
existent infinity. (b) This self-sameness of the substrate is posited in that
the qualitative independent measures into which the determining unit is
dispersed consist of only quantitative differences, so that the substrate persists while being internally distinguished. (g) In the infinite progression of
the nodal series there is posited the continuation of the qualitative into the
quantitative advance as into an indifferent alteration, but equally too, there
is posited the negation of the qualitative contained in the progression and
consequently, at the same time, of the merely quantitative externality. The
quantitative pointing beyond itself to an other which is itself quantitative
perishes with the emergence of a measure-relation, of a quality, and the
qualitative transition is sublated in the very fact that the new quality is
itself only a quantitative relation. This reciprocal transition into the other
of the qualitative and the quantitative moments occurs on the basis of their
unity, and the meaning of this process is only the existence which is the
demonstration or the positing that such a substrate does underlie the process
and is the unity of its moments.33
In the series of independent measure-relations the one-sided members
of the series are immediate qualitative somethings (specific gravities or
33

This is a reminder, at the end of the dialectic of being, that the task we have been performing all
along, and are still engaged in at the moment, is to bring stability to the fluidity of becoming.
We first did this with the category of “existence” or the “being this or that” (Dasein). That first
determination has now developed into an objective structure with an internal distinction between
a permanent substrate and all the other determinations introduced so far under the rubrics of
“quality” and “quantity.” This distinction will next develop into the distinction between essence
and being.

Real measure

325

chemical materials, bases or alkalis, acids, for instance), and their neutralizations (by which we must understand here also the combinations
of materials of different specific gravities) are in turn self-subsistent and
themselves exclusive measure-relations, mutually indifferent totalities existing for themselves. Such relations are now determined only as nodes of one
and the same substrate. The measures and the self-subsistent forms posited
with them are consequently demoted to states. Alteration is only the mutation of a state, and that which passes over is posited as remaining the same
in the mutation.
In reviewing the progressive determination which measure has gone
through, the moments of the progression can be summed up as follows.
Measure is at first itself the immediate unity of quality and quantity in the
form of a common quantum which is, however, specific. As a determinateness of quantity which does not refer to an other but refers to itself,
measure is thus essentially a ratio. Consequently, it also holds its moments
as sublated and unseparated in itself; as is always the case in a concept, the
difference in the ratio is such that each of its moments is itself the unity of
the qualitative and the quantitative moment. The difference is thus real,
and it yields a multitude of measure-relations which, as formal totalities,
are each self-subsistent in themselves. The series which form the two sides
of these ratios are for each single member the same constant ordering
by which the member, as belonging to the one side, relates itself to the
whole series standing opposite it. This ordering, although a mere order,
a still wholly external unity, demonstrates itself to be, as the immanently
specifying unity of a measure which has a determinate being-for-itself,
distinguished from its specifications; but this specifying principle is not
yet the free concept, which alone gives its differences an immanent determination; the principle is at first, rather, only a substrate, a matter, for
whose differences, in order that they be totalities, that is, that they should
have in themselves the nature of their stable, self-equal substrate, there is
only available the external quantitative determination which shows itself
at the same time to be a qualitative differentiation. In this self-unity of
the substrate the determination of measure is a sublated determination, its
quality an external state determined by quantum. – This course is equally
the progressive determination of measure and its demotion to a moment.

21.372

c h a p ter 3

The becoming of essence

21.373

a. absolute indifference

21.374

Being is abstract indifference, and when this trait is to be thought by itself as
being, the abstract expression “indifferentness”34 has been used – in which
there is not supposed to be as yet any kind of determinateness. Pure quantity
is this indifference in the sense of being open to any determinations,
provided that these are external to it and that quantity itself does not
have any link with them originating in it. The indifference which can
be called absolute, however, is one which, through the negation of every
determinateness of being, of quality and quantity and of their at first
immediate unity, that is, of measure, mediates itself with itself to form a
simple unity. Determinateness is in it still only a state, that is, something
qualitative and external which has the indifference as a substrate.
But that which has thus been determined as qualitative and external
is only a vanishing something; as thus external with respect to being, the
qualitative sphere is the opposite of itself and, as such, only the sublating
of itself. In this way, determinateness is still only posited in the substrate
as an empty differentiation. But it is precisely this empty differentiation
which is the indifference itself as result. And this indifference is indeed
concrete, in the sense that it is self-mediated through the negation of all
the determinations of being. As such a mediation, it contains negation and
relation, and what was called “state” is a differentiation which is immanent
to it and self-referring. It is precisely this externality and its vanishing which
make the unity of being into an indifference: consequently, they are inside
this indifference, which thereby ceases to be only a substrate and, within,
only abstract.
34

Indifferenz. “Indifferentness” is recognized in the OED. I use it here because “-ness” is the normal
way of creating abstract nouns in English, and in this passage Hegel stresses the abstractness of the
term. I shall revert to the more common “indifference.”

326

The becoming of essence

327

b. indifference as inverse ratio of its factors
We now have to see how this determination of indifference is posited in
the indifference itself and the latter is posited, therefore, as existing for itself.
1. The reduction of at first independently accepted measure-relations
establishes their one substrate; this substrate is their continuing into one
another and is, therefore, the one indivisible independent measure which
is wholly present in its differentiation. Present for this differentiation are
the two determinations contained in the measure, quality and quantity,
and everything depends on how these two are posited in it. But this is in
turn determined by the fact that the substrate is at first posited as result
and, though in itself mediation, this mediation is not yet posited as such
in it; for this reason, it is in the first instance substrate and, with respect to
determinateness, indifference.
Consequently, the difference present in it is at first essentially one which
is only quantitative and external; there simply are two different quanta of
one and the same substrate which would thus be their sum, itself posited as a
quantum. But the indifference is this fixed measure, the implicitly existent
absolute limit which, as connected to those differences, would not itself
be in itself a quantum, and would not in any way enter into opposition
with others, whether as sum or also as exponent, be those others sums
or indifferences. It is only the abstract determinateness which falls into
the indifference; the two quanta, in order that they may be posited in it
as moments, are alterable, indifferent, greater or smaller relative to one
another. However, inasmuch as they are restricted by the fixed limit of
their sum, they are at the same time related to each other not externally,
but negatively, and this is now the qualitative determination in which they
stand to each other. Accordingly, they stand in inverse ratio to each other.
This relation differs from the earlier formal inverted ratio35 inasmuch as
the limit is here a real substrate, and each of the two sides is posited as
having to be in itself the whole.
According to the qualitative determinacy just stated, the difference is
present, further, in the form of two qualities, each of which is sublated
by the other and yet, since the two are held together in the one unity
which they constitute, is inseparable from it. The substrate itself, as the
indifference, is in itself likewise the unity of the two qualities; consequently,
each of the sides of the relation equally contains both sides within itself
and is distinguished from the other by a more of one quality and a less
35

Cf. above, 21.314–318.

21.375

328

21.376

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of the other, or conversely. The one quality, through its quantum, only
predominates on the one side, as does the other quality on the other side.
Thus each side is in it an inverted relation which, as formal, recurs in
the two distinguished sides. The sides themselves thus continue into each
other also according to their qualitative determinations; each of the qualities relates itself in the other to itself and is present in each of the two
sides, only in a different quantum. Their quantitative difference is that
indifference in accordance with which they continue into each other, and
this continuation is the self-sameness of the qualities in each of the two
unities. – The sides, however, each containing the whole of the determinations and consequently the indifference itself, are thus at the same time
posited as self-subsistent vis-à-vis each other.
2. As this indifference, being is now the determinateness of measure no
longer in its immediacy but in the developed manner just indicated; it is
indifference because it is in itself the whole of the determinations of being
now resolved into this unity; and it is existence as well, as a totality of the
posited realization, in which the moments themselves are the totality of
the indifference existing in itself, sustained by the latter as their unity. But
because the unity is held fast only as indifference and consequently only
implicitly in itself, and the moments are not yet determined as existing for
themselves, that is, are not yet determined as sublating themselves into unity
internally and through each other, what is here present is therefore simply the
indifference of the unity itself towards itself as a developed determinateness.
This thus indivisible independent measure is now to be more closely
examined. It is immanent in all its determinations and in them it remains in
unity with itself and undisturbed by them. But, (a) since the determinacies
sublated in it implicitly remain the totality, they emerge in it groundlessly.
The implicit being of indifference and its existence are thus unconnected;
the determinacies show up in the indifference in an immediate manner
and the indifference is in each of them entirely the same. The difference
between them is thus posited at first as sublated, hence as quantitative –
for this reason, therefore, not as a self-repelling; and the indifference not as
self-determining, but as having and becoming the determinate being that
it has only externally.
(b) The two moments are in inverse quantitative relation – a fluctuating on the scale of magnitude which is not however determined by the
indifference, which is precisely the indifference of the fluctuation, but only
externally. For the determining appeal is made to an other which lies outside the indifference. The absolute, as indifference, has in this respect the
second defect of quantitative form, namely that the determinateness of

The becoming of essence

329

the difference is not determined by the absolute itself, just as it has the
first defect in that the differences emerge in it only in general, that is, the
positing of them is something immediate, not a self-mediation.
(g) The quantitative determinateness of the moments which are now
sides of the relation constitutes the mode of their subsistence; their existence is
by virtue of this indifference withdrawn from the transitoriness of quality.
But they do have a subsistence of their own in themselves, one that differs
from this quantitative existence, for they are in themselves the indifference
itself, each the unity itself of the two qualities into which the qualitative
moment splits itself. The difference of the two moments is restricted by
the fact that the one quality is posited on the one side with a more and in
the other with a less, and the other is posited in inverse order accordingly.
Each side is thus in it the totality of the indifference. – Each of the two
qualities taken singly for itself likewise remains the same sum which the
indifference is; it continues from one side into the other without being
restricted by the quantitative limit which is thereby posited in it. At this,
the determinations come into immediate opposition, an opposition which
develops into contradiction, as we must now see.
3. Namely, each quality enters inside each side in connection with the
other, and it does so in such a manner that, as has been determined, this
connection also is supposed to be only a quantitative difference. If the
two qualities are both self-subsistent – something like sensible materials
independent of each other – then the whole determinateness of indifference
falls apart; their unity and totality would be empty names. But they are
at the same time determined as comprised into one unity, as inseparable,
each having meaning and reality only in this one qualitative connecting
reference to the other. But now, because their quantitativeness36 is simply
and solely of this qualitative nature, each reaches only as far as the other. If
they are assumed to differ as quanta, then the one would reach beyond
the other and would have in this more an indifferent existence which the
other would not have. As qualitatively connected, however, each is only in
so far as the other is. – The result is that they are in equilibrium, so that to
the extent that one increases or decreases, the other likewise increases or
decreases and would do so in the same proportion.
On the basis, therefore, of their qualitative connection, there is no
question of a quantitative difference or of a more of the one quality. The
more by which the one of the two connected moments would exceed the
other would be only an unstable determination, or would only be the other
36

Quantitativität.

21.377

330

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

itself again; but, in this equality of the two, neither would then be there,
for their existence would have to rest on the inequality of their quantum. –
Each of these supposed factors vanishes, whether the one factor is assumed
to exceed the other or to be equal to it. From the standpoint of quantitative
representation, the vanishing appears as a disturbance of the equilibrium,
one factor becoming greater than the other; the sublation of the quality
of the other and its instability are thus posited; the first factor becomes
the predominant one as the other diminishes with accelerated velocity and
is overcome by it; this in turn constitutes itself as the one self-subsistent
factor; with this, however, there are no longer two specific moments as
factors but only the one whole.
This unity thus posited as the totality of the process of determining, itself
determined in this process as indifference, is a contradiction all around.
It must therefore be posited as this self-sublating contradiction, and be
determined as subsistence existing for itself, one which no longer has a
merely indifferent unity for result but a unity immanently negative and
absolute. This is essence.

21.378

Remark
The relation of a whole whose determinateness is to be had in the difference
in magnitude of factors qualitatively determined against each other is used
in the case of the elliptical movement of the celestial bodies. This example
displays throughout only two qualities in inverse relation to each other,
not two sides each of which would be itself the unity of the two and
their inverse relation. The bare fact on which the theory is based is solid
enough. But because of this solidity the consequence to which the theory
leads is overlooked, namely the wrecking of the bare fact itself on which
it is based or, if this is held on to (as it ought), the trivialization of the
theory vis-à-vis it. By ignoring the consequence, the fact and the theory
contradicting it are left to rest untroubled side by side. – The bare fact
is that in the elliptical movement of the celestial bodies their velocity
accelerates as they approach perihelion and decreases as they approach
aphelion. The quantitative side of this fact has been accurately established
by the untiring diligence of observation and, further, it has been reduced
to its simple law and formula. All that is legitimately required of a theory
has thus been provided. But it did not seem sufficient to the reflection
of the understanding. For the purpose of a so-called explanation of the
phenomenon and its law, a centripetal and a centrifugal force have been
assumed as the qualitative moments of movement along a curved line.
Qualitatively, their difference lies in the contrariety of their direction;

The becoming of essence

331

quantitatively, granted that the two are unequally determined, in that as
one increases, the other is supposed to decrease, and vice-versa; and also, in
that the relation between the two is suddenly reversed again, for after the
centripetal force has been increasing for a length of time and the centrifugal
force has decreased accordingly, a point is reached at which the centripetal
force decreases and the centrifugal increases. But what contradicts this way
of imagining things is the reciprocal relation of the essentially qualitative
determinateness of the two forces which will simply not allow their being
taken apart. For each force has meaning only with respect to the other;
and to the extent, therefore, that the one had an excess over the other,
to that extent it would have no connection with this other and would
not be. – If it is assumed that one of them is at one time greater than
the other and stood in relation to the smaller precisely as greater, then
what was said above applies,37 namely that the greater would gain absolute
predominance and the smaller would vanish; it is as something vanishing,
lacking support, that the latter is being posited, and nothing is altered in
this determination by supposing that the vanishing happens only gradually,
or that it decreases only as much as the other increases, for the one force
that increases is destroyed together with the other that decreases, since it
is what it is only to the extent that the other is what it is. It takes but
little consideration to see that if, for example, a body’s centripetal force
increases as it approaches perihelion, as it is claimed, while the centrifugal
force decreases in the same proportion, the latter force would no longer
be able to pull the body away from the former and steer it again at a
distance from the central body. On the contrary, since the one force has
gained the upper hand, the other is overpowered, and the body will be
driven with accelerated velocity to its central body. And conversely, if the
centrifugal force gains the upper hand when infinitely near to aphelion, it
is contradictory that now, right in aphelion, it would be overpowered by
the weaker force. – Further, it is evident that it is an alien force which would
produce this turnabout, and this means that the sometimes accelerating,
sometimes decelerating, velocity of the movement cannot be ascertained or,
as it is said, explained from the assumed determination of the very factors
which were assumed precisely for the sake of explaining this difference. The
logical consequence of the vanishing of the force in either direction and thus
of elliptical movement in general is ignored and obscured because of the
undeniable fact that this motion does endure, shifting from accelerating to
decelerating velocity. The assumption of the sudden conversion in aphelion
37

Cf. above, 21.377.

21.379

332

21.380

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of the weakness of the centripetal force into the predominating strength
of the centrifugal force, and of the converse in perihelion, implies for one
thing our earlier result, namely that each of the two sides of the inverse
relation is in it the whole inverse relation. For the side of the motion
from aphelion to perihelion, that is, the side where the centripetal force
is taken to predominate, is still supposed to contain the centrifugal force,
though in decreasing proportion as the other increases; and, on the side
of the retarded motion, the predominant and ever more predominating
centrifugal force is supposed to be present in an exact inverse relation to
the centripetal; so that on neither side does one of the two forces ever vanish
but only becomes smaller up to the moment of its sudden conversion into
the predominant force. All that thus transpires on each side is the defect
typical of an inverse relation, in this case namely, that either each force is
taken to be self-subsistent for itself (but then the two forces merely join in a
movement externally, as in the parallelogram of forces, and the unity of the
concept, the nature of the thing itself, is consequently done away with), or,
since each relates to the other qualitatively by virtue of the concept, neither
can attain in face of the other the indifferent independent subsistence
which a more supposedly imparts to it. The form of intensity, the so-called
dynamic factor, changes nothing, because it too has its determinateness
in quantum and hence can express force (that is, has concrete existence)
only to the extent that it is confronted by an opposing force. But this
same sudden conversion of a predominating force into its opposite also
implies the alternation of the qualitative determination of positive and
negative, the increase of the one being just as much the loss of the other.
But the theory breaks up the indivisible qualitative bond of this qualitative
opposition into a temporal succession and consequently begs the explanation
of the qualitative alternation and, most of all, of the breaking up itself.
There is no trace left here of the semblance of unity which is still to be
found in the increase of the one side accompanied by the corresponding
decrease of the other; all that we have is a merely external succession which
contradicts what the bond between the two entails, namely that as one
predominates, the other must disappear.
The same relation has been applied to the forces of attraction and
repulsion for the purpose of understanding the different densities of bodies;
also the inverse relation of sensibility and irritability has been enlisted in
order to understand, from the inequality of these factors of life, the different
determinations of the whole, health, as well as the differentiation of living
things into species. This kind of explaining was supposed to become in the
philosophy of nature the basis for physiology, nosology, and then zoology.
But the confusion, the verbal nonsense into which it became entangled

The becoming of essence

333

because of the uncritical use of these conceptual determinations, quickly
led to the abandonment in these areas of philosophy of this formalism –
though it is widely practiced in science, especially physical astronomy.
Since absolute indifference may seem to be the fundamental determination of Spinoza’s substance, we may further remark that this is indeed the
case to the extent that in both all the determinations of being, like in general every further concrete differentiation of thought and extension, etc.,
are posited as vanished. It is simply a matter of indifference what anything
might have looked like in existence before being swallowed up in this abyss
of abstraction if one stops short at it. But substance, as indifference, is
obligated on one side by the need of determining it and of taking this need
into consideration: substance ought not to remain Spinoza’s substance, the
sole determination of which is the negative one that everything is absorbed
into it. Differentiation occurs with Spinoza quite empirically – attributes
(thought and extension) and then modes, affects, and all the remaining.
The differentiation falls to the intellect, itself a mode; the connection of
the attributes to substance and to each other says no more than that they
express the whole of substance, that their content, the order of things as
extended and as thoughts, is this same substance. But by the determination
of substance as indifference, difference itself now becomes a topic of reflection and is now explicitly posited as it de facto is in Spinoza, namely as an
external and therefore, more precisely, a quantitative difference. The indifference does remain, just like substance, immanent in the differentiation,
but abstractly, only in itself; the difference is not immanent in the indifference but, being quantitative, is rather the opposite of immanence, and
the quantitative indifference is rather the self-externality of the unity. Thus
the difference is also not conceptually grasped qualitatively, and the substance is not determined as self-differentiating, as subject. The immediate
consequence so far as the category of indifference itself is concerned is that
in it the differentiation of qualitative and quantitative determination falls
apart, just as was our result when developing the category itself.38 Whereas
in measure both moments were immediately posited as one, indifference is
the dissolution of measure.
c. transition into essence
Absolute indifference is the final determination of being before the latter
becomes essence; but it does not attain essence. It shows that it still belongs to
the sphere of being because it is still determined as indifferent, and therefore
38

Cf. above, 21.377.

21.381

334

21.382

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

difference is external to it, quantitative. This externality is its existence, by
which it finds itself at the same time in the opposition of being determined
over against it as existing in itself,39 not as being thought as the absolute that
exists for itself. Or again, it is external reflection which insists that specific
determinations, whether in themselves or in the absolute, are one and the
same – that their difference is only an indifferent one, not a difference in
itself. What is still missing here is that this reflection should sublate itself,
that it would cease to be the external reflection of thought, of a subjective
consciousness, but that it would be rather the very determination of the
difference of that unity – a unity which would then prove itself to be the
absolute negativity, the unity’s indifference towards itself, towards its own
indifference no less than towards otherness.
But this self-sublation of the determination of indifference has already
manifested itself; in the progressive positing of its being it has shown itself
on all sides to be contradiction. Indifference is in itself the totality in which
all the determinations of being are sublated and contained; thus it is the
substrate, but at first only in the one-sided determination of being-in-itself,
and consequently the differences, the quantitative difference and the inverse
ratio of factors, are present in it as external. As thus the contradiction of
itself and its determinateness, of its implicitly existent determination and of
its posited determinateness, it is the negative totality whose determinacies
have internally sublated themselves – consequently, have also sublated
the one-sidedness of their substrate, their in-itselfness. Indifference, now
posited as what it in fact is, is simple and infinitely negative self-reference,
the incompatibility of itself with itself, the repelling of itself from itself.
Determining and being determined are not a transition, nor an external
alteration, nor again an emergence of determinations in it, but its own
referring to itself which is the negativity of itself, of its in-itselfness.
But as so repelled, the determinations are not self-possessed – do not
emerge as self-subsistent or external but are rather as moments: first, as
belonging to the unity whose existence is still only implicit, they are not
let go by it but are rather borne by it as their substrate and are filled by
it alone; and, second, as determinations immanent to the unity as it exists
for itself, they are only through their repulsion from themselves. Instead of
some existent or other, as they are in the whole sphere of being, they now are
simply and solely as posited, with the sole determination and significance of
being referred to their unity and hence each to the other and to negation –
marked by this their relativity.
39

an sichseiende.

The becoming of essence

335

Being in general and the being or immediacy of the different determinacies have thereby vanished just as much as the in-itselfness, and the
unity is being, immediately presupposed totality, so that it is only this simple
self-reference, mediated by the sublation of this presupposition, and this presupposedness, the immediate being, is itself only a moment of its repelling:
the original self-subsistence and self-identity are only as the resulting infinite
self-rejoining. And so is being determined as essence – being which, through
the sublation of being, is simple being with itself.

21.383

book two

The Doctrine of Essence

essence
The truth of being is essence.
Being is the immediate. Since the goal of knowledge is the truth, what
being is in and for itself, knowledge does not stop at the immediate and
its determinations, but penetrates beyond it on the presupposition that
behind this being there still is something other than being itself, and that
this background constitutes the truth of being. This cognition is a mediated
knowledge, for it is not to be found with and in essence immediately, but
starts off from an other, from being, and has a prior way to make, the way
that leads over and beyond being or that rather penetrates into it. Only
inasmuch as knowledge recollects itself into itself out of immediate being,
does it find essence through this mediation. – The German language has
kept “essence” (Wesen) in the past participle (gewesen) of the verb “to be”
(sein), for essence is past – but timelessly past – being.
When this movement is represented as a pathway of knowledge, this
beginning with being and the subsequent advance which sublates being
and arrives at essence as a mediated term appears to be an activity of
cognition external to being and indifferent to its nature.
But this course is the movement of being itself. That it is being’s nature
to recollect itself, and that it becomes essence by virtue of this interiorizing,
this has been displayed in being itself.
If, therefore, the absolute was at first determined as being, now it is
determined as essence. Cognition cannot in general stop at the manifold of
existence; but neither can it stop at being, pure being; immediately one is
forced to the reflection that this pure being, this negation of everything finite,
presupposes a recollection and a movement which has distilled immediate
existence into pure being. Being thus comes to be determined as essence, as
a being in which everything determined and finite is negated. So it is simple
337

11.241

338

11.242

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

unity, void of determination, from which the determinate has been removed
in an external manner; to this unity the determinate was itself something
external and, after this removal, it still remains opposite to it; for it has not
been sublated in itself but relatively, only with reference to this unity. – We
already noted above1 that if pure essence is defined as the sum total of all
realities, these realities are equally subject to the nature of determinateness
and abstractive reflection and their sum total is reduced to empty simplicity.
Thus defined, essence is only a product, an artifact. External reflection,
which is abstraction, only lifts the determinacies of being out of what is left
over as essence and only deposits them, as it were, somewhere else, letting
them exist as before. In this way, however, essence is neither in itself nor for
itself; it is by virtue of another, through external abstractive reflection; and it
is for another, namely for abstraction and in general for the existent which
still remains opposite to it. In its determination, therefore, it is a dead and
empty absence of determinateness.
As it has come to be here, however, essence is what it is, not through
a negativity foreign to it, but through one which is its own – the infinite
movement of being. It is being-in-and-for-itself – absolute in-itselfness; since
it is indifferent to every determinateness of being, otherness and reference
to other have been sublated. But neither is it only this in-itselfness; as
merely being-in-itself, it would be only the abstraction of pure essence;
but it is being-for-itself just as essentially; it is itself this negativity, the
self-sublation of otherness and of determinateness.
Essence, as the complete turning back of being into itself, is thus at first
the indeterminate essence; the determinacies of being are sublated in it; it
holds them in itself but without their being posited in it. Absolute essence
in this simple unity with itself has no existence. But it must pass over into
existence, for it is being-in-and-for-itself; that is to say, it differentiates the
determinations which it holds in itself, and, since it is the repelling of itself
from itself or indifference towards itself, negative self-reference, it thereby
posits itself over against itself and is infinite being-for-itself only in so far
as in thus differentiating itself from itself it is in unity with itself. – This
determining is thus of another nature than the determining in the sphere of
being, and the determinations of essence have another character than the
determinations of being. Essence is absolute unity of being-in-itself and
being-for-itself; consequently, its determining remains inside this unity;
it is neither a becoming nor a passing over, just as the determinations
themselves are neither an other as other nor references to some other; they
1

Cf. GW 11, 76; also above, 21.99–100.

The Doctrine of Essence

339

are self-subsisting but, as such, at the same time conjoined in the unity
of essence. – Since essence is at first simple negativity, in order to give
itself existence and then being-for-itself, it must now posit in its sphere the
determinateness which it contains in principle only in itself.
Essence is in the whole what quality was in the sphere of being: absolute
indifference with respect to limit. Quantity is instead this indifference in
immediate determination, limit being in it an immediate external determinateness; quantity passes over into quantum; the external limit is necessary
to it and exists in it. In essence, by contrast, the determinateness does not
exist; it is posited only by the essence itself, not free but only with reference
to the unity of the essence. – The negativity of essence is reflection, and the
determinations are reflected – posited by the essence itself in which they
remain as sublated.
Essence stands between being and concept; it makes up their middle, its
movement constituting the transition of being into the concept. Essence
is being-in-and-for-itself, but it is this in the determination of being-initself; for its general determination is that it emerges from being or that
it is the first negation of being. Its movement consists in positing negation
or determination in being, thereby giving itself existence and becoming as
infinite being-for-itself what it is in itself. It thus gives itself its existence
which is equal to its being-in-itself and becomes concept. For the concept
is the absolute as it is absolutely, or in and for itself, in its existence. But
the existence which essence gives to itself is not yet existence as it is in and
for itself but as essence gives it to itself or as posited, and hence still distinct
from the existence of the concept.
First, essence shines within itself or is reflection; second, it appears; third, it
reveals itself. In the course of its movement, it posits itself in the following
determinations:
I. As simple essence existing in itself, remaining in itself in its determinations;
II. As emerging into existence, or according to its concrete existence and
appearance;
III. As essence which is one with its appearance, as actuality.

11.243

section i
11.244

Essence as Reflection Within

Essence issues from being; hence it is not immediately in and for itself but
is a result of that movement. Or, since essence is taken at first as something
immediate, it is a determinate existence to which another stands opposed;
it is only essential existence, as against the unessential. But essence is being
which has been sublated in and for itself; what stands over against it is only
shine. The shine, however, is essence’s own positing.
First, essence is reflection. Reflection determines itself; its determinations
are a positedness which is immanent reflection at the same time. Second,
these reflective determinations or essentialities are to be considered. Third, as
the reflection of its immanent determining, essence turns into foundation
and passes over into concrete existence and appearance.

340

c h a p ter 1

Shine

As it issues from being, essence seems to stand over against it; this immediate
being is, first, the unessential.
But, second, it is more than just the unessential; it is being void of essence;
it is shine.
Third, this shine is not something external, something other than
essence, but is essence’s own shining. This shining of essence within it
is reflection.
a. the essential and the unessential
Essence is sublated being. It is simple equality with itself but is such as
the negation of the sphere of being in general. And so it has immediacy
over against it, as something from which it has come to be but which has
preserved and maintained itself in this sublating. Essence itself is in this
determination an existent immediate essence, and with reference to it being
is only something negative, nothing in and for itself: essence, therefore, is a
determined negation. Being and essence relate to each other in this fashion
as again others in general which are mutually indifferent, for each has a
being, an immediacy, and according to this being they stand in equal value.
But as contrasted with essence, being is at the same time the unessential;
as against essence, it has the determination of something sublated. And in
so far as it thus relates to essence as an other only in general, essence itself
is not essence proper but is just another existence, the essential.
The distinction of essential and unessential has made essence relapse
into the sphere of existence, for as essence is at first, it is determined with
respect to being as an existent and therefore as an other. The sphere of
existence is thus laid out as foundation, and that in this sphere being is
being-in-and-for-itself is a further determination external to existence, just
as, contrariwise, essence is indeed being-in-and-for-itself, but only over
against an other, in a determinate respect. – Consequently, inasmuch as
341

11.245

342

11.246

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

essential and unessential aspects are distinguished in an existence from each
other, this distinguishing is an external positing, a taking apart that leaves
the existence itself untouched; it is a separation which falls on the side of
a third and leaves undetermined what belongs to the essential and what
belongs to the unessential. It is dependent on some external standpoint or
consideration and the same content can therefore sometimes be considered
as essential, sometimes as unessential.
On closer consideration, essence becomes something only essential as
contrasted with an unessential because essence is only taken, is as sublated
being or existence. In this fashion, essence is only the first negation, or
the negation, which is determinateness, through which being becomes only
existence, or existence only an other. But essence is the absolute negativity
of being; it is being itself, but not being determined only as an other: it
is being rather that has sublated itself both as immediate being and as
immediate negation, as the negation which is affected by an otherness.
Being or existence, therefore, does not persist except as what essence is, and
the immediate which still differs from essence is not just an unessential
existence but an immediate which is null in and for itself; it only is a
non-essence, shine.
b. shine
1. Being is shine. The being of shine consists solely in the sublatedness of
being, in being’s nothingness; this nothingness it has in essence, and apart
from its nothingness, apart from essence, it does not exist. It is the negative
posited as negative.
Shine is all that remains of the sphere of being. But it still seems to have
an immediate side which is independent of essence and to be, in general,
an other of essence. Other entails in general the two moments of existence
and non-existence. Since the unessential no longer has a being, what is
left to it of otherness is only the pure moment of non-existence; shine is this
immediate non-existence, a non-existence in the determinateness of being,
so that it has existence only with reference to another, in its non-existence;
it is the non-self-subsistent which exists only in its negation. What is left
over to it is thus only the pure determinateness of immediacy; it is as
reflected immediacy, that is, one which is only by virtue of the mediation of
its negation and which, over against this mediation, is nothing except the
empty determination of the immediacy of non-existence.
– Shine, the “phenomenon” of skepticism, and also the “appearance”
of idealism, is thus this immediacy which is not a something nor a

Shine

343

thing – in general, not an indifferent being that would exist apart from
its determinateness and connection with the subject. Skepticism did not
permit itself to say “It is,” and the more recent idealism did not permit itself
to regard cognitions as a knowledge of the thing-in-itself. The shine of the
former was supposed absolutely not to have the foundation of a being:
the thing-in-itself was not supposed to enter into these cognitions. But at
the same time skepticism allowed a manifold of determinations for its
shine, or rather the latter turned out to have the full richness of the world
for its content. Likewise for the appearance of idealism: it encompassed the
full range of these manifold determinacies. So, the shine of skepticism and
the appearance of idealism do immediately have a manifold of determination. This content, therefore, might well have no being as foundation, no
thing or thing-in-itself; for itself, it remains as it is; it is simply transposed
from being into shine, so that the latter has within itself those manifold
determinacies that exist immediately, each an other to the other. The shine
is thus itself something immediately determined. It can have this or that
content; but whatever content it has, it has not posited it but possesses it
immediately. Idealism, whether Leibnizian, Kantian, Fichtean, or in any
other form, has not gone further than skepticism in this: it has not advanced
beyond being as determinateness. Skepticism lets the content of its shine
to be given to it; the shine exists for it immediately, whatever content it
might have. The Leibnizian monad develops its representations from itself
but is not their generating and controlling force; they rise up in it as a
froth, indifferent, immediately present to each other and to the monad
as well. Likewise Kant’s appearance is a given content of perception that
presupposes affections, determinations of the subject which are immediate
to each other and to the subject. As for the infinite obstacle of Fichte’s
Idealism, it might well be that it has no thing-in-itself for foundation, so
that it becomes a determinateness purely within the “I.” But this determinateness that the “I” makes its own, sublating its externality, is to the
“I” at the same time an immediate determinateness, a limitation of the “I”
which the latter may transcend but which contains a side of indifference,
and on account of this indifference, although internal to the “I,” it entails
an immediate non-being of it. –
2. Shine thus contains an immediate presupposition, an independent
side vis-à-vis essence. But the task, inasmuch as this shine is distinct
from essence, is not to demonstrate that it sublates itself and returns
into essence, for being has returned into essence in its totality; shine is the
null as such. The task is to demonstrate that the determinations which
distinguish it from essence are the determinations of essence itself; further,

11.247

344

11.248

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

that this determinateness of essence, which shine is, is sublated in essence
itself.
What constitutes the shine is the immediacy of non-being; this nonbeing, however, is nothing else than the negativity of essence within essence
itself. In essence, being is non-being. Its inherent nothingness is the negative
nature of essence itself. But the immediacy or indifference which this nonbeing contains is essences’s own absolute in-itself. The negativity of essence
is its self-equality or its simple immediacy and indifference. Being has
preserved itself in essence inasmuch as this latter, in its infinite negativity,
has this equality with itself; it is through this that essence is itself being.
The immediacy that the determinateness has in shine against essence is
thus none other than essence’s own immediacy, though not the immediacy
of an existent but rather the absolutely mediated or reflective immediacy
which is shine – being, not as being, but only as the determinateness of
being as against mediation; being as moment.
These two moments – nothingness but as subsisting, and being but as
moment; or again, negativity existing in itself and reflected immediacy –
these two moments that are the moments of shine, are thus the moments of
essence itself; it is not that there is a shine of being in essence, or a shine of
essence in being: the shine in the essence is not the shine of an other but is
rather shine as such, the shine of essence itself.
Shine is essence itself in the determinateness of being. Essence has a
shine because it is determined within itself and is therefore distinguished
from its absolute unity. But this determinateness is as determinateness just
as absolutely sublated in it. For essence is what stands on its own: it exists2
as self-mediating through a negation which it itself is. It is, therefore, the
identical unit of absolute negativity and immediacy. – The negativity is
negativity in itself; it is its reference to itself and thus immediacy in itself.
But it is negative reference to itself, a self-repelling negating; thus the
immediacy existing in itself is the negative or the determinate over against
the negativity. But this determinateness is itself absolute negativity and this
determining, which as determining immediately sublates itself, is a turning
back into itself.
Shine is the negative which has a being, but in another, in its negation; it
is a non-self-subsisting-being which is sublated within and null. And so it is
the negative which returns into itself, the non-subsistent as such, internally
non-subsistent. This reference of the negative or the non-subsistent to
itself is the immediacy of this non-subsistent; it is an other than it; it is its
2

ist (stressed in Hegel).

Shine

345

determinateness over against it, or the negation over against the negative.
But this negation which stands over against the negative is negativity as
referring solely to itself, the absolute sublation of the determinateness itself.
The determinateness that shine is in essence is, therefore, infinite determinateness; it is only the negative which coincides with itself and hence
a determinateness that, as determinateness, is self-subsistence and not
determined. – Contrariwise, the self-subsistence, as self-referring immediacy, equally is just determinateness and moment, negativity solely referring
to itself. – This negativity which is identical with immediacy, and thus the
immediacy which is identical with negativity, is essence. Shine is, therefore,
essence itself, but essence in a determinateness, in such a way, however,
that the determinateness is only a moment, and the essence is the shining
of itself within itself.
In the sphere of being, non-being arises over against being, each equally
an immediate, and the truth of both is becoming. In the sphere of essence,
we have the contrast first of essence and the non-essential, then of essence
and shine, the non-essential and the shine being both the leftover of being.
But these two, and no less the distinction of essence from them, consist
solely in this: that essence is taken at first as an immediate, not as it is in
itself, namely as an immediacy which is immediacy as pure mediacy or
absolute negativity. This first immediacy is thus only the determinateness
of immediacy. The sublating of this determinateness of essence consists,
therefore, in nothing further than showing that the unessential is only
shine, and that essence rather contains this shine within itself. For essence
is an infinite self-contained movement which determines its immediacy as
negativity and its negativity as immediacy, and is thus the shining of itself
within itself. In this, in its self-movement, essence is reflection.
c. reflection
Shine is the same as what reflection is; but it is reflection as immediate. For
this shine which is internalized and therefore alienated from its immediacy,
the German has a word from an alien language, “Reflexion.”
Essence is reflection, the movement of becoming and transition that
remains within itself, wherein that which is distinguished is determined
simply and solely as the negative in itself, as shine. – In the becoming
of being, it is being which lies at the foundation of determinateness,
and determinateness is reference to an other. Reflective movement is by
contrast the other as negation in itself, a negation which has being only
as self-referring. Or, since this self-referring is precisely this negating of

11.249

346

11.250

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

negation, what we have is negation as negation, negation that has its being
in its being-negated, as shine. Here, therefore, the other is not being with
negation or limit, but negation with negation. But the first over against this
other, the immediate or being, is only this self-equality itself of negation, the
negated negation, the absolute negativity. This self-equality or immediacy,
therefore, is not a first from which the beginning is made and which would
pass over into its negation; nor is there an existent substrate which would
go through the moves of reflection; immediacy is rather just this movement
itself.
In essence, therefore, the becoming, the reflective movement of essence,
is the movement from nothing to nothing and thereby back to itself. Transition
or becoming sublates itself in its transition; the other which comes to be
in this transition is not the non-being of a being but the nothingness of
a nothingness, and this, to be the negation of a nothingness, constitutes
being. – Being is only as the movement of nothingness to nothingness, and
so it is essence; and this essence does not have this movement in itself, but
the movement is rather the absolute shine itself, the pure negativity which
has nothing outside it which it would negate but which rather negates only
its negative, the negative which is only in this negating.
This pure absolute reflection, which is the movement from nothing to
nothing, further determines itself.
It is, first, positing reflection.
Second, it takes as its starting point the presupposed immediate, and then
it is external reflection.
Third, it sublates however this presupposition, and because in the sublating of the presupposition it presupposes at the same time, it is determining
reflection.
1. Positing reflection
Shine is a nothingness or a lack of essence. But a nothingness or that which
is void of essence does not have its being in an other in which it shines, but
its being is its own equality with itself; this conversion of the negative with
itself has been determined as the absolute reflection of essence.
This self-referring negativity is therefore the negating of itself. It is thus
just as much sublated negativity as it is negativity. Or again, it is itself
the negative and the simple equality with itself or immediacy. It consists,
therefore, in being itself and not being itself, and the two in one unity. –
Reflection is at first the movement of the nothing to the nothing, and
thus negation coinciding with itself. This self-coinciding is in general

Shine

347

simple equality with itself, immediacy. But this falling together is not the
transition of negation into equality as into a being other than it; reflection
is transition rather as the sublating of transition, for it is the immediate
falling together of the negative with itself. And so this coinciding is, first,
self-equality or immediacy; but, second, this immediacy is the self-equality
of the negative, and hence self-negating equality, immediacy which is in
itself the negative, the negative of itself: its being is to be what it is not.
The self-reference of the negative is therefore its turning back into itself;
it is immediacy as the sublating of the negative, but immediacy simply
and solely as this reference or as turning back from a one, and hence
as self-sublating immediacy. – This is positedness, immediacy purely as
determinateness or as self-reflecting. This immediacy, which is only as the
turning back of the negative into itself, is the immediacy which constitutes the determinateness of shine, and from which the previous reflective
movement seemed to begin. But, far from being able to begin with this
immediacy, the latter first is rather as the turning back or as the reflection
itself. Reflection is therefore the movement which, since it is the turning
back, only in this turning is that which starts out or returns.
It is a positing, inasmuch as it is immediacy as a turning back; that is to
say, there is not an other beforehand, one either from which or to which it
would turn back; it is, therefore, only as a turning back or as the negative of
itself. But further, this immediacy is sublated negation and sublated return
into itself. Reflection, as the sublating of the negative, is the sublating of its
other, of the immediacy. Because it is thus immediacy as a turning back,
the coinciding of the negative with itself, it is equally the negation of the
negative as negative. And so it is presupposing. – Or immediacy is as a
turning back only the negative of itself, just this, not to be immediacy;
but reflection is the sublating of the negative of itself, coincidence with
itself; it therefore sublates its positing, and inasmuch as it is in its positing
the sublating of positing, it is presupposing. – In presupposing, reflection
determines the turning back into itself as the negative of itself, as that of
which essence is the sublating. It is its relating to itself, but to itself as to
the negative of itself; only so is it negativity which abides with itself, selfreferring negativity. Immediacy comes on the scene simply and solely as a
turning back and is that negative which is the semblance of a beginning,
the beginning which the return negates. The turning back of essence is
therefore its self-repulsion. Or inner directed reflection is essentially the
presupposing of that from which the reflection is the turning back.
It is only by virtue of the sublating of its equality with itself that essence
is equality with itself. Essence presupposes itself, and the sublating of this

11.251

348
11.252

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

presupposing is essence itself; contrariwise, this sublating of its presupposition is the presupposition itself. – Reflection thus finds an immediate
before it which it transcends and from which it is the turning back. But
this turning back is only the presupposing of what was antecedently found.
This antecedent comes to be only by being left behind; its immediacy is sublated immediacy. – The sublated immediacy is, contrariwise, the turning
back into itself, essence that arrives at itself, simple being equal to itself.
This arriving at itself is thus the sublating of itself and self-repelling, presupposing reflection, and its repelling of itself from itself is the arriving at
itself.
It follows from these considerations that the movement of reflection is to
be taken as an absolute internal counter-repelling. For the presupposition of
the turning back into itself – that from which essence arises, essence being
only as this coming back – is only in the turning back itself. Transcending
the immediate from which reflection begins occurs rather only through
this transcending; and the transcending of the immediate is the arriving at
the immediate. The movement, as forward movement, turns immediately
around into itself and so is only self-movement – a movement which comes
from itself in so far as positing reflection is presupposing reflection, yet, as
presupposing reflection, is simply positing reflection.
Thus is reflection itself and its non-being, and only is itself by being the
negative of itself, for only in this way is the sublating of the negative at the
same time a coinciding with itself.
The immediacy which reflection, as a process of sublating, presupposes
for itself is simply and solely a positedness, something in itself sublated
which is not diverse from reflection’s turning back into itself but is itself
only this turning back. But it is at the same time determined as a negative, as
immediately in opposition to something, and hence to an other. And so is
reflection determined. According to this determinateness, because reflection
has a presupposition and takes its start from the immediate as its other, it
is external reflection.
2. External reflection

11.253

Reflection, as absolute reflection, is essence shining within, essence that
posits only shine, only positedness, for its presupposition; and as presupposing reflection, it is immediately only positing reflection. But external
or real reflection presupposes itself as sublated, as the negative of itself. In
this determination, it is doubled. At one time it is as what is presupposed,
or the reflection into itself which is the immediate. At another time, it is as

Shine

349

the reflection negatively referring to itself; it refers itself to itself as to that
its non-being.
External reflection thus presupposes a being, at first not in the sense that
its immediacy is only positedness or moment, but in the sense rather that
this immediacy refers to itself and the determinateness is only as moment.
Reflection refers to its presupposition in such a way that the latter is its
negative, but this negative is thereby sublated as negative. – Reflection,
in positing, immediately sublates its positing, and so it has an immediate
presupposition. It therefore finds this presupposition before it as something
from which it starts, and from which it only makes its way back into
itself, negating it as its negative. But that this presupposition is a negative
or a positedness is not its concern; this determinateness belongs only to
positing reflection, whereas in the presupposing positedness it is only as
sublated. What external reflection determines and posits in the immediate
are determinations which to that extent are external to it. – In the sphere
of being, external reflection was the infinite; the finite stands as the first,
as the real from which the beginning is made as from a foundation that
abides, whereas the infinite is the reflection into itself standing over against
it.
This external reflection is the syllogism in which the two extremes are
the immediate and the reflection into itself; the middle term is the reference
connecting the two, the determinate immediate, so that one part of this
connecting reference, the immediate, falls to one extreme alone, and the
other, the determinateness or the negation, only to the other extreme.
But if one takes a closer look at what the external reflection does, it
turns out that it is, secondly, the positing of the immediate, an immediate
which thus becomes the negative or the determined; but it is immediately
also the sublating of this positing, for it pre-supposes the immediate; in
negating, it is the negating of its negating. But thereby it immediately is
equally a positing, the sublating of the immediate which is its negative; and
this negative, from which it seemed to begin as from something alien, only
is in this its beginning. In this way, the immediate is not only implicitly
in itself (that is, for us or in external reflection) the same as what reflection
is, but is posited as being the same. For the immediate is determined by
reflection as the negative of the latter or as the other of it, but it is reflection
itself which negates this determining. – The externality of reflection visà-vis the immediate is consequently sublated; its self-negating positing is
its coinciding with its negative, with the immediate, and this coinciding is
the immediacy of essence itself. – It thus transpires that external reflection
is not external but is just as much the immanent reflection of immediacy

11.254

350

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

itself; or that the result of positing reflection is essence existing in and for
itself. External reflection is thus determining reflection.

11.255

Remark
Reflection is usually taken in a subjective sense as the movement of judgment which transcends an immediately given representation and seeks more
universal determinations for it or compares it with such determinations.
Kant opposes reflective and determining judgment (Critique of Judgment,
Introduction, pp. xxiiiff.). He defines judgment in general as the faculty of
thinking the particular as contained under the universal. If the universal (the
rule, the principle, the law) is given, then the judgment which subsumes the
particular under it is determining. But if what is given is only a particular,
for which it is up to the judgment to find the universal, then the judgment
is reflecting. Here, too, reflection is therefore a matter of rising above the
immediate to the universal. On the one hand, the immediate is determined
as particular only by being thus referred to its universal; for itself, it is only
a singular or an immediate existent. But, on the other hand, that to which
it is referred, its universal, its rule, principle, law, is in general that which
is reflected into itself, which refers itself to itself, is the essence or the
essential.
But at issue here is neither the reflection of consciousness, nor the more
specific reflection of the understanding that has the particular and the
universal for its determinations, but reflection in general. It is clear that
the reflection to which Kant assigns the search of the universal for a given
particular is likewise only an external reflection which applies itself to the
immediate as to something given. – But the concept of absolute reflection,
too, is implicit in it. For the universal, the principle or the rule and law,
to which reflection rises in its process of determination is taken to be the
essence of the immediate from which the reflection began; the immediate,
therefore, to be a nothingness which is posited in its true being only by
the turning back of the reflection from it, by the determining of reflection.
Therefore, what reflection does to the immediate, and the determinations
that derive from it, is not anything external to it but is rather its true being.
External reflection was also meant whenever reflection, as it was for a
while the fashion in recent philosophy, was being accused of all evil, and
it and its ways of determining were regarded as the polar opposite, nay
the ancestral enemy, of true philosophical method. In fact, also thoughtreflection, in so far as it operates externally, proceeds from something
immediately given that is alien to it, and considers itself to be a merely
formal operation that receives its material content from outside and of

Shine

351

itself only is a movement conditioned by that content. – Further, as the
examination of determining reflection will now bear out, reflective determinations are of a different kind than the merely immediate determinations of
being. These last are more readily admitted to be transient, merely relative,
confined to the reference to another. The reflective determinations have
instead the form of a being which is in-and-for-itself. They claim the status,
therefore, of essential determinations, and instead of passing over into their
opposites, they appear rather as absolute, free, and mutually indifferent.
They stubbornly resist, therefore, their movement; their being is the selfidentity which they possess in their determinateness, and by virtue of it,
though indeed presupposing each other, in this referring to the other they
nonetheless maintain themselves as totally separate.
3. Determining reflection
Determining reflection is in general the unity of positing and external
reflection. This is now to be examined more closely.
1. External reflection begins from immediate being, positing reflection
from nothing. In its determining, external reflection posits another in the
place of the sublated being, but this other is essence; the positing does not
posit its determination in the place of an other; it has no presupposition.
But, precisely for this reason, it is not complete as determining reflection;
the determination which it posits is consequently only a posited; this is an
immediate, not however as equal to itself but as self-negating; its connection
with the turning back into itself is absolute; it is only in the reflection-intoitself but is not this reflection itself.
The posited is therefore an other, but in such a manner that the selfequality of reflection is retained; for the posited is only as sublated, as
reference to the turning back into itself. – In the sphere of being, existence
was the being that had negation in it, and being was the immediate ground
and element of this negation which was, therefore, itself immediate negation. In the sphere of essence, positedness is what corresponds to existence.
Positedness is equally an existence, but its ground is being as essence or as
pure negativity; it is a determinateness or a negation, not as existent but
immediately as sublated. Existence is only positedness; this is the principle
of the essence of existence. Positedness stands on the one side over against
existence, and over against essence on the other: it is to be regarded as the
means which conjoins existence with essence and essence with existence. –
If it is said, a determination is only a positedness, the claim can thus have
a twofold meaning, according to whether the determination is such in

11.256

352

11.257

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

opposition to existence or in opposition to essence. In either meaning, existence is taken for something superior to positedness, which is attributed
to external reflection, to the subjective. In fact, however, positedness is
the superior, because, as posited, existence is what it is in itself – something negative, something that refers simply and solely to the turning back
into itself. For this reason positedness is only a positedness with respect to
essence: it is the negation of this turning back as achieved return into itself.
2. Positedness is not yet a determination of reflection; it is only determinateness as negation in general. But the positing is now united with
external reflection; in this unity, the latter is absolute presupposing, that is,
the repelling of reflection from itself or the positing of determinateness as
its own. As posited, therefore, positedness is negation; but as presupposed,
it is reflected into itself. And in this way positedness is a determination of
reflection.
The determination of reflection is distinct from the determinateness
of being, of quality; the latter is immediate reference to other in general;
positedness also is reference to other, but to immanently reflected being.
Negation as quality is existent negation; being constitutes its ground and
element. The determination of reflection, on the contrary, has for this
ground immanent reflectedness. Positedness gets fixed in determination
precisely because reflection is self-equality in its negatedness; the latter
is therefore itself reflection into itself. Determination persists here, not
by virtue of being but because of its self-equality. Since the being which
sustains quality is unequal to the negation, quality is consequently unequal
within itself, and hence a transient moment which disappears in the other.
The determination of reflection is on the contrary positedness as negation –
negation which has negatedness for its ground, is therefore not unequal to
itself within itself, and hence essential rather than transient determinateness.
What gives subsistence to it is the self-equality of reflection which has the
negative only as negative, as something sublated or posited.
Because of this reflection into themselves, the determinations of reflection
appear as free essentialities, sublated in the void without reciprocal attraction
or repulsion. In them the determinateness has become entranced and
infinitely fixed by virtue of the reference to itself. It is the determinate
which has subjugated its transitoriness and its mere positedness to itself,
that is to say, has deflected its reflection-into-other into reflection-intoitself. These determinations hereby constitute the determinate shine as it
is in essence, the essential shine. Determining reflection is for this reason
reflection that has exited from itself; the equality of essence with itself is
lost in the negation, and negation predominates.

Shine

353

Thus there are two distinct sides to the determination of reflection. First,
reflection is positedness, negation as such; second, it is immanent reflection.
According to the side of positedness, it is negation as negation, and this
already is its unity with itself. But it is this unity at first only implicitly or
in itself, an immediate which sublates itself within, is the other of itself. –
To this extent, reflection is a determining that abides in itself. In it essence
does not exit from itself; the distinctions are solely posited, taken back
into essence. But, from the other side, they are not posited but are rather
reflected into themselves; negation as negation is equality with itself, not
in its other, not reflected into its non-being.
3. Now keeping in mind that the determination of reflection is both
immanently reflected reference and positedness as well, its nature immediately becomes more transparent. For, as positedness, the determination
is negation as such, a non-being as against another, namely, as against the
absolute immanent reflection or as against essence. But as self-reference, it
is reflected within itself. – This, the reflection of the determination, and
that positedness are distinct; its positedness is rather the sublatedness of
the determination whereas its immanent reflectedness is its subsisting. In
so far as now the positedness is at the same time immanent reflection, the
determinateness of the reflection is the reference in it to its otherness. – It is
not a determinateness that exists quiescent, one which would be referred
to an other in such a way that the referred term and its reference would be
different, each something existing in itself, each a something that excludes
its other and its reference to this other from itself. Rather, the determination of reflection is within it the determinate side and the reference of
this determinate side as determinate, that is, the reference to its negation. –
Quality, through its reference, passes over into another; its alteration begins
in its reference. The determination of reflection, on the contrary, has taken
its otherness back into itself. It is positedness – negation which has however
deflected the reference to another into itself, and negation which, equal to
itself, is the unity of itself and its other, and only through this is an essentiality. It is, therefore, positedness, negation, but as reflection into itself it
is at the same time the sublatedness of this positedness, infinite reference
to itself.

ch a p ter 2
11.258

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

Reflection is determined reflection; accordingly, essence is determined
essence, or it is essentiality.
Reflection is the shining of essence within itself. Essence, as infinite immanent turning back is not immediate simplicity, but negative simplicity;
it is a movement across moments that are distinct, is absolute mediation
with itself. But in these moments it shines; the moments are, therefore,
themselves determinations reflected into themselves.
First, essence is simple self-reference, pure identity. This is its determination, one by which it is rather the absence of determination.
Second, the specifying determination is difference – difference which is
either external or indefinite, diversity in general, or opposed diversity or
opposition.
Third, as contradiction this opposition is reflected into itself and returns
to its foundation.

11.259

Remark
The determinations of reflection have customarily been singled out in the
form of propositions which were said to apply to everything. They were said
to have the status of universal laws of thought that lie at the base of all
thinking; to be inherently absolute and indemonstrable but immediately
and indisputably recognized and accepted as true by all thought upon
grasping their meaning.
Thus identity, as an essential determination, is enunciated in the proposition, “Everything is equal to itself; A = A,” or, negatively, “A cannot be
A and not-A at the same time.”
On the face of it, it is difficult to see why only these simple determinations of reflection should be expressed in this particular form and not
also the rest, such as the categories that belong to the sphere of being.
We would then have, for instance, such propositions as, “Everything is,”
“Everything has an existence,” etc.; or again, “Everything has a quality, a
354

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

355

quantity, and so on.” For being, existence, etc., are as logical determinations the predicates of everything in general. A category, according to the
etymology of the word and Aristotle’s definition of it, is what is said and
asserted of every existent. – But the difference is that a determinateness
of being is essentially a transition into the opposite of it; the negative of
every determinateness is just as necessary as that determinateness itself; as
immediate determinacies, each determinateness immediately confronts the
others. If any of these categories is therefore expressed in a proposition,
the opposite proposition comes up just as well, both offering themselves
with equal necessity and, as immediate claims, each has at least equal right.
Each would therefore require a proof as against the other, and both claims
would no longer possess the character of immediately true and indisputable
propositions.
The determinations of reflection are, on the contrary, not qualitative in
kind. They are self-referring and consequently abstract from the determinateness of others. Further, since as determinacies they are self-references,
they therefore already have the propositional form in them. For proposition
and judgment differ mainly because in the former the content constitutes
the connection itself of the terms, or is a specific connection. Judgment,
on the contrary, converts the content into a predicate which is a universal
determinateness by itself, distinct from its connection which is the simple
copula. Whenever a proposition is to be transformed into a judgment, the
determinate content – if, for instance, it resides in a verb – is transformed
into a participle in order in this way to separate the determination itself
from its connection with a subject. The propositional form is instead more
closely allied to the determinations of reflection which are immanently
reflected positedness. – Only, when they are enunciated as universal laws of
thought, they are in need of a subject of their connection, and this subject
is the everything, or an A which equally means “all being” and “each being.”
Now this propositional form is, for one thing, something superfluous; the determinations of reflection are to be regarded in and for themselves. Moreover, the propositions suffer from the drawback that they have
“being,” “everything,” for subject. They thus bring being into play again,
and enunciate the determinations of reflection (the identity, etc., of anything) as a quality which a something would have within – not in any
speculative sense, but in the sense that the something, as subject, persists
in such a quality as an existent, not that it has passed over into identity
(etc.) as into its truth and essence.
Finally, although the determinations of reflection have the form of selfequality, and are therefore unconnected to an other and without opposition,

11.260

356

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

they are in fact determinate against one another, as it will result on closer
examination – or is immediately evident in them in the case of identity,
diversity, and opposition – and are not therefore exempt from transition
and contradiction because of their reflective form. Therefore, on closer
examination, the several propositions that are set up as absolute laws of
thought are opposed to each other: they contradict each other and mutually
sublate each other. – If everything is identical with itself, then it is not
different, is not opposed, has no ground. Or if it is assumed that there are
no two things alike, that is, that all things are different from each other,
then A is not equal to A, nor is A in opposition, etc. The assumption of
any of these propositions does not allow the assumption of any other. –
The thoughtless examination of them enumerates them one after the other,
so that they appear unconnected; it merely adverts to their reflectedness
without paying attention to their other moment, to the positedness, or the
determinateness as such which propels them on to transition or to their
negation.
a. identity

11.261

1. Essence is simple immediacy as sublated immediacy. Its negativity is
its being; it is equal to itself in its absolute negativity by virtue of which
otherness and reference to other have as such simply disappeared into pure
self-equality. Essence is therefore simple self-identity.
This self-identity is the immediacy of reflection. It is not that self-equality
which being is, or also nothing, but a self-equality which, in producing itself
as unity, does not produce itself over again, as from another, but is a pure
production, from itself and in itself, essential identity. It is not, therefore,
abstract identity or an identity which is the result of a relative negation
preceding it, one that separates indeed what it distinguishes from it but,
for the rest, leaves it existing outside it, the same after as before. Being, and
every determinateness of being, has rather sublated itself not relatively, but
in itself, and this simple negativity, the negativity of being in itself, is the
identity itself.
In general, therefore, it is still the same as essence.
Remark 1
1. Thought that keeps to external reflection and knows of no other thought
except that of external reflection does not attain to identity as we have
just grasped it, nor does it recognize essence, which is the same. Such
a thought will always have only abstract identity in mind, and, outside

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

357

and alongside it, difference. In its opinion, reason is no more than a
loom intertwining warp (say, identity) and woof (say, difference), joining
them externally; or, if it turns to analysis, now specifically pulling out
identity, and at the same time also obtaining difference alongside it; now a
comparing, and also a differentiating at the same time – a comparing in that
it abstracts from difference, and a differentiating in that it abstracts from
the comparing. – One must completely dismiss these assertions and these
opinions concerning what reason does, since they are, as it were, of merely
historical interest; it is rather the consideration of all things that are that
reveals, in them, that each is self-unlike and contradictory in its equality
with itself, and each self-identical in its difference, in its contradiction:
that everything intrinsically is this movement of transition of one of these
determinations to the other, and that everything is this transition because
each determination is itself, within it, the opposite of itself. The concept
of identity, a simple negativity that refers itself to itself, is not the product
of external reflection but derives from being itself. Contrary to this, the
identity that stays distant from difference, and the difference that stays
distant from identity, are the products of external reflection and of an
abstraction that arbitrarily clings to this point of indifferent difference.
2. This identity is, in the first instance, essence itself, not yet a determination
of it; it is the entire reflection, not a distinct moment of it. As absolute negation, it is negation immediately negating itself – a non-being and difference
that vanishes as it arises, or a distinguishing by which nothing is distinguished but which immediately collapses within itself. But the non-being
of the other is the sublating of the other and hence of the distinguishing
itself. Here, then, distinguishing is present as self-referring negativity, as a
non-being which is the non-being of itself – a non-being which does not
have its non-being in an other but has it within itself. What is present,
therefore, is self-referring, reflected difference, or pure, absolute difference.
Or identity is immanent reflection, reflection which is such only as
inner repelling, and it is this repelling as immanent reflection, repelling
that immediately recovers itself. And so identity is identity as difference
which is identical with itself. But difference is identical with itself only
inasmuch as it is not identity but absolute non-identity. But again, nonidentity is absolute to the extent that it does not contain anything of its
other but is only itself, that is, to the extent that it is identity with itself.
Internally, therefore, identity is absolute non-identity. But it is also
the determination of identity over against non-identity. For, as immanent
reflection, it posits itself as its own non-being; it is the whole, but as

11.262

358

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

reflection it posits itself as its own moment, as the positedness from which
it is the turning back into itself. Thus identity is such only as a moment
of itself, as determination of simple self-equality over against absolute
difference.

11.263

Remark 2
In this remark I shall examine identity more closely as the principle of
identity which is commonly adduced as the first law of thought.
In its positive formulation, A = A, this proposition is at first no more
than the expression of empty tautology. It is rightly said, therefore, that this
law of thought is without content and that it leads nowhere. It is thus to
an empty identity that they cling, those who take it to be something true,
insisting that identity is not difference but that the two are different. They
do not see that in saying, “Identity is different from difference,” they have
thereby already said that identity is something different. And since this must
also be conceded as the nature of identity, the implication is that to be different belongs to identity not externally, but within it, in its nature. – But,
further, inasmuch as these same individuals hold firm to their unmoved
identity, of which the opposite is difference, they do not see that they have
thereby reduced it to a one-sided determinateness which, as such, has no
truth. They are conceding that the principle of identity only expresses a
one-sided determinateness, that it only contains formal truth, truth abstract
and incomplete. – Immediately implied in this correct judgment, however,
is that the truth is complete only in the unity of identity and difference, and,
consequently, that it only consists in this unity. When asserting that formal
identity is incomplete, there is vaguely present to one’s mind the totality, measured against which that identity is incomplete; but the moment
one insists that identity is absolutely separate from difference and in this
separation takes it to be something essential, valid, true, then what transpires from these two contradictory claims is only the failure to reconcile
these two thoughts: that identity is as abstract identity essential, but that,
as such, it is equally incomplete. What is lacking is the awareness of the
negative movement as which, in these claims, identity itself is displayed. –
Or when this is said, that identity is identity essentially as separation from
difference or in the separation from difference, then right there we have the
expressed truth about it, namely that identity consists in being separation
as such, or in being essentially in the separation, that is, it is nothing for itself
but is rather moment of separation.
As to the other confirmation of the absolute truth of the principle of
identity, this is made to rest on experience in so far as appeal is made

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

359

to the experience of every consciousness; for anyone presented with this
proposition, “A is A,” “a tree is a tree,” immediately grants it and is satisfied
that the proposition is self-evident and in need of no further justification
or demonstration.
On the one hand, this appeal to experience, that every consciousness
acknowledges the principle universally, is a mere manner of speaking. For
nobody will want to say that the abstract proposition, “A is A,” has actually
been tried out on every consciousness. The appeal to actual experience
is therefore not in earnest but is rather only an assurance that, if the
said experiment were made, universal acknowledgment of the proposition
would be the result. – And if it is not the abstract proposition as such that is
meant, but the proposition in concrete application, from which application
the abstract proposition would then have to be developed, then the claim to
the universality and immediacy of the latter would consist in the fact that
every consciousness assumes it or implies it as foundation, and indeed does
so in its every utterance. But the concrete and the application are precisely
in the reference that connects simple identity with a manifold which is
different from it. Expressed as a proposition, the concrete would be first of
all a synthetic proposition. From this concrete itself, or from the synthetic
proposition expressing it, abstraction could indeed extract the principle
of identity through analysis; but, in actual fact, it would not then leave
experience as is but would have altered it, since in experience the identity was
rather in unity with difference. And this is the immediate refutation of the
claim that abstract identity is as such something true, for what transpires
in every experience is the very opposite, namely identity only united with
difference.
On the other hand, the experiment with the pure principle of identity is
also all too often made, and it demonstrates clearly enough how the truth
contained in the principle is regarded. If, for instance, to the question,
“What is a plant?,” the answer is given, “A plant is . . . a plant,” the whole
company on which this answer is tried out would both grant it and at the
same time unanimously declare that the statement says nothing. If anyone
opens his mouth and promises to announce what God is, and says that
“God is . . . God,” expectation is cheated, for a different determination was
anticipated; and though the proposition is absolute truth, very little is
made of such absolute verbiage. Nothing will be held to be more tedious,
more aggravating, than a conversation which only chews the cud, however
true the cud might nevertheless be.
Let us take a closer look at what makes such a truth tedious. So, the
beginning, “The plant is . . . ,” makes moves in the direction of saying

11.264

360

11.265

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

something, of adducing a further determination. But since only the same
is repeated, the opposite has happened instead, nothing has occurred. Such
talk of identity, therefore, contradicts itself. Identity, instead of being in
itself the truth and the absolute truth, is thus rather the opposite; instead
of being the unmoved simple, it surpasses itself into the dissolution of
itself.
More is entailed, therefore, in the form of the proposition expressing identity than simple, abstract identity; entailed by it is this pure movement of
reflection in the course of which there emerges the other, but only as reflective shine, as immediate disappearing; “A is” is a beginning that envisages a
something different before it to which the “A is” would proceed; but the “A
is” never gets to it. “A is . . . A”: the difference is only a disappearing and the
movement goes back into itself. – The propositional form can be regarded
as the hidden necessity of adding to abstract identity the extra factor of that
movement. – Thus an A is added, a plant or some other substrate, a useless
content with no significance; but it constitutes the difference that seems to
associate itself by accident. If instead of A or any other substrate, identity
itself is assumed – “identity is identity” – it is then thereby admitted that
any other substrate could be assumed instead of this identity. Consequently,
if appeal is to be made to what appearance indicates, then the result is this:
that in the expression of identity, difference also immediately emerges; or
more precisely, in accordance with what has been said, that this identity is
a nothing, is negativity, the absolute difference from itself.
The other expression of the principle of identity, “A cannot be A and
not-A at the same time,” is in a negative form; it is called the “principle
of contradiction.” No justification is normally given for how the form of
negation by which this principle is distinguished from the other comes to
identity. – But this form is implied by the pure movement of reflection
which identity is, by the simple negativity which is contained in a more
developed form by the just stated second formulation of the principle. A is
enunciated, and a not-A which is the pure other of A; but this not-A only
shows itself in order to disappear. In this proposition, therefore, identity is
expressed as a negation of negation. A and not-A are distinct; the two terms
are distinguished with reference to one and the same A. Here identity is
displayed, therefore, as this differentiation of the terms in the one connection
or as the simple difference in the terms themselves.
From this it is clear that the principle of identity itself, and still more
the principle of contradiction, are not of merely analytical but of synthetic
nature. For the latter expresses not only empty, simple self-equality, but
the other of this self-equality, and not just this other in general but as

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

361

absolute inequality, contradiction in itself. As for the principle of identity
itself, we have shown that it entails the movement of reflection, identity as
the disappearing of otherness.
Thus the result of this consideration is this: (1) the principle of identity or
contradiction, when meant to express merely abstract identity in opposition
to difference as a truth, is not a law of thought but expresses rather the
opposite of it; (2) these two principles contain more than is meant by them,
namely this opposite, absolute difference itself.
b. difference
1. Absolute difference
Difference is the negativity that reflection possesses in itself, the nothing
which is said in identity discourse, the essential moment of identity itself
which, as the negativity of itself, at the same time determines itself and is
differentiated from difference.
1. This difference is difference in and for itself, absolute difference, the
difference of essence. – It is difference in and for itself, not difference through
something external but self-referring, hence simple, difference. – It is essential that we grasp absolute difference as simple. In the absolute difference
of A and not-A from each other, it is the simple “not” which, as such,
constitutes the difference. Difference itself is a simple concept. “In this,”
so it is said, “two things differ, in that etc.” – “In this,” that is, in one and
the same respect, relative to the same basis of determination. It is the difference of reflection, not the otherness of existence. One existence and another
existence are posited as lying outside each other; each of the two existences
thus determined over against each other has an immediate being for itself.
The other of essence, by contrast, is the other in and for itself, not the other
of some other which is to be found outside it; it is simple determinateness
in itself. Also in the sphere of existence did otherness and determinateness
prove to be of this nature, simple determinateness, identical opposition;
but this identity showed itself only as the transition of a determinateness
into the other. Here, in the sphere of reflection, difference comes in as
reflected, so posited as it is in itself.
2. Difference in itself is the difference that refers itself to itself; thus
it is the negativity of itself, the difference not from another but of itself
from itself; it is not itself but its other. What is different from difference, however, is identity. Difference is, therefore, itself and identity.
The two together constitute difference; difference is the whole and its

11.266

362

11.267

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

moment. – One can also say that difference, as simple difference, is no
difference; it is such only with reference to identity; even better, that as difference it entails itself and this reference equally. – Difference is the whole
and its own moment, just as identity equally is its whole and its moment. –
This is to be regarded as the essential nature of reflection and as the determined primordial origin of all activity and self-movement. – Both difference
and identity make themselves into moment or positedness because, as reflection, they are negative self-reference.
Difference, thus as unity of itself and of identity, is internally determined
difference. It is not the transition into another, not reference to another
outside it; it has its other, identity, within, and in like manner identity, in
being included in the determination of difference, has not lost itself in it as
its other but retains itself therein – is the reflection-into-itself of difference,
its moment.
3. Difference has both these moments, identity and difference; thus
the two are both a positedness, determinateness. But in this positedness
each refers to itself. The one, identity, is itself immediately the moment of
immanent reflection; but no less is the other, difference, difference in itself,
reflected difference. Difference, inasmuch as it has two such moments
which are themselves reflections into themselves, is diversity.
2. Diversity
1. Identity internally breaks apart into diversity because, as absolute difference in itself, it posits itself as the negative of itself and these, its two
moments (itself and the negative of itself ), are reflections into themselves,
are identical with themselves; or precisely because it itself immediately sublates its negating and is in its determination reflected into itself. The different
subsists as diverse, indifferent to any other, because it is identical with itself,
because identity constitutes its base and element; or, the diverse remains
what it is even in its opposite, identity.
Diversity constitutes the otherness as such of reflection. The other of
existence has immediate being, where negativity resides, for its foundation.
But in reflection it is self-identity, the reflected immediacy, that constitutes
the subsistence of the negative and its indifference.
The moments of difference are identity and difference itself. These
moments are diverse when reflected into themselves, referring themselves to
themselves; thus, in the determination of identity, they are only self-referring;
identity is not referred to difference, nor is difference referred to identity;
hence, inasmuch as each of these moments is referred only to itself, the two

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

363

are not determined with respect to each other. – Now because in this way
the two are not differentiated within, the difference is external to them. The
diverse moments, therefore, conduct themselves with respect to each other,
not as identity and difference, but only as moments different in general,
indifferent to each other and to their determinateness.
2. In diversity, as the indifference of difference, reflection has in general
become external; difference is only a positedness or as sublated, but is itself the
whole reflection. – On closer consideration, both, identity and difference
are reflections, as we have just established; each is the unity of it and
its other, each is the whole. But the determinateness, to be only identity
or only difference, is thus a sublated something. They are not, therefore,
qualities, since their determinateness, because of the immanent reflection,
is at the same time only as negation. What we have is therefore this
duplicity, immanent reflection as such and determinateness as negation or
positedness. Positedness is the reflection that is external to itself; it is negation
as negation and consequently, indeed in itself self-referring negation and
immanent reflection, but only in itself, implicitly; its reference is to a
something external.
Reflection in itself and external reflection are thus the two determinations in which the moments of difference, identity and difference, are
posited. They are these moments themselves as they have determined themselves at this point. – Immanent reflection is identity, but determined to
be indifferent to difference, not to have difference at all but to conduct
itself towards difference as identical with itself; it is diversity. It is identity
that has so reflected itself into itself that it truly is the one reflection of
the two moments into themselves; both are immanent reflections. Identity
is this one reflection of the two, the identity which has difference within
it only as an indifferent difference and is diversity in general. – External
reflection, on the contrary, is their determinate difference, not as absolute
immanent reflection, but as a determination towards which the implicitly
present reflection is indifferent; its two moments, identity and difference
themselves, are thus externally posited, are not determinations that exist in
and for themselves.
Now this external identity is likeness, and external difference is
unlikeness. – Likeness is indeed identity, but only as a positedness, an
identity which is not in and for itself. – Unlikeness is equally difference,
but an external difference which is not, in and for itself, the difference of
the unlike itself. Whether something is like or unlike something else is
not the concern of either the like of the unlike; each refers only to itself,
each is in and for itself what it is; identity or non-identity, in the sense of

11.268

364

11.269

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

likeness or unlikeness, depend on the point of view of a third external to
them.
3. External reflection connects diversity by referring it to likeness and
unlikeness. This reference, which is a comparing, moves back and forth from
likeness to unlikeness and from unlikeness to likeness. But this back and
forth referring of likeness and unlikeness is external to these determinations
themselves; moreover, they are not referred to each other, but each, for itself,
is referred to a third. In this alternation, each immediately stands out on its
own. – External reflection is as such external to itself; determinate difference
is negated absolute difference; it is not simple difference, therefore, not an
immanent reflection, but has this reflection outside it; hence its moments
come apart and both refer, each also outside the other, to the immanent
reflection confronting them.
In reflection thus alienated from itself, likeness and unlikeness present
themselves, therefore, as themselves unconnected, and reflection keeps them
apart, for it refers them to one and the same something by means of “in so
far,” “from this side or that,” and “from this view or that.” Thus diverse
things that are one and the same, when likeness and unlikeness are said of
them, are from one side like each other, but from another side unlike, and
in so far as they are alike, to that extent they are not unlike. Likeness thus
refers only to itself, and unlikeness is equally only unlikeness.
Because of this separation from each other, they sublate themselves.
Precisely that which should save them from contradiction and dissolution,
namely that something is like another in one respect but unlike in another –
precisely this keeping of likeness and unlikeness apart, is their destruction.
For both are determinations of difference; they are references to each other,
each intended to be what the other is not; the like is not the unlike, and the
unlike is not the like; both have this connecting reference essentially, and
have no meaning outside it; as determinations of difference, each is what it
is as different from its other. But because of their indifference to each other,
the likeness is referred to itself, and similarly is unlikeness a point of view of
its own and a reflection unto itself; each, therefore, is like itself; difference
has vanished, since they have no determinateness to oppose them; in other
words, each is consequently only likeness.
Accordingly, this indifferent viewpoint or the external difference sublates
itself and it is in itself the negativity of itself. It is the negativity which in
comparing belongs to that which does the comparing. This latter oscillates
from likeness to unlikeness and back again; hence it lets the one disappear
into the other and is in fact the negative unity of both. This negative
unity transcends at first what is compared as well as the moments of the

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

365

comparing as a subjective operation that falls outside them. But the result
is that this unity is in fact the nature of likeness and unlikeness themselves.
Even the independent viewpoint that each of these is, is rather the selfreference that sublates their distinctness and so, too, themselves.
From this side, as moments of external reflection and as external to
themselves, likeness and unlikeness disappear together into their likeness.
But this, their negative unity, is in addition also posited in them; for their
reflection implicitly exists outside them, that is, they are the likeness and
unlikeness of a third, of another than they themselves are. Thus the like is
not the like of itself, and the unlike, as the unlike not of itself but of an
unlike to it, is itself the like. The like and the unlike is each therefore the
unlike of itself. Each is thereby this reflection: likeness, that it is itself and
the unlikeness; unlikeness, that it is itself and the likeness.
Likeness and unlikeness constituted the side of positedness as against
what is being compared or the diverse which, as contrasted with them,
had determined itself as implicitly existent reflection. But this positedness
has consequently equally lost its determinateness as against this reflection.
Likeness and unlikeness, the determinations of external reflection, are precisely the merely implicitly existent reflection which the diverse as such was
supposed to be, its only indeterminate difference. Implicitly existent reflection is self-reference without negation, abstract self-identity and therefore
positedness itself. – The merely diverse thus passes over through the positedness into negative reflection. The diverse is difference which is merely
posited, hence a difference which is no difference, hence a negation that
negates itself within. Likeness and unlikeness themselves, the positedness,
thus return through indifference or through implicitly existing reflection
back into negative unity with themselves, into the reflection which is the
implicit difference of likeness and unlikeness. Diversity, the indifferent sides
of which are just as much simply and solely moments of a negative unity, is
opposition.
Remark
Diversity, like identity, is expressed in a proposition of its own. But the two
propositions otherwise remain indifferent to each other, each valid on its
own irrespective of the other.
“All things are different,” or “No two things are alike.” – This principle
is in fact opposed to the principle of identity, for it says: “A is something
distinctive, therefore A is also not-A”; or, “A is unlike another, hence it is
not A in general but rather a distinctive A.” In the proposition expressing
identity, the A can be replaced by any other substrate, but when A is

11.270

366

11.271

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

something distinctive, it cannot be interchanged with anything else. Of
course it is not supposed to be different from itself, but only from some
other; but this diversity is its own determination. As self-identical, A is
indeterminateness; but as determinate it is the opposite thereof; it no
longer has only self-identity but also carries a negation within, and hence
a difference within it of itself from itself.
That everything is different from everything else is an altogether superfluous proposition, for in the plural of things there is already implied a
multitude and totally indeterminate diversity. – The principle, however,
“There are no two perfectly like things,” expresses more than that, for it
expresses determinate difference. Two things are not merely two (numerical
multiplicity is only the repetition of one) but are rather differentiated by a
determination. The proposition that there are no two things which are like
each other strikes the imagination as strange – as in the anecdote about the
court where Leibniz propounded it, occasioning the ladies to search among
the leaves of trees to see whether two alike could be found. – Happy times
for metaphysics those, when it was practiced at court and no greater effort
was called for to demonstrate its propositions than to compare the leaves
of trees! – The reason why the principle strikes us as strange lies in what
has just been said, namely because “two,” or any numerical plurality, does
not yet contain a diversity which is determinate, and because diversity as
such, taken in abstraction, is at first indifferent with respect to likeness and
unlikeness. Ordinary thinking, when it goes on to determine it, assumes
that these two moments are themselves indifferent to each other, so that
each is sufficient for the determination without the other, the mere likeness
of things sufficient without their unlikeness – as if the things would be
diverse even if only numerically many, diverse in general without being
unequal. The law of diversity, on the contrary, proclaims that things are
diverse from each other by virtue of unlikeness, that the determination of
unlikeness belongs to them just as much as that of likeness, for only the
two together constitute determinate difference.
Now this proposition, that the determination of unlikeness pertains to
all things, is surely in need of demonstration; it cannot be advanced as an
immediate proposition, for it is the ordinary norm of cognition itself to
require a demonstration for linking diverse determinations together into
one synthetic proposition, or to indicate some third term in which such
determinations are mediated. Such a demonstration would have to display
the transition from identity to diversity, and the transition then from
diversity to determinate diversity, to unlikeness. But this is not ordinarily
done. The demonstration would follow from the fact that diversity or

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

367

external difference is in truth reflected into itself, is difference within;
that the indifferent subsistence of the diverse is a mere positedness and
therefore not external, indifferent difference, but one reference of the two
moments.
In this lies also the dissolution, the nothingness, of the law of diversity.
Two things are not perfectly alike. So they are at the same time alike and
unlike – alike, by the very fact that they are things, or two in general, for
each is a thing or a one just as well as any other, and each is therefore the
same as the other; unlike, however, ex hypothesi. What we then have is
this determination, that the two moments, likeness and unlikeness, are
different in one and the same thing, or that their differentiating difference
is at the same time one and the same reference. Here is where we have the
transition into opposition.
The “at the same time” of the two predicates will indeed be held fragmented by means of the “in so far”: two things are in so far like, in so
far unlike; or they are alike from one side and viewpoint, but unlike from
another. In this way, the unity of likeness and unlikeness is kept away
from a thing, and what would be the thing’s own reflection and the immanent reflection of likeness and unlikeness is fixed as a reflection external
to the thing. But it is this reflection which, in one and the same activity,
distinguishes the two sides of likeness and unlikeness, by the same token
contains them in one activity, and lets the one shine reflected into the
other. – The ordinary tenderness for things, the overriding worry of which
is that they do not contradict themselves, forgets instead, here as elsewhere,
that contradiction is not thereby dissolved but is rather shoved elsewhere,
into subjective or external reflection; forgets that the two moments of this
reflection, of which it speaks as assumed facts in its effort at removing
them or displacing them, are in fact contained in it as sublated, and each
referring to the other in one unity.
3. Opposition
In opposition, the determinate reflection, difference, is brought to completion. Opposition is the unity of identity and diversity; its moments are
diverse in one identity, and so they are opposites.
Identity and difference are the moments of difference as held inside difference itself; they are reflected moments of its unity. Likeness and unlikeness
are instead the externalized reflection; their self-identity is not only the
indifference of each towards the other differentiated from it, but towards
being-in-and-for-itself as such; theirs is a self-identity that contrasts with

11.272

368

11.273

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

identity reflected into itself, hence an immediacy which is not reflected into
itself. The positedness of the sides of external reflection is therefore a being,
just as their non-positedness is a non-being.
On closer consideration, the moments of opposition are positedness
reflected into itself or determination in general. Positedness is likeness and
unlikeness; these two, reflected into themselves, constitute the determinations of opposition. Their immanent reflection consists in that each is
within it the unity of likeness and unlikeness. Likeness is only in a reflection which compares according to the unlikeness and is therefore mediated
by its other indifferent moment; similarly, unlikeness is only in the same
reflective reference in which likeness is. – Each of these moments, in its
determinateness, is therefore the whole. It is the whole because it also contains its other moment; but this, its other, is an indifferent existent; thus
each contains a reference to its non-being, and it is reflection-into-itself, or
the whole, only as essentially referring to its non-being.
This self-likeness, reflected into itself and containing the reference to
unlikeness within it, is the positive; and the unlikeness that contains within
itself the reference to its non-being, to likeness, is the negative. – Or again,
both are positedness; now in so far as the differentiated determinateness is
taken as a differentiated determinate reference of positedness to itself, opposition is, on the one hand, positedness reflected into its likeness with itself;
and, on the other hand, it is the same positedness reflected into its inequality with itself: the positive and the negative. – The positive is positedness as
reflected into self-likeness; but what is reflected is positedness, that is, the
negation as negation, and so this immanent reflection has the reference to
the other for its determination. The negative is positedness as reflected into
unlikeness; but positedness is the unlikeness itself, and so this reflection is
therefore the identity of unlikeness with itself and absolute self-reference. –
Each, therefore, equally has the other in it: positedness reflected into selflikeness has the unlikeness; and positedness reflected into self-unlikeness,
the likeness.
The positive and the negative are thus the sides of opposition that
have become self-subsisting. They are self-subsisting because they are the
reflection of the whole into itself, and they belong to opposition in so far
as the latter is determinateness which, as the whole, is reflected into itself.
Because of their self-subsistence, the opposition which they constitute is
implicitly determinate. Each is itself and its other; for this reason, each
has its determinateness not in an other but within. – Each refers itself to
itself only as referring itself to its other. This has a twofold aspect. Each

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

369

is the reference to its non-being as the sublating of this otherness in itself;
its non-being is thus only a moment in it. But, on the other hand, here
positedness has become a being, an indifferent subsistence; the other of
itself which each contains is therefore also the non-being of that in which
it should be contained only as a moment. Each is, therefore, only to the
extent that its non-being is, the two in an identical reference.
The determinations which constitute the positive and the negative consist, therefore, in that the positive and the negative are, first, absolute
moments of opposition; their subsistence is indivisibly one reflection; it is
one mediation in which each is by virtue of the non-being of its other,
hence by virtue of its other or its own non-being. – Thus they are simply
opposites; or each is only the opposite of the other; the one is not yet the
positive and the other not yet the negative, but both are negative with
respect to each other. Each, therefore, simply is, first, to the extent that the
other is; it is what it is by virtue of the other, by virtue of its own non-being;
it is only positedness. Second, it is to the extent that the other is not; it is what
it is by virtue of the non-being of the other; it is reflection into itself. – The
two, however, are both the one mediation of opposition as such in which
they simply are only posited moments.
Moreover, this mere positedness is reflected into itself in general and,
according to this moment of external reflection, the positive and the negative
are indifferent towards this first identity where they are only moments; or
again, because that first reflection is the positive’s and the negative’s own
reflection into itself, each is indifferent towards its reflection into its nonbeing, towards its own positedness. The two sides are thus merely diverse,
and because their determinateness – that they are positive or negative –
constitutes their positedness as against each other, each is not specifically so
determined internally but is only determinateness in general; to each side,
therefore, there belongs indeed one of the two determinacies, the positive
or the negative; but the two can be interchanged, and each side is such as
can be taken equally as positive or negative.
But, in third place, the positive and the negative are not only a posited
being, nor are they something merely indifferent, but their positedness, or
the reference to the other in the one unity which they themselves are not, is
rather taken back into each. Each is itself positive and negative within; the
positive and the negative are the determination of reflection in and for
itself; only in this reflection of the opposite into itself is the opposite either
positive or negative. The positive has within it the reference to the other in
which the determinateness of the positive consists. And the same applies

11.274

370

11.275

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to the negative: it is not negative as contrasted with another but has the
determinateness by which it is negative within.
Each is thus self-subsistent unity existing for itself. The positive is indeed
a positedness, but in such a way that the positedness is for it posited being
as sublated. It is the non-opposed, the sublated opposition, but as the side
of the opposition itself. – As positive, it is indeed a something which is
determined with reference to an otherness, but in such a way that its nature
is not to be something posited; it is the immanent reflection that negates
otherness. But its other, the negative, is itself no longer positedness or a
moment but itself a self-subsisting being; and so the negating reflection
of the positive is internally determined to exclude this being, which is its
non-being, from itself.
Thus the negative, as absolute reflection, is not the immediate negative
but is the negative as sublated positedness, the negative in and for itself
which positively rests upon itself. As immanent reflection, it negates its
reference to its other; its other is the positive, a self-subsisting being –
hence its negative reference to this positive is the excluding of it from
itself. The negative is the independently existing opposite, over against the
positive which is the determination of the sublated opposition – the whole
opposition resting upon itself, opposed to the self-identical positedness.
The positive and the negative are such, therefore, not just in themselves,
but in and for themselves. They are in themselves positive and negative when
they are abstracted from their excluding reference to the other and are taken
only in accordance with their determination. Something is in itself positive
or negative when it is not supposed to be determined as positive or negative
merely in contrast with the other. But the positive and the negative, taken
not as a positedness and hence not as opposed, are each an immediate, being
and non-being. They are, however, moments of opposition: their in-itself
constitutes only the form of their immanent reflectedness. Something is
said to be positive in itself, outside the reference to something negative, and
something negative in itself, outside the reference to something negative: in
this determination, merely the abstract moment of this reflectedness is held
on to. However, to say that the positive and the negative exist in themselves
essentially implies that to be opposed is not a mere moment, nor that it is
just a matter of comparison, but that it is the determination of the sides
themselves of the opposition. The sides, as positive or negative in themselves,
are not, therefore, outside the reference to the other; on the contrary, this
reference, precisely as exclusive, constitutes their determination or their initselfness; in this, therefore, they are at the same time in and for themselves.

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

371

Remark
Mention must be made here of the concept of the positive and negative
as it occurs in arithmetic. The concept is presupposed there as known,
but, since it is not grasped in its specific difference, it is not immune to
insoluble difficulties and complications. We have just seen how the two
real determinations of the positive and negative, outside the simple concept
of their opposition, come to be. Namely, only a differentiated immediate
existence stands in a first instance as ground, the simple immanent reflection
of which is distinguished from its positedness, from the opposition itself.
This opposition, therefore, does not count as anything which is in and
for itself, and, although it does apply to its diverse sides so that each is an
opposite in general, the sides remain nonetheless indifferent to it and it is a
matter of indifference which of the two is regarded as positive or negative. –
In a second instance, the positive is however the positive in itself, and the
negative is the negative in itself, so that the two diverse sides are not
indifferent to their respective determination but each is that determination
in and for itself. – We see these two forms of the positive and the negative
occur in arithmetic in the very first applications of them.
In a first sense, the +a and –a are simply opposite magnitudes; the a is
the unit that stands by itself at the base of both – itself indifferent towards
the opposition and serving here as an inert foundation, without further
conceptual consideration. The –a is indeed designated as the negative, the
+a as the positive; but the one is just as much an opposite as the other.
In yet another sense, the a is not only the simple unit serving as the
foundation but, as +a and –a, it is the reflection of these opposites into
themselves; there are two different as at hand, and it is indifferent which of
the two is designated as the positive or the negative; each has a particular
self-subsistence and is positive.
According to the first sense, +y and −y = 0; or, in −8 + 3, the positive
3 are negatives in the 8. The opposites cancel themselves in combination.
A one-hour march is made to the East, and an equal march back to the
West undoes it; so many are the debts pending, that many less assets are
available; so many are the assets available, that many debts are absolved.
The one-hour march to the East is not in itself a positive march; nor is the
march to the West a negative march; the directions are rather indifferent
to this determinateness of opposition; only a third standpoint external to
both makes a positive of the one and a negative of the other. So also debts
are not a negative in and for themselves but are such only with reference
to the one in debt; for the creditor, they are a positive asset; they are a

11.276

372

11.277

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

sum of money, or anything else of a given value, which, in accordance with
standpoints external to it, is either debt or asset.
The opposites do indeed cancel themselves in reference to each other, the
result being equal to zero; but there is also present in them their identical
reference3 which is itself indifferent to the opposition; so the two constitute
a one. The same goes for the sum of money just mentioned, which is only
one sum; or for the a, which is only one a whether in +a or –a; and for the
one-hour march as well, which covers one stretch of road, whether in the
direction of East or West. And the same applies to an ordinate y, which
is the same whether taken on one side or the other of the axis; hence,
+y − y = y ; it is only one ordinate with only one determination and law
for it.
But, in the second sense, the opposites are not only one indifferent
something but also two indifferent somethings. For, as opposites, they are
also reflected into themselves and thus stand as diverse.
Thus in −8 +3 there are eleven units altogether; +y , −y , are ordinates
on opposite sides of the axis, where each is an existence indifferent to this
limit and to their opposition; in this sense, +y − y = 2y . – Also the road
covered from East to West and back is the sum of a twofold effort or the
sum of two time periods. Likewise in the economy of a state, a quantum of
money or of assets is not just this one quantum as a means of subsistence
but is rather doubled; it is a means of subsistence for both creditor and
debtor. The capital of a state is calculated not merely as the sum of cash
and of other real or liquid assets available to it; even less so as the sum of
what is left over after subtracting passive from active assets; for the capital
rather, even if its active and passive accounts nullify each other, remains,
first, positive capital, as +a − a = a ; and, second, since it is passive in a
variety of ways, by being lent many times over, it is thereby a resource
many times over.
But not only are opposite magnitudes, on the one hand, just merely
opposed, and, on the other hand, real or indifferent. For although quantum
itself is being indifferent to limit, the positive in itself and the negative in
itself do also occur in it. Take the a, for instance, with no sign designation.
If a sign is required, the presumption is that the a is positive. If opposition
is required, though only in general, then it can just as well be taken as –a.
But the positive sign is the one given to it immediately, for the positive
carries as such the particular meaning of the immediate, as self-identical,
in contrast to the opposition.
3

identische Beziehung.

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

373

Further, inasmuch as positive and negative magnitudes are added or
subtracted, they count as positive or negative for themselves, not as acquiring this value externally, merely through the connective4 of addition or
subtraction. In 8 − (−3), the first minus means “opposite to 8,” but the
second, the (−3), has the value of something opposed in itself, outside the
reference to 8.
This is even more apparent in multiplication and division. Here we must
take the positive as essentially the not-opposite and the negative, on the
contrary, as the opposite, not both determinations equally as just opposites
in general. In the textbooks of arithmetic, the demonstrations of how the
signs function in these two types of reckoning do not go past the concept of
opposite magnitudes in general, and for this reason they remain incomplete
and land themselves in contradictions. – In multiplication and division the
plus and the minus obtain the more specific meaning of the positive and
the negative in itself, because the relation of “unit” and “amount” in which
the factors stand to each other is not a mere relation of the more and
less, as in addition and subtraction, but is a qualitative relation, and for
this reason the plus and minus also obtain the qualitative meaning of
the positive and the negative. – Without this determination and merely
from the concept of opposite magnitudes, the false conclusion can easily
be drawn that, if −a · +a = −a 2 , then contrariwise +a · −a = +a 2 .
Since one factor indicates the “amount” and the other the “unit,” and
the “amount” is usually indicated by the factor that comes first, the two
expressions, −a · +a and +a · −a , are distinguished by the fact that in
the first the +a is the unit and –a the amount, and the contrary is the case
in the other. Now it is common to say with respect to the first expression
that if I am to take +a (the unit) –a times, then I take it not merely a times
but also in the manner opposite to it, +a times –a; therefore, since the a
is plus, I have to take it negatively, and the product is –a2 . But if, in the
second case, –a is to be taken +a times, then –a should equally be taken
not –a times but in the determination opposite to it, namely +a times.
Therefore, on the argument of the first case the product would have to be
+a2 . – The same goes for division.
This is the conclusion that necessarily follows when we take plus and
minus as opposite magnitudes in general; in the first case, to the minus is
attributed the power of altering the plus; yet in the second case the plus
is supposed not to have the same power over the minus, despite the fact
that it is as good an opposite determination of magnitude as the minus.
4

Beziehung.

11.278

374

11.279

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

In point of fact, the plus does not have this power, for it is to be taken
here according to its qualitative determination as against the minus, since
the factors stand in qualitative relation to each other. For this reason, the
negative here is therefore the inherently opposite as such, but the positive is
the indeterminate, the indifferent in general; it, too, is indeed the negative,
but the negative of the other, not a negative within it. – A determination
of negation thus derives solely by virtue of the negative at hand, not by
virtue of the positive.
And so −a · −a = +a 2 , because the negative −α is not to be taken
merely in the opposite manner (as it would have to be taken when multiplied −a times), but because it is to be taken negatively. But the negation
of the negation is the positive.
c. contradiction
1. Difference in general contains both its sides as moments; in diversity, these
sides fall apart as indifferent to each other; and in opposition as such, they
are the moments of difference, each determined by the other and hence
only moments. But in opposition these moments are equally determined
within, indifferent to each other and mutually exclusive, self-subsisting
determinations of reflection.
One is the positive and the other the negative, but the former as a positive
which is such within, and the latter as a negative which is such within. Each
has indifferent self-subsistence for itself by virtue of having the reference to
its other moment within it; each moment is thus the whole self-contained
opposition. – As this whole, each moment is self-mediated through its other
and contains this other. But it is also self-mediated through the non-being of
its other and is, therefore, a unity existing for itself and excluding the other
from itself.
Since the self-subsisting determination of reflection excludes the other
in the same respect as it contains it and is self-subsisting for precisely
this reason, in its self-subsistence the determination excludes its own selfsubsistence from itself. For this self-subsistence consists in that it contains
the determination which is other than it in itself and does not refer to
anything external for just this reason; but no less immediately in that it is
itself and excludes from itself the determination that negates it. And so it
is contradiction.
Difference as such is already implicitly contradiction; for it is the unity
of beings which are, only in so far as they are not one – and it is the
separation of beings which are, only in so far as they are separated in the

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

375

same reference connecting them. The positive and the negative, however, are
the posited contradiction, for, as negative unities, they are precisely their
self-positing and therein each the sublating of itself and the positing of
its opposite. – They constitute determining reflection as exclusive; for the
excluding is one act of distinguishing and each of the distinguished beings,
as exclusive, is itself the whole act of excluding, and so each excludes itself
internally.
If we look at the two self-subsisting determinations of reflection on
their own, the positive is positedness as reflected into likeness with itself –
positedness which is not reference to another, hence subsistence inasmuch
as the positedness is sublated and excluded. But with this the positive makes
itself into the reference of a non-being – into a positedness. – In this way the
positive is contradiction – in that, as the positing of self-identity by the
excluding of the negative, it makes itself into a negative, hence into the other
which it excludes from itself. This last, as excluded, is posited free of the
one that excludes; hence, as reflected into itself and itself as excluding. The
reflection that excludes is thus the positing of the positive as excluding
the other, so that this positing immediately is the positing of its other
which excludes it.
This is the absolute contradiction of the positive; but it is immediately
the absolute contradiction of the negative; the positing of both in one
reflection. – Considered in itself as against the positive, the negative is
positedness as reflected into unlikeness to itself, the negative as negative. But
the negative is itself the unlike, the non-being of another; consequently,
reflection is in its unlikeness its reference rather to itself. – Negation in
general is the negative as quality or immediate determinateness; but taken
as negative, it is referred to the negative of itself, to its other. If this second
negative is taken only as identical with the first, then it is also only immediate, just like the first; they are not taken, therefore, as each the other of
the other, hence not as negatives: the negative is not at all an immediate. –
But now, since each is moreover equally the same as what the other is,
this reference connecting them as unequal is just as much their identical
connection.
This is therefore the same contradiction which the positive is, namely
positedness or negation as self-reference. But the positive is only implicitly
this contradiction, is contradiction only in itself; the negative, on the
contrary, is the posited contradiction; for in its reflection into itself, as a
negative which is in and for itself or a negative which is identical with
itself, its determination is to be the not-identical, the exclusion of identity.
The negative is this, to be identical with itself over against identity, and

11.280

376

11.281

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

consequently, because of this excluding reflection, to exclude itself from
itself.
The negative is therefore the whole opposition – the opposition which,
as opposition, rests upon itself; distinction that absolutely does not refer
itself to another; distinction which, as opposition, excludes identity from
itself, but thereby also excludes itself, for as reference to itself it determines
itself as the very identity which it excludes.
2. Contradiction resolves itself.
In the self-excluding reflection we have just considered, the positive and
the negative, each in its self-subsistence, sublates itself; each is simply the
passing over, or rather the self-translating of itself into its opposite. This
internal ceaseless vanishing of the opposites is the first unity that arises by
virtue of contradiction; it is the null.
But contradiction does not contain merely the negative; it also contains
the positive; or the self-excluding reflection is at the same time positing
reflection; the result of contradiction is not only the null. – The positive
and the negative constitute the positedness of the self-subsistence; their own
self-negation sublates it. It is this positedness which in truth founders to the
ground in contradiction.
The immanent reflection by virtue of which the sides of opposition are
turned into self-subsistent self-references is, first of all, their self-subsistence
as distinct moments; thus they are this self-subsistence only in themselves,
for they are still opposites, and that they are in themselves self-subsistent
constitutes their positedness. But their excluding reflection sublates this
positedness, turns them into self-subsistent beings existing in and for themselves, such as are self-subsistent not only in themselves but by virtue of their
negative reference to their other; in this way, their self-subsistence is also
posited. But, further, by thus being posited as self-subsistent, they make
themselves into a positedness. They fate themselves to founder, since they
determine themselves as self-identical, yet in their self-identity they are
rather the negative, a self-identity which is reference-to-other.
However, on closer examination, this excluding reflection is not only
this formal determination. It is self-subsistence existing in itself, and the
sublating of this positedness – is only through this sublating a unity that
exists for itself and is in fact self-subsistent. Of course, through the sublating
of otherness or positedness, positedness or the negative of an other is indeed
present again. But in fact, this negation is not just a return to the first
immediate reference to the other, is not positedness as sublated immediacy,
but positedness as sublated positedness. The excluding reflection of selfsubsistence, since it is excluding, makes itself a positedness but is just as

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

377

much the sublation of its positedness. It is sublating reference to itself; in
that reference, it first sublates the negative and it secondly posits itself as a
negative, and it is only this posited negative that it sublates; in sublating
the negative, it both posits and sublates it at the same time. In this way the
exclusive determination is itself that other of itself of which it is the negation;
the sublation of this positedness is not, therefore, once more positedness
as the negative of an other, but is self-withdrawal, positive self-unity. Selfsubsistence is thus unity that turns back into itself by virtue of its own
negation, for it turns into itself through the negation of its positedness. It
is the unity of essence – to be identical with itself through the negation not
of an other, but of itself.
3. According to this positive side, since self-subsistence in opposition,
as excluding reflection, makes itself into a positedness and equally sublates
this positedness, not only has opposition foundered but in foundering it has
gone back to its foundation, to its ground. – The excluding reflection of the
self-subsisting opposition turns it into a negative, something only posited;
it thereby reduces its formerly self-subsisting determinations, the positive
and the negative, to determinations which are only determinations; and the
positedness, since it is now made into positedness, has simply gone back
to its unity with itself; it is simple essence, but essence as ground. Through
the sublating of the determinations of essence, which are in themselves
self-contradictory, essence is restored, but restored in the determination of
an exclusive, reflective unity – a simple unity which determines itself as
negation, but in this positedness is immediately like itself and withdrawn
into itself.
In the first place, therefore, because of its contradiction, the selfsubsisting opposition goes back into a ground; this opposition is what comes
first, the immediate from which the beginning is made, while the sublated
opposition or the sublated positedness is itself a positedness. Accordingly,
essence is as ground a positedness, something that has become. But conversely,
only this has been posited, namely that the opposition or the positedness is something sublated, only is as positedness. As ground, therefore,
essence is excluding reflection because it makes itself into a positedness;
because the opposition from which the start was just now made and
was the immediate is the merely posited determinate self-subsistence of
essence; because opposition only sublates itself within, whereas essence is
in its determinateness reflected into itself. As ground, therefore, essence
excludes itself from itself, it posits itself; its positedness – which is what
is excluded – is only as positedness, as identity of the negative with
itself. This self-subsistent is the negative posited as the negative, something

11.282

378

11.283

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

self-contradictory which, consequently, remains in the essence as in its
ground.
The resolved contradiction is therefore ground, essence as unity of the
positive and the negative. In opposition, determinateness has progressed
to self-subsistence; but ground is this self-subsistence as completed; in it,
the negative is self-subsistent essence, but as negative; and, as self-identical
in this negativity, ground is thus equally the positive. In ground, therefore,
opposition and its contradiction are just as much removed as preserved.
Ground is essence as positive self-identity which, however, at the same time
refers itself to itself as negativity and therefore determines itself, making
itself into an excluded positedness; but this positedness is the whole selfsubsisting essence, and essence is ground, self-identical in its negation
and positive. The self-contradictory self-subsistent opposition was itself,
therefore, already ground; all that was added to it was the determination
of self-unity which emerges as each of the self-subsisting opposites sublates
itself and makes itself into its other, thereby founders and sinks to the
ground but therein also reunites itself with itself; thus in this foundering,
that is, in its positedness or in the negation, it rather is for the first time
the essence that is reflected into itself and self-identical.
Remark 1
The positive and the negative are the same. This is a maxim of external
reflection, for it sets up a comparison between the two terms. But it is not
an external comparison that should be drawn between them or, for that
matter, between any two other categories. The categories must rather be
considered on their own, that is to say, it is their own reflection that must
be considered. And we have seen in this reflection that each is the reflective
shining of itself in the other, and itself the positing of itself as the other.
Superficial thought that does not consider the positive and the negative
as they are in themselves can of course be made aware of the instability
of these distinct terms, which it assumes to be fixed in their opposition to
each other, by being referred to the act of comparing. The most cursory
experiment in reflective thought will demonstrate that, if something is
determined as a positive and is then taken as the starting point, this same
something will have immediately turned in the process into a negative
and, vice versa, anything negatively determined will have turned into a
positive; it will demonstrate that reflective thinking gets confused and runs
into contradictions in these determinations. Ignorance of their nature will
interpret this confusion as a misstep that should not occur, and will ascribe
it to a subjective failure. Indeed, the shifting back and forth from one

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

379

determination to the other will remain mere confusion as long as there
is no awareness of the necessity of the alternation. – But even to external
reflection it will be a matter of simple consideration that the positive, to
start with, is not a simple identity but is rather, on the one hand, opposed to
the negative – has meaning only in this reference to it and therefore entails
the negative in its very concept – and, on the other hand, is inherently the
self-referring negation of mere positedness or of the negative and therefore
is itself implicitly the absolute negation. – Similarly, the negative that stands
over against the positive has meaning only in thus referring to its other; it
contains it, therefore, in its concept. But the negative has a self-subsistence of
its own also without the reference to the positive; it is self-identical; thus it
is itself what the positive was supposed to be.
The opposition of positive and negative is normally taken in the sense
that the former (even though its name conveys positedness) is to be supposed
as objective; the latter, instead, as something subjective that only belongs to
an external reflection and has nothing to do with what exists objectively in
and for itself, even is for the latter nothing at all. And in fact, if the negative
only expressed a subjectively arbitrary abstraction or a determination of
external comparison, then it would indeed be for the positive nothing at
all, that is, there would be no reference in the positive to such an empty
abstraction; but then its determination, that it is a positive, would equally
be only external to it. – As an example of the fixed opposition of these
determinations of reflection, take light in general to be the solely positive,
and darkness the solely negative. But light has, in its unending expansion
and power to suscitate and vivify, the nature of absolute negativity. Darkness, on the other hand, as a non-manifold or as the non-self-differentiating
womb of generation, is simple self-identity, the positive. In the way it is
taken, it is only a negative, in the sense that it is the mere absence of
light, nothing at all for itself, so that light, in referring to it, would not be
referring to another but purely to itself, would therefore simply disappear
before it. But surely light is dimmed to gray by darkness; and, besides this
merely quantitative alteration, it also suffers the qualitative one of being
determined as color by referring to darkness. – So also virtue, for example,
is not without struggle; it is rather the highest, the perfect struggle, and
thus not only a positive but rather absolute negativity; virtue is virtue, not
just by comparison to vice, but for the opposition and the combat in it. Or
again, vice is not only the lack of virtue – innocence too is such a lack –
and distinct from virtue not just in the eyes of an external reflection, but
is opposed to virtue in itself; it is evil. Evil consists in maintaining one’s
own ground as against the good; it is positive negativity. Innocence, on

11.284

380

11.285

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the other hand, as the lack of both good and evil, is indifferent to these
determinations – is neither positive nor negative. But at the same time this
lack must be taken also as a determinateness and, as such, on the one hand
it is to be considered as the positive nature of something just as, on the
other, as referring to an opposite. And thus all natures fall from innocence,
from their indifferent self-identity; because of what they are in themselves
they refer to their other, and therefore they cause themselves to founder,
or, positively expressed, they return to their ground. – Truth also is the
positive as the knowledge that agrees with the object, but it is this likeness
to itself only in so far as knowledge has related itself negatively to the other,
has penetrated the object and sublated the negation which the latter is.
Error is something positive as the self-aware and deliberate assertion of
something which has no existence in and for itself. Ignorance, for its part,
is either something indifferent to truth and error – hence neither positively
nor negatively determined, its determination a lack and thus the domain
of external reflection – or, objectively taken as the defining determination
of a nature, an instinct that is directed against itself, a negative containing a
positive direction within it. – To perceive and to be mindful of this nature
of the determinations of reflection is among the most important steps in
cognition: that their truth consists only in their reference to one another,
and hence that each contains the other within its very concept. Without
this recognition, no proper step in philosophy can be made.
Remark 2
The determination of opposition has equally been made into a proposition,
the so-called “Principle of the Excluded Middle.”
Something is either A or not-A; there is no third.
This principle contains, first, that everything is an opposite, determined
either as positive or as negative. – It is an important principle, necessary
because identity passes over into diversity and diversity into opposition.
But this is not the sense in which it is normally understood, for its ordinary
meaning amounts rather to just this, that of all predicates, either this one
here or its non-being comes to a thing. Here the opposite of the predicate
signifies a mere lack or rather indeterminateness; and the principle is so
insignificant that it is hardly worth the effort of enunciating it. If the
predicates “green,” “sweet,” “square,” are taken – and it is assumed that
they are all taken – and then it is said of spirit that it is either sweet or notsweet, green or not-green, and so on, this is a triviality that leads nowhere.
Determinateness, the predicate, is referred to something; “this something is
determined,” the principle says. Now what the principle ought essentially

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

381

to imply is that the determinateness should further determine itself, that
it become determinateness in itself, opposition. Instead of this, however, it
only goes, in the trivial sense just mentioned, from determinateness over
to its non-being in general, goes back to indeterminateness.
The principle of the excluded middle is further distinguished from
the previously examined principles of identity or contradiction that said,
“Nothing is A and not-A at the same time.” What this implies is that there
is nothing which is not either A or not-A; that there is no third that would
be indifferent to that opposition. But in fact a third indifferent to it is given
in the principle itself, for the A itself is there. This A is neither +A nor
–A and just as much also +A and –A. – The something which ought to
have been either +A or –A is here attached to the +A as well as the –A;
and again, inasmuch as it is attached to the A, it ought not to be attached
to the –A, just as it ought not to be attached to the A inasmuch as it is
to the not-A. The something itself is therefore the third which ought to
have been excluded. Since in this something the opposite determinations
are equally posited and sublated, that third which is here in the shape of an
inert something, when taken more profoundly, is the unity of the reflection
into which the opposition returns as into ground.
Remark 3
Now if the first determinations of reflection, identity, diversity, and opposition, have been formulated each as a principle,5 all the more should the
one determination into which they pass over as in their truth, namely
contradiction, be grasped and enunciated as a principle: “All things are in
themselves contradictory,” in the sense, moreover, that as contrasted with
the other this proposition expresses rather the truth and the essence of
things. – The contradiction that emerges in opposition is only the developed nothing which is contained in identity and came to the fore in the
claim that the principle of identity says nothing. This negation further
determines itself into difference and into opposition, which is now the
posited contradiction.
It is, however, one of the basic prejudices of previous logic and of
ordinary thought that contradiction is not as essential and immanent a
determination as identity. But in fact, if order of precedence were an issue,
and the two determinations were to be held separate, it would be the
principle of contradiction that should be taken as the more profound and
the more essential. For in contrast to it, identity is only the determination
5

Cf. above, 11.258, 270, 285.

11.286

382

11.287

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of simple immediacy, of inert being, whereas contradiction is the root of
all movement and life; it is only in so far as something has a contradiction
within it that it moves, is possessed of instinct and activity.
Contradiction is ordinarily the first to be kept away from things, away
from any existent and from the true; as the saying goes, there is nothing
contradictory. For the rest, it is relegated to subjective reflection which
allegedly first posits it by way of reference and comparison. And even
within this reflection it is not really there, for the contradictory cannot
supposedly be represented or thought. Whether it occurs in actuality or
in the reflection of thought, it is universally reckoned as an accident, an
abnormality as it were, a momentary fit of sickness.
Now as regards the claim that there is no contradiction, that none is to
be found, we need not worry on account of such protestations; an absolute
determination of essence must be found in every experience, in anything
actual just as in every concept. We have already remarked this much earlier
on in connection with the infinite,6 which is contradiction as displayed
in the sphere of being. But ordinary experience itself testifies that there do
exist at least a great many contradictory things, contradictory dispositions
etc., of which the contradiction is present not in any external reflection but
right in them. Nor is contradiction to be taken as an abnormality which
happens only here and there, but it is rather the negative in its essential
determination, the principle of all self-movement which consists in nothing
else than in the display of contradiction. External, sensuous motion is itself
contradiction’s immediate existence. Something moves, not because now
it is here and there at another now, but because in one and the same now it
is here and not here; because in this here it is and is not at the same time.
One must concede to the dialecticians of old the contradictions which they
pointed to in motion; but what follows from them is not that motion is
not but that it is rather contradiction as existent.
Internal self-movement, self-movement proper, drive in general (the
appetite or nisus of the monad, the entelechy of the absolutely simple
essence)7 is likewise nothing else than that something is, in itself, itself and
the lack of itself (the negative), in one and the same respect. Abstract selfidentity is not yet vitality; but the positive, since implicitly it is negativity,
goes out of itself and sets its alteration in motion. Something is alive,
therefore, only to the extent that it contains contradiction within itself:
indeed, force is this, to hold and endure contradiction within. If, on the
6
7

Cf. above, 21.127, where Hegel refers to contradiction in the transition from the finite to the infinite.
But Hegel must here be referring to the 1812 edition of the Logic. Cf. GW 11, 83, 140.
Monadology, §§18, 19, 20.

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

383

contrary, a concrete existent were not capable of overreaching its positive
determination and grasping the negative one at the same time, holding
the two firmly together; if it were not capable of harboring contradiction
within it, it would not then be a living unity as such, not a ground, and
in contradiction it would founder and sink to the ground. – Speculative
thought consists only in this, in holding firm to contradiction and to itself
in the contradiction, but not in the sense that, as it happens in ordinary
thought, it would let itself be ruled by it and allow it to dissolve its
determinations into just other determinations or into nothing.
If to ordinary thought the contradiction which is in motion, in a drive
and the like, remains concealed in the simplicity of such determinations,
contradiction is, on the other hand, immediately displayed in the determinations of relation. The most trivial of examples – “above and under,”
“right and left,” “father and son,” and so on ad infinitum – all contain
opposition within one and the same term. “Above” is what “under” is not;
“above” is determined by just this, “not to be under,” and is only to the
extent that an “under” is, and contrariwise. “Father” is the other of “son”
and “son” the other of “father,” and each is only as this other of the other;
and the one determination is at the same time only with reference to the
other; their being is one subsisting. The father is indeed something for itself
outside this reference to the son, but then he is not “father” but a “man” in
general. The same applies to “above” and “under,” “right” and “left”: they
too are something outside the reference when reflected into themselves,
but just “places” in general. – Opposites entail contradiction inasmuch as,
in negatively referring to each other, they sublate each other reciprocally and
are indifferent to each other. Ordinary thought, when it passes over to the
moment of indifference, forgets there the negative unity of the opposites
and therefore holds on to them only as “different” in general. And, of
course, in this general determination “right” is no longer “right,” “left” no
longer “left,” and so on. But if “right” and “left” are in fact there, present
to the thought, then they are present to it in determinations which are
self-negating, each negating itself in the other, and yet, in this unity, also
not negating itself but each existing indifferently for itself.
Ordinary thought, therefore, does have contradiction everywhere for
content but fails to become aware of it; it remains an external reflection
that simply shifts from likeness to unlikeness or from the negative reference
connecting distinct terms to their immanent reflectedness. It holds these
two determinations apart, external to each other, and has only them in
mind, not the transition from the one to the other which is the essential and
that which contains the contradiction. – The speculative reflection of spirit,

11.288

384

11.289

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to mention it here, consists on the contrary in grasping and enunciating
contradiction. Although it might not express the concept of things and their
relations and has only representational determinations for its content, it
nevertheless connects these in a reference that contains their contradiction
and lets their concept reflectively shine through the contradiction. – But
thoughtful reason sharpens, as it were, the blunt difference of diverse terms,
the mere manifold of representation, to essential distinction, to opposition.
Only when driven to the extreme of contradiction are the many of that
manifold quickened and alive to each other: they hold the negativity in
them which is the inner pulse of self-movement and life.
We have already remarked concerning the ontological proof of God’s existence that the determination on which it is based is that of the sum-total of all
realities.8 It is customary regarding this determination first to demonstrate
that it is possible because it entails no contradiction, since reality is taken
here only as reality without restrictions. We pointed out that this concept,
the sum-total of all realities, is thereby reduced to simple, indeterminate
being, or, if the realities are in fact taken as severally determinate, to the
sum-total of all negations. And if the distinction differentiating them is
then taken with greater precision, the difference turns into opposition and
consequently into contradiction, and the sum-total of all realities in general
into absolute internal contradiction. The usual horror which ordinary (not
speculative) thought has of contradiction (as nature has of the vacuum)
rejects this consequence, for it remains at the one-sided consideration that
contradiction resolves into nothing without recognizing its positive side
where it becomes absolute activity and absolute ground.
The upshot of this examination of the nature of contradiction is that,
if a contradiction can be pointed out in something, by itself this is still
not, as it were, a blemish, not a defect or failure. On the contrary, every
determination, anything concrete, every concept, is essentially a unity of
distinguished and distinguishable elements which, by virtue of the determinate, essential difference, pass over into elements which are contradictory.
This contradictoriness of course resolves itself into nothing: it goes back
into its negative unity. A thing, a subject, a concept, is then precisely this
negative unity; it is something inherently self-contradictory, but it is no
less the resolved contradiction; it is the ground which contains the determinations it bears. The thing, the subject or the concept, each as reflected
into itself within its sphere, is their contradiction as resolved; but the whole
sphere of each is in turn determinate, diverse, and therefore finite, and this
8

Cf. above, 21.99ff. But Hegel must here be referring to the 1812 edition of the Logic. Cf. GW 11, 64.

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

385

means contradictory. This sphere is not itself the resolution of its higher
contradiction but has yet a higher sphere for its negative unity, for its
ground. Finite things, in their indifferent variety, are therefore just this: to
be contradictory, internally fractured and bound to return to their ground. –
As we shall see in due course,9 the true inference from the finite and accidental to an absolutely necessary being does not consist in inferring the
latter from that finite and accidental as a being which is and remains the
ground of the inference, but from it as a being which is only “falling” [as
accidentality, from the Latin cadere, immediately conveys], a being inherently self-contradictory; or rather, the inference consists in demonstrating
that accidental being makes in itself its return to its ground and is there
sublated – in addition, that in this return to the ground it posits the latter
in such a manner that it makes itself rather into a positedness. In customary
inference, the being of the finite appears to be the ground of the absolute;
because the finite is, the absolute is. But the truth is that the absolute is
because the finite is the immanently self-contradictory opposition, because
it is not. In the former meaning, the conclusion is that “the being of the
finite is the being of the absolute”; but in the latter, that “the non-being of
the finite is the being of the absolute.”
9

Cf. below, 11.384ff.

11.290

c h a p ter 3
11.291

Ground

Essence determines itself as ground.
Just as nothing is at first in simple immediate unity with being, so here
too the simple identity of essence is at first in simple unity with its absolute
negativity. Essence is only this negativity which is pure reflection. It is this
pure reflection as the turning back of being into itself; hence it is determined,
in itself or for us, as the ground into which being resolves itself. But this
determinateness is not posited by the essence itself; in other words, essence is
not ground precisely because it has not itself posited this determinateness
that it possesses. Its reflection, however, consists in positing itself as what
it is in itself, as a negative, and in determining itself. The positive and
the negative constitute the essential determination in which essence is lost
in its negation. These self-subsisting determinations of reflection sublate
themselves, and the determination that has foundered to the ground is the
true determination of essence.
Consequently, ground is itself one of the reflected determinations of essence,
but it is the last, or rather, it is determination determined as sublated determination. In foundering to the ground, the determination of reflection
receives its true meaning – that it is the absolute repelling of itself within
itself; or again, that the positedness that accrues to essence is such only
as sublated, and conversely that only the self-sublating positedness is the
positedness of essence. In determining itself as ground, essence determines
itself as the not-determined, and only the sublating of its being determined
is its determining. – Essence, in thus being determined as self-sublating,
does not proceed from an other but is, in its negativity, identical with
itself.
Since the advance to the ground is made starting from determination
as an immediate first (is done by virtue of the nature of determination
itself that founders to the ground through itself ), the ground is at first
determined by that immediate first. But this determining is, on the one
386

Ground

387

hand, as the sublating of the determining, the merely restored, purified or
manifested identity of essence which the determination of reflection is in
itself; on the other hand, this negating movement is, as determining, the
first positing of that reflective determinateness that appeared as immediate
determinateness, but which is posited only by the self-excluding reflection
of ground and therein is posited as only something posited or sublated. –
Thus essence, in determining itself as ground, proceeds only from itself.
As ground, therefore, it posits itself as essence, and its determining consists
in just this positing of itself as essence. This positing is the reflection of
essence that sublates itself in its determining; on that side is a positing, on
this side is the positing of essence, hence both in one act.
Reflection is pure mediation in general; ground, the real mediation of
essence with itself. The former, the movement of nothing through nothing
back to itself, is the reflective shining of one in an other; but, because in
this reflection opposition does not yet have any self-subsistence, neither is
the one, that which shines, something positive, nor is the other in which it
reflectively shines something negative. Both are substrates, actually of the
imagination; they are still not self-referring. Pure mediation is only pure
reference, without anything being referred to. Determining reflection, for
its part, does posit such terms as are identical with themselves; but these
are at the same time only determined references. Ground, on the contrary,
is mediation that is real, since it contains reflection as sublated reflection;
it is essence that turns back into itself through its non-being and posits itself.
According to this moment of sublated reflection, what is posited receives
the determination of immediacy, of an immediate which is self-identical
outside its reference or its reflective shining. This immediacy is being as
restored by essence, the non-being of reflection through which essence
mediates itself. Essence returns into itself as it negates; therefore, in its
turning back into itself, it gives itself the determinateness that precisely
for this reason is the self-identical negative, is sublated positedness, and
consequently, as the self-identity of essence as ground, equally an existent.
The ground is, first, absolute ground – one in which the essence is first
of all the general substrate for the ground-connection. It then further
determines itself as form and matter and gives itself a content.
Second, it is determinate ground, the ground of a determinate content.
Because the ground-connection, in being realized, becomes as such external, it passes over into conditioning mediation.
Third, ground presupposes a condition; but the condition equally presupposes the ground; the unconditioned is the unity of the two, the fact

388

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

11.293

itself that, by virtue of the mediation of the conditioning reference, passes
over into concrete existence.

11.294

Remark
Ground, like all the other determinations of reflection, is expressed in a
principle: “Everything has a sufficient ground or reason.” – In general, this
means nothing but this: Anything which is, is to be considered to exist
not as an immediate, but as a posited; there is no stopping at immediate
existence but a return must rather be made from it back into its ground,
and in this reflection it is a sublated being and is in and for itself. What is
expressed by the principle of sufficient reason is, therefore, the essentiality
of immanent reflection as against mere being. – That the ground or reason
must be sufficient is strictly speaking a totally superfluous addition, for
it goes without saying; a thing without sufficient ground would have no
ground, yet everything ought to have a ground. But Leibniz, for whom
the principle of sufficient reason was especially dear to his heart and even
made it the basic principle of his whole philosophy,10 associated a more
profound meaning with “sufficient” than is normally the case when one
simply stops at its immediate expression – although, to be sure, even in
this ordinary sense the proposition is already to be regarded as important,
for it says that being as such, in its immediacy, is an untruth, that it is
something essentially posited, and that it is the ground which is rather the
true immediate. But Leibniz took the sufficiency of the ground above all
in opposition to causality taken in its strict sense as mechanical efficiency.
Since this mode of efficiency is as such an external activity restricted to
a single determinateness according to content, the determinations that
it posits come associated together externally and accidentally; taken one by
one, the determinations are comprehended through their causes; but their
connection, which constitutes what is essential in a concrete existence,
is not to be found in mechanical causes. That connection, the whole as
essential unity, is to be found only in the concept, in the purpose. Mechanical
causes are not sufficient for this unity, for they do not have as their ground
the purpose which is the unity of the determinations. Accordingly, by
“sufficient ground” Leibniz understood one that sufficed also for this unity
and comprehended, therefore, not just causes but final causes. But this
definition of “ground” is at this point still premature; to be a ground in a
teleological sense is a property of the concept and of the mediation effected
through of it, and this mediation is reason.
10

Monadology, §32.

Ground

389

a. absolute ground
a. Form and essence
The determination of reflection, inasmuch as this determination returns
into ground, is a first immediate existence in general from which the
beginning is made. But existence still has only the meaning of positedness
and essentially presupposes a ground, in the sense that it does not really
posit a ground; that the positing is a sublating of itself; that it is rather the
immediate that is posited, and the ground the non-posited. As we have
seen,11 this presupposing is the positing that rebounds on that which posits;
as sublated determinate being, the ground is not an indeterminate but is
rather essence determined through itself, but determined as indeterminate or
as sublated positedness. It is essence that in its negativity is identical with itself.
The determinateness of essence as ground is thus twofold: it is the determinateness of the ground and of the grounded. It is, first, essence as ground,
essence determined to be essence as against positedness, as non-positedness.
Second, it is that which is grounded, the immediate that, however, is not
anything in and for itself: is positedness as positedness. Consequently, this
positedness is equally identical with itself, but in an identity which is that
of the negative with itself. The self-identical negative and the self-identical
positive are now one and the same identity. For the ground is the self-identity
of the positive or even also of positedness; the grounded is positedness as
positedness, but this its reflection-into-itself is the identity of the ground. –
This simple identity, therefore, is not itself ground, for the ground is essence
posited as the non-posited as against positedness. As the unity of this determinate identity (the ground) and of the negative identity (the grounded),
it is essence in general distinct from its mediation.
For one thing, this mediation, compared with the preceding reflections
from which it derives, is not pure reflection, which is undistinguished from
essence and still does not have the negative in it, consequently also does
not as yet contain the self-subsistence of the determinations. These have
their subsistence, rather, in the ground understood as sublated reflection. –
And it is also not the determining reflection whose determinations have
essential self-subsistence, for that reflection has foundered, has sunk to the
ground, and in the unity of the latter the determinations are only posited
11

Cf. above, 11.252. To be kept in mind is that “presupposing” in German is “voraussetzen,” i.e. “prepositing.” The connection between “presupposing” and “positing” is lost in English, unless one
remembers that the Latin root of “supposing,” “ponere,” means the same as the German “setzen.”

11.295

390

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determinations. – This mediation of the ground is thus the unity of pure
reflection and determining reflection; their determinations or that which
is posited has self-subsistence, and conversely the self-subsistence of the
determinations is a posited subsistence. Since this subsistence of the determinations is itself posited or has determinateness, the determinations are
consequently distinguished from their simple identity, and they constitute
the form as against essence.
Essence has a form and determinations of this form. Only as ground
does it have a fixed immediacy or is substrate. Essence as such is one with
its reflection, inseparable from its movement. It is not essence, therefore,
through which this movement runs its reflective course; nor is essence
that from which the movement begins, as from a starting point. It is this
circumstance that above all makes the exposition of reflection especially
difficult, for strictly speaking one cannot say that essence returns into itself,
that essence shines in itself, for essence is neither before its movement nor
in the movement: this movement has no substrate on which it runs its
course. A term of reference arises in the ground only following upon the
moment of sublated reflection. But essence as the referred-to term is determinate essence, and by virtue of this positedness it has form as essence. –
The determinations of form, on the contrary, are now determinations in
the essence; the latter lies at their foundation as an indeterminate which
in its determination is indifferent to them; in it, they are reflected into
themselves. The determinations of reflection should have their subsistence
in them and be self-subsistent. But their self-subsistence is their dissolution, which they thus have in an other; but this dissolution is itself this
self-identity or the ground of the subsistence that they give to themselves.
Everything determinate belongs in general to form; it is a form determination inasmuch as it is something posited and hence distinguished
from that of which it is the form. As quality, determinateness is one with
its substrate, being; being is the immediate determinate, not yet distinct
from its determinateness or, in this determinateness, still unreflected into
itself, just as the determinateness is, therefore, an existent determinateness, not yet one that is posited. – Moreover, the form determinations
of essence are, in their more specific determinateness, the previously considered moments of reflections:12 identity and difference, the latter as both
diversity and opposition. But also the ground-connection belongs among
these form determinations of essence, because through it, though itself the
sublated determination of reflection, essence is at the same time as posited.
12

Cf above, 11.258–290.

Ground

391

By contrast, the identity that has the ground immanent in it does not pertain to form, because positedness, as sublated and as such (as ground and
grounded), is one reflection, and this reflection constitutes essence as simple
substrate which is the subsistence of form. But in ground this subsistence is
posited, or this essence is itself essentially as determinate and, consequently,
is in turn also the moment of the ground-connection and form. – This is
the absolute reciprocal connecting reference of form and essence: essence
is the simple unity of ground and grounded but, in this unity, is itself
determined, or is a negative, and it distinguishes itself as substrate from
form, but at the same time it thereby becomes itself ground and moment
of form.
Form is therefore the completed whole of reflection; it also contains this
determination of reflection, that it is sublated; just like reflection, therefore,
it is one unity of its determining, and it is also referred to its sublatedness,
to another that is not itself form but in which the form is. As essential selfreferring negativity, in contrast with that simple negative, form is positing
and determining; simple essence, on the contrary, is indeterminate and
inert substrate in which the determinations of form have their subsistence
or their reflection into themselves. – External reflection normally halts at
this distinction of essence and form; the distinction is necessary, but the
distinguishing itself of the two is their unity, just as this unity of ground is
essence repelling itself from itself and making itself into positedness. Form
is absolute negativity itself or the negative absolute self-identity by virtue
of which essence is indeed not being but essence. This identity, taken
abstractly, is essence as against form, just as negativity, taken abstractly
as positedness, is the one determination of form. But this determination
has shown itself to be in truth the whole self-referring negativity which
within, as this identity, thus is simple essence. Consequently, form has
essence in its own identity, just as essence has absolute form in its negative
nature. One cannot therefore ask, how form comes to essence, for form is
only the internal reflective shining of essence, its own reflection inhabiting
it. Form equally is, within it, the reflection turning back into itself or the
identical essence; in its determining, form makes the determination into
positedness as positedness. – Form, therefore, does not determine essence,
as if it were truly presupposed, separate from essence, for it would then be
the unessential, constantly foundering determination of reflection; here it
rather is itself the ground of its sublating or the identical reference of its
determinations. That the form determines the essence means, therefore,
that in its distinguishing form sublates this very distinguishing and is the
self-identity that essence is as the subsistence of the determinations; form

11.296

392

11.297

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is the contradiction of being sublated in its positedness and yet having
subsistence in this sublatedness; it is accordingly ground as essence which
is self-identical in being determined or negated.
These distinctions, of form and of essence, are therefore only moments
of the simple reference of form itself. But they must be examined and fixed
more closely. Determining form refers itself to itself as sublated positedness;
it thereby refers itself to its identity as to another. It posits itself as sublated;
it therefore pre-supposes its identity; according to this moment, essence is
the indeterminate to which form is an other. It is not the essence which is
absolute reflection within, but essence determined as formless identity: it
is matter.
b. Form and matter

11.298

Essence becomes matter in that its reflection is determined as relating itself
to essence as to the formless indeterminate. Matter, therefore, is the simple
identity, void of distinction, that essence is, with the determination that
it is the other of form. Hence it is the proper base or substrate of form,
since it constitutes the immanent reflection of the determinations of form,
or the self-subsistent term, to which such determinations refer as to their
positive subsistence.
If abstraction is made from every determination, from every form of
a something, matter is what is left over. Matter is the absolutely abstract.
(One cannot see, feel, etc. matter; what one sees or feels is a determinate
matter, that is, a unity of matter and form.) This abstraction from which
matter derives is not, however, an external removal and sublation of form;
it is rather the form itself which, as we have just seen, reduces itself by
virtue of itself to this simple identity.
Further, form presupposes a matter to which it refers. But for this reason
the two do not find themselves confronting each other externally and
accidentally; neither matter nor form derives from itself, is a se, or, in
other words, is eternal. Matter is indifferent with respect to form, but this
indifference is the determinateness of self-identity to which form returns
as to its substrate. Form pre-supposes matter for the very reason that it
posits itself as a sublated, hence refers to this, its identity, as to something
other. Contrariwise, form is presupposed by matter; for matter is not
simple essence, which immediately is itself absolute reflection, but is essence
determined as something positive, that is to say, which only is as sublated
negation. – But, on the other hand, since form posits itself as matter only in
sublating itself, hence in presupposing matter, matter is also determined as

Ground

393

groundless subsistence. Equally so, matter is not determined as the ground
of form; but rather, inasmuch as matter posits itself as the abstract identity
of the sublated determination of form, it is not that identity as ground,
and form is therefore groundless with respect to it. Form and matter are
consequently alike determined as not to be posited each by the other, each
not to be the ground of the other. Matter is rather the identity of the
ground and the grounded, as the substrate that stands over against this
reference of form. This determination of indifference that the two have in
common is the determination of matter as such and also constitutes their
reciprocal reference. The determination of form, that it is the connection
of the two as distinct, equally is also the other moment of the relating of
the two to each other. – Matter, determined as indifferent, is the passive as
contrasted to form, which is determined as the active. This latter, as selfreferring negative, is inherently contradiction, self-dissolving, self-repelling,
and self-determining. It refers to matter, and it is posited to refer to this
matter, which is its subsistence, as to another. Matter is posited, on the
contrary, as referring only to itself and as indifferent to the other; but,
implicitly, it does refer to the form, for it contains the sublated negativity
and is matter only by virtue of this determination. It refers to it as an other
only because form is not posited in it, because it is form only implicitly.
It contains form locked up inside it, and it is an absolute receptivity for
form only because it has the latter within it absolutely, because to be form
is its implicit vocation.13 Hence matter must be informed, and form must
materialize itself; it must give itself self-identity or subsistence in matter.
2. Consequently, form determines matter, and matter is determined by
form. – Because form is itself absolute self-identity and hence implicitly
contains matter; and equally because matter in its pure abstraction or
absolute negativity possesses form within it, the activity of the form on the
matter and the reception by the latter of the form determination is only
the sublating of the semblance of their indifference and distinctness. Thus
the determination referring each to the other is the self-mediation of each
through its own non-being. But the two mediations are one movement,
and the restoration of their original identity is the inner recollection14 of
their exteriorization.
First, form and matter pre-suppose each other. As we have seen,15 this
only means that the one essential unity is negative self-reference, and that
it therefore splits, determined as an indifferent substrate in the essential
13
14

ihre an sich seyende Bestimmung. “Bestimmung” conveys here its other meaning of “vocation.”
15 Cf. above, 11.296, 297.
“inner recollection” = Erinnerung.

394
11.299

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

identity, and as determining form in essential distinction or negativity.
That unity of essence and form, the two opposed to each other as form
and matter, is the absolute self-determining ground. Inasmuch as this unity
differentiates itself, the reference connecting the two diverse terms, because
of the unity that underlies them, becomes a reference of reciprocal presupposition.
Second, the form already is, as self-subsisting, self-sublating contradiction; but it is also posited as in this way self-sublating, for it is self-subsisting
and at the same time essentially referred to another, and consequently it
sublates itself. Since it is itself two-sided, its sublating also has two sides. For
one, form sublates its self-subsistence and transforms itself into something
posited, something that exists in an other, and this other is in its case matter.
For the other, form sublates its determinateness vis-à-vis matter, sublates
its reference to it, consequently its positedness, and it thereby gives itself
subsistence. Its reflection in thus sublating its positedness is its own identity
into which it passes over. But since form at the same time externalizes this
identity and posits it over against itself as matter, that reflection of the
positedness into itself is a union with a matter in which it obtains subsistence. In this union, therefore, it is equally both: is united with matter as
with something other (in accordance with the first side, viz. in that it makes
itself into a positedness), and, in this other, is united with its own identity.
The activity of form by which matter is determined consists, therefore,
in a negative relating of the form to itself. But, conversely, form thereby
negatively relates itself to matter also; the movement, however, by which
matter becomes determined is just as much the form’s own movement.
Form is free of matter, but it sublates its self-subsistence; but this, its selfsubsistence, is matter itself, for it is in this matter that it has its essential
identity. It makes itself into a positedness, but this is one and the same
as making matter into something determinate. – But, considered from
the other side, the form’s own identity is at the same time externalized,
and matter is its other; for this reason, because form sublates its own
self-subsistence, matter is also not determined. But matter only subsists
vis-à-vis form; as the negative sublates itself, so does the positive also. And
as the form sublates itself, the determinateness of matter that the latter has
vis-à-vis form also falls away – the determinateness, namely, of being the
indeterminate subsistence.
What appears here as the activity of form is, moreover, just as much the
movement that belongs to matter itself. The determination that implicitly
exists in matter, what matter is supposed to be, is its absolute negativity.
Through it matter does not just refer to form simply as to an other, but this

Ground

395

external other is the form rather that matter itself contains locked up within
itself. Matter is in itself the same contradiction that form contains, and this
contradiction, like its resolution, is only one. But matter is thus in itself
self-contradictory because, as indeterminate self-identity, it is at the same
time absolute negativity; it sublates itself within: its identity disintegrates
in its negativity while the latter obtains in it its subsistence. Since matter is
therefore determined by form as by something external, it thereby attains
its determination, and the externality of the relating, for both form and
matter, consists in that each, or rather in that the original unity of each,
in positing is at the same time presupposing: the result is that self-reference
is at the same time a reference to the self as sublated or is reference to its
other.
Third, through this movement of form and matter, the original unity of
the two is, on the one hand, restored; on the other hand, it is henceforth a
posited unity. Matter is just as much a self-determining as this determining
is for it an activity of form external to it; contrariwise, form determines
only itself, or has the matter that it determines within it, just much as in
its determining it relates itself to another; and both, the activity of form
and the movement of matter, are one and the same thing, only that the
former is an activity, that is, it is the negativity as posited, while the latter
is movement or becoming, the negativity as determination existing in itself.
The result, therefore, is the unity of the in-itself and positedness. Matter is
as such determined or necessarily has a form, and form is simply material,
subsistent form.
Inasmuch as form presupposes a matter as its other, it is finite. It is
not a ground but only the active factor. Equally so, matter, inasmuch as
it presupposes form as its non-being, is finite matter; it is not the ground
of its unity with form but is for the latter only the substrate. But neither
this finite matter nor the finite form have any truth; each refers to the
other, or only their unity is their truth. The two determinations return to
this unity and there they sublate their self-subsistence; the unity thereby
proves to be their ground. Consequently, matter is the ground of its form
determination not as matter but only inasmuch as it is the absolute unity
of essence and form; similarly, form is the ground of the subsistence of
its determinations only to the extent that it is that same one unity. But
this one unity, as absolute negativity, and more specifically as exclusive
unity, is, in its reflection, a presupposing; or again, that unity is one act,
of preserving itself as positedness in positing, and of repelling itself from
itself; of referring itself to itself as itself and to itself as to another. Or,
the act by which matter is determined by form is the self-mediation of

11.300

396
11.301

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

essence as ground, in one unity: through itself and through the negation of
itself.
Informed matter or form that possesses subsistence is now, not only this
absolute unity of ground with itself, but also unity as posited. The movement just considered is the one in which the absolute ground has exhibited
its moments at once as self-sublating and consequently as posited. Or the
restored unity, in withdrawing into itself, has repelled itself from itself and
has determined itself; for its unity has been established through negation
and is, therefore, also negative unity. It is, therefore, the unity of form
and matter, as the substrate of both, but a substrate which is determinate: it is formed matter, but matter at the same time indifferent to form
and matter, indifferent to them because sublated and unessential. This is
content.
c. Form and content
Form stands at first over against essence; it is then the ground-connection
in general, and its determinations are the ground and the grounded. It then
stands over against matter, and so it is determining reflection, and its determinations are the determination of reflection itself and the subsistence of
the latter. Finally, it stands over against content, and then its determinations
are again itself and matter. What was previously the self-identical – at first
the ground, then subsistence in general, and finally matter – now passes
under the dominion of form and is once more one of its determinations.
Content has, first, a form and a matter that belong to it essentially; it
is their unity. But, because this unity is at the same time determinate or
posited unity, content stands over against form; the latter constitutes the
positedness and is the unessential over against content. The latter is therefore
indifferent towards form; form embraces both the form as such as well as
the matter, and content therefore has a form and a matter, of which it
constitutes the substrate and which are to it mere positedness.
Content is, second, what is identical in form and matter, so that these
would be only indifferent external determinations. They are positedness in
general, but a positedness that has returned in the content to its unity or its
ground. The identity of the content with itself is, therefore, in one respect
that identity which is indifferent to form, but in another the identity of
ground. The ground has at first disappeared into content; but content is
at the same time the negative reflection of the form determinations into
themselves; its unity, at first only the unity indifferent to form, is therefore
also the formal unity or the ground-connection as such. Content, therefore,

Ground

397

has this ground-connection as its essential form, and, contrariwise, the
ground has a content.
The content of the ground is therefore the ground that has returned
into its unity with itself; the ground is at first the essence that in its
positedness is identical with itself; as diverse from and indifferent to its
positedness, the ground is indeterminate matter; but as content it is at
the same time informed identity, and this form becomes for this reason a
ground-connection, since the determinations of its oppositions are posited
in the content also as negated. – Content is further determined within,
not like matter as an indifferent in general, but like informed matter, so
that the determinations of form have a material, indifferent subsistence.
On the one hand, content is the essential self-identity of the ground in its
positedness; on the other hand, it is posited identity as against the groundconnection; this positedness, which is in this identity as determination of
form, stands over against the free positedness, that is to say, over against
the form as the whole connection of ground and grounded. This form is
the total positedness returning into itself; the other form, therefore, is only
the positedness as immediate, the determinateness as such.
The ground has thus made itself into a determinate ground in general,
and the determinateness is itself twofold: of form first, and of content
second. The former is its determinateness of being external to the content
as such, the content that remains indifferent to this external reference. The
latter is the determinateness of the content that the ground has.
b. determinate ground
a. Formal ground
The ground has a determinate content. For the form, as we have seen,16 the
determinateness of content is the substrate, the simple immediate as against
the mediation of form. The ground is negatively self-referring identity
which, for this reason, makes itself into a positedness; it negatively refers to
itself because in its negativity it is identical with itself; this identity is the
substrate or the content which thus constitutes the indifferent or positive
unity of the ground-connection and, in this connection, is the mediating
factor.
In this content, the determinateness that the ground and the grounded
have over against one another has at first disappeared. The mediation,
16

Cf. just above, 11.301.

11.302

398
11.303

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

however, is also negative unity. The negative implicit in that indifferent
substrate is this substrate’s immediate determinateness through which the
ground has a determinate content. But then, the negative is the negative
reference of form to itself. What has been posited sublates itself on its
side and returns to its ground; the ground, however, the essential selfsubsistence, refers negatively to itself and makes itself into a positedness.
This negative mediation of ground and grounded is the mediation that
belongs to form as such, formal mediation. Now both sides of form, because
each passes over into the other, thereby mutually posit themselves into one
identity as sublated; in this, they pre-suppose the identity. The latter is
the determinate content to which the formal mediation thus refers itself
through itself as to the positive mediating factor. That content is the
identical element of both, and because the two are distinct, yet in their
distinction each is the reference to the other, it is their subsistence, the
subsistence of each as the whole itself.
Accordingly, the result is that in the determinate ground we have the
following. First, a determinate content is considered from two sides, once
in so far as it is ground, then again in so far as it is grounded. The content
itself is indifferent to these forms; it is in each simply and solely one
determination. Second, the ground is itself just as much a moment of form
as what is posited by it; this is its identity according to form. It is a matter of
indifference which of the two determinations is made the first, whether the
transition is from the one as posited to the other as ground or from the one
as ground to the other as posited. The grounded, considered for itself, is
the sublating of itself; it thereby makes itself on the one side into a posited,
and is at the same time the positing of the ground. The same movement
is the ground as such; it makes itself into something posited, and thereby
becomes the ground of something, that is to say, is present therein both
as a posited and also first as ground. That there be a ground, of that the
posited is the ground, and, conversely, the ground is thereby the posited.
The mediation begins just as much from the one as from the other; each
side is just as much ground as posited, and each is the whole mediation
or the whole form. – Further, this whole form is itself, as self-identical,
the substrate of the two determinations that constitute the two sides of the
ground and the grounded; form and content are thus themselves one and
the same identity.
Because of this identity of the ground and the grounded, according both
to content and form, the ground is sufficient (the sufficiency being limited
to this relation); there is nothing in the grounded which is not in the ground.
Whenever one asks for a ground, one expects to see the same determination

Ground

399

which is the content doubled, once in the form of that which is posited, and
again in the form of existence reflected into itself, of essentiality.
Now inasmuch as in the determined ground, the ground and the
grounded are each the whole form, and their content, though determinate, is nevertheless one and the same, the two sides of the ground do
not as yet have a real determination, do not have a different content; the
determinateness is only one simple determinateness that has yet to pass
over into the two sides; the determinate ground is present only in its pure
form, as formal ground. – Because the content is only this simple determinateness, one that does not have in it the form of the ground-connection,
the determinateness is a self-identical content indifferent to form, and the
form is external to it; the content is other than the form.
Remark
When the search for determinate grounds does not go past the form of
ground as we have just developed, then the assigning of a ground remains a
mere formalism, the empty tautology of repeating in the form of immanent
reflection, of essentiality, the same content already present in the form
of immediate existence considered as posited. This exercise of assigning
grounds is for this reason just as empty as any discourse only governed by
the principle of identity. The sciences, especially the physical sciences, are
full of tautologies of this kind which apparently constitute the prerogative
of science. – For instance, the ground for the planets moving around the
sun is given to be the reciprocal attractive force of the sun and the earth.
So far as content goes, this says no more than what is contained in the
phenomenon, namely that the movements of the two bodies are correlated,
except that it is expressed in the form of a determination reflected into itself,
that of force. If it is asked what kind of force this attractive force might
be, the answer is that it is the force that makes the earth move around
the sun, that is to say, it has exactly the same content as the existence
for which it is supposed to be the ground; the connection of the earth
and sun with respect to motion is the identical substrate of ground and
grounded. – When a form of crystallization is explained in this way, namely
that it is grounded in the particular arrangement into which the molecules
enter with one another, the actual crystallization is this arrangement itself,
except expressed as ground. These etiologies, which are the privilege of the
sciences, are valued in ordinary life for what they are – tautological, empty
talk. If to the question why does this man travel to the city, one were to give
as ground that there is in the city an attractive force impelling him to it,
this kind of answer would be deemed brainless – yet it is the kind of answer

11.304

11.305

400

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which is sanctioned in the sciences. – Leibniz accused Newton’s force of
attraction of being precisely the kind of occult quality that the Scholastics
used for the purpose of explanation.17 One should rather accuse it of being
the opposite of occult, that it is all too known a quality, for it has no other
content than the phenomenon itself. – What recommends this manner of
explanation is its great clarity and easy comprehension, for there is nothing
clearer and more open to comprehension than that a plant, for instance,
has its ground in a vegetative, that is, plant-producing, force. – Such a force
may be called an occult quality only in the sense that a ground ought to
have another content than what is to be explained; but no such content is
given, and in that sense, of course, the force appealed to for explanation is
a hidden ground, the required but not given ground. Something is no more
explained by this formalism than is the nature of a plant known when I say
that it is a plant; for all the clarity of the statement, or of the claim that the
plant has its ground in a plant-producing force, and just because of that
clarity, one can indeed call this a very occult manner of explanation.
Secondly, as regards form, in this kind of explanation the two opposite
directions of the ground-connection are adduced without being apprehended in their determinate relation. On the one hand, the ground is
ground as the immanently reflected content determination of the existence
which it grounds; on the other hand, it is that which is posited. It is that
on the basis of which that existence is supposed to be understood; but,
conversely, it is inferred from the latter and is understood from it. The main
business of this reflection thus consists in gleaning the ground from an
existence, that is, in converting the immediate existence into the form of
reflected being; consequently the ground, instead of being self-subsisting
in and for itself, is rather that which is posited and derived. And since
on this procedure the ground is arranged to fit the phenomenon, and its
determinations depend on the latter, the phenomenon unhindered flows
smoothly out of the ground with full wind in its sails. But in this way,
knowledge has not advanced an inch; it runs in circles, making formal
distinctions which the procedure itself overturns and sublates. One of the
main difficulties in making progress in the study of the sciences in which
this procedure is the rule is due precisely to this wrongheaded procedure,
of premising as ground that which is in fact derived, and in fact producing in what follows, once one gets there, the ground of this previously
17

Godfredi Gulielmi Leibnitii Opera Omnia, Tomus Secundus in duas Partes, Pars Altera: Physica
Generalis, Chymia, Medicina, Botanica, Historia Naturalis, ed. L. Duten (Geneva, 1768), Epistola
III (Letter to J. G. Liebnecht), p. 95: “I consider such an attractive force to be either a miracle or
no more than a scholastic occult quality.”

Ground

401

supposed ground. The exposition begins with grounds that are floated as
principles and original concepts. They are simple determinations lacking
necessity in and for themselves; what follows is supposed to be based on
them. Therefore, anyone who would penetrate such sciences must begin by
assimilating these grounds, and this is a business that reason finds unsavory,
for it requires accepting as groundwork what is in fact groundless. More
conducive to progress is to accept such principles as given without much
reflection, and then to use them as fundamental rules of one’s understanding. Without this method, one cannot make a start; nor without it can one
make any advance. But the advance is hindered the moment the method
shows its hand by reversing itself, and looks for the derived in the consequent when in fact it is the derived that alone contains the grounds of the
above presuppositions. Further, because the consequent proves to be the
phenomenon from which the ground was derived, this relation into which
the phenomenon is cast raises suspicion about the way it is presented, for the
phenomenon is not in fact expressed in the immediacy of a phenomenon
but as evidence for the ground. But because the latter, though the ground,
is derived from the phenomenon, all the more so would one wish to see
the phenomenon in its immediacy in order to be able to pass judgment
on how the ground is derived from it. In an exposition of this kind, where
the true ground comes out as the derived, one never knows what to make
of either the ground or the phenomenon. And the uncertainty grows –
particularly when the procedure is not rigorously consistent but is more
honest – when the phenomenon betrays traces and circumstances that point
to other things, and often entirely different things, than are contained
in the principles alone. Lastly, the confusion grows even greater when
hypothetical determinations that are the product of reflection are blended
with the immediate determinations of the phenomenon itself, and are then
spoken of as if they belonged to immediate experience. Many who come to
these sciences in good faith may well believe, from the way in which these
things are spoken of in them as immediate determinations of existence,
that molecules, empty interstices, centrifugal force, ether, the separate ray
of light, electrical and magnetic matter, and an assortment of other like
things or relations, are actually to be found in perception. They serve as first
grounds for other things; they are spoken of, and deliberately made use of,
as actual things; in good faith one accepts them as such, before one realizes
that they are determinations inferred from that which they are supposed
to ground, hypotheses and fictions derived by an uncritical reflection. In
fact one finds oneself in a kind of witches’ circle in which determinations of existence and determinations of reflection, ground and grounded,

11.306

402
11.307

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

phenomena and phantoms, mix in promiscuous company enjoying equal
rank in common.
Along with the formal business of this method of explaining from
grounds, one also hears it repeatedly said – in spite of all the explaining done on the basis of well-known forces and matters – that we do not
know the inner essence of these same forces and matters. This can only be
seen as an admission that this method of explaining from grounds does not
satisfy its own expectations, that it itself demands something quite different
from such grounds. But it is then difficult to see why so much effort goes
into that explaining; why that different something is not sought for, or at
least why the explaining is not set aside and the facts are not taken as they
simply stand.
b. Real ground
The determinateness of ground is, as we have seen, on the one hand determinateness of the substrate or content determination; on the other hand,
it is the otherness in the ground-connection itself, namely the distinctness
of its content and the form; the connection of ground and grounded strays
in the content as an external form, and the content is indifferent to these
determinations. – But in fact the two are not external to each other; for
this is what the content is: to be the identity of the ground with itself in
the grounded, and of the grounded in the ground. The side of the ground
has shown itself to be itself a posited, and the side of the grounded to be
itself ground; each side is this identity of the whole within it. But since
they equally belong to form and constitute its determinate difference, each
is in its determinateness the identity of the whole with itself. Consequently,
each has a diverse content as against the other. – Or, considering the matter
from the side of the content, since the latter is the self-identity of the
ground-connection, it essentially possesses this difference of form within,
and is as ground something other than what it is as grounded.
Now the moment ground and grounded have a diverse content, the
ground-connection has ceased to be a formal one; the turning back to the
ground and the procession forward from ground to posited is no longer
a tautology; the ground is realized. Henceforth, whenever we ask for a
ground, we actually demand another content determination for it than the
determination of the content whose ground we are asking for.
This connection now determines itself further. For inasmuch as its two
sides are of different content, they are indifferent to each other; each is
an immediate, self-identical determination. Moreover, as referred to each

Ground

403

other as ground and grounded, the ground reflects itself in the other, as
in something posited by it, back to itself; the content on the side of the
ground, therefore, is equally in the grounded; the latter, as the posited, has
its self-identity and subsistence only in the ground. But besides this content
of the ground, the grounded also now possesses a content of its own and
is accordingly the unity of a twofold content. Now this unity, as the unity
of sides that are different, is indeed their negative unity; but since the two
determinations of content are indifferent to each other, that unity is only
their empty reference to each other, in itself void of content, and not their
mediation; it is a one or a something externally holding them together.
In the real grounding connection there is present, therefore, a twofold.
For one thing, the content determination which is ground extends
continuously18 into the positedness, so that it constitutes the simple identity
of the ground and the grounded; the grounded thus contains the ground
fully within itself; their connection is one of undifferentiated essential
compactness. Anything else in the grounded added to this simple essence is,
therefore, only an unessential form, external determinations of the content
that, as such, are free from the ground and constitute an immediate manifold. Of this unessential more, therefore, the essential is not the ground,
nor is it the ground of any connection between it and the unessential in
the grounded. The unessential is a positively identical element that resides
in the grounded but does not posit itself there in any distinctive form;
as self-referring content, it is rather an indifferent positive substrate. – For
another thing, that which in the something is linked with this substrate is an
indifferent content, but as the unessential side. The main thing is the connection of the substrate and the unessential manifold. But this connection,
since the determinations that it connects are an indifferent content, is also
not a ground; true, one determination is determined as essential content
and the other as only unessential or as posited; but this form is to each,
as a self-referring content, an external one. The one of the something that
constitutes their connection is for this reason not a reference of form, but
only an external tie that does not hold the unessential manifold content as
posited; it too is therefore likewise only a substrate.
Ground, in determining itself as real, because of the diversity of the
content that constitutes its reality, thus breaks down into external determinations. The two connections of the essential reality – content, as
the simple immediate identity of ground and grounded; and then the
something connecting distinct contents – are two different substrates. The
18

“extends continuously” = mit sich selbst kontinuirt.

11.308

404

11.309

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

self-identical form of ground, according to which one and the same thing
is at one time the essential and at another the posited, has vanished. The
ground-connection has thus become external to itself.
Consequently, it is an external ground that now holds together a diversified content and determines what is ground and what is posited by it; this
determination is not to be found in the two-sided content itself. The real
ground is therefore the reference to another, on the one hand, of a content
to another content and, on the other, of the ground-connection itself (the
form) to another, namely to an immediate, to something not posited by it.
Remark
The formal ground-connection has only one content for the ground and
the grounded; its necessity rests on this identity, but so does its tautological
nature. The real ground has a diversified content; with this content, however, there also comes the contingency and the externality of the groundconnection. On the one hand, that which is considered as essential, and
therefore as the ground determination, is not the ground of other determinations that are linked to it. On the other hand, it is also undetermined
which of the several content determinations of a concrete thing should be
taken as the essential and as ground; the choice between them is free. For
instance, as regards the first point, the ground of a house is its foundation;
this is so because of the gravity which is inherent in sensuous matter, and
this gravity is perfectly identical in both the ground of the house and the
grounded house. Now, that there is in heavy matter a distinction as that
of a foundation and a modification of it distinct from it through which it
constitutes a habitation, this is to gravity itself totally indifferent; the reference connecting it to the other content determinations, the purpose, the
furnishings of the house, etc., is external to it; gravity, therefore, though it is
the common substrate of the determinations constituting the house, is not
the ground of it as house. Accordingly, gravity is just as much the ground
for a house standing up as for a stone falling down. The stone has this
ground, gravity, in itself; but the fact that it has a further content determination by which it is not just something heavy but a stone, this is external
to gravity. And one must look elsewhere than in gravity for the cause that
removed the stone from the ground on which it then falls; similarly the
time and space of the fall and their correlation, the motion of falling, are
of another content than gravity and can be conceived of without it (as is
commonly said), and therefore are not essentially posited by it. – Gravity
is equally the ground that makes the upward trajectory of a projectile the
opposite counterpart of the falling trajectory. – It is clear from the diversity

Ground

405

of the determinations for which gravity is the ground, that something else
is required that will make it the ground of this determination or that. –
When it is said of nature that it is the ground of the world, then what
is called nature is, on the one hand, one with the world and the world
nothing but nature itself. On the other hand, the two are also different,
nature being rather the indeterminate, or at least determinate only as the
essence of the world, self-identical in the universal differences that are laws;
to be a world, a manifold of determinations is still to be externally added
to it. But these determinations do not have their ground in nature as such,
which is rather indifferent with respect to them as accidentalities. – We
have the same relation when God is defined as the ground of nature. As
ground, he is the essence of nature; nature contains him within it and is
identical with him; but nature has yet another manifold which is distinct
from the ground itself; this manifold is a third in which these two diverse
sides, God and nature, are linked together; the side of the ground is neither
the ground of this manifold, which is different from him, nor of his link
with it. There is, therefore, no cognition of nature to be had from God as
the ground, for God would then be only nature’s universal essence and, as
such, would not contain it in its determinate essence or as nature.
Because of the diversity of content between the ground or, more appropriately, the substrate, and that which in the grounded is linked to it, the
assigning of real grounds is no less of a formalism than is the formal ground
itself. In the latter, the self-identical content is indifferent to form, and the
same applies to the real ground. In its case, it further follows that the real
ground does not have specifically within it the wherewithal for determining which in a manifold of determinations is to be taken as the essential.
Something is a concrete something; its manifold determinations are to all
appearances equally stable and permanent in it. Any of them, therefore,
can be taken as ground no less than any other, that is to say, can be taken
as the essential determination, and in comparison to it the others would
then be only something posited. We go back here to what we noted earlier,
namely that from the fact that a determination is deemed in one case to
be the ground of another, it does not follow that this other is posited with
it in another case or at all. – Punishment, for instance, has a variety of
determinations: that it is retribution; and also a deterrent example, a deterring threat made by the law; and also a contribution to the self-awareness
and betterment of the culprit. Each of these different determinations has
been regarded as the ground of punishment, on the ground that it is the
essential determination, and by default the others, since they are different
from it, have been regarded as only accidental. But the one determination

11.310

406

11.311

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which is assumed as ground does not amount to the whole punishment;
the latter, as something concrete, also contains all of the rest, and in it
these are only linked to the first without having their ground in it. – Or
again a civil servant has a talent for his office, as an individual has family
relations, has a number of acquaintances, a particular character, was called
upon to prove himself under such and such circumstances and on such
and such occasions, etc. Now each of these properties can be, or can be
regarded to be, the ground of his being a civil servant; they are a diversified
content held together in a third; the form, in which they are determined
relatively to each other as essential and posited, is external to this content.
To the civil servant each of the properties is essential, for it is by virtue of
them that he is the determinate individual that he is; since his office can
be regarded as a determination externally posited in him, each of the rest
can be determined as a ground with respect to it, but conversely, they too
can be regarded as posited and the office as their ground. How they relate
actually, that is, in this singular case, is a determination external to the
grounding connection and to the content itself; it is a third that confers on
them the form of ground and grounded.
So in general every existence can have several grounds; each of its content
determinations pervades the concrete whole while retaining its identity, and
thus allows the possibility that it be regarded as essential; because of the
contingency of the link connecting them, the door is left wide open to
a multitude of points of view, that is, determinations that lie outside the
fact itself. – Whether a ground has this or that consequence is therefore
equally accidental. For instance, moral motives are essential determinations
of ethical nature, but what follows from them is at the same time an
externality distinct from them, one that may or may not follow from
them but is attached to them only by virtue of a third factor. Or to be
more precise, if the moral determination is a ground, it is not accidental
to it that it should have a consequence or that something be grounded
by it; but that it should be made into a ground in the first place, that is
accidental. But again, since the content which is its consequence has the
nature of externality when the determination is made into a ground, it can
be immediately sublated by some other externality. From a moral motive,
therefore, an action can proceed but can also not proceed. Conversely,
an action can have several grounds; as something concrete, it contains a
manifold of essential determinations, each of which can therefore be offered
as the ground. The search and the assigning of grounds which is the special
domain of argumentation is for this reason an endless meandering without
final destination; for each and every thing good grounds can be adduced,

Ground

407

but so they can for its opposite just as well, and there can be a great many
grounds with nothing following from them. What Socrates and Plato call
sophistry is nothing else than argumentation from grounds; Plato opposed
to it the examination of the idea, that is, of a fact in and for itself or in its
concept.19 Grounds are taken only from essential determinations of content,
relations and points of view, of which each fact and also its opposite can
have several; in their form of essentiality, each is just as valid as the next;
each is a one-sided ground, because none contains the whole compass
of the fact for which other particular sides then provide other particular
grounds, and none exhausts the fact that links them together and contains
them all; none is the sufficient ground or reason, that is, the concept.
c. Complete ground
1. In real ground, ground as content and ground as connection are only
substrates. The former is only posited as essential and as ground; the connection is what the grounded immediately is as the indeterminate substrate
of a diversified content, a linking of this content which is not the content’s
own reflection but is rather external and consequently a reflection which
is only posited. The real ground-connection is ground, therefore, rather as
sublated; consequently, it rather makes up the side of the grounded or of
the positedness. As positedness, however, the ground itself has now returned
to its ground; it is now something grounded: it has another ground. This
ground will therefore be so determined that, first, it is identical with the
ground by which it is grounded; both sides have in this determination one
and the same content; the two content determinations and their linkage in
a something are equally to be found in the new ground. But, second, the
new ground into which the previously merely posited and external link is
now sublated is the immanent reflection of this link: the absolute reference
of the two content determinations to each other.
Because real ground has itself thus returned to its ground, the identity
of ground and grounded or the formality of ground reasserts itself in it.
The newly arisen ground-connection is therefore the one which is complete,
which contains the formal and real ground in itself at the same time and
mediates the content determinations which in the real ground confronted
each other immediately.
2. Thus the ground-connection has more precisely determined itself as
follows. First, something has a ground; it contains the content determination
19

The Sophist, 259c–e.

11.312

408

11.313

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which is the ground and, in addition, a second determination as posited by
the ground. But, because of the indifference of content, the one determination is not ground in itself, nor is the other in itself one that is grounded
by the first; this connection of ground and grounded is rather sublated in
the immediacy of their content, is posited, and as such has its ground
in another such connection. Since this second connection is distinguished
only according to form, it has the same content as the first; it still has the
same two determinations of content but is now their immediate linking
together. This linking, however, is of a general nature, and the content,
therefore, is diversified into determinations that are indifferent to each
other. The linking is not, therefore, their true absolute connection that
would make one determination the element of self-identity in the positedness, and the other determination the positedness of this same self-identity;
on the contrary, the two are supported by a something and this something
is what connects them, but in a connection which is not reflected, is rather
only immediate and, therefore, only a relative ground as against the linking
in the other something. The two somethings are therefore the two distinct
connections of content that have transpired. They stand in the identical ground-connection of form; they are one and the same whole content,
namely the two content determinations and their connection; they are distinct only by the kind of this connection, which in the one is an immediate
and in the other a posited connection; through this, they are distinguished
one from another as ground and grounded only according to form. – Second,
this ground-connection is not only formal, but also real. Formal ground
passes over into real ground, as has been shown; the moments of the form
reflect themselves into themselves; they are a self-subsistent content, and
the ground-connection contains also one content with the character of
ground and another with that of grounded. The content constitutes at first
the immediate identity of both sides of the formal ground; so the two sides
have one and the same content. But the content also has the form in it, and
so it is a twofold content that behaves as ground and grounded. One of the
two content determinations of the two somethings is therefore determined,
not merely as being common to them according to external comparison,
but as their identical substrate and the foundation of their connection.
As against the other determination of the content, this determination is
essential and is the ground of the other which is posited, that is, posited
in the something, the connection of which is the grounded. In the first
something, which is the ground-connection, this second determination of
the content is also immediately and in itself linked with the first. But the
other something only contains the one determination in itself as that in

Ground

409

which it is immediately identical with the first something, but the other
as the one which is posited in it. The former content determination is its
ground by virtue of its being originally linked in the first something with
the other content determination.
The ground-connection of the content determinations in the second
something is thus mediated through the connection present in the first
something. The inference is this: since determination B is implicitly linked
with determination A in a something, in a second something to which only
the one determination A immediately belongs, also B is linked with it. In
the second something, not only is this second determination mediated;
also mediated is that its immediate ground is mediated, namely by virtue
of its original connection with B in the first something. This connection
is thus the ground of the ground A, and the whole ground-connection is
present in the second something as posited or grounded.
3. Real ground shows itself to be the self-external reflection of ground;
its complete mediation is the restoration of its identity with itself. But
because this identity has in the process equally acquired the externality of
real ground, the formal ground-connection in this unity of itself and real
ground is just as much self-positing as self-sublating ground; the groundconnection mediates itself with itself through its negation. The ground is at
first, as the original connection, the connection of immediate content determinations. The ground-connection, being essential form, has for sides such
that are sublated or are as moments. Consequently, as the form of immediate determinations, it connects itself with itself as self-identical while at
the same time connecting with their negation; accordingly, it is ground not
in and for itself but as connected with the sublated ground-connection. –
Second, the sublated connection or the immediate, which in the original
and in the posited connection is the identical substrate, is likewise real
ground not in and for itself; that it is ground is rather posited by virtue of
that original link. –
Thus the ground-connection is in its totality essentially presupposing
reflection; formal ground presupposes the immediate content determination, and this content presupposes form as real ground. Ground is
therefore form as an immediate linkage but in such a manner that it
repels itself from itself and rather presupposes immediacy, referring itself
therein as to another. This immediate is the content determination, the
simple ground; but as such, that is, as ground, it is equally repelled
from itself and refers itself to itself equally as to an other. – Thus the
total ground-connection has taken on the determination of conditioning
mediation.

11.314

410

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
c. condition
a. The relatively unconditioned

11.315

1. Ground is the immediate, and the grounded the mediated. But ground
is positing reflection; as such, it makes itself into positedness and is presupposing reflection; as such it refers itself to itself as to something sublated,
to an immediate through which it is itself mediated. This mediation, as an
advance from the immediate to the ground, is not an external reflection
but, as we have seen, the ground’s own doing or, what is the same, the
ground-connection, as reflection into its self-identity, is just as essentially
self-externalizing reflection. The immediate to which ground refers as to its
essential presupposition is condition; real ground is accordingly essentially
conditioned. The determinateness that it contains is the otherness of itself.
Condition is therefore, first, an immediate, manifold existence. Second,
it is this existence referred to an other, to something which is ground, not
of this existence but in some other respect, for existence itself is immediate
and without ground. According to this reference, it is something posited;
as condition, the immediate existence is supposed to be not for itself
but for another. But this, that it thus is for another, is at the same time
itself only a positedness; that it is posited is sublated in its immediacy: an
existence is indifferent to being a condition. Third, condition is something
immediate in the sense that it constitutes the presupposition of ground. In
this determination, it is the form-connection of ground withdrawn into
self-identity, hence the content of ground. But content is as such only the
indifferent unity of ground, as in the form: without form, no content.
It nevertheless frees itself from this indifferent unity in that the groundconnection, in the complete ground, becomes a connection external to
its identity, whereby content acquires immediacy. In so far, therefore, as
condition is that in which the ground-connection has its identity with itself,
it constitutes the content of ground; but since this content is indifferent
to form, it is only implicitly the content of form, is something which has
yet to become content and hence constitutes the material for the ground.
Posited as condition, and in accordance with the second moment, existence
is determined to lose its indifferent immediacy and to become the moment
of another. By virtue of its immediacy, it is indifferent to this connection;
inasmuch as it enters into it, however, it constitutes the in-itself of the
ground and is for it the unconditioned. In order to be condition, it has its
presupposition in the ground and is itself conditioned; but this condition
is external to it.

Ground

411

2. Something is not through its condition; its condition is not its ground.
Condition is for the ground the moment of unconditioned immediacy, but
is not itself the movement and the positing that refers itself to itself negatively and that makes itself into a positedness. Over against condition
there stands, therefore, the ground-connection. Something has, besides its
condition, also a ground. – This ground is the empty movement of reflection, for the latter has the immediacy which is its presupposition outside
it. But it is the whole form and the self-subsistent process of mediation,
for the condition is not its ground. Since this mediating refers itself to
itself as positing, it equally is according to this side something immediate
and unconditioned; it does indeed presuppose itself, but as an externalized
or sublated positing; whatever it is in accordance with its determination,
that it is, on the contrary, in and for itself. – Inasmuch as the groundconnection is thus a self-subsisting self-reference and has within it the
identity of reflection, it has a content which is peculiarly its own as against
the content of the condition. The one content is that of the ground and is
therefore essentially informed; the other content, that of the condition, is
on the contrary only an immediate material whose connecting reference to
the ground, while at the same time constituting the in-itself of the latter, is
also equally external to it; it is thus a mingling of a self-subsisting content
that has no reference to the content of the ground determination and of
the content that enters into the latter and, as its material, should become
a moment of it.
3. The two sides of the whole, condition and ground, are thus, on the one
hand, indifferent and unconditioned with respect to each other: the one as
the non-referred-to side, to which the connecting reference in which it is
the condition is external; the other as the connecting reference, or form,
for which the determinate existence of the condition is only a material,
something passive whose form, such as it possesses on its own account, is
unessential. On the other hand, the two sides are also mediated. Condition
is the in-itself of the ground; so much is it the essential moment of the
ground-connection, that it is the simple self-identity of the ground. But this
also is sublated; this in-itself is only something posited; immediate existence
is indifferent to being a condition. The fact, therefore, that condition is the
in-itself of the ground constitutes the side of it by which it is a mediated
condition. Likewise, the ground-connection has in its self-subsistence also
a presupposition; it has its in-itself outside itself. – Consequently, each
of the two sides is this contradiction, that they are indifferent immediacy
and essential mediation, both in one reference – or the contradiction of
independent subsistence and of being determined as only moments.

11.316

412

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
b. The absolutely unconditioned

11.317

At first, each of the two relatively unconditioned sides reflectively shines in
the other; condition, as an immediate, is reflected in the form connection
of the ground, and this form in the immediate existence as its positedness;
but each, apart from this reflective shine of its other in it, stands out on its
own and has a content of its own.
Condition is at first immediate existence; its form has these two moments:
that of positedness, according to which it is, as condition, material and
moment of the ground; and that of the in-itself, according to which it
constitutes the essentiality of ground or its simple reflection into itself.
Both sides of the form are external to immediate existence, for the latter
is the sublated ground-connection. – But, first, existence is in it only this:
to sublate itself in its immediacy and to founder, going to the ground.
Being is as such only the becoming of essence; it is its essential nature to
make itself into a positedness and into an identity which is an immediacy
through the negation of itself. The form determinations of positedness and
of self-identical in-itself, the form through which immediate existence is
condition, are not, therefore, external to that existence; the latter is, rather,
this very reflection. Second, as condition, being is now posited as that which
it essentially is, namely as a moment and consequently as the being of an
other, and at the same time as the in-itself of an other; it is in itself but only
through the negation of itself, namely through the ground and through
its self-sublating and consequent presupposing reflection; the in-itself of
being is thus only something posited. This in-itself of the condition has
two sides: one side is its essentiality as essentiality of the ground, while the
other is the immediacy of its existence. Or rather, both sides are the same
thing. Existence is an immediate, but immediacy is essentially something
mediated, namely through the self-sublating ground. Existence, as this
immediacy mediated by a self-sublating mediating, is at the same time
the in-itself of the ground and its unconditioned side; but again, this initself is at the same time itself equally only moment or positedness, since
it is mediated. – Condition is, therefore, the whole form of the groundconnection; it is the presupposed in-itself of the latter, but, consequently,
is itself a positedness and its immediacy is this, to make itself into a
positedness and thereby to repel itself from itself, in such as way that it
both founders to the ground and is ground, the ground that makes itself
into a positedness and thereby into a grounded, and both are one and the
same.

Ground

413

Likewise in the conditioned ground, the in-itself is not just as the
reflective shining of an other in it. This ground is the self-subsistent,
that is, self-referring reflection of the positing, and consequently the selfidentical; or it is in it its in-itself and its content. But it is at the same time
presupposing reflection; it negatively refers to itself and posits its in-itself
as an other opposite to it, and condition, according to both its moment
of in-itself and of immediate existence, is the ground-connection’s own
moment; the immediate existence essentially is only through its ground
and is a moment of itself as a presupposing. This ground, therefore, is
equally the whole itself.
What we have here, therefore, is only one whole of form, but equally so
only one whole of content. For the proper content of condition is essential
content only in so far as it is the self-identity of reflection in the form, or the
ground-connection is in it this immediate existence. Further, this existence
is condition only through the presupposing reflection of the ground; it is
the ground’s self-identity, or its content, to which the ground posits itself
as opposite. Therefore, the existence is not a merely formless material for
the ground-connection; on the contrary, because it has this form in it, it is
informed matter, and because in its identity with it it is at the same time
indifferent to it, it is content. Finally, it is the same content as that possessed
by the ground, for it is precisely content as that which is self-identical in
the form connection.
The two sides of the whole, condition and ground, are therefore one
essential unity, as content as well as form. They pass into one another, or,
since they are reflections, they posit themselves as sublated, refer themselves
to this their negation, and reciprocally presuppose each other. But this is at
the same time only one reflection of the two, and their presupposing
is, therefore, one presupposing only; the reciprocity of this presupposing
ultimately amounts to this, that they both presuppose one identity for their
subsistence and their substrate. This substrate, the one content and unity
of form of both, is the truly unconditioned; the fact in itself. – Condition
is, as it was shown above,20 only the relatively unconditioned. It is usual,
therefore, to consider it as itself something conditioned and to ask for a new
condition, whereby the customary progression ad infinitum from condition
to condition is set in motion. But now, why is it that at one condition
a new condition is asked for, that is, why is that condition assumed to
be something conditioned? Because it is some finite determinate existence
20

Cf. above, 11.316.

11.318

414

11.319

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

or other. But this is a further determination of condition that does not
enter into its concept. Condition is as such conditioned solely because
it is the posited in-itselfness; it is, therefore, sublated in the absolutely
unconditioned.
Now this contains within itself the two sides, condition and ground,
as its moments; it is the unity to which they have returned. Together, the
two constitute its form or its positedness. The unconditioned fact is the
condition of both, but the condition which is absolute, that is to say, one
which is itself ground. – As ground, the fact is now the negative identity
that has repelled itself into those two moments: first, in the shape of the
sublated ground-connection, the shape of an immediate manifold void of
unity and external to itself, one that refers to the ground as an other to
it and at the same time constitutes its in-itself; second, in the shape of an
inner, simple form which is ground, but which refers to the self-identical
immediate as to an other, determining it as condition, that is, determining
the in-itself of it as its own moment. – These two sides pre-suppose the
totality, presuppose that it is that which posits them. Contrariwise, because
they presuppose the totality, the latter seems to be in turn also conditioned
by them, and the fact to spring forth from its condition and its ground. But
since these two sides have shown themselves to be an identity, the relation
of condition and ground has disappeared; the two are reduced to a mere
reflective shine; the absolutely unconditioned is in its movement of positing
and presupposing only the movement in which this shine sublates itself. It
is the fact’s own doing that it conditions itself and places itself as ground
over against its conditions; but in connecting conditions and ground, the
fact is a reflection shining in itself; its relation to them is a rejoining itself.
c. Procession of the fact into concrete existence
The absolutely unconditioned is the absolute ground that is identical with
its condition, the immediate fact as the truly essential. As ground, it refers
negatively to itself and makes itself into a positedness; but this positedness
is a reflection that is complete in both its sides and is in them the selfidentical form of connection, as has transpired from its concept. This
positedness is therefore first the sublated ground, the fact as an immediacy
void of reflection, the side of the conditions. This is the totality of the
determinations of the fact, the fact itself, but the fact as thrown into the
externality of being, the restored circle of being. In condition, essence lets
go of the unity of its immanent reflection; but it lets it go as an immediacy
that now carries the character of being a conditioning presupposition and of

Ground

415

essentially constituting only one of its sides. – For this reason the conditions
are the whole content of the fact, because they are the unconditioned in
the form of formless being. But because of this form, they also have yet
another shape besides the conditions of the content as this is in the fact
as such. They appear as a manifold without unity, mingled with extraessential elements and other circumstances that do not belong to the circle
of existence as constituting the conditions of this determinate fact. – For
the absolute, unrestricted fact, the sphere of being itself is the condition.
The ground, returning into itself, posits that sphere as the first immediacy
to which it refers as to its unconditioned. This immediacy, as sublated
reflection, is reflection in the element of being, which thus forms itself as
such into a whole; form proliferates as determinateness of being and thus
appears as a manifold distinct from the determination of reflection and as
a content indifferent to it. The unessential, which is in the sphere of being
but which the latter sheds in so far as it is condition, is the determinateness
of the immediacy into which the unity of form has sunk. This unity of
form, as the connection of being, is in the latter at first as becoming – the
passing over of a determinateness of being into another. But the becoming
of being is also the coming to be of essence and a return to the ground.
The existence that constitutes the conditions, therefore, is in truth not
determined as condition by an other and is not used by it as material; on
the contrary, it itself makes itself, through itself, into the moment of an
other. – Further, the becoming of this existence does not start off from itself
as if it were truly the first and immediate; on the contrary, its immediacy
is something only presupposed, and the movement of its becoming is the
doing of reflection itself. The truth of existence is thus that it is condition;
its immediacy is solely by virtue of the reflection of the ground-connection
that posits itself as sublated. Consequently, like immediacy, becoming is
only the reflective shine of the unconditioned inasmuch as this presupposes
itself and has its form in this presupposing, and hence the immediacy of
being is essentially only a moment of the form.
The other side of this reflective shining of the unconditioned is the
ground-connection as such, determined as form as against the immediacy
of the conditions and the content. But this side is the form of the absolute
fact that possesses the unity of its form with itself or its content within
it, and, in determining this content as condition, in this very positing
sublates the diversity of the content and reduces it to a moment; just
as, contrariwise, as a form void of essence, in this self-identity it gives
itself the immediacy of subsistence. The reflection of the ground sublates
the immediacy of the conditions, connecting them and making them

11.320

416

11.321

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

moments within the unity of the fact; but the conditions are that which the
unconditioned fact itself presupposes and the latter, therefore, sublates its
own positing; consequently, its positing converts itself just as immediately
into a becoming. – The two, therefore, are one unity; the internal movement
of the conditions is a becoming, the return into the ground and the
positing of the ground; but the ground as posited, and this means as
sublated, is the immediate. The ground refers negatively to itself, makes
itself into a positedness and grounds the conditions; in this, however, in that
the immediate existence is thus determined as a positedness, the ground
sublates it and only then makes itself into a ground. – This reflection is
therefore the self-mediation of the unconditioned fact through its negation.
Or rather, the reflection of the unconditioned is at first a presupposing,
but this sublating of itself is immediately a positing which determines;
secondly, in this positing the reflection is immediately the sublating of
the presupposed and a determining from within itself; this determining is
thus in turn the sublating of the positing: it is a becoming within itself.
In this, the mediation as a turning back to itself through negation has
disappeared; mediation is simple reflection reflectively shining within itself
and groundless, absolute becoming. The fact’s movement of being posited,
on the one hand through its conditions, and on the other hand through
its ground, now is the disappearing of the reflective shine of mediation. The
process by which the fact is posited is accordingly a coming forth, the simple
self-staging of the fact in concrete existence, the pure movement of the fact
to itself.
When all the conditions of a fact are at hand, the fact steps into concrete
existence. The fact is, before it exists concretely; it is, first, as essence or
as unconditioned; second, it has immediate existence or is determined,
and this in the twofold manner just considered, on the one hand in its
conditions and on the other in its ground. In the former case, it has given
itself the form of the external, groundless being, for as absolute reflection
the fact is negative self-reference and makes itself into its presupposition.
This presupposed unconditioned is, therefore, the groundless immediate
whose being is just to be there, without grounds. If, therefore, all the
conditions of the fact are at hand, that is, if the totality of the fact is
posited as a groundless immediate, then this scattered manifold internally
recollects itself. – The whole fact must be there, within its conditions, or
all the conditions belong to its concrete existence; for the all of them
constitutes the reflection of the fact. Or again, immediate existence, since
it is condition, is determined by form; its determinations are therefore
determinations of reflection and with the positing of one the rest also

Ground

417

are essentially posited. – The recollecting of the conditions is at first the
foundering to the ground of immediate existence and the coming to be
of the ground. But the ground is thereby a posited ground, that is, to
the extent that it is ground, to that extent it is sublated as ground and is
immediate being. If, therefore, all the conditions of the fact are at hand, they
sublate themselves as immediate existence and as presupposition, and the
ground is equally sublated. The latter proves to be only a reflective shine
that immediately disappears; this coming forth is thus the tautological
movement of the fact to itself: its mediation through the conditions and
through the ground is the disappearing of both of these. The coming forth
into concrete existence is therefore so immediate, that it is mediated only
by the disappearing of the mediation.
The fact proceeds from the ground. It is not grounded or posited by it in
such a manner that the ground would still stay underneath, as a substrate;
on the contrary, the positing is the outward movement of ground to itself
and the simple disappearing of it. Through its union with the conditions, it
obtains the external immediacy and the moment of being. But it does not
obtain them as a something external, nor by referring to them externally;
rather, as ground it makes itself into a positedness; its simple essentiality
rejoins itself in the positedness and, in this sublating of itself, it is the
disappearing of its difference from its positedness, and is thus simple
essential immediacy. It does not, therefore, linger on as something distinct
from the grounded; on the contrary, the truth of the grounding is that in
grounding the ground unites with itself, and its reflection into another is
consequently its reflection into itself. The fact is thus the unconditioned
and, as such, equally so the groundless; it arises from the ground only in so
far as the latter has foundered and is no longer ground: it rises up from the
groundless, that is, from its own essential negativity or pure form.
This immediacy, mediated by ground and condition and self-identical
through the sublating of mediation, is concrete existence.

11.322

section ii

Appearance

Essence must appear.
Being is the absolute abstraction; this negativity is not something external to it, but being is rather being, and nothing but being, only as this
absolute negativity. Because of this negativity, being is only as self-sublating
being and is essence. But, conversely, essence as simple self-equality is likewise being. The doctrine of being contains the first proposition, “being is
essence.” The second proposition, “essence is being,” constitutes the content of the first section of the doctrine of essence. But this being into which
essence makes itself is essential being, concrete existence,1 a being which has
come forth out of negativity and inwardness.
Thus essence appears. Reflection is the internal shining of essence. The
determinations of this reflection are included in the unity purely and simply
as posited, sublated; or reflection is essence immediately identical with
itself in its positedness. But since this essence is ground, through its selfsublating reflection, or the reflection that which returns into itself, essence
determines itself as something real; further, since this real determination,
or the otherness, of the ground-connection sublates itself in the reflection
of the ground and becomes concrete existence, the form determinations
acquire therein an element of independent subsistence. Their reflective shine
comes to completion in appearance.
The essentiality that has advanced to immediacy is, first, concrete existence,
and a concrete existent or thing – an undifferentiated unity of essence and
its immediacy. The thing indeed contains reflection, but its negativity is
at first dissolved in its immediacy; but, because its ground is essentially
reflection, its immediacy is sublated and the thing makes itself into a
positedness.
Second, then, it is appearance. Appearance is what the thing is in itself, or
the truth of it. But this concrete existence, only posited and reflected into
1

die Existenz.

418

Appearance

419

otherness, is equally the surpassing of itself into its infinity; opposed to the
world of appearance there stands the world that exists in itself reflected into
itself.
But the being that appears and essential being stand referred to each
other absolutely. Thus concrete existence is, third, essential relation; what
appears shows the essential, and the essential is in its appearance. – Relation
is the still incomplete union of reflection into otherness and reflection into
itself; the complete interpenetrating of the two is actuality.

11.324

c h a p ter 1

Concrete existence

11.325

Just as the principle of sufficient reason says that whatever is has a ground,
or is something posited, something mediated, so there would also have to be a
principle of concrete existence saying that whatever is, exists concretely. The
truth of being is to be, not an immediate something, but essence that has
come forth into immediacy.
But when it was further said that whatever exists concretely has a ground
and is conditioned, it also would have had to be said that it has no ground
and is unconditioned. For concrete existence is the immediacy that has come
forth from the sublating of the mediation that results from the connection
of ground and condition, and which, in coming forth, sublates this very
coming forth.
Inasmuch as mention may be made here of the proofs of the concrete
existence2 of God, it is first to be noted that besides immediate being that
comes first, and concrete existence (or the being that proceeds from essence)
that comes second, there is still a third being, one that proceeds from the
concept, and this is objectivity. – Proof is, in general, mediated cognition. The
various kinds of being require or contain each its own kind of mediation,
and so will the nature of the proof also vary accordingly. The ontological
proof wants to start from the concept; it lays down as its basis the sum total
of all realities, where under reality also concrete existence is subsumed. Its
mediation, therefore, is that of the syllogism, and syllogism is not yet under
consideration here. We have already commented above (Part 1, Section 1)3
on Kant’s objection to the ontological proof, and have remarked that by
concrete existence Kant understands the determinate immediate existence
with which something enters into the context of total experience, that is,
into the determination of being an other and of being in reference to an
other. As an existent concrete in this way, something is thus mediated by
2
3

Existenz.
Hegel is referring to the 1812 edition (cf. 11.47ff.). For the corresponding comment in the 1832 edition,
cf. 21.73ff.

420

Concrete existence

421

an other, and concrete existence is in general the side of its mediation. But
in what Kant calls the concept, namely, something taken as only simply
self-referring, or in representation as such, this mediation is missing; in
abstract self-identity, opposition is left out. Now the ontological proof
would have to demonstrate that the absolute concept, namely the concept
of God, attains to a determinate existence, to mediation, or to demonstrate
how simple essence mediates itself with mediation. This is done by the just
mentioned subsumption of concrete existence under its universal, namely
reality, which is assumed as the middle term between God in his concept,
on the one hand, and concrete existence, on the other. – This mediation,
inasmuch as it has the form of a syllogism, is not at issue here, as already
said. However, how that mediation of essence and concrete existence truly
comes about, this is contained in the preceding exposition. The nature of
the proof itself will be considered in the doctrine of cognition. Here we
have only to indicate what pertains to the nature of mediation in general.
The proofs of the existence of God adduce a ground for this existence. It
is not supposed to be an objective ground of the existence of God, for this
existence is in and for itself. It is, therefore, solely a ground for cognition.
It thereby presents itself as a ground that vanishes in the subject matter
that at first seems to be grounded by it. Now the ground which is derived
from the contingency of the world entails the regress of the latter into
the absolute essence, for the accidental is that which is in itself groundless
and self-sublating. In this way, therefore, the absolute essence does indeed
proceed from that which has no ground, for the ground sublates itself and
with this there also vanishes the reflective shine of the relation that was
given to God, that it is grounded in an other. This mediation is therefore
true mediation. But the reflection involved in that proof does not know
the nature of the mediation that it performs. On the one hand, it takes
itself to be something merely subjective, and it consequently distances its
mediation from God himself; on the other hand, for that same reason it
also fails to recognize its mediating movement, that this movement is in
the essence itself and how it is there. The true relation of reflection consists
in being both in one: mediation as such but, of course, at the same time
a subjective, external mediation, that is to say, a self-external mediation
which in turn internally sublates itself. In that other presentation, however,
concrete existence is given the false relation of appearing only as mediated
or posited.
So, on the other side, concrete existence also cannot be regarded merely
as an immediate. Taken in the determination of an immediacy, the comprehension of God’s concrete existence has been declared to be beyond proof,

422
11.326

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

and the knowledge of it an immediate consciousness only, a faith. Knowledge should arrive at the conclusion that it knows nothing, and this means
that it gives up its mediating movement and the determinations themselves
that have come up in the course of it. This is what has also occurred in
the foregoing; but it must be added that reflection, by ending up with the
sublation of itself, does not thereby have nothing for result, so that the
positive knowledge of the essence would then be an immediate reference
to it, divorced from that result and self-originating, an act that starts only
from itself; on the contrary, the end itself, the foundering of the mediation,
is at the same time the ground from which the immediate proceeds. In “zu
Grunde gehen,” the German language unites, as we remarked above,4 the
meaning of foundering and of ground; the essence of God is said to be the
abyss (Abgrund in German) for finite reason. This it is, indeed, in so far as
reason surrenders its finitude therein, and sinks its mediating movement;
but this abyss, the negative ground, is at the same time the positive ground
of the emergence of the existent, of the essence immediate in itself; mediation is an essential moment. Mediation through ground sublates itself but
does not leave the ground standing under it, so that what proceeds from
it would be a posited that has its essence elsewhere; on the contrary, this
ground is, as an abyss, the vanished mediation, and, conversely, only the
vanished mediation is at the same time the ground and, only through this
negation, the self-equal and immediate.
Concrete existence, then, is not to be taken here as a predicate, or as
a determination of essence, of which it could be said in a proposition,
“essence exists concretely,” or “it has concrete existence.” On the contrary,
essence has passed over into concrete existence; concrete existence is the
absolute self-emptying of essence, an emptying that leaves nothing of the
essence behind. The proposition should therefore run: “Essence is concrete
existence; it is not distinct from its concrete existence.” – Essence has
passed over into concrete existence inasmuch as essence as ground no longer
distinguishes itself from itself as grounded, or inasmuch as the ground has
sublated itself. But this negation is no less essentially its position, or the
simply positive continuity with itself; concrete existence is the reflection of
the ground into itself, its self-identity as attained in its negation, therefore
the mediation that has posited itself as identical with itself and through
that is immediacy.
Now because concrete existence is essentially self-identical mediation,
it has the determinations of mediation in it, but in such a way that the
4

Cf. above, 11.283.

Concrete existence

423

determinations are at the same time reflected into themselves and have
essential and immediate subsistence. As an immediacy which is posited
through sublation, concrete existence is negative unity and being-withinitself; it therefore immediately determines itself as a concrete existent and
as thing.
a. the thing and its properties
Concrete existence as a concrete existent is posited in the form of the
negative unity which it essentially is. But this negative unity is at first only
immediate determination, hence the oneness5 of the something in general.
But the concretely existent something is different from the something that
exists immediately. The former is essentially an immediacy that has arisen
through the reflection of mediation into itself. The concretely existent
something is thus a thing.
The thing is distinct from its concrete existence just as the something
can be distinguished from its being. The thing and the concrete existent
are immediately one and the same. But because concrete existence is not
the first immediacy of being but has the moment of mediation within
it, its further determination as thing and the distinguishing of the two is
not a transition but truly an analysis. Concrete existence as such contains
this very distinction in the moment of its mediation: the distinction of
thing-in-itself and external concrete existence.
a. The thing in itself and concrete existence
1. The thing in itself is the concrete existent as the essential immediate that
has resulted from the sublated mediation. Mediation is therefore equally
essential to it; but this distinction in this first or immediate concrete
existence falls apart into indifferent determinations. The one side, namely
the mediation of the thing, is its non-reflected immediacy, and hence its
being in general; and this being, since it is at the same time determined
as mediation, is an existence which is other to itself, manifold and external
within itself. But it is not just immediate existence; it also refers to the
sublated mediation and the essential immediacy; it is therefore immediate
existence as unessential, as positedness. – (When the thing is differentiated
from its concrete existence, it is then the possible, the thing of representation,
or the thing of thought, which as such is at the same time not supposed to
5

das Eins.

11.327

424

11.328

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

exist. However, the determination of possibility and of the opposition of
the thing and its concrete existence comes later.) – But the thing-in-itself
and its mediated being are both contained in the concrete existence, and
both are themselves concrete existences; the thing-in-itself exists concretely
and is the essential concrete existence, but the mediated being is the thing’s
unessential concrete existence.
The thing in itself, as the simple reflectedness of the concrete existence
within itself, is not the ground of unessential existence; it is the unmoved,
indeterminate unity, for it has precisely the determination of being the
sublated mediation, and is therefore the substrate of that existence. For this
reason reflection, too, as an immediate existence which is mediated through
some other, falls outside the thing-in-itself. The latter is not supposed to
have any determinate manifold in it; for this reason it obtains it only when
exposed to external reflection, though it remains indifferent to it. (The thingin-itself has color only when exposed to the eye, smell when exposed to
the nose, and so on.) Its diversity consists of aspects which an other picks
out, specific points of reference which this other assumes with respect to
the thing-in-itself and which are not the thing’s own determinations.
2. Now this other is reflection which, determined as external, is, first,
external to itself and determinate manifoldness. Second, it is external to the
essential concrete existent and refers to it as to its absolute presupposition.
These two moments of external reflection, its own manifoldness and its
reference to the thing-in-itself as its other, are however one and the same.
For this concrete existence is external only in so far as it refers to the
essential identity as to an other. The manifoldness, therefore, does not have
an independent subsistence of its own besides the thing-in-itself but, over
against it, it is rather only as reflective shine; in its necessary reference to it,
it is like a reflex refracting itself in it. Diversity, therefore, is present as the
reference of an other to the thing-in-itself; but this other is nothing that
subsists on its own but is only as reference to the thing-in-itself; but at the
same time it only is in being repelled from it;6 thus it is the unsupported
rebound of itself within itself.7
Now since the thing-in-itself is the essential identity of the concrete
existence, this essenceless reflection does not accrue to it but collapses
within itself externally to it. It founders to the ground and thus itself
comes to be essential identity or thing-in-itself. – This can also be looked
at in this way: the essenceless concrete existence has in the thing-in-itself its
reflection into itself; it refers to it in the first place as to its other; but as the
6

als das Abstossen von diesem.

7

der haltlose Gegenstoß seiner in sich selbst.

Concrete existence

425

other over against that which is in itself, it is only the sublation of its self,
and its coming to be in the in-itself. The thing-in-itself is thus identical
with external concrete existence.
This is exhibited in the thing-in-itself as follows. The thing-in-itself is
self-referring essential concrete existence; it is self-identity only in so far
as it holds negativity’s reflection in itself; that which appeared as concrete
existence external to it is, consequently, a moment in it. It is for this reason
also self-repelling thing-in-itself which thus relates itself to itself as to an
other. Hence, there are now a plurality of things-in-themselves standing
in the reciprocal reference of external reflection. This unessential concrete
existence is their reciprocal relation as others; but it is, further, also essential
to them – or, in other words, this unessential concrete existence, in collapsing internally, is thing-in-itself, but a thing-in-itself which is other than the
first, for that first is immediate essentiality whereas the present proceeds
from the unessential concrete existence. But this other thing-in-itself is
only an other in general; for, as self-identical thing, it has no further determinateness vis-à-vis the first; like the first, it is the reflection within itself
of the unessential concrete existence. The determinateness of the various
things-in-themselves over against one another falls therefore into external
reflection.
3. This external reflection is henceforth a relating of the things-inthemselves to one another, their reciprocal mediation as others. The thingsin-themselves are thus the extreme terms of a syllogism, the middle term of
which is made up by their external concrete existence, the concrete existence
by virtue of which they are other to each other and distinct. This, their
difference, falls only in their connecting reference; they send determinations,
as it were, from their surface into the reference, while remaining themselves
indifferent to it. – This relation now constitutes the totality of the concrete
existence. The thing-in-itself is drawn into a reflection external to it in
which it has a manifold of determinations; this is the repelling of itself
from itself into another thing-in-itself, a repelling which is its rebounding
back into itself, for each thing-in-itself is an other only as reflected back
from the other; it has its supposition not in itself but in the other, is
determined only through the determinateness of the other; this other is
equally determined only through the determinateness of the first. But the
two things-in-themselves, since each has its difference not in it but in
the other, are not therefore distinct things; the thing-in-itself, in relating
as it should to the other extreme as to another thing-in-itself, relates to
it as to something non-distinguished from it, and the external reflection
that should constitute the mediating reference between the extremes is a

11.329

426

11.330

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

relation of the thing-in-itself only to itself, or is essentially its reflection
within itself; the reflection is, therefore, determinateness existing in itself,
or the determinateness of the thing-in-itself. The latter, therefore, does
not have this determinateness in a reference, external to it, to another
thing-in-itself, and of this other to it; the determinateness is not just its
surface but is rather the essential mediation of itself with itself as with an
other. – The two things-in-themselves that should constitute the extremes
of the reference, since they are supposed not to have any contrasting
determinateness, collapse in fact into one; it is only one thing-in-itself that
relates itself to itself in the external reflection, and it is its own reference to
itself as to another that constitutes its determinateness.
This determinateness of the thing-in-itself is the property of the thing.
b. Property
Quality is the immediate determinateness of something; the negative itself
by virtue of which being is something. The property of the thing is, for its
part, the negativity of reflection, by virtue of which concrete existence in
general is a concrete existent and, as simple self-identity, is thing-in-itself.
But the negativity of reflection, the sublated mediation, is itself essentially
mediation and reference, though not to an other in general like quality
which is not reflected determinateness; it is rather reference to itself as to an
other, or mediation which immediately is no less self-identity. The abstract
thing-in-itself is itself this relation which turns from another back to itself;
it is thereby determined in itself; but its determinateness is constitution,
which is as such itself determination, and in relating to the other it does not
pass over into otherness and is excluded from alteration.
A thing has properties; these are, first, its determinate references to something other; the property is there only as a way of reciprocal relating; it is,
therefore, the external reflection of the thing and the side of its positedness.
But, second, in this positedness the thing is in itself; it maintains itself in
its reference to the other and thus is admittedly only a surface where the
concrete existence is exposed to the becoming of being and to alteration;
the property is not lost in this. A thing has the property to effect this or that
in an other, and in this connection to express itself in some characteristic
way. It demonstrates this property only under the condition that another
thing has a corresponding constitution, but at the same time the property
is characteristically the thing’s own and its self-identical substrate; for this
reason this reflected quality is called property. The thing thereby passes
over into an externality, but the property maintains itself in this transition.

Concrete existence

427

Through its properties the thing becomes cause, and to be a cause is this,
to preserve itself as effect. However, the thing is here still the static thing
of many properties; it is not yet determined as actual cause; it is so far only
the reflection of its determinations immediately existing in itself, not yet
itself the reflection that posits them.
Essentially, therefore, the thing-in-itself has just shown itself to be thingin-itself not only in such a way that its properties are the positedness
of an external reflection; on the contrary, those properties are its own
determinations by virtue of which it relates in some determinate manner;
it is not an indeterminate substrate located on the other side of its external
concrete existence but is present in its properties rather as ground, that
is to say, it is self-identity in its positedness; but, at the same time, it
is conditioned ground, that is to say, its positedness is equally reflection
external to itself; it is reflected into itself and in itself only to the extent
that it is external. – Through concrete existence the thing-in-itself enters
into external references, and the concrete existence consists precisely in this
externality; it is the immediacy of being and because of that the thing is
subjected to alteration; but it is also the reflected immediacy of the ground,
hence the thing in itself in its alteration. – This mention of the groundconnection is not however to be taken here as if the thing in general were
determined as the ground of its properties; thinghood itself is, as such,
the ground-connection; the property is not distinguished from its ground,
nor does it constitute just the positedness but is rather the ground that has
passed over into its externality and is consequently truly reflected into itself;
the property is itself, as such, the ground, implicitly existent positedness;
it is the ground, in other words, that constitutes the form of the property’s
identity, and the property’s determinateness is the self-external reflection of
the ground; the whole is the ground which in its repelling and determining,
in its external immediacy, refers itself to itself. – The thing-in-itself thus
concretely exists essentially, and that it concretely exists essentially means,
conversely, that concrete existence, as external immediacy, is at the same
time in-itselfness.
Remark
Mention was already made above (Section 1, p. 64)8 of the thing-in-itself
in connection with the moment of immediate existence,9 of being-initself, and it was then remarked that the thing-in-itself is as such nothing
8
9

Hegel is referring to the 1812 edition, as in GW 11, 59ff., especially 69ff. The parallel, but by no
means identical, section in the 1832 edition is in 21.105ff.
i.e. Dasein.

11.331

428

11.332

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

but the empty abstraction of all determinateness, of which nothing can of
course be known just because it is supposed to be the abstraction of all
determination. – Once the thing-in-itself has been presupposed in this
way, all determination falls outside it into an alien reflection to which it is
indifferent. For transcendental idealism, this external reflection is consciousness. Now on this standpoint, because this philosophical system relegates
to consciousness every determinateness of things, both according to form
and content, it falls in me, in the subject, whether I see the leaves of a
tree not as black but green, the sun as round and not square, whether
I taste sugar as sweet and not bitter; or again, whether I determine that
the first and the second stroke of a clock are successive and not simultaneous, or that the first is cause and not effect, etc. – This crude display
of subjective idealism is directly contradicted by the consciousness of the
freedom in accordance with which I know myself as rather the universal
and indeterminate, and I separate off from myself those manifold and necessary determinations, recognizing them to be something external to me
and pertaining only to things. – In this consciousness of its freedom the
“I” is to itself the true internally reflected identity which the thing-in-itself
was supposed to be. – I have shown elsewhere10 that that transcendental
idealism does not escape from the restriction of the “I” by the object; in
general, that it does not escape from the finite world, but that it only alters
the form of the restriction, which remains absolute to it. This it does by
simply transposing it from an objective to a subjective shape; by turning
it into determinacies of the “I,” into an unruly alternation of these that
occurs within the “I” as if this were a thing, the kind of thing which
for ordinary consciousness is a manifold of determinacies and alterations
only pertaining to things outside it. – In the present treatment, only the
thing-in-itself and the reflection at first external to it stand opposed; the
latter has not yet determined itself as consciousness, nor the thing-in-itself
as “I.” What has resulted from the nature of the thing-in-itself and of the
external reflection is that this same externality determines itself to be the
thing-in-itself, or, conversely, that it becomes the determination belonging
to that first thing-in-itself. The inadequacy now of the standpoint at which
that philosophy remains fixed consists essentially in its holding on to the
abstract thing-in-itself as to an ultimate determination, or in opposing the
determinateness and manifoldness of the properties to the thing-in-itself,
whereas the latter in fact possesses that external reflection essentially within
it and determines itself as one endowed with determinations that are its
10

Hegel is referring to the 1812 edition. Cf. GW 11, 18. Cf. 21.31.

Concrete existence

429

own, with properties, in this way demonstrating that the abstraction of the
thing as a pure thing-in-itself is an untrue determination.

c. The reciprocal action of things
The thing-in-itself exists in concreto by essence; external immediacy and
determinateness belong to its being-in-itself, or to its immanent reflection.
The thing in-itself is thus a thing that has properties, and hence there are a
number of things distinct from one another, not because of some viewpoint
alien to them but through themselves. These many diverse things stand in
essential reciprocal action by virtue of their properties; the property is
this reciprocal connecting reference itself, apart from which the thing is
nothing; the reciprocal determination, the middle term of the thingsin-themselves that are taken as extreme terms indifferent to the reference
connecting them, is itself the self-identical reflection and the thing-in-itself
which those extremes were supposed to be. Thinghood is thus reduced to
the form of indeterminate self-identity having its essentiality only in its
property. Thus, if one speaks of a thing or of things in general without a
determinate property, then their difference is merely indifferent, quantitative. What is considered as a thing can just as well be made into a plurality
of things or be considered as a plurality of things; their separation or their
union is an external one. – A book is a thing, and each of its pages is also a
thing, and equally so every tiny piece of its pages, and so on to infinity. The
determinateness, in virtue of which a thing is this thing only, lies solely in its
properties. It is through them that the thing differentiates itself from other
things, for the property is the negative reflection and the differentiating;
only in its property, therefore, does the thing possess in it the difference
of itself from others. This is the difference reflected into itself, by virtue
of which the thing, in its positedness, that is, in its reference to others,
is equally indifferent to the other and to its reference to it. Without its
properties, therefore, there is nothing that remains to the thing except the
unessential compass and the external gathering of an abstract in-itselfness.
With this, thinghood has passed over into property.
The thing, as the extreme term that exists in itself, was supposed to relate
to the property, and this property to constitute the middle term between
things that stand connected. But this connection is where the things meet
as self-repelling reflection, where they are distinguished and connected. This,
their distinction and their connecting reference, is one reflection and one
continuity of both. Accordingly, the things themselves fall only within this

11.333

430

11.334

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

continuity which is the property; they vanish as would-be self-subsisting
extremes that would have a concrete existence outside this property.
The property, which was supposed to connect the self-subsisting extremes,
is therefore itself self-subsistent. The things are, on the contrary, the unessential. They are something essential only as the self-differentiating and selfreferring reflection; but this is the property. The latter is in the thing,
therefore, not as something sublated, not just a moment of it; on the contrary, the truth of the thing is that it is only an unessential compass which
is indeed a negative unity, but only like the one of the something, that
is to say, a one which is immediate. Whereas earlier the thing was determined as an unessential compass because it was made such by an external
abstraction that omits the property, this abstraction now happens through
the transition of the thing-in-itself into the property itself. But there is
now an inversion of values, for the earlier abstraction still envisaged the
abstract thing without its property as being the essential, and the property
as an external determination, whereas it is the thing as such which is now
reduced, through itself, to the determination of an indifferent external form
of the property. – The latter is henceforth thus freed of the indeterminate
and impotent bond which is the unity of the thing; the property is what
constitutes the subsistence of the thing; it is a self-subsisting matter. – Since
this matter is simple continuity with itself, it only possesses at first the form
of diversity. There is, therefore, a manifold of these self-subsisting matters,
and the thing consists of them.
b. the constitution of the thing out of matters
The transition of property into a matter or into a self-subsistent stuff is
the familiar transition performed on sensible matter by chemistry when
it seeks to represent the properties of color, smell, etc., as luminous matter,
coloring matter, odorific matter, sour, bitter matter and so on; or when it
simply assumes others, like calorific matter, electrical, magnetic matter, in
the conviction that it has thereby gotten hold of properties as they truly
are. – Equally current is the saying that things consist of various matters
or stuffs. One is careful about calling these matters or stuffs “things,” even
though one will readily admit that, for example, a pigment is a thing; but
I do not know whether luminous matter, for instance, or calorific matter,
or electrical matter, etc., are called things. The distinction is made between
things and their components without any exact statement as to whether
these components also, and to what extent, are things or perhaps just
half-things; but they are at least concretes in general.

Concrete existence

431

The necessity of making the transition from properties to matters, or of
assuming that the properties are truly matters, has resulted from the fact
that they are what is the essential in things and consequently their true
self-subsistence. – At the same time, however, the reflection of the property
into itself constitutes only one side of the whole reflection, namely the
sublation of the distinction and the continuity of the property (which was
supposed to be a concrete existence for an other) with itself. Thinghood,
as immanent negative reflection and as a distinguishing that repels itself
from the other, has consequently been reduced to an unessential moment;
at the same time, however, it has further determined itself. First, this
negative moment has preserved itself, for property has become a matter
continuous with itself and self-subsisting only inasmuch as the difference
of things has sublated itself; thus the continuity of the property in the
otherness itself contains the moment of the negative, and, as this negative
unity, its self-subsistence is at the same time the restored something of
thinghood, negative self-subsistence versus the positive self-subsistence of
the stuff. Second, the thing has thereby progressed from its indeterminacy
to full determinateness. As thing in itself, it is abstract identity, simple
negative concrete existence, or this concrete existence determined as the
indeterminate; it is then determined through its properties, by virtue of
which it is supposed to be distinguished from other things; but, since
through the property the thing is rather continuous with other things, this
imperfect distinction is sublated; the thing has thereby returned into itself
and is now determined as determined; it is determined in itself or is this
thing. –
But, third, this turning back into itself, though a self-referring determination, is at the same time an unessential determination; the selfcontinuous subsistence makes up the self-subsistent matter in which the
difference of things, their determinateness existing in and for itself, is sublated and is something external. Therefore, although the thing as this thing
is complete determinateness, this determinateness is such in the element of
inessentiality.
Considered from the side of the movement of the property, this result
follows in this way. The property is not only external determination but
concrete existence immediately existing in itself. This unity of externality and
essentiality repels itself from itself, for it contains reflection-into-itself and
reflection-into-other, and, on the one hand, it is determination as simple,
self-identical and self-referring self-subsistent in which the negative unity,
the one of the thing, is sublated; on the other hand, it is this determination
over against an other, but likewise as a one which is reflected into itself

11.335

432

11.336

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

and is determined in itself; it is, therefore, the matters and this thing. These
are the two moments of self-identical externality, or of property reflected
into itself. – The property was that by which things were supposed to be
distinguished. Since the thing has freed itself of its negative side of inhering
in an other, it has thereby also become free from its being determined by
other things and has returned into itself from the reference connecting
it to the other. At the same time, however, it is only the thing-in-itself
now become the other of itself, for the manifold properties on their part
have become self-subsistent and their negative connection in the one of
the thing is now only a sublated connection. Consequently, the thing
is self-identical negation only as against the positive continuity of the
material.
The “this” thus constitutes the complete determinateness of the thing,
a determinateness which is at the same time an external determinateness.
The thing consists of self-subsistent matters indifferent to the connection
they have in the thing. This connection is therefore only an unessential
linking of them, the difference of one thing from another depending on
whether there is in it a more or less of particular matters and in what
amount. These matters overrun this thing, continue into others, and that
they belong to this thing is no restriction for them. Just as little are they,
moreover, a restriction for one another, for their negative connection is
only the impotent “this.” Hence, in being linked together in it, they do
not sublate themselves; they are as self-subsistent, impenetrable to each
other; in their determinateness they refer only to themselves and are a
mutually indifferent manifold of subsistence; the only limit of which they
are capable is a quantitative one. – The thing as this is just their merely
quantitative connection, a mere collection, their “also.” The thing consists
of some quantum or other of a matter, also of the quantum of another,
and also of yet another; this combination, of not having any combination
alone constitutes the thing.
c. dissolution of the thing
This thing, in the manner it has determined itself as the merely quantitative
combination of free matters, is the absolutely alterable. Its alteration consists in one or more matters being dropped from the collection, or being
added to this “also,” or in the rearrangement of the matters’ respective
quantitative ratio. The coming-to-be and the passing-away of this thing is
the external dissolution of such an external bond, or the binding of such for
which it is indifferent whether they are bound or not. The stuffs circulate

Concrete existence

433

unchecked in or out of “this” thing, and the thing itself is absolute porosity
without measure or form of its own.
So the thing, in the absolute determinateness through which it is a “this,”
is the absolutely dissoluble thing. This dissolution is an external process of
being determined, just like the being of the thing; but its dissolution and
the externality of its being is the essential of this being; the thing is only the
“also”; it consists only of this externality. But it consists also of its matters,
and not just the abstract “this” as such but the “this” thing whole is the
dissolution of itself. For the thing is determined as an external collection
of self-subsisting matters; such matters are not things, they lack negative
self-subsistence; it is the properties which are rather self-subsistent, that is
to say, are determined with a being which, as such, is reflected into itself.
Hence the matters are indeed simple, referring only to themselves; but it is
their content which is a determinateness; the immanent reflection is only the
form of this content, a content which is not, as such, reflected-into-itself
but refers to an other according to its determinateness. The thing, therefore,
is not only their “also,” is not their reference to each other as indifferent
but is, on the contrary, equally so their negative reference; and on account
of their determinateness the matters are themselves this negative reflection
which is the puncticity11 of the thing. The one matter is not what the other
is according to the determinateness of its content as contrasted to that of
an other; and the one is not to the extent that the other is, in accordance
with their self-subsistence.
The thing is, therefore, the connecting reference of the matters of which
it consists to each other, in such a manner that the one matter, and the other
also, subsist in it, and yet, at the same time, the one matter does not subsist
in it in so far as the other does. To the extent, therefore, that the one matter
is in the thing, the other is thereby sublated; but the thing is at the same
time the “also,” or the subsistence of the other matter. In the subsistence
of the one matter, therefore, the other matter does not subsist, and it also
no less subsists in it; and so with all these diverse matters in respect to each
other. Since it is thus in the same respect as the one matter subsists that the
other subsists also, and this one subsistence of both is the puncticity or
the negative unity of the thing, the two interpenetrate absolutely; and since
the thing is at the same time only the “also” of the matters, and these are
reflected into their determinateness, they are indifferent to one another, and
in interpenetrating they do not touch. The matters are, therefore, essentially
porous, so that the one subsists in the pores or in the non-subsistence of
11

Punctualität.

11.337

434

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the others; but these others are themselves porous; in their pores or their
non-subsistence the first and also all the rest subsist; their subsistence is
at the same time their sublatedness and the subsistence of others; and
this subsistence of the others is just as much their sublatedness and the
subsisting of the first and equally so of all others. The thing is, therefore,
the self-contradictory mediation of independent self-subsistence through
its opposite, that is to say, through its negation, or of one self-subsisting
matter through the subsisting and non-subsisting of an other. – In “this”
thing, concrete existence has attained its completion, namely, that it is at
once being that exists in itself, or independent subsistence, and unessential
concrete existence. The truth of concrete existence is thus this: that it has
its in-itself in unessentiality, or that it subsists in an other, indeed in the
absolute other, or that it has its own nothingness for substrate. It is, therefore,
appearance.

11.338

Remark
It is one of the commonest assumptions of ordinary thinking that a thing
consists of many self-subsisting matters. On the one hand, the thing is treated
as having properties; the thing is their substance. But, on the other hand,
these different determinations are regarded as matters, and their subsistence
is not the thing; on the contrary, the converse is the case; it is the thing
rather that consists of them and is itself only their external bond and
quantitative limit. Both the properties and the matters are the same content
determinations, except that in the former case these determinations are
moments reflected into their negative unity which is a substrate distinct
from them, the thinghood; whereas in the latter case, they are a variety of
self-subsistent matters, each reflected into its own self-unity. These matters
are now further determined as independent subsistence; but they are also
together in a thing. This thing has the two determinations, first, of being a
“this,” and, second, of being the “also.” The “also” is represented in external
intuition as spatial extension; the “this,” the negative unity, is instead the
puncticity of the thing. The matters are together in this puncticity, and
their “also” or their extension is everywhere this puncticity; for the “also,”
as thinghood, is essentially determined also as negative unity. Therefore,
where one of these matters is, in that one and same point the other is; the
thing does not have its color in one place, its aroma in another, its heat in a
third, and so forth, but at the point where it is warm, there it is also colored,
sour, electric, and so forth. Now because these stuffs are not outside one
another but are in one “this,” they are assumed as porous, so that one stuff
concretely exists in the interstices of an other. But the one that occupies

Concrete existence

435

the interstices of the other is itself porous; conversely, therefore, the other
concretely exists in its pores; and this applies not just to this second stuff,
but to a third also, a tenth, and so forth. They are all porous, and in the
interstices of each all the others are present, just as each is present with
the rest in the pores of every other. They are, therefore, an aggregate of
matters that interpenetrates one another in such a way that in penetrating
the others each is equally penetrated by them, so that each again penetrates
its own penetratedness. Each is posited as its negation, and this negation is
the subsistence of an other; but this subsistence is just as much the negation
of this other and the subsistence of the first.
The well-known common excuse by which ordinary thinking evades the
contradiction of an independent subsistence of many matters in one thing,
or of the reciprocal indifference of these matter in their interpenetration, is
that the parts and the pores are very small. Where the difference-in-itself,
the contradiction and the negation of negation, comes into play; where
it ought to be conceptualized as such, ordinary thinking falls back upon
external, quantitative difference; where coming-to-be and passing-away are
concerned, it takes refuge in gradualness, and, where being is the issue, in a
smallness in which disappearing is reduced to imperceptibility, contradiction
to a matter of confusion, and true relation is played out in the medium of
vague representation, the obscurity of which rescues the self-sublation of
the relation.
But when light is shone on this obscurity, it proves to be a contradiction
(both subjective on the part of the representation and objective on the part
of the subject matter), the elements of which are completely contained
in pictorial representation itself. The latter runs into contradiction from
the start for wanting, on the one hand, to hold on to perception and have
before it things that have real being, and, on the other hand, for ascribing
sensible existence to imperceptible things that are determined through
reflection; the minute parts and the pores are at the same time supposed
to be a sensible existence and their positedness is spoken of as if it were
the same as the reality which belongs to color, heat, etc. If representation
were to consider this objective fog more closely, the pores and the minute
parts, it would discover in them not just a matter and also the negation
of it – so that matter would be here and its negation next to it; the pore
and next to it matter again, and so forth – but that in “this” thing it has,
in one and the same point, (1) the self-subsistent matter, (2) its negation or
porosity and the other self-subsistent matter, and that this porosity and
the independent subsistence of the matters in one another as in one single
point is a reciprocal negation and a penetration of the penetration. – Recent

11.339

436

11.340

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

accounts of physics regarding the expansion of steam in atmospheric air
and of various kinds of gases in one another bring out with greater precision
one side of the concept concerning the nature of a thing that has here come
to view. They show, namely, that for example a certain volume holds just as
much steam whether empty or full of atmospheric air; also that the various
gases expand into one another in such a way that each is for the other as
good as a vacuum, at least that they are not in any chemical bonding with
each other, each remains continuous with itself, uninterrupted by the other,
and in penetrating the others it remains itself indifferent to them. – But the
further moment in the concept of a thing is that in the “this” one matter
is present where another matter is, and that the penetrating matter is also
penetrated at the same point, or that the self-subsistent is immediately the
self-subsistence of an other. This is contradictory. But the thing is nothing
else but this contradiction itself; that is why it is appearance.
We find in the spiritual realm a situation similar to that of these matters,
in the conception of forces or faculties of the soul. Spirit is a “this,” the
negative unity in which its determinations interpenetrate, in a much more
profound sense. But represented as soul, it is commonly taken as a thing.
Just as the human being in general is made to consist of soul and body, each
of which is taken as something subsisting on its own, so also the soul is made
to consist of so-called soul-forces, each of which has a self-subsistence of its
own, or is an activity with direct effects specifically its own. The assumption
is that the understanding operates on its own here, the imagination there;
that one can cultivate the understanding, the memory, etc., each for itself,
leaving the others aside for the time being until, perhaps, their turn comes
up, or perhaps not. Although the faculties, since they are transposed into
a materially simple soul-thing which as simple is allegedly immaterial, are
not portrayed as particular matters, as forces they are nevertheless equally
assumed to be indifferent to one another, just like those matters. But spirit is
not the contradiction that the thing is, which dissolves itself and passes over
into appearance. Rather, it already is within it the contradiction that has
returned into its absolute unity, namely into the concept; the differences
are no longer to be thought in it as self-subsistent but only as particular
moments in the subject, the simple individuality.

ch a p ter 2

Appearance

Concrete existence is the immediacy of being to which essence has again
restored itself. In itself this immediacy is the reflection of essence into itself.
As concrete existence, essence has stepped out of its ground which has itself
passed over into it. Concrete existence is this reflected immediacy in so far
as, within, it is absolute negativity. It is now also posited as such, in that it
has determined itself as appearance.
At first, therefore, appearance is essence in its concrete existence; essence
is immediately present in it. That it is not immediate, but rather reflected
concrete existence, constitutes the moment of essence in it; or concrete
existence, as essential concrete existence, is appearance.
Something is only appearance – in the sense that concrete existence is
as such only a posited being, not something that is in- and for-itself. This
is what constitutes its essentiality, to have the negativity of reflection, the
nature of essence, within it. There is no question here of an alien, external
reflection to which essence would belong and which, by comparing this
essence with concrete existence, would declare the latter to be appearance.
On the contrary, as we have seen,12 this essentiality of concrete existence,
that it is appearance, is concrete existence’s own truth. The reflection by
virtue of which it is this is its own.
But if it is said that something is only appearance, meaning that as
contrasted with it immediate concrete existence is the truth, then the fact is
that appearance is the higher truth, for it is concrete existence as essential,
whereas concrete existence is appearance that is still void of essence because
it only contains in it the one moment of appearance, namely that of concrete
existence as immediate, not yet negative, reflection. When appearance is
said to be essenceless, one thinks of the moment of its negativity as if,
by contrast with it, the immediate were the positive and the true; in
fact, however, this immediate does not yet contain essential truth in it.
12

Cf. above, 11.337.

437

11.341

438

11.342

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Concrete existence rather ceases to be essenceless by passing over into
appearance.
Essence reflectively shines at first just within, in its simple identity; as such,
it is abstract reflection, the pure movement of nothing through nothing
back to itself. Essence appears, and so it now is real shine, since the moments
of the shine have concrete existence. Appearance, as we have seen,13 is the
thing as the negative mediation of itself with itself; the differences which it
contains are self-subsisting matters which are the contradiction of being an
immediate subsistence, yet of obtaining their subsistence only in an alien
self-subsistence, hence in the negation of their own, but then again, just
because of that, also in the negation of that alien self-subsistence or in the
negation of their own negation. Reflective shine is this same mediation,
but its fleeting moments obtain in appearance the shape of immediate
self-subsistence. On the other hand, the immediate self-subsistence which
pertains to concrete existence is reduced to a moment. Appearance is
therefore the unity of reflective shine and concrete existence.
Appearance now determines itself further. It is concrete existence as
essential; as essential, concrete existence differs from the concrete existence
which is unessential, and these two sides refer to each other. – Appearance
is, therefore, first, simple self-identity which also contains diverse content determinations and, both as identity and as the connecting reference
of these determinations, is that which remains self-equal in the flux of
appearance; this is the law of appearance.
But, second, the law which is simple in its diversity passes over into opposition; the essential moment of appearance becomes opposed to appearance
itself and, confronting the world of appearance, the world that exists in itself
comes onto the scene.
Third, this opposition returns into its ground; that which is in itself is in
the appearance and, conversely, that which appears is determined as taken
up into its being-in-itself. Appearance becomes relation.
a. the law of appearance
1. Appearance is the concrete existent mediated through its negation,
which constitutes its subsistence. This, its negation, is indeed another selfsubsistent; but the latter is just as essentially something sublated. The concrete existent is consequently the turning back of itself into itself through
its negation and through the negation of this negation; it has, therefore,
13

Cf. above, 11.337.

Appearance

439

essential self-subsistence, just as it is equally immediately an absolute positedness that has a ground and an other for its subsistence. – In the first place,
therefore, appearance is concrete existence along with its essentiality, the
positedness along with its ground; but this ground is the negation, and the
other self-subsistent, the ground of the first, is equally only a positedness.
Or the concrete existent is, as an appearance, reflected into an other and has
this other for its ground, and this ground is itself only this, to be reflected
into another. The essential self-subsistence that belongs to it because it is a
turning back into itself is, for the sake of the negativity of the moments,
the return of nothing through nothing back to itself; the self-subsistence
of the concrete existent is therefore only the reflective shine of essence. The
linkage of the reciprocally grounding concrete existents consists, therefore,
in this reciprocal negation, namely that the subsistence of the one is not
the subsistence of the other but is its positedness, where this connection of
positedness alone constitutes their subsistence. The ground is present as it
is in truth, namely as being a first which is only a presupposed.
This now constitutes the negative side of appearance. In this negative
mediation, however, there is immediately contained the positive identity of
the concrete existent with itself. For this concrete existent is not positedness
vis-à-vis an essential ground, or is not the reflective shine in a self-subsistent, but
is rather positedness that refers itself to a positedness, or a reflective shine only in
a reflective shine. In this, its negation, or in its other which is itself something
sublated, it refers to itself and is thus self-identical or positive essentiality. –
This identity is not the immediacy that pertains to concrete existence as
such and only is its unessential moment of subsisting in an other. It is
rather the essential content of appearance which has two sides: first, to be in
the form of positedness or external immediacy; second, to be positedness as
self-identical. According to the first side, it is as a determinate being, but
one which in keeping with its immediacy is accidental, unessential, and
subject to transition, to coming-to-be and passing-away. According to the
other side, it is the simple content determination exempted from that flux,
the permanent element in it.
This content, besides being in general the simple element of the transient,
is also a determined content, varied in itself. It is the reflection of appearance, of the negative determinate being, into itself, and therefore contains
determinateness essentially. Appearance is however the multifarious diversity of immediately existing beings that revels in unessential manifoldness;
its reflected content, on the other hand, is its manifoldness reduced to
simple difference. Or, more precisely, the determinate essential content is
not just determined in general but, as the essential element of appearance,

11.343

440

11.344

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is complete determinateness; the one and its other. Each of these two has
in appearance its subsistence in the other, but in such a way that it is at
the same time only in the other’s non-subsistence. This contradiction sublates itself; and its reflection into itself is the identity of their two-sided
subsistence, namely that the positedness of the one is also the positedness of
the other. The two constitute one subsistence, each at the same time as a
different content indifferent to the other. In the essential side of appearance, the negativity of the unessential content, that it sublates itself, has
thus gone back into identity; it is an indifferent subsistence which is not the
sublatedness of the other but rather its subsistence.
This unity is the law of appearance.
2. The law is thus the positive element of the mediation of what appears.
Appearance is at first concrete existence as negative self-mediation, so that
the concrete existent, through its own non-subsistence, through an other
and again through the non-subsistence of this other, is mediated with itself.
In this there is contained, first, the merely reflective shining and the disappearing of both, the unessential appearance; second, also the persistence or
the law; for each of the two concretely exists in the sublation of the other,
and their positedness is as their negativity at the same time the identical
positive positedness of both.
This permanent subsistence which appearance obtains in the law is
thus, as it has determined itself, first, opposed to the immediacy of the
being which concrete existence has. This immediacy is indeed one which is
in itself reflected, namely the ground that has gone back into itself; but in
appearance this simple immediacy is now distinguished from the reflected
immediacy that first began to separate itself in the “thing.” The concretely
existing thing in its dissolution has become this opposition; the positive element of its dissolution is the said self-identity of what appears, a positedness
in the positedness of its other. – Second, this reflected immediacy is itself
determined as positedness over against the immediate determinate being of
concrete existence. This positedness is henceforth what is essential and the
true positive. The German expression Gesetz [law] likewise contains this
note of positedness or Gesetztsein. In this positedness there lies the essential
connection of the two sides of the difference that the law contains; they
are a diverse content, each immediate with respect to the other, and they
are this as the reflection of the disappearing content belonging to appearance. As essential difference, the different sides are simple, self-referring
determinations of content. But just as equally, neither is immediate, just
for itself, but is rather essential positedness, or is only to the extent that the
other is.

Appearance

441

Third, appearance and law have one and the same content. The law is
the reflection of appearance into self-identity; appearance, as an immediate
which is null, thus stands opposed to that which is immanently reflected,
and the two are distinguished according to form. But the reflection of
appearance by virtue of which this difference is, is also the essential identity
of appearance itself and its reflection, and this is in general the nature of
reflection; it is what in the positedness is self-identical and indifferent to
that difference, which is form or positedness – hence a content continuous
from appearance to law, the content of the law and of the appearance.
This content thus constitutes the substrate of appearance; the law is this
substrate itself, appearance is the same content but contains still more,
namely the unessential content of its immediate being. And so is also
the form determination by which appearance as such is distinguished
from the law, namely a content and equally a content distinguished from
the content of the law. For concrete existence, as immediacy in general,
is likewise a self-identity of matter and form which is indifferent to its
form determinations and is, therefore, a content; the concrete existence
is the thinghood with its properties and matters. But it is the content
whose self-subsisting immediacy is at the same time also only a nonsubsistence. But the self-identity of the content in this its non-subsistence
is the other, essential content. This identity, the substrate of appearance,
which constitutes law, is appearances’s own moment; it is the positive side
of the essentiality by virtue of which concrete existence is appearance.
The law, therefore, is not beyond appearance but is immediately present
in it; the kingdom of laws is the restful copy of the concretely existing
or appearing world. But, more to the point, the two are one totality, and
the concretely existing world is itself the kingdom of laws which, simple
identity, is at the same time self-identical in the positedness or in the selfdissolving self-subsistence of concrete existence. In the law, concrete existence returns to its ground; appearance contains both of these, the simple
ground and the dissolving movement of the appearing universe, of which
the law is the essentiality.
3. The law is therefore the essential appearance; it is the latter’s reflection
into itself in its positedness, the identical content of itself and the unessential
concrete existence. In the first place, this identity of the law with its concrete
existence is now, to start with, immediate, simple identity, and the law
is indifferent with respect to its concrete existence; appearance still has
another content as contrasted with the content of the law. That content
is indeed the unessential one and the return into the latter; but for the
law it is an original starting point not posited by it; as content, therefore,

11.345

442

11.346

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

it is externally bound up with the law. Appearance is an aggregate of more
detailed determinations that belong to the “this” or the concrete, and are
not contained in the law but are rather determined each by an other. –
Secondly, that which appearance contains distinct from the law determined
itself as something positive or as another content; but it is essentially a
negative; it is the form and its movement is a movement that belongs to
appearance. The kingdom of laws is the restful content of appearance; the
latter is this same content but displayed in restless flux and as reflection-intoother. It is the law as negative, relentlessly self-mutating concrete existence,
the movement of the passing over into the opposite, of self-sublation and
return into unity. This side of the restless form or of the negativity does
not contain the law; as against the law, therefore, appearance is the totality,
for it contains the law but more yet, namely the moment of the selfmoving form. – Thirdly, this shortcoming is manifested in the law in
the mere diversity at first, and the consequent internal indifference, of its
content; the identity of its sides with one another is at first, therefore, only
immediate and hence inner, not yet necessary in other words. In a law
two content determinations are essentially bound together (for instance,
spatial and temporal magnitudes in the law of falling bodies: the traversed
spaces vary as the squares of the elapsed times); they are bound together;
this connection is at first only an immediate one. At first, therefore, it
is likewise only a posited connection, just as the immediate has obtained
in appearance the meaning of positedness in general. The essential unity
of the two sides of the law would be their negativity, namely that each
contains the other in it; but in the law this essential unity has not yet come
the fore. (Thus it is not contained in the concept of the space traversed by
a falling body that time corresponds to it as a square. Because the falling is
a sensible movement, it is the ratio of space and time; but first, that time
refers to space and space to time does not lie in the determination of time
itself, that is to say, in time as ordinarily represented; it is said that time can
very well be represented without space and space without time; the one
thus comes to the other externally, and their external reference to each
other is movement. Second, the more particular determination of how the
magnitudes further relate to each other in movement is indifferent. The
relevant law here is drawn from experience and is to this extent immediate;
there is still required a proof, that is, a mediation, in order to know that the
law not only occurs but is necessary; the law as such does not contain this
proof and its objective necessity.) The law is, therefore, only the positive
essentiality of appearance, not its negative essentiality according to which
the content determinations are moments of the form, as such pass over

Appearance

443

into their other and are in their own selves not themselves but their other.
In the law, therefore, although the positedness of the one side of it is the
positedness of the other side, the content of the two sides is indifferent to
this connection; it does not contain this positedness in it. Law, therefore,
is indeed essential form, but not as yet real form which is reflected into its
sides as content.

11.347

b. the world of appearance and the world-in-itself
1. The concrete existing world tranquilly raises itself to a kingdom of laws;
the null content of its manifold determinate being has its subsistence in
an other; its subsistence is therefore its dissolution. In this other, however,
that which appears also comes to itself; thus appearance is in its changing
also an enduring, and its positedness is law. Law is this simple identity of
appearance with itself; it is, therefore, its substrate and not its ground, for
it is not the negative unity of appearance but, as its simple identity, is its
immediate unity – the abstract unity, alongside which, therefore, its other
content also occurs. The content is this content; it holds together internally,
or has its negative reflection inside itself. It is reflected into an other; this
other is itself a concrete existence of appearance; the appearing things have
their grounds and conditions in other appearing things.
In fact, however, law is also the other of appearance as appearance, and its
negative reflection as in its other. The content of appearance, which differs
from the content of law, is the concrete existent which has negativity for
its ground or is reflected into its non-being. But this other, which is also a
concrete existent, is such an existent as likewise reflected into its non-being;
it is thus the same and that which appears in it is in fact reflected not into
an other but into itself; it is this very reflection of positedness into itself
which is law. But as something that appears it is essentially reflected into its
non-being, or its identity is itself essentially just as much its negativity and
its other. The immanent reflection of appearance, law, is therefore not only
the identical substrate of appearance but the latter has in law its opposite,
and law is its negative unity.
Now through this, the determination of law has been altered within the
law itself. At first, law is only a diversified content and the formal reflection
of positedness into itself, so that the positedness of one of its sides is the
positedness of the other side. But because it is also the negative reflection
into itself, its sides behave not only as different but as negatively referring
to each other. – Or, if the law is considered just for itself, the sides of its
content are indifferent to each other; but they are no less sublated through

11.348

444

11.349

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

their identity; the positedness of the one is the positedness of the other;
consequently, the subsistence of each is also the non-subsistence of itself.
This positedness of the one side in the other is their negative unity, and
each positedness is not only the positedness of that side but also of the other, or
each side is itself this negative unity. The positive identity which they have
in the law as such is at first only their inner unity which stands in need of
proof and mediation, since this negative unity is not yet posited in them.
But since the different sides of law are now determined as being different
in their negative unity, or as being such that each contains the other within
while at the same time repelling this otherness from itself, the identity of
law is now also one which is posited and real.
Consequently, law has likewise obtained the missing moment of the
negative form of its sides, the moment that previously still belonged to
appearance; concrete existence has thereby returned into itself fully and
has reflected itself into its absolute otherness which has determinate being
in- and for-itself. That which was previously law, therefore, is no longer
only one side of the whole. It is the essential totality of appearance, so
that it now obtains also the moment of unessentiality that belonged to the
latter – but as reflected unessentiality that has determinate being in itself,
that is, as essential negativity. – As immediate content, law is determined
in general, distinguished from other laws, of which there is an indeterminate multitude. But because now it explicitly is essential negativity, it no
longer contains that merely indifferent, accidental content determination;
its content is rather every determinateness in general, essentially connected
together in a totalizing connection. Thus appearance reflected-into-itself is
now a world that discloses itself above the world of appearance as one which
is in and for itself.
The kingdom of laws contains only the simple, unchanging but diversified content of the concretely existing world. But because it is now the
total reflection of this world, it also contains the moment of its essenceless
manifoldness. This moment of alterability and alteration, reflected into
itself and essential, is the absolute negativity or the form in general as such:
its moments, however, have the reality of self-subsisting but reflected concrete existence in the world that has determinate being in- and for-itself,
just as, conversely, this reflected self-subsistence has form in it, and its content is therefore not a mere manifold but a content holding itself together
essentially.
– This world which is in and for itself is also called the suprasensible
world, inasmuch as the concretely existing world is characterized as sensible,
that is, as one intended for intuition, which is the immediate attitude of

Appearance

445

consciousness. – The suprasensible world likewise has immediate, concrete existence, but reflected, essential concrete existence. Essence has no
immediate existence14 yet; but it is, and in a more profound sense than
being; the thing is the beginning of the reflected concrete existence; it
is an immediacy which is not yet posited, not yet essential or reflected;
but it is in truth not an immediate which is simply there.15 Things are
posited only as the things of another, suprasensible, world – first as
true concrete existences, and, second, as the truth in contrast to that
which just is. What is recognized in them is that there is a being distinguished from immediate being, and this being is true concrete existence. On the one side, the sense-representation that ascribes concrete
existence only to the immediate being of feeling and intuition is in this
determination overcome; but, on the other side, also overcome is the
unconscious reflection which, although it possesses the representation of
things, forces, the inner, and so on, does not know that such determinations are not sensible or immediately existing beings, but reflected concrete
existences.
2. The world which is in and for itself is the totality of concrete existence;
outside it there is nothing. But, within it, it is absolute negativity or form,
and therefore its immanent reflection is negative self-reference. It contains
opposition, and splits internally as the world of the senses and as the
world of otherness or the world of appearance. For this reason, since it
is totality, it is also only one side of the totality and constitutes in this
determination a self-subsistence different from the world of appearance.
The world of appearance has its negative unity in the essential world to
which it founders and into which it returns as to its ground. Further, the
essential world is also the positing ground of the world of appearances; for,
since it contains the absolute form essentially, it sublates its self-identity,
makes itself into positedness and, as this posited immediacy, it is the world
of appearance.
Further, it is not only ground in general of the world of appearance but
its determinate ground. Already as the kingdom of laws it is a manifold
of content, indeed the essential content of the world of appearance, and,
as ground with content, it is the determinate ground of that other world.
But it is such only according to that content, for the world of appearance
still had other and manifold content than the kingdom of laws, because
the negative moment was still the one peculiarly its own. But because
the kingdom of laws now has this moment likewise in it, it is the totality of
14

“immediate existence” = Dasein.

15

“which is simply there” = ein seiendes.

11.350

446

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the content of the world of appearance and the ground of all its manifoldness. But it is at the same time the negative of this manifoldness and thus
a world opposed to it. – That is to say, in the identity of the two worlds,
because the one world is determined according to form as the essential and
the other as the same world but posited and unessential, the connection of
ground has indeed been restored. But it has been restored as the groundconnection of appearance, namely as the connection, not of the two sides
of an identical content, nor of a mere diversified content, like law, but
as total connection, or as negative identity and essential connection of the
opposed sides of the content. – The kingdom of laws is not only this, that the
positedness of a content is the positedness of an other, but rather that this
identity, as we have seen,16 is essentially also negative unity, and in this negative unity each of the two sides of law is in it, therefore, its other content;
consequently, the other is not an other in general, indeterminedly, but is its
other, equally containing the content determination of that other; and thus
the two sides are opposed. Now, because the kingdom of laws now has in it
this negative moment, namely opposition, and thus, as totality, splits into a
world which exists in and for itself and a world of appearance, the identity
of these two is the essential connection of opposition. – The connection of
ground is, as such, the opposition which, in its contradiction, has foundered
to the ground; and concrete existence is the ground that has come to itself.
But concrete existence becomes appearance; ground is sublated in concrete
existence; it reinstates itself as the return of appearance into itself, but
does so as sublated ground, that is to say, as the ground-connection of
opposite determinations; the identity of such determinations, however, is
essentially a becoming and a transition, no longer the connection of ground
as such.
The world that exists in and for itself is thus itself a world distinguished
within itself, in the total compass of a manifold content. That is to say,
it is identical with the world of appearance or the posited world and to
this extent it is its ground. But its identity connection is at the same time
determined as opposition, because the form of the world of appearance is
reflection into its otherness and this world of appearance, therefore, in the
world that exists in and for itself has truly returned into itself, in such a
manner that that other world is its opposite. Their connection is, therefore,
specifically this, that the world that exists in and for itself is the inversion
of the world of appearance.
16

Cf. above, 11.348.

Appearance

447

c. the dissolution of appearance
The world that exists in and for itself is the determinate ground of the
world of appearance and is this only in so far as, within it, it is the negative
moment and hence the totality of the content determinations and their
alterations that correspond to that world of appearance, yet constitutes at
the same time its completely opposed side. The two worlds thus relate to
each other in such a way that what in the world of appearance is positive,
in the world existing in and for itself is negative, and, conversely, what is
negative in the former is positive in the latter. The north pole in the world
of appearance is the south pole in and for itself, and vice-versa; positive
electricity is in itself negative, and so forth. What is evil in the world of
appearance is in and for itself goodness and a piece of good luck.p
In fact it is precisely in this opposition of the two worlds that their
difference has disappeared, and what was supposed to be the world existing
in and for itself is itself the world of appearance and this last, conversely,
the world essential within. – The world of appearance is in the first instance
determined as reflection into otherness, so that its determinations and concrete existences have their ground and subsistence in an other; but because
this other, as other, is likewise reflected into an other, the other to which they
both refer is one which sublates itself as other; the two consequently refer
to themselves; the world of appearance is within it, therefore, law equal to
itself. – Conversely, the world existing in and for itself is in the first instance
self-identical content, exempt from otherness and change; but this content,
as complete reflection of the world of appearance into itself, or because its
diversity is difference reflected into itself and absolute, consequently contains negativity as a moment and self-reference as reference to otherness; it
thereby becomes self-opposed, self-inverting, essenceless content. Further,
this content of the world existing in and for itself has thereby also retained
the form of immediate concrete existence. For it is at first the ground of the
world of appearance; but since it has opposition in it, it is equally sublated
ground and immediate concrete existence.
Thus the world of appearance and the essential world are each, each
within it, the totality of self-identical reflection and of reflection-intoother, or of being-in-and-for-itself. They are both the self-subsisting wholes
of concrete existence; the one is supposed to be only reflected concrete
existence, the other immediate concrete existence; but each continues into
the other and, within, is therefore the identity of these two moments.
p

See Phenomenology of Spirit, pp. 96ff. GW 9, 96–98.

11.351

11.352

448

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

What we have, therefore, is this totality that splits into two totalities, the
one reflected totality and the other immediate totality. Both, in the first
instance, are self-subsistent; but they are this only as totalities, and this
they are inasmuch as each essentially contains the moment of the other in
it. Hence the distinct self-subsistence of each, one determined as immediate
and one as reflected, is now so posited as to be essentially the reference to
the other and to have its self-subsistence in this unity of the two.
We started off from the law of appearance; this law is the identity of a
content and another content different from it, so that the positedness of
the one is the positedness of the other. Still present in law is this difference,
that the identity of its sides is at first only an internal identity which the
two sides do not yet have in them. Consequently the identity is, for its part,
not realized; the content of law is not identical but indifferent, diversified.
This content, therefore, is on its side only in itself so determined that the
positedness of the one is the positedness of the other; this determination is
not yet present in it. But now law is realized; its inner identity is existent at
the same time and, conversely, the content of law is raised to ideality; for
it is sublated within, is reflected into itself, for each side has the other in it,
and therefore is truly identical with it and with itself.
Thus is law essential relation. The truth of the unessential world is at
first a world in and for itself and other to it; but this world is a totality, for
it is itself and the first world; both are thus immediate concrete existences
and consequently reflections in their otherness, and therefore equally truly
reflected into themselves. “World” signifies in general the formless totality
of a manifoldness; this world has foundered both as essential world and
as world of appearance; it is still a totality or a universe but as essential
relation. Two totalities of content have arisen in appearance; at first they
are determined as indifferently self-subsisting vis-à-vis each other, each
having indeed form within it but not with respect to the other; this form
has however demonstrated itself to be their connecting reference, and the
essential relation is the consummation of their unity of form.

c h a p ter 3

The essential relation

The truth of appearance is the essential relation. Its content has immediate
self-subsistence: the existent immediacy and the reflected immediacy or
the self-identical reflection. In this self-subsistence, however, it is at the
same time a relative content; it is simply and solely as a reflection into
its other, or as unity of the reference with its other. In this unity, the
self-subsistent content is something posited, sublated; but precisely this
unity is what constitutes its essentiality and self-subsistence; this reflection
into an other is reflection into itself. The relation has sides, since it is
reflection into an other; so its difference is internal to it, and its sides are
independent subsistence, for in their mutually indifferent diversity they are
thrown back into themselves, so that the subsistence of each equally has
its meaning only in its reference to the other or in the negative unity of
both.
The essential relation is therefore not yet the true third to essence and to
concrete existence but already contains the determinate union of the two.
Essence is realized in it in such a way that it has self-subsistent, concrete
existents for its subsistence, and these concrete existents have returned
from their indifference back into their essential unity so that they have
only this unity as their subsistence. Also the reflective determinations of
positive and negative are reflected into themselves only as each is reflected
into its opposite; but they have no other determination besides this their
negative unity, whereas the essential relation has sides that are posited as
self-subsistent totalities. It is the same opposition as that of positive and
negative, but it is such as an inverted world. The side of the essential relation
is a totality which, however, essentially has an opposite or a beyond; it is only
appearance; its concrete existence, rather than being its own, is that of its
other. It is, therefore, something internally fractured; but this, its sublated
being, consists in its being the unity of itself and its other, therefore a
whole, and precisely for this reason it has self-subsistent concrete existence
and is essential reflection into itself.
449

11.353

450
11.354

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

This is the concept of relation. At first, however, the identity it contains is
not yet perfect; the totality which each relative is as relative, is only an inner
one; the side of the relation is posited at first in one of the determinations of
negative unity; what constitutes the form of the relation is the specific selfsubsistence of each of the two sides. The identity of the form is therefore
only a reference, and the self-subsistence of the sides falls outside it, that is
to say, it falls in the sides; we still do not have the reflected unity of the
identity of the relation and of the self-subsistent concrete existents; we still
do not have substance. – It follows that the concept of relation has indeed
shown itself to be the unity of reflected and immediate self-subsistence.
But it is this concept still immediately at first; immediate are therefore its
moments vis-à-vis each other, and immediate is the unity of the reference
connecting them essentially – a unity this, which only then is the true
unity that conforms to the concept, when it has realized itself, that is to
say, through its movement has posited itself as this unity.
The essential relation is therefore immediately the relation of the whole
and the parts – the reference of reflected and immediate self-subsistence, so
that both are at the same time mutually conditioning and presupposing.
In this relation, neither of the sides is yet posited as moment of the other;
their identity is therefore itself one side, or not their negative unity. Hence,
secondly, the relation passes over into one in which one side is the moment
of the other and is present there as in its ground, the true self-subsistent
element of both. This is the relation of force and its expression.
Third, the inequality still present in this reference sublates itself, and the
final relation is that of inner and outer. – In this difference, which has now
become totally formal, relation itself founders, and substance or actuality
come on the stage as the absolute unity of immediate and reflected concrete
existence.
a. the relation of whole and parts

11.355

First, the essential relation contains the self-subsistence of concrete existence
reflected into itself; it is then the simple form whose determinations are indeed
also concrete existences, but they are posited at the same time, moments
held in the unity. This self-subsistence reflected into itself is at the same
time reflection into its opposite, namely the immediate self-subsistence, and
its subsistence is this identity with its opposite no less than its own selfsubsistence. – Second, the other side is thereby also immediately posited.
This is the immediate self-subsistence which, determined as the other, is
in itself a multifarious manifold, but in such a way that this manifold also

The essential relation

451

essentially has within it the reference of the other side, the unity of the
reflected self-subsistence. That one side, the whole, is the self-subsistence
that constitutes the world existing in and for itself; the other side, the parts,
is the immediate concrete existence which was the world of appearance.
In the relation of whole and parts, the two sides are these self-subsistences
but in such a way that each has the other reflectively shining in it and, at
the same time, only is as the identity of both. Now because the essential
relation is at first only the first, immediate relation, the negative unity and
the positive self-subsistence are bound together by the “also”; the two sides
are indeed both posited as moments, but equally so as concretely existing selfsubsistences. – Their being posited as moments is henceforth so distributed
that the whole, the reflected self-subsistence, is as concrete self-existent first,
and the other, the immediate, is in it as a moment. – The whole constitutes
here the unity of the two sides, the substrate, and the immediate concrete
existence is as positedness. – Conversely, on the other side which is the side of
the parts, the immediate and internally manifold concrete existence is the
self-subsistent substrate; the reflected unity, the whole, is on the contrary
only external reference.
2. This relation thus contains the self-subsistence of the sides, and their
sublatedness no less, and the two simply in one reference. The whole is
the self-subsistent; the parts are only moments of this unity, but they are
also equally self-subsistent and their reflected unity is only a moment;
and each is, in its self-subsistence, simply the relative of an other. This
relation is within it, therefore, immediate contradiction, and it sublates
itself.
On closer inspection, the whole is the reflected unity that stands independently on its own; but this subsistence that belongs to it is equally
repelled by it; it is thus self-externalized; it has its subsistence in its opposite,
in the manifold immediacy, the parts. The whole thus consists of the parts,
and apart from them it is not anything. It is therefore the whole relation
and the self-subsistent totality, but, for precisely this reason, it is only a
relative, for what makes it a totality is rather its other, the parts; it does not
have its subsistence within it but in its other.
The parts, too, are likewise the whole relation. They are the immediate as
against the reflected self-subsistence, and do not subsist in the whole but are
for themselves. Further, they have this whole within them as their moment;
the whole constitutes their connecting reference; without the whole there
are no parts. But because they are the self-subsistent, this connection is only
an external moment with respect to which they are in and for themselves
indifferent. But at the same time the parts, as manifold concrete existence,

11.356

452

11.357

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

collapse together, for this concrete existence is reflectionless being; they
have their self-subsistence only in the reflected unity which is this unity
as well as the concrete existent manifoldness; this means that they have
self-subsistence only in the whole, but this whole is at the same time the
self-subsistence which is the other to the parts.
The whole and the parts thus reciprocally condition each other; but the
relation here considered is at the same time higher than the reference of
conditioned and condition to each other as earlier determined.17 Here this
reference is realized, that is to say, it is posited that the condition is the
essential self-subsistence of the conditioned in such a manner that it is
presupposed by the latter. The condition as such is only the immediate,
and it is only implicitly presupposed. But the whole, through the condition
of the parts, itself immediately entails that it, too, is only in so far as it
has the parts for presupposition. Thus, since both sides of the relation
are posited as conditioning each other reciprocally, each is on its own an
immediate self-subsistence, but their self-subsistence is equally mediated or
posited through the other. The whole relation, because of this reciprocity,
is the turning back of the conditioning into itself, the non-relative, the
unconditioned.
Now inasmuch as each side of the relation has its self-subsistence not in
it but in its other, what we have is only one identity of the two in which
they are both only moments; but inasmuch as each is self-subsistent on its
own, the two are two self-subsistent concrete existences indifferent to each
other.
In the first respect, that of the essential identity of the two sides, the
whole is equal to the parts and the parts are equal to the whole. Nothing is
in the whole which is not in the parts, and nothing is in the parts which
is not in the whole. The whole is not an abstract unity but the unity
of a diversified manifoldness; but this unity within which the manifold is
held together is the determinateness by virtue of which the latter is the
parts. The relation has, therefore, an indivisible identity and only one selfsubsistence.
But further, the whole is equal to the parts but not to them as parts; the
whole is the reflected unity whereas the parts constitute the determinate
moment or the otherness of the unity and are the diversified manifold.
The whole is not equal to them as this self-subsistent diversity but to
them together. But this, their “together,” is nothing else but their unity,
the whole as such. In the parts, therefore, the whole is only equal to
17

Cf. above, 11.324–325.

The essential relation

453

itself, and the equality of it and the parts expresses only this tautology, namely that the whole as whole is equal not to the parts but to the
whole.
Conversely, the parts are equal to the whole; but because, as parts, they
are the moment of otherness, they are not equal to it as the unity, but in
such a way that one of the whole’s manifold determinations maps over a
part, or that they are equal to the whole as manifold, and this is to say that
they are equal to it as an apportioned whole, that is, as parts. Here we thus
have the same tautology, that the parts as parts are equal not to the whole as
such but, in the whole, to themselves.
The whole and the parts thus fall indifferently apart; each side refers
only to itself. But, as so held apart, they destroy themselves. The whole
which is indifferent towards the parts is abstract identity, undifferentiated
in itself. Identity is a whole only inasmuch as it is differentiated in itself,
so differentiated indeed that the manifold determinations are reflected
into themselves and have immediate self-subsistence. And the identity of
reflection has shown through its movement that it has this reflection into
its other for its truth. – In just the same way are the parts, as indifferent
to the unity of the whole, only the unconnected manifold, the inherently
other which, as such, is the other of itself and only sublates itself. – This
self-reference of each of the two sides is their self-subsistence; but this
self-subsistence which each side has for itself is rather the negation of their
respective selves. Each side has its self-subsistence, therefore, not within
but in the other side; this other, which constitutes the subsistence, is its
presupposed immediate which is supposed to be the first and its starting
point; but this first of each side is itself only a first which is not first but
has its beginning in its other.
The truth of the relation consists therefore in the mediation; its essence is
the negative unity in which both the reflected and the existent immediacy
are equally sublated. The relation is the contradiction that returns to its
ground, into the unity which, as turning back, is reflected unity but which,
since it has equally posited itself as sublated, refers to itself negatively and
makes itself into existent immediacy. But this unity’s negative reference, in
so far as it is a first and an immediate, only is as mediated by its other and
equally as posited. This other, the existent immediacy, is equally only as
sublated; its self-subsistence is a first, but only in order to disappear, and it
has an existence which is posited and mediated.
Determined in this way, the relation is no longer one of whole and
parts. The previous immediacy of its sides has passed over into positedness and mediation. Each side is posited, in so far as it is immediate, as

11.358

454

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

self-sublating and as passing over into the other; and, in so far as it is itself
negative reference, it is at the same time posited as conditioned through
the other, as through its positive. And the same applies to the immediate
transition of each; it is equally a mediation, a sublating which is posited
through the other. – Thus the relation of whole and parts has passed over
into the relation of force and its expressions.

11.359

Remark
The antinomy of the infinite divisibility of matter was examined above
(Section I, pp. 138ff.)18 in connection with the concepts of quantity.
Quantity is the unity of continuity and discreteness; it contains in the
self-subsistent one its confluence with others, and in this uninterrupted continuing self-identity it equally contains the negation of it. Inasmuch as the
immediate connection of these moments of quantity finds expression in
the essential relation of whole and parts – the one of quantity being part,
and its continuity the whole which is composed of parts – the antinomy
consists in the contradiction that was incurred, and was resolved, in conjunction with the relation of whole and parts. – For whole and parts are
just as essentially related to one another and constitute only one identity
as they are indifferent to each other, having independent subsistence. The
relation, therefore, is this antinomy: that the one moment, in freeing itself
from the other, immediately brings about this other.
The concrete existent, then, determined as a whole, has parts, and these
constitute its subsistence; the unity of the whole is a posited connection,
an external composition which is extraneous to the self-subsistent concrete
existent. Now if such a concrete existent is a part, then it is not the whole, is
not composed, hence is a simple. But the reference to the whole is external
to it and therefore extraneous. It follows that the self-subsistent, in itself, is
also not a part, for it is a part only by virtue of that connecting reference.
But now, since it is not part, it is a whole, for this relation of whole and
parts is the only one that there is and the self-subsistent is one of the
two. But as a whole, it is again composed; it again consists of parts and
so on to infinity. – This infinity consists in nothing else but the perennial
alternation of the two determinations of the relation, in each of which the
other immediately arises, so that the positedness of one is the disappearing
of itself. Determined as a whole, matter consists of parts and in these the
whole becomes an unessential connection; it disappears. But a part, thus
18

Hegel is referring to the 1812 edition (cf. GW 11, 113ff.). For the corresponding text in the 1832
edition, cf. 21.179ff.

The essential relation

455

taken on its own, is also not a part but the whole. – The antinomy of this
inference, on close inspection, is really this: Since the whole is not what
subsists on its own, the part is the self-subsistent; but since the latter is selfsubsistent only without the whole, it is then self-subsistent not as a part but
rather as a whole. The infinitude of the ensuing progress is the incapacity
to bring together the two thoughts which this mediation entails, namely
that each of the two determinations, by virtue of its self-subsistence and
separation from the other, passes over into non-self-subsistence and into the
other.
b. the relation of force and its expression
Force is the negative unity into which the contradiction of whole and parts
has resolved itself; it is the truth of that first relation. That of whole and
parts is the thoughtless relation which the understanding first happens to
come up with; or, objectively speaking, it is a dead mechanical aggregate
that indeed has form determinations and brings the manifoldness of its
self-subsisting matter together into one unity; but this unity is external to
the manifoldness. – But the relation of force is the higher immanent turning
back in which the unity of the whole that made up the connection of the
self-subsisting otherness ceases to be something external and indifferent to
this manifoldness.
In the essential relation as now determined, the immediate and the
reflected self-subsistence are now posited in that manifoldness as sublated
or as moments, whereas in the preceding relation they were self-subsisting
sides or extremes. In this there is contained, first, that the reflected unity
and its immediate existence, in so far as they are both first and immediate,
sublate themselves and pass over into their other: the former, force, passes
over into its expression, and what is expressed is a disappearing something
that returns into force as its ground and only exists as supported and
posited by it. Second, this transition is not only a becoming and a disappearing but is rather negative reference to itself; that is, that which alters its
determination is in this altering reflected-into-itself and preserves itself; the
movement of force is not as much a transition as a translation, and in this
alteration posited through itself it remains what it is. – Third, this reflected,
self-referring unity is itself also sublated and a moment; it is mediated
through its other and it has this as condition; its negative self-reference,
which is a first and begins the movement of the transition out of itself, has
equally a presupposition by which it is solicited, and an other from which
it begins.

11.360

456

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
a. The conditionedness of force

11.361

Considered in its closer determinations, force contains, first, the moment
of existing immediacy; it itself is determined over against this immediacy
as negative unity. But this unity, in the determination of immediate being,
is an existing something. This something appears as a first, since as an
immediate it is negative unity; force, on the contrary, since it is a reflected
something, appears as positedness and to this extent as pertaining to the
existing thing or to a matter. Not that force is the form of this thing and
the thing is determined by it; on the contrary, the thing is as an immediate
indifferent to it. – As so determined, there is no ground in the thing for
having a force; force, on the other hand, since it is the side of positedness,
presupposes the thing essentially. If it is therefore asked, how the thing or
matter happens to have a force, the latter appears as externally connected
to it and impressed upon the thing by some alien power.
As this immediate subsistence, force is a quiescent determinateness of the
thing in general; not anything that expresses itself but something immediately external. Hence force is also designated as matter, and instead of
a magnetic force, and an electric force, and other such forces, a magnetic
matter, an electric matter, and so on, are assumed; or again, instead of the
renowned force of attraction, a fine ether is assumed that holds everything
together. – These are the matters, which we considered above,19 into which
the inert, powerless negative unity of the thing dissolved itself.
But force contains immediate concrete existence as a moment, one
which, though a condition, is transient and self-sublating; it contains it,
therefore, not as a concretely existing thing. Further, it is not negation as
determinateness, but negative unity reflected into itself. Consequently, the
thing where the force was supposed to be no longer has any significance
here; the force itself is rather the positing of the externality that appears
as concrete existence. It also no longer is, therefore, merely a determinate
matter; such self-subsistence has long since passed over into positedness
and appearance.
Second, force is the unity of reflected and immediate subsistence, or of
form-unity and external self-subsistence. It is both in one; it is the contact
of sides of which one is in so far as the other is not, self-identical positive
reflection and negated reflection. Force is thus self-repelling contradiction;
it is active; or it is self-referring negative unity in which the reflected immediacy or the essential in-itselfness is posited as being only as sublated or as
19

Cf. above, 11.334.

The essential relation

457

a moment, and consequently, in so far as it distinguishes itself from immediate concrete existence, as passing over into it. Force, as the determination
of the reflected unity of the whole, is thus posited as becoming concretely
existent external manifoldness from out of itself.
But, third, force is activity at first only in principle and immediately; it
is reflected unity, and just as essentially the negation of it; inasmuch as it
differs from this unity, but is only the identity of itself and its negation,
it essentially refers to this identity as an immediacy external to it and one
which it has as presupposition and condition.
Now this presupposition is not a thing standing over against it; in
force any such indifferent self-subsistence is sublated; as the condition of
force, the thing is a self-subsistent other to it. But because it is not a thing,
and the self-subsistent immediacy has on the contrary attained here the
determination of self-referring negative unity, the self-subsistent other is itself
a force. – The activity of force is conditioned through itself as through an
other to itself, through a force.
Accordingly, force is a relation in which each side is the same as the other.
They are forces that stand in relation, and refer to each other essentially. –
Further, they are different at first only in general; the unity of their relation
is at first one which is internal and exists only implicitly. The conditionedness
of a force through another force is thus the doing of the force itself in itself;
that is, the force is at first a positing act as pre-supposing, an act that
only negatively refers to itself; the other force still lies beyond its positing
activity, namely the reflection that in its determining immediately returns
into itself.
b. The solicitation of force
Force is conditioned because the moment of immediate concrete existence
which it contains is something only posited, but, because it is at the same
time an immediate, is posited as something presupposed in which the force
negates itself. Accordingly, the externality which is present to force is its
own activity of presupposing posited at first as another force.
This presupposing is moreover reciprocal. Each of the two forces contains
the unity reflected into itself as sublated and is therefore a presupposing; it
posits itself as external; this moment of externality is its own; but since it
is equally a unity reflected into itself, it posits that externality at the same
time not within itself but as another force.
But the external as such is self-sublating; further, the activity that reflects
itself into itself essentially refers to that externality as to its other, but

11.362

458

11.363

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

equally to it as to something which is null in itself and identical with it.
Since the presupposing activity is equally immanent reflection, it sublates
that external negation, and posits it as something external to it, or as its
externality. Thus force, as conditioning, is reciprocally a stimulus for the
other force against which it is active. The attitude of each force is not one
of passive determination, as if something other than it were thereby being
elicited in it; the stimulus rather only solicits it. The force is within it the
negativity of itself, the repelling of itself from itself is its own positing. Its
act, therefore, consists in sublating the externality of the stimulus, reducing
it to just a stimulus and positing it as its own repelling of itself from itself,
as its own expression.
The force that expresses itself is thus the same as what was at first a
presupposing activity, that is, one which makes itself external; but, as selfexpressive, force also negates externality and posits it as its own activity.
Now in so far as in this examination we start from force as the negative
unity of itself, and consequently as presupposing reflection, this is the same
as when, in the expression of force, we start from the soliciting stimulus.
Thus force is in its concept at first determined as self-sublating identity, and
in its reality one of the two forces is determined as soliciting and the other
as being solicited. But the concept of force is as such the identity of positing
and presupposing reflection, or of reflected and immediate unity, and each
of these determinations is simply a moment, in unity, and consequently
is as mediated through the other. But, equally so, there is nothing in the
two forces thus alternately referring to each other that determines which
would be the soliciting and which the solicited, or rather, both of these
form determinations belong to each in equal manner. And this identity is
not just one of external comparison but an essential unity of the two.
Thus one force is determined first as soliciting and the other as being
solicited; these determinations of form appear in this guise as two differences
present in the forces immediately. But they are essentially mediated. The
one force is solicited; this stimulus is a determination posited in it from
outside. But the force is itself a presupposing; it essentially reflects into
itself and sublates the fact that the stimulus is something external. That
it is solicited is thus its own doing, or, it is through its own determining
that the other force is an other force in general and the one soliciting. The
soliciting force refers to the other negatively and so sublates its externality
and is positing; but it is this positing only on the presupposition that it has
an other over against it; that is to say, it is itself soliciting only to the extent
that it has an externality in it, and hence to the extent that it is solicited.
Or it is soliciting only to the extent that it is solicited to be soliciting. And

The essential relation

459

so, conversely, the first is solicited only to the extent that it itself solicits the
other to solicit it, that is, the first force. Each thus receives the stimulus from
the other; but the stimulus that each delivers as active consists in receiving
a stimulus from the other; the stimulus which it receives is solicited by
itself. Both, the given and the received stimulus, or the active expression
and the passive externality, are each, therefore, nothing immediate but are
mediated: indeed, each force is itself the determinateness which the other
has over against it, is mediated through this other, and this mediating other
is again its own determining positing.
This then – that a force happens to incur a stimulus through another
force; that it therefore behaves passively but then again passes over from this
passivity into activity – this is the turning back of force into itself. Force
expresses itself. The external expression is a reaction in the sense that it
posits the externality as its own moment and thus sublates its having been
solicited through an other force. The two are therefore one: the expression
of the force by virtue of which the latter, through its negative activity which
is directed at itself, imparts a determinate being-for-other to itself; and the
infinite turning in this externality back to itself, so that there it only refers
to itself. The presupposing reflection, to which belong the conditionedness
and the stimulus, is therefore immediately also the reflection that returns
into itself, and the activity is essentially reactive, against itself. The positing
of the stimulus or the external is itself the sublation of it, and, conversely,
the sublation of the stimulus is the positing of the externality.
c. The infinity of force
Force is finite inasmuch as its moments still have the form of immediacy.
In this determination its presupposing and its self-referring reflection are
different: the one appears as an external self-subsisting force and the other
as passively referring to it. Force is thus still conditioned according to form,
and according to content likewise still restricted, for a determinateness of
form still entails a restriction of content. But the activity of force consists
in expressing itself; that is, as we have seen, in sublating the externality and
determining it as that in which it is identical with itself. What force truly
expresses, therefore, is that its reference to an other is its reference to itself;
that its passivity consists in its activity. The stimulus by virtue of which it
is solicited to activity is its own soliciting; the externality that comes to it is
nothing immediate but something mediated by it, just as its own essential
self-identity is not immediate but is mediated by virtue of its negation. In
brief, force expresses this, that its externality is identical with its inwardness.

11.364

460

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
c. relation of outer and inner

11.365

1. The relation of whole and parts is the immediate relation; in it, therefore,
reflected and existent immediacy have a self-subsistence of their own. But
now, since they stand in essential relation, their self-subsistence is their
negative unity, and this is now posited in the expression of force; the
reflected unity is essentially a becoming-other, the unity’s translation of
itself into externality; but this externality is just as immediately taken
back into that unity; the difference of the self-subsisting forces sublates
itself; the expression of force is only a mediation of the reflected unity
with itself. What is present is only an empty and transparent difference,
a reflective shine, but this shine is the mediation which is precisely the
independent subsistence. What we have is not just opposite determinations
openly sublating themselves, and their movement is not only a transition;
rather, what we have is both that the immediacy from which the start and
the transition into otherness were made is itself only posited, and that,
consequently, each of the determinations is already in its immediacy the
unity with its other, so that the transition equally is a self-positing turning
back into itself.
The inner is determined as the form of reflected immediacy or of essence
over against the outer as the form of being; the two, however, are only
one identity. – This identity is, first, the sustaining unity of the two as
substrate replete of content, or the absolute fact with respect to which
the two determinations are indifferent, external moments. To this extent,
it is content and totality, a totality which is an inner that has equally
become an outer but, in this outer, is not something-that-has-become or
something-that-has-been-left-behind but is self-equal. The outer, in this
determination, is not only equal to the inner according to content but the
two are rather only one fact. – But this fact, as simple identity with itself, is
different from its form determinations, or these determinations are external
to it; it is itself, therefore, an inner which is different from its externality.
But this externality consists in the two determinations, the inner and the
outer, both constituting it. But the fact is itself nothing other than the
unity of the two. Again, therefore, the two sides are the same according to
content. But in the fact they are as self-penetrating identity, as substrate full
of content. But in the externality, as forms of the fact, they are indifferent
to that identity and consequently each is indifferent to the other.
2. They are in this wise the different form determinations that have an
identical substrate, not in them but in an other. These are determinations
of reflection which are each for itself: the inner, as the form of immanent

The essential relation

461

reflection, the form of essentiality; the outer, as the form instead of immediacy reflected into an other, or the form of unessentiality. But the nature
of relation has shown that these determinations constitute just one identity
alone. In its expression force is a determining which is one and the same
as presupposing and as returning into itself. Inasmuch as the inner and
the outer are considered as determinations of form, they are, therefore,
first, only the simple form itself, and, second, because in this form they are
at the same time determined as opposite, their unity is the pure abstract
determination in which the one is immediately the other, and is this other
because it is the one that it is. Thus the inner is immediately only the outer,
and it is this determinateness of externality for the reason that it is the inner;
conversely, the outer is only an inner because it is only an outer. – In other
words, since the unity of form holds its two determinations as opposites,
their identity is only this transition, and is in this transition only the other
of both, not their identity replete with content. Or this holding fast to form
is in general the side of determinateness. What is determined according to
this side is not the real totality of the whole but the totality or the fact itself
only in the determinacy of form; since this unity is simply the coincidence
of two opposed determinations, then when one of them is taken first (it is
indifferent which), it must be said of the substrate or the fact that it is for
this reason just as essentially in the other determinateness, but also only in
the other, just as it was first said that it is only in the first. –
Thus something which is at first only an inner, is for just that reason only
an outer. Or conversely something which is only an outer, is for that reason
only an inner. Or if the inner is determined as essence but the outer as being,
then inasmuch as a fact is only in its essence, it is for that very reason only
an immediate being; or a fact which only is, is for that very reason as yet
only in its essence. – Outer and inner are determinateness so posited that
each, as a determination, not only presupposes the other and passes over
into it as its truth, but, in being this truth of the other, remains posited
as determinateness and points to the totality of both. – The inner is thus
the completion of essence according to form. For in being determined as
inner, essence implies that it is deficient and that it is only with reference
to its other, the outer; but this other is not just being, or even concrete
existence, but is the reference to essence or the inner. What we have here is
not just the reference of the two to each other, but the determining element
of absolute form, namely that each term is immediately its opposite, and
each is their common reference to a third or rather to their unity. Their
mediation, however, still misses this identical substrate that contains them
both; their reference is for this reason the immediate conversion of the one

11.366

462

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

into the other, and this negative unity tying them together is the simple
point empty of content.

11.367

Remark
The movement of essence is in general the coming to be of the concept. In the
relation of inner and outer the essential moment of the concept comes on
stage, namely that its determinations are so posited in negative unity that
each not only is its other immediately, but is also the totality of the whole.
In the concept as such, however, this totality is the universal – a substrate
which is still absent in the relation of inner and outer. – Also missing in
the negative unity of inner and outer which is the immediate conversion
of the one determination into the other is that substrate which we have
called the “fact.”
The immediate identity of form as has been posited here, still without the
rich content of the movement of the fact itself, merits close attention. It
occurs in the fact as the latter is at its beginning. Thus pure being is immediately nothing. Quite in general, everything real is at its beginning only an
immediate identity of this sort, for at this stage it has not yet opposed and
developed its moments: on the one hand, it has not yet inwardly recollected
itself from externality; on the other, it has not yet relinquished its inwardness, not yet produced itself out of it. It is, therefore, the inner only as determinateness against the outer, and the outer only as determinateness against
the inner. Hence it is partly only an immediate being; and partly, since it is
equally the negativity which will be the activity of development, is as such
still essentially only an inner. – This is manifest, quite in general, in every
natural, scientific, and spiritual development, and it is essential to recognize
that because something is at first only an inner or also in its concept, as a first
it is for that reason only its immediate passive existence. Thus – just to take
the nearest example – the essential relation now under consideration, before
going through the mediation of the relation of force and thus realizing itself,
is relation only in itself, is the concept of relation, or relation only implicitly.
But for that reason it is only the external, immediate relation, the relation of
whole and parts in which the sides have indifferent subsistence vis-à-vis each
other. Their identity is not yet explicit in them; it is implicit at first, and for
this reason they fall apart; they have an immediate, external subsistence. –
Thus the sphere of being is in general only the absolutely still inner and for
this reason the sphere of existent immediacy or of externality. – Essence [or
Wesen in German] is only the inner at first; hence it is also taken for a totally
external and unsystematic common element; one speaks [in German] of
Schulwesen, Zeitungswesen, that is, of public instruction, of the press, and

The essential relation

463

understands by it a common something made up of existing objects externally assembled together, with no essential bond or organization. – Or, with
regard to concrete objects, the seed of a plant is at first only inner plant, or
the child only implicitly human. But this is why the plant or the human
being is, as germ, an immediate, something external which has not yet given
itself negative self-reference, is something passive, the prey to otherness. –
Also God, in his immediate concept, is not spirit; spirit is not an immediate,
is not opposed to mediation, but is essence eternally positing its immediacy
and eternally returning from it back into itself. Immediately, therefore, God
is only nature. Or, nature is God only as the inner God, not the God who
is actual as spirit, and hence is not the true God. – Or, as thought, as first
thought, God is only the pure being, or also essence, the abstract absolute;
but not God as absolute spirit, which alone is the true nature of God.
3. The first of the identities considered, the identity of inner and outer, is
the substrate which is indifferent to the difference of these determinations
as to a form external to it, or the identity is as content. The second is
the unmediated identity of their difference, the immediate conversion of
each into its opposite, or it is inner and outer as pure form. But both
these identities are only the sides of one totality, or the totality itself is
only the conversion of the one identity into the other. The totality, as
substrate and content, is this immediacy reflected into itself only through
the presupposing reflection of form that sublates their difference and posits
itself as indifferent identity, as reflected unity over against it. Or again, the
content is the form itself in so far as the latter determines itself as difference
and makes itself into one side of this difference as externality, but into the
other side as an immediacy which is reflected into itself, or into an inner.
It follows that, conversely, the differences of form, the inner and the
outer, are each posited as the totality within it of itself and its other; the
inner, as simple identity reflected into itself, is immediacy and hence, no
less than essence, being and externality; and the external, as the manifold
and determined being, is only external, that is, is posited as unessential
and as having returned into its ground, therefore as inner. This transition
of each into the other is their immediate identity, as substrate, but also
their mediated identity, that is, each is what it is in itself, the totality of the
relation, precisely through its other. Or, conversely, the determinateness of
either side is mediated through the determinateness of the other because
each is in itself the totality; the totality thus mediates itself with itself
through the form or the determinateness, and the determinateness mediates
itself with itself through its simple identity.

11.368

464

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Therefore, what something is, that it is entirely in its externality; its
externality is its totality and equally so its unity reflected into itself. Its
appearance is not only reflection-into-other but immanent reflection, and
its externality is therefore the expression of what it is in itself; and since its
content and its form are thus absolutely identical, it is, in and for itself,
nothing but this: to express itself. It is the revealing of its essence, and this
essence, accordingly, consists simply in being self-revealing.
The essential relation, in this identity of appearance with the inner or
with essence, has determined itself as actuality.

section iii

Actuality

Actuality is the unity of essence and concrete existence; in it, shapeless essence
and unstable appearance – or subsistence without determination and manifoldness without permanence – have their truth. Although concrete existence is the immediacy that has proceeded from ground, it still does not
have form explicitly posited in it; inasmuch as it determines and informs
itself, it is appearance; and in developing this subsistence that otherwise
only is a reflection-into-other into an immanent reflection, it becomes two
worlds, two totalities of content, one determined as reflected into itself and the
other as reflected into other. But the essential relation exposes the formality
of their connection, and the consummation of the latter is the relation of
the inner and the outer in which the content of both is equally only one
identical substrate and only one identity of form. – Because this identity
has come about also in regard to form, the form determination of their
difference is sublated, and that they are one absolute totality is posited.
This unity of the inner and outer is absolute actuality. But this actuality
is, first, the absolute as such – in so far as it is posited as a unity in which the
form has sublated itself, making itself into the empty or external distinction of
an outer and inner. Reflection relates to this absolute as external to it; it only
contemplates it rather than being its own movement. But it is essentially
this movement and is, therefore, as the absolute’s negative turning back
into itself.
Second, it is actuality proper. Actuality, possibility, and necessity constitute
the formal moments of the absolute, or its reflection.
Third, the unity of the absolute and its reflection is the absolute relation,
or rather the absolute as relation to itself, substance.

465

11.369

c h a p ter 1
11.370

The absolute

The simple solid identity of the absolute is indeterminate, or rather, every
determinateness of essence and concrete existence, or of being in general as well
as of reflection, has dissolved itself into it. Accordingly, the determining of
what is the absolute appears to be a negating, and the absolute itself appears
only as the negation of all predicates, as the void. But since it must equally
be spoken of as the position of all predicates, it appears as the most formal
of contradictions. In so far as that negating and this positing belong to
external reflection, what we have is a formal, unsystematic dialectic that has
an easy time picking up a variety of determinations here and there, and is
just as at ease demonstrating, on the one hand, their finitude and relativity,
as declaring, on the other, that the absolute, which it vaguely envisages as
totality, is the dwelling place of all determinations, yet is incapable of raising
either the positions or the negations to a true unity. – The task is indeed to
demonstrate what the absolute is. But this demonstration cannot be either
a determining or an external reflection by virtue of which determinations
of the absolute would result, but is rather the exposition of the absolute,
more precisely the absolute’s own exposition, and only a displaying of what
it is.

a. the exposition of the absolute
The absolute is not just being, nor even essence. The former is the first
unreflected immediacy; the latter, the reflected immediacy; further, each
is explicitly a totality, but a determinate totality. Being emerges in essence
as concrete existence, and the connection of being and essence develops
into the relation of inner and outer. The inner is essence, but as a totality
whose essential determination is to be referred to being and to be being
immediately. The outer is being, but with the essential determination of
being immediately connected with reflection and, equally, in a relationless
466

The absolute

467

identity with essence. The absolute itself is the absolute unity of the two;
it is that which constitutes in general the ground of the essential relation
which, as only relation, has yet to return into this its identity and whose
ground is not yet posited.
It follows that the determination of the absolute is to be absolute form,
but at the same time not as an identity whose moments only are simple
determinacies, but, on the contrary, as an identity whose moments are each
explicitly the totality and hence, indifferent with respect to the form, the
complete content of the whole. But, conversely, the absolute is absolute
content in such a way that this content, which is as such indifferent
plurality, explicitly has the negative connection of form by virtue of which
its manifold is only one substantial identity.
Thus the identity of the absolute is for this reason absolute identity,
because each of its parts is itself the whole or each determinateness is the
totality, that is, because determinateness has become as such a thoroughly
transparent reflective shine, a difference that has disappeared in its positedness. Essence, concrete existence, the world existing in itself, whole, parts, force –
these reflected determinations appear to representation as true being valid
in and for itself; but against them the absolute is the ground into which
they have foundered. – Because in the absolute the form is now only simple
self-identity, the absolute does not determine itself, for the determination is
a difference of form which is valid as such from the start. But because the
absolute at the same time contains every difference and form determination
in general, or because it is itself absolute form and reflection, the difference
of content must also come into it. But the absolute itself is the absolute
identity; to be this identity is its determination, for the manifoldness of the
world-in-itself and of the phenomenal world has all been sublated in it. –
In the absolute itself there is no becoming, since the absolute is not being;
nor does the absolute determine itself reflectively, for it is not the essence
which determines itself only inwardly; and it also does not externalize itself,
for it is the identity of inner and outer. – But in this way the movement of
reflection stands over against its absolute identity. The movement is sublated in this identity and is thus only its inner; but consequently its outer.
– At first, therefore, the movement consists only in sublating its act in the
absolute. It is the beyond of the manifold differences and determinations
and of their movement, a beyond that lies at the back of the absolute.
It is thus the negative exposition of the absolute earlier alluded to.1 – In
its true presentation, this exposition is the preceding whole of the logical
1

Cf. above, 11.370.

11.371

468

11.372

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

movement of the spheres of being and essence, the content of which has
not been gathered in from outside as something given and contingent; nor
has it been sunk into the abyss of the absolute by a reflection external to
it; on the contrary, it has determined itself within it by virtue of its inner
necessity, and, as being’s own becoming and as the reflection of essence, has
returned into the absolute as into its ground.
But this exposition has itself also a positive side, for in foundering to
the ground the finite demonstrates that its nature is to be referred to the
absolute, or to contain the absolute within. However, this side is not as
much the positive exposition of the absolute as it is rather the exposition
of the determinations, namely that these have the absolute for their abyss,
but also for their ground,2 or that that which imparts subsistence to them,
to their reflective shine, is the absolute itself. – Being as shine is not nothing
but reflection, reference to the absolute; or it is a shine inasmuch as that
which shines in it is the absolute. This positive exposition thus halts the
finite just before its disappearing: it considers it an expression and a copy
of the absolute. But this transparency of the finite that lets only the absolute
transpire through it ends up in complete disappearance, for there is nothing
in the finite which would retain for it a difference over against the absolute;
as a medium, it is absorbed by that through which it shines.
This positive exposition of the absolute is therefore itself only a reflective shine, for the true positive, that which contains the exposition and the
expounded content, is the absolute itself. Whatever the further determinations that may occur, the form in which the absolute reflectively shines is a
nullity which the exposition gathers up from outside and in which it gains
for itself a starting point for its activity. Any such determination has in the
absolute, not its beginning but its end. This expository process, therefore,
though it is an absolute act because of its reference to the absolute into
which it returns, is not so at its starting point which is a determination
external to the absolute.
But in actual fact the exposition of the absolute is the absolute’s own
doing, an act that begins from itself and arrives at itself. The absolute, only
as absolute identity, is absolute in a determined guise, that is, as identical
absolute; it is posited as such by reflection over against opposition and
manifoldness; or it is only the negative of reflection and determination in
general. – It is not just the exposition of the absolute which is therefore
something incomplete, but this absolute itself which is only arrived at. Or
again, the absolute which is only as absolute identity is only the absolute of
2

Hegel is playing on “Abgrund . . . Grund,” “abyss . . . ground.”

The absolute

469

an external reflection. It is, therefore, not the absolutely absolute but the
absolute in a determination, or it is attribute.
But the absolute is not attribute just because it is the subject matter of
an external reflection and is consequently something determined by it. –
Or, reflection is not only external to it; but, precisely because it is external
to it, it is immediately internal to it. The absolute is absolute only because
it is not abstract identity but is the identity of being and essence, or the
identity of the inner and the outer. It is therefore itself the absolute form
that makes it reflectively shine within itself and determines it as attribute.

b. the absolute attribute
The expression which we have used, “the absolute absolute,” denotes the
absolute which in its form has returned back into itself or whose form is
equal to its content. The attribute is just the relative absolute, a combination
which only signifies the absolute in a form determination. For at first, before
its complete exposition, the form is only internally or, which is the same,
only externally; it is at first determinate form in general or negation in
general. But because form is at the same time as the form of the absolute,
the attribute is the whole content of the absolute; it is the totality which
earlier appeared as a world, or as one of the sides of the essential relation,
each of which is itself the whole. But both worlds, the phenomenal world
and the world that exists in and for itself, were supposed to be opposed to
each other in their essence. Each side of the essential relation was indeed
equal to the other – the whole as much as the parts, the expression of force
the same content as force itself, and the outer everywhere the same as the
inner. But these sides were at the same time supposed each to have still
an immediate subsistence of its own, the one side as existent immediacy
and the other as reflected immediacy. In the absolute, on the contrary,
these different immediacies have been reduced to a reflective shine, and the
totality that the attribute is is posited as its true and single subsistence, while
the determination in which it is is posited as unessential subsistence.
The absolute is attribute because, as simple absolute identity, it is in
the determination of identity; now to the determination as such other
determinations can be attached, for instance, also that there are several
attributes. But because absolute identity has only this meaning, that not
only all determinations have been sublated but that reflection itself has
also sublated itself, all determinations are thus posited in it as sublated.
Or the totality is posited as absolute totality. Or again, the attribute has

11.373

470
11.374

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the absolute for its content and subsistence and, consequently, its form
determination by which it is attribute is also posited, posited immediately
as mere reflective shine; the negative is posited as negative. The positive
reflective shine that the exposition gives itself through the attribute – in
that it does not take the finite in its limitation as something that exists in
and for itself but dissolves its subsistence into the absolute and expands
it into attribute – sublates precisely this, that the attribute is attribute; it
sinks it and its differentiating act into the simple absolute.
But since reflection thus reverts from its differentiating act only to the
identity of the absolute, it has not at the same time left its externality behind
and has not arrived at the true absolute. It has only reached the indeterminate, abstract identity, which is to say, the identity in the determinateness
of identity. – Or, since reflection determines the absolute into attribute as
inner form, this determining is something still distinct from externality;
the inner determination does not penetrate the absolute; the attribute’s
expression, as something merely posited, is to disappear into the absolute.
The form by virtue of which the absolute would be attribute, whether
it is taken as outer or inner, is therefore posited as something null in itself,
an external reflective shine, or a mere way and manner.
c. the mode of the absolute

11.375

The attribute is first the absolute in simple self-identity. Second, it is negation, a negation which is as such formal immanent reflection. These two
sides constitute at first the two extremes of the attribute, the middle term
of which is the attribute itself, since it is both the absolute and the determinateness. – The second of these extremes is the negative as negative, the
reflection external to the absolute. – Or inasmuch as the negative is taken
as the inner of the absolute and its own determination is to posit itself
as mode, it is then the self-externality of the absolute, the loss of itself in
the changeability and contingency of being, its having passed over into its
opposite without turning back into itself, the manifoldness of form and
content determinations that lacks totality. –
But the mode, the externality of the absolute, is not just this. It is
rather externality posited as externality, a mere way and manner, hence the
reflective shine as reflective shine, or the reflection of form into itself; hence,
the self-identity which is the absolute. In actual fact, therefore, the absolute
is first posited as absolute identity only in the mode; it is what it is, namely
self-identity, only as self-referring negativity, as reflective shining which is
posited as reflective shining.

The absolute

471

Hence, in so far as the exposition of the absolute begins from its absolute
identity and passes over to the attribute and from there to the mode, it
has therein exhaustively run through its moments. But first, in this course
it does not just behave negatively towards these determinations; its act is
rather the reflective movement itself, and it is only as such a movement
that the absolute truly is absolute identity. – Second, the exposition does
not thereby deal with mere externality, and the mode is not only the most
external externality. Rather, since the mode is reflective shine as shine, it is
an immanent turning back, the self-dissolving reflection, and it is in being
this reflection that the absolute is absolute being. – Third, the reflective
act of exposition seems to begin from its own determinations and from
something external, to take up the modes or even the determinations of
the attribute as if they were found outside the absolute and its contribution were only to reduce them to undifferentiated identity. But it has
in fact found the determinateness from which it begins in the absolute
itself. For as first undifferentiated identity, the absolute is itself only the
determinate absolute, or attribute, because it is the unmoved, still unreflected absolute. This determinateness, since it is determinateness, belongs
to the reflective movement, and it is through this movement alone that
the absolute is determined as the first identity; through it alone that it
has absolute form and does not just exist as self-equal but posits itself as
self-equal.
Accordingly the true meaning of mode is that it is the absolute’s own
reflective movement; it is a determining by virtue of which the absolute
would become, not an other, but what it already is; a transparent externality
which is a pointing to itself; a movement out of itself, but in such a way
that being outwardly is just as much inwardness, and consequently equally
a positing which is not mere positedness but absolute being.
When therefore one asks for a content of the exposition, for what the
absolute manifests, the reply is that the distinction of form and content
in the absolute has been dissolved; or that just this is the content of the
absolute, that it manifests itself. The absolute is the absolute form which
in its diremption of itself is utterly identical with itself, is the negative
as negative or the negative that rejoins itself and in this way alone is the
absolute self-identity which equally is indifferent towards its distinctions or
is absolute content. The content is therefore only this exposition itself.
As this self-bearing movement of exposition, as a way and manner which
is its absolute identity with itself, the absolute is expression, not of an inner,
nor over against an other, but simply as absolute manifestation of itself for
itself. Thus it is actuality.

11.376

472

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Remark
Spinoza’s concept of substance corresponds to the concept of the absolute,
and to the relation of reflection to it, as presented here. Spinozism is a
deficient philosophy because reflection and its manifold determining is in
it an external thinking. – The substance of this system is one substance,
one indivisible totality; there is no determinateness which would not be
contained in this absolute and be dissolved into it; and all that is important
is that anything that to the natural way of representing and to the determining of the understanding appears vaguely to occur as self-subsistent
is totally reduced in this necessary concept to a mere positedness. –
“Determinateness is negation”3 is the absolute principle of Spinozist philosophy; this true and simple insight is at the basis of the absolute unity of
substance. But Spinoza stops short at negation as determinateness or quality;
he does not advance to the cognition of it as absolute, that is, self-negating
negation; therefore his substance does not contain the absolute form, and the
cognition of it is not a cognition from within. Of course, substance is
the absolute unity of thought and being or extension; it therefore contains
thought itself, but only in its unity with extension, that is to say, not as
separating itself from extension and hence, in general, not as determining
and informing, nor as a movement of return that begins from itself. For
this reason, on the one hand substance lacks the principle of personality –
a defect that has especially aroused indignation against Spinoza’s system4
– and, on the other hand, cognition is an external reflection that fails to
comprehend what appears as finite – that is, the determinateness of the
attribute and the mode, and in general itself as well – by not deriving them
from substance; it behaves like an external understanding, taking up the
determinations as given and reducing them to the absolute but not taking
their beginning from it.
The concepts that Spinoza gives of substance are that it is the cause of
itself, that its essence includes concrete existence within itself, that the concept
of the absolute is in no need of the concept of an other by which it would
have to be formed.5 These concepts, however profound and correct, are
3

4

5

See Spinoza, Opera, Vol. 4, ed. Carl Gebhardt (Heidelberg: Carl Winters, no year given), letter 50,
240. For an English translation, see The Correspondence of Spinoza, trans., ed. A. Wolff (New York:
Russell & Russell, 1966), p. 270.
Here Hegel probably has Jacobi primarily in mind. See Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Über die Lehre
des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn, 2nd edition (Breslau: Gottlieb Löwe, 1789),
27, 31f. Beytrage IV: 335–341; The Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel Allwill, trans., ed.
George di Giovanni (Montreal and Kingston: McGill Queen’s University Press, 1994), 27, 31f.,
363–4.
Spinoza, Ethics, Part 1, Definition 1.

The absolute

473

definitions that are immediately assumed in the science from the start.
Mathematics and other subordinate sciences must begin with something
presupposed that constitutes their element and positive substrate. But the
absolute cannot be a first, an immediate. Essentially the absolute is rather
its result.
The further definition of the attribute is introduced in Spinoza simply
following that of the absolute. Spinoza defines the attribute as the manner
in which the understanding conceives the essence of the absolute.6 Leaving aside
the fact that the understanding is assumed to be by nature posterior to the
attribute (for Spinoza defines it as mode),7 the attribute, or determination
as determination of the absolute, is made to depend on an other, namely
the understanding, which simply occurs over against substance externally
and immediately.
Spinoza further defines the attributes as infinite – infinite also in the
sense of an infinite multiplicity.8 But only two are named in what follows,
thought and extension, and no indication is given of how the infinite multiplicity necessarily reduces to opposition, specifically this opposition of
thought and extension. – These two attributes are for this reason empirically assumed. Thought and being display the absolute in a determination;
the absolute itself is their absolute unity, so that the two are only unessential forms; the order of things is the same as the order of representations
or thoughts, and the one absolute is viewed only in external reflection
(by a mode) under both the two determinations, once as a totality of
representations, and once again as a totality of things and their alterations. It is this external reflection that both generates the distinction of
representation and being and reduces it to absolute identity, dissolving
it there. But this whole movement goes on outside the absolute. True,
the absolute is itself also thought, and therefore the movement is only in
the absolute; but, as just remarked, it is in the absolute only as one with
extension, and hence not as this movement, which is essentially also the
moment of opposition. – Spinoza makes the sublime demand on thought
that it consider everything under the form of eternity, sub specie æterni,9 that
is, as it is in the absolute. But in an absolute which is only unmoved
identity, the attribute, like the mode, is only as disappearing, not as becoming, so that this disappearing also makes its positive beginning only from
without.

6
8

7 Spinoza, Ethics, Part 1, Proposition 31, Proof.
Spinoza, Ethics, Part 1, Definition 4.
9 Spinoza, Ethics, Part 2, Proposition 44, Corollary 2.
Spinoza, Ethics, Part 2, Propositions 1, 2.

11.377

474

11.378

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

The third, the mode, is according to Spinoza an affection of substance,10
the determinate determinateness, that which is in an other and is comprehended through this other. Strictly speaking, the only determination of the
attributes is indeterminate difference; each is supposed to express the totality
of substance and be comprehended by itself; but since each is the absolute
as determined, it contains otherness and cannot be comprehended by itself.
It is only in the mode, therefore, that the determination of the attribute is
truly posited. Further, this third element remains mere mode; on the one
hand, it is immediately given; on the other hand, its nothingness is not
recognized as reflection into itself. – Consequently, Spinoza’s exposition
of the absolute is indeed complete in so far as it begins with the absolute,
lets the attribute follow therefrom, and ends with the mode. But these
three are only enumerated one after the other, without the inner chain of
development, and the third is not negation as negation, not the negatively
self-referring negation by virtue of which it would explicitly be the turning
back to the first identity and this identity be in turn truly identity. What
is lacking, therefore, is the necessity of the progression of the absolute to
inessentiality, as well as the dissolution in and for itself of the latter into
identity; or again, missing are both the becoming of the identity and its
determinations.
Similarly in the oriental representation of emanation, the absolute is the
self-illuminating light. But it does not just illumine itself; it also emanates.
Its emanations are distancings from its unclouded clarity; whatever is generated after is less perfect than that which precedes it and from which it
arises. Emanation is taken only as a happening, becoming only as a progressive loss. Being thus becomes progressively obscured, and the night, the
negative, which is the final term in the progression, does not revert back
to the original light.
The lack of immanent reflection that affects both the Spinozist exposition of the absolute and the doctrine of emanation is remedied in Leibniz’s
concept of the monad.11 – It is common for the one-sidedness of a philosophical principle to be countered by the opposite one-sidedness of another,
and for a totality to emerge in them, taken together, as a sort of scattered
completeness. – The monad is a one, a negative reflected into itself; it is the
totality of the content of the world; in it the differentiated manifold has not
only disappeared but is preserved in a negative manner. Spinoza’s substance
is the unity of the content; but this manifold content of the world is not
as such in it but in external reflection. The monad is, therefore, essentially
10

Spinoza, Ethics, Part 1, Definition 5.

11

Leibniz, Principles of Nature and Grace, §1.

The absolute

475

representational; however, although indeed finite, it has no passivity but the
alterations and the determinations in it are rather manifestations within it
of itself. It is an entelechy; to manifest is its distinctive act. – The monad is
thereby also determined, differentiated from others; the determinateness falls
in the particular content and in the way and manner of the manifestation.
Consequently the monad is the totality in itself, according to its substance
and not in its manifestation. This limitation of the monad necessarily falls,
not in the self-positing or representational monad, but in its in-itself; or it
is absolute limit, a predestination which is posited through another being
than itself. Moreover, since anything limited exists only with reference to
other limited things, but the monad is at the same time a self-contained
absolute, the harmony of these limits, that is, the reciprocal references of
the monads, falls outside them and is likewise pre-established by another
being or in itself.
It is clear that although the principle of immanent reflection that constitutes the fundamental determination of the monad generally removes
otherness and external influence, and by virtue of it the alterations of the
monad are its own positing, the side of passivity due to an other is however
only transformed into an absolute limitation, into a limitation of the initself. Leibniz ascribes to the monads a certain completeness in themselves,
a kind of self-subsistence; they are created beings.12 – When their limitation
is more closely examined, the result of Leibniz’s account is that the selfmanifestation which belongs to them is the totality of form. It is a concept
of the utmost importance that the alterations of the monad be represented
as actions free of passivity, as self-manifestations, and that the principle of
immanent reflection and of individuation stand out as essential. And it is
necessary to have finitude consist in the fact that the content or the substance is distinguished from the form, and further, also that the one is limited
while the other is infinite. But then we should find in the concept of the
absolute monad not only that absolute unity of form and content but also
the nature of reflection – which is, as self-referring negativity, to repel itself
from itself – by which it posits and creates. And in the system of Leibniz we
find indeed also the further point, that God is the source of concrete existence
and of the essence of the monads,13 that is, that the absolute limitations in
the in-itself of the monads are not anything in and for themselves but
vanish in the absolute. But in these determinations we still only find the
common representations, left philosophically undeveloped without being
raised to the speculative concept. So the principle of individuation does
12

Leibniz, Monadology, §6.

13

Leibniz, Monadology, §43.

11.379

476

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

not receive the more profound elaboration which is its due. The concepts
concerning the distinctions between the various finite monads and their
relation to the absolute do not originate out of this being itself, do not
originate absolutely, but belong rather to ratiocinative, dogmatic reflection
and have not therefore attained inner coherence.

ch a p ter 2

Actuality

The absolute is the unity of inner and outer as a first implicitly existent unit.
The exposition appeared as an external reflection which, for its part, has the
immediate as something it has found, but it equally is its movement and
the reference connecting it to the absolute and, as such, it leads it back
to the latter, determining it as a mere “way and manner.” But this “way
and manner” is the determination of the absolute itself, namely its first
identity or its mere implicitly existent unity. And through this reflection, not
only is that first in-itself posited as essenceless determination, but, since the
reflection is negative self-reference, it is through it that the in-itself becomes
a mode in the first place. It is this reflection that, in sublating itself in its
determinations and as a movement which as such turns back upon itself,
is first truly absolute identity and, at the same time, the determining of
the absolute or its modality. The mode, therefore, is the externality of the
absolute, but equally so only its reflection into itself; or again, it is the
absolute’s own manifestation, so that this externalization is its immanent
reflection and therefore its being in-and-for-itself.
So, as the manifestation that it is nothing, that it has no content, save
to be the manifestation of itself, the absolute is absolute form. Actuality is
to be taken as this reflected absoluteness. Being is not yet actual; it is the
first immediacy; its reflection is therefore becoming and transition into an
other; or its immediacy is not being-in-and-for-itself. Actuality also stands
higher than concrete existence. It is true that the latter is the immediacy
that has proceeded from ground and conditions, or from essence and
its reflection. In itself or implicitly, it is therefore what actuality is, real
reflection; but it is still not the posited unity of reflection and immediacy.
Hence concrete existence passes over into appearance as it develops the
reflection contained within it. It is the ground that has foundered to the
ground; its determination, its vocation,14 is to restore this ground, and
14

Bestimmung, which can mean both “determination” and “vocation.”

477

11.380

478

11.381

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

therefore it becomes essential relation, and its final reflection is that its
immediacy be posited as immanent reflection and conversely. This unity,
in which concrete existence or immediacy and the in-itself, the ground or
the reflected, are simply moments, is now actuality. The actual is therefore
manifestation. It is not drawn into the sphere of alteration by its externality,
nor is it the reflective shining of itself in an other. It just manifests itself, and
this means that in its externality, and only in it, it is itself, that is to say,
only as a self-differentiating and self-determining movement.
Now in actuality as this absolute form, the moments only are as sublated
or formal, not yet realized; their differentiation thus belongs at first to
external reflection and is not determined as content.
Actuality, as itself immediate form-unity of inner and outer, is thus in
the determination of immediacy as against the determination of immanent
reflection; or it is an actuality as against a possibility. The connection of the
two to each other is the third, the actual determined both as being reflected
into itself and as this being immediately existing. This third is necessity.
But first, since the actual and the possible are formal distinctions, their
connection is likewise only formal, and consists only in this, that the one
just like the other is a positedness, or in contingency.
Second, because in contingency the actual as well as the possible are a
positedness, because they have retained their determination, real actuality
now arises, and with it also real possibility and relative necessity.
Third, the reflection of relative necessity into itself yields absolute necessity, which is absolute possibility and actuality.
a. contingency 15 or formal actuality,
possibility, and necessity

11.382

1. Actuality is formal inasmuch as, as a first actuality, it is only immediate,
unreflected actuality, and hence is only in this form determination but not
as the totality of form. And so it is nothing more than a being, or concrete
existence in general. But because by essence it is not mere concrete existence
but is the form-unity of the in-itselfness or inwardness and externality, it
immediately contains in-itselfness or possibility. What is actual is possible.
2. This possibility is actuality reflected into itself. But this reflectedness, itself a first, is equally something formal and consequently only the
determination of self-identity or of the in-itself in general.
15

Zufälligkeit, which can be translated as “contingency” and also as “accidentality,” which is the term
that I would prefer. But Hegel later shifts to the Latinate Accidentalität, very likely to connect the
term with “accident” as contrasted to “substance.”

Actuality

479

But because the determination is here totality of form, this in-itself is
determined as sublated or essentially only with reference to actuality; as the
negative of actuality, it is posited as negative. Possibility entails, therefore,
two moments. It has first the positive moment of being a being-reflectedinto-itself. But this being-reflected-into-itself, since in the absolute form it
is reduced to a moment, no longer has the value of essence but has rather
the negative meaning that possibility is (in a second moment) something
deficient, that it points to an other, to actuality, and is completed in this
other.
According to the first, merely positive side, possibility is therefore the
mere form determination of self-identity, or the form of essentiality. As such
it is the relationless, indeterminate receptacle of everything in general. –
In this formal sense of possibility, everything is possible that does not contract
itself; the realm of possibility is therefore limitless manifoldness. But every
manifold is determined in itself and as against an other: it possesses negation
within. Indifferent diversity passes over as such into opposition; but opposition is contradiction. Therefore, all things are just as much contradictory
and hence impossible.
– When we therefore say of something that “it is possible,” this purely
formal assertion is just as superficial and empty as the principle of contradiction, and any content that we put into it, “A is possible,” says no more
than “A is A.” Left undeveloped, this content has the form of simplicity;
only after being resolved into its determinations, does difference emerge
within it. To the extent that we stop at that simple form, the content
remains something self-identical and hence a possible. But we do not say
anything by it, just as we do not with the principle of identity.
Yet the possible amounts to more than just the principle of identity.
The possible is reflected immanent reflectedness; or the identical simply as a
moment of the totality, hence also as determined not to be in itself; it therefore
has the second determination of being only a possible and the ought-to-be of
the totality of form. Without this ought-to-be, possibility is essentiality as
such; but the absolute form entails this, that essence itself is only a moment
and that it has no truth without being. Possibility is this mere essentiality,
but so posited as to be only a moment, to be disproportionate with respect
to the absolute form. It is the in-itself, determined as only a posited or,
equally, as not to be in itself. –
Internally, therefore, possibility is contradiction, or it is impossibility.
This finds expression at first in this way, that possibility as form determination posited as sublated possesses a content in general. As possible, this
content is an in-itself which is at the same time something sublated or an

11.383

480

11.384

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

otherness. But because this content is only a possible, an other opposite to it
is equally possible. “A is A”; then, too, “– A is – A.” These two statements
each express the possibility of its content determination. But, as identical
statements, they are indifferent to each other; that the other is also added,
is not posited in either. Possibility is the connection comparing the two; as
a reflection of the totality, it implies that the opposite also is possible. It is
therefore the ground for drawing the connection that, because A equals A, –
A also equals – A; entailed in the possible A there is also the possible not-A,
and it is this reference itself connecting them which determines both as
possible.
But this connection, in which the one possible also contains its other, is
as such a contradiction that sublates itself. Now, since it is determined to
be reflective and, as we have just seen, reflectively self-sublating, it is also
therefore an immediate and it consequently becomes actuality.
3. This actuality is not the first actuality but reflected actuality, posited
as unity of itself and possibility. What is actual is as such possible; it is in
immediate positive identity with possibility; but the latter has determined
itself as only possibility; consequently the actual is also determined as only a
possible. And because possibility is immediately contained in actuality, it is
immediately in it as sublated, as only possibility. Conversely, actuality which
is in unity with possibility is only sublated immediacy; or again, because
formal actuality is only immediate first actuality, it is only a moment, only
sublated actuality, or only possibility.
With this we also have a more precise expression of the extent to which
possibility is actuality. Possibility is not yet all actuality; there has been no
talk yet of real and absolute actuality. It is still only the possibility as it first
presented itself, namely the formal possibility that has determined itself
as being only possibility and hence the formless actuality which is only
being or concrete existence in general. Everything possible has therefore in
general a being or a concrete existence.
This unity of possibility and actuality is contingency. – The contingent
is an actual which is at the same time determined as only possible, an
actual whose other or opposite equally is. This actuality is, therefore, mere
being or concrete existence, but posited in its truth as having the value of
a positedness or a possibility. Conversely, possibility is immanent reflection
or the in-itself posited as positedness; what is possible is an actual in this
sense of actuality, that it has only as much value as contingent actuality; it
is itself something contingent.
The contingent thus presents these two sides. First, in so far as it has
possibility immediately in it, or, what is the same, in so far as this possibility

Actuality

481

is sublated in it, it is not positedness, nor is it mediated, but is immediate
actuality; it has no ground. – Because this immediate actuality pertains also
to the possible, the latter is determined no less than the actual as contingent
and is likewise groundless.
But, second, the contingent is the actual as what is only possible, or as
a positedness; thus the possible also, as formal in-itself, is only positedness.
Consequently, the two are both not in and for themselves but have their
immanent reflection in an other, or they do have a ground.
The contingent thus has no ground because it is contingent; and for
that same reason it has a ground, because it is contingent.
It is the posited, immediate conversion of inner and outer, or of
immanently-reflected-being and being, each into the other – posited,
because possibility and actuality both have this determination in them
by being moments of the absolute form. – So actuality, in its immediate unity with possibility, is only concrete existence and is determined as
groundless, something only posited or only possible; or, as reflected and determined over against possibility, it is separated from possibility, from immanent reflectedness, and then, too, is no less immediately only a possible. –
Likewise possibility, as simple in-itself, is something immediate, only an
existent in general; or, opposed to actuality, it equally is an in-itself without
actuality, only a possible, but, for that very reason, again only a concrete,
not immanently reflected, existence in general.
This absolute restlessness of the becoming of these two determinations is
contingency. But for this reason, because each determination immediately
turns into the opposite, in this opposite each equally rejoins itself, and this
identity of the two, of each in the other, is necessity.
The necessary is an actual; as such it is immediate, groundless; but it
equally has its actuality through an other or in its ground and is at the
same time the positedness of this ground and its reflection into itself; the
possibility of the necessary is a sublated one. The contingent is therefore
necessary because the actual is determined as a possible; its immediacy
is consequently sublated and is repelled into the ground or the in-itself,
and into the grounded, equally because its possibility, this ground-groundedconnection, is simply sublated and posited as being. What is necessary is,
and this existent is itself the necessary. At the same time it is in itself; this
immanent reflection is an other than that immediacy of being, and the
necessity of the existent is an other. Thus the existent is not the necessary;
but this in-itself is itself only positedness; it is sublated and itself immediate.
And so actuality, in that from which it is distinguished, in possibility, is
identical with itself. As this identity, it is necessity.

11.385

482

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
b. relative necessity or real actuality,
possibility, and necessity

11.386

1. The necessity which has resulted is formal because its moments are formal,
that is, simple determinations which are a totality only as an immediate
unity, or as an immediate conversion of the one into the other, and thus
lack the shape of self-subsistence. – The unity in this formal necessity is
therefore simple at first, and indifferent to its differences. As the immediate
unity of the form determinations, this necessity is actuality, but an actuality
which, since its unity is now determined as indifferent to the difference of
the form determinations, has a content. This content as an indifferent
identity contains the form also as indifferent, that is, as a mere variety of
determinations, and is a manifold content in general. This actuality is real
actuality.
Real actuality is as such at first the thing of many properties, the concretely existing world; but it is not the concrete existence that dissolves into
appearance but, as actuality, it is at the same time an in-itself and immanent
reflection; it preserves itself in the manifoldness of mere concrete existence;
its externality is an inner relating only to itself. What is actual can act; something announces its actuality by what it produces. Its relating to an other
is the manifestation of itself, and this manifestation is neither a transition
(the immediate something refers to the other in this way) nor an appearing
(in this way the thing only is in relation to an other); it is a self-subsistent
which has its immanent reflection, its determinate essentiality, in another
self-subsistent.
Now real actuality likewise has possibility immediately present in it. It
contains the moment of the in-itself; but, since it is in the first instance
only immediate unity, it is in one of the determinations of form and hence
distinguished, as immediate existent, from the in-itself or possibility.
2. This possibility, as the in-itself of real actuality, is itself real possibility, at
first the in-itself full of content. – Formal possibility is immanent reflection
only as abstract identity, the absence of contradiction in a something. But
when we delve into the determinations, the circumstances, the conditions
of a fact in order to discover its possibility, we do not stop at this formal
possibility but consider its real possibility.
This real possibility is itself immediate concrete existence, but no longer
because possibility as such, as a formal moment, is immediately its opposite,
a non-reflected actuality, but because this determination pertains to it by
the very fact of being real possibility. The real possibility of a fact is therefore
the immediately existent manifoldness of circumstances that refer to it.

Actuality

483

This manifoldness of existence is therefore indeed both possibility and
actuality, but their identity is at first only the content which is indifferent to
these form determinations; they therefore constitute the form, determined
as against their identity. – Or the immediate real actuality, because it is
immediate, is determined as against its possibility; as this determinate and
hence reflected actuality, it is real possibility. This real possibility is now
indeed the posited whole of the form, but of the form in the determinateness
of actuality as formal or immediate and equally of possibility as the abstract
in-itself. This actuality, therefore, which constitutes the possibility of a fact,
is not its own possibility but the in-itself of an other actual; itself, it is the
actuality that ought to be sublated, the possibility as only possibility. – Real
possibility thus constitutes the totality of conditions, a dispersed actuality
which is not reflected into itself but is determined to be the in-itself of an
other and intended in this determination to return to itself.
What is really possible is, therefore, something formally identical according to its in-itself, free of contradiction because of its simple content determination; but, as self-identical, this something must also not contradict
itself according to its developed and differentiated circumstances and all
else connected with it. But, secondly, because it is manifold in itself and in
manifold connection with others, and variety inherently passes over into
opposition, it is contradictory. Whenever a possibility is in question, and
the issue is to demonstrate its contradiction, one need only fasten on to
the multiplicity that it contains as content or as its conditioned concrete
existence, and from this the contradiction will easily be discovered. – And
this contradiction is not just a function of comparing; on the contrary, the
manifold of concrete existence is in itself this, to sublate itself and to founder
to the ground: in this it explicitly has the determination of being only a
possibility. – Whenever all the conditions of a fact are completely present,
the fact is actually there; the completeness of the conditions is the totality
as in the content, and the fact is itself this content determined as being
equally actual as possible. In the sphere of the conditioned ground, the
conditions have the form (that is, the ground or the reflection that stands
on its own) outside them, and it is this form that makes them moments
of the fact and elicits concrete existence in them.16 Here, on the contrary,
the immediate actuality is not determined to be condition by virtue of a
presupposing reflection, but the supposition is rather that the immediate
actuality is itself the possibility.
16

Cf. above, 11.312ff.

11.387

484

11.388

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

In self-sublating real possibility, it is a twofold that is now sublated; for this possibility is itself the twofold of actuality and possibility.
(1) The actuality is formal, or is a concrete existence which appeared to
subsist immediately, and through its sublating becomes reflected being, the
moment of an other, and thus comes in possession of the in-itself. (2) That
concrete existence was also determined as possibility or as the in-itself, but
of an other. As it sublates itself, this in-itself of the other is also sublated
and passes over into actuality. – This movement of self-sublating real possibility thus produces the same moments that are already present, but each as
it comes to be out of the other; in this negation, therefore, the possibility
is also not a transition but a self-rejoining. – In formal possibility, if something was possible, then an other than it, not itself, was also possible. Real
possibility no longer has such an other over against it, for it is real in so
far as it is itself also actuality. Therefore, as its immediate concrete existence,
the circle of conditions, sublates itself, it makes itself into the in-itselfness
which it already is, namely the in-itself of an other. And conversely, since
its moment of in-itselfness thereby sublates itself at the same time, it
becomes actuality, hence the moment which it likewise already is. – What
disappears is consequently this, that actuality was determined as the possibility or the in-itself of an other, and, conversely, the possibility as an
actuality which is not that of which it is the possibility.
3. The negation of real possibility is thus its self-identity; inasmuch as in
its sublating it is thus within itself the recoiling of this sublating, it is real
necessity.
What is necessary cannot be otherwise; but what is only possible can be,
for possibility is the in-itself which is only positedness and hence essentially
otherness. Formal possibility is this identity as transition into the other as
such; but real possibility, since it has the other moment of actuality within
it, is already itself necessity. Hence what is really possible can no longer
be otherwise; under the given conditions and circumstances, nothing else
can follow. Real possibility and necessity are, therefore, only apparently
distinguished; theirs is an identity that does not first come to be but is
already presupposed at their base. Real possibility is therefore a connection
full of content, for the content is that identity, existing in itself, which is
indifferent to form.
But this necessity is at the same time relative. – For it has a presupposition
from which it begins; it takes its start from the contingent. For the real
actual is as such the determinate actual, and first has its determinateness as
immediate being in that it is a multiplicity of concretely existing circumstances; but this immediate being as determinateness is also the negative of

Actuality

485

itself, is an in-itself or possibility and so real possibility. As this unity of the
two moments, it is the totality of form, but a totality which is still external
to itself; it is the unity of possibility and actuality in such a way that (1) the
manifold concrete existence is possibility immediately or positively: it is a
possible, something self-identical as such, because it is an actual; (2) inasmuch as this possibility of concrete existence is posited, it is determined as
only possibility, as the immediate conversion of actuality into its opposite –
or as contingency. Hence this possibility which immediate actuality has
within in so far as it is condition, is only the in-itself or the possibility of an
other. Because this in-itself, as shown,17 sublates itself and this positedness
is itself posited, real possibility becomes indeed necessity; but this necessity
thus begins from that unity of the possible and the actual which is not yet
reflected into itself – this presupposing and the movement which turns back
unto itself are still separate – or necessity has not yet determined itself out of
itself into contingency.
The relativity of real possibility is manifested in the content by the fact
that the latter is at first only the identity indifferent to form, is therefore
distinct from it and a determinate content in general. A necessary reality is
for this reason any limited actuality which, because of its limitation, is in
some other respect also only something contingent.
In actual fact, therefore, real necessity is in itself also contingency. – This
first becomes apparent because real necessity, although something necessary
according to form, is still something limited according to content, and
derives its contingency through the latter. But this contingency is to be
found also in the form of real necessity because, as shown,18 real possibility
is the necessary only in itself, but as posited it is the mutual otherness of
actuality and possibility. Real necessity thus contains contingency; it is the
turning back into itself from the restless being-the-other-of-each-other of
actuality and possibility, but not the turning back from itself to itself.
In itself, therefore, we have here the unity of necessity and contingency;
this unity is to be called absolute actuality.
c. absolute necessity
Real necessity is determinate necessity; formal necessity does not yet have
any content and determinateness in it. The determinateness of necessity
consists in its having its negation, contingency, within it. This is how it
has shown itself to be.
17

Cf. above, 11.387.

18

Cf. above, 11.388.

11.389

486

11.390

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

But in its first simplicity this determinateness is actuality; determinate
necessity is therefore immediate actual necessity. This actuality which is
itself as such necessary, since it contains necessity as its in-itself, is absolute
actuality – an actuality which can no longer be otherwise, for its in-itself is
not possibility but necessity itself.
But because this actuality is posited to be absolute, that is to say, to
be itself the unity of itself and possibility, it is consequently only an empty
determination, or it is contingency. – This emptiness of its determination
makes it into a mere possibility, one which can just as well be an other and
is determined as possibility. But this possibility is itself absolute possibility,
for it is precisely the possibility of being equally determined as possibility
and actuality. For this reason, because it is this indifference towards itself,
it is posited as empty, contingent determination.
Thus real necessity not only contains contingency implicitly, but the
latter also becomes in it; but this becoming, as externality, is itself only the
in-itself of the necessity, because it is only an immediate determinateness. But
it is not only this but the necessity’s own becoming – or the presupposition
which it had is its own positing. For as real necessity, it is the sublatedness
of actuality into possibility and of possibility into actuality; because it is
this simple conversion of one of these moments into the other, it is also
their positive unity, for in the other each rejoins itself. And so it is actuality,
yet an actuality which is nothing but this rejoining of form with itself. Its
negative positing of these moments is thereby itself the presupposing or the
positing of itself as sublated, or the positing of immediacy.
But it is precisely in this positing that this actuality is determined as the
negative; it rejoins itself from the actuality which was real possibility; this
new actuality thus comes to be only out of its in-itself, out of the negation
of itself. – Consequently, it is at the same time immediately determined
as possibility, as mediated by virtue of its negation. But accordingly, this
possibility is immediately nothing but this mediating in which the in-itself,
namely the possibility itself and the mediating, both in the same manner,
are positedness. – Thus it is necessity which is equally the sublating of this
positedness, or the positing of immediacy and of the in-itself, just as in this
very sublating it is the determining of it as positedness. It is necessity itself,
therefore, that determines itself as contingency: in its being it repels itself
from itself, in this very repelling has only returned to itself, and in this
turning back which is its being has repelled itself from itself.
Thus has form pervaded in its realization all its distinctions; it has made
itself transparent and, as absolute necessity, is only this simple self-identity of
being in its negation, or in essence. – The distinction itself of content and

Actuality

487

form has thus equally vanished; for that unity of possibility in actuality
and actuality in possibility is the form which in its determinateness or
in positedness is indifferent towards itself: it is the fact full of content on
which the form of necessity externally ran its course. But necessity is thus
this reflected identity of the two determinations as indifferent to them,
and hence the form determination of the in-itself as against the positedness,
and this possibility constitutes the limitation of the content which real
necessity had. The resolution of this difference is however the absolute
necessity whose content is this difference which in this necessity penetrates
itself.
Absolute necessity is therefore the truth in which actuality and possibility
in general as well as formal and real necessity return. – As we have just
seen,19 it is being which in its negation, in essence, refers itself to itself and
is being. It is equally simple immediacy or pure being and simple immanent
reflection or pure essence; it is this, that the two are one and the same. – The
absolutely necessary only is because it is; it otherwise has neither condition
nor ground. – But it equally is pure essence, its being the simple immanent
reflection; it is because it is. As reflection, it has a ground and a condition
but has only itself for this ground and condition. It is in-itself, but its
in-itself is its immediacy, its possibility is its actuality. – It is, therefore,
because it is; as the rejoining of being with itself, it is essence; but because
this simple is equally immediate simplicity, it is being.
Absolute necessity is thus the reflection or form of the absolute, the unity
of being and essence, simple immediacy which is absolute negativity. On
the one hand, therefore, its differences are not like the determinations
of reflection but an existing manifoldness, a differentiated actuality in the
shape of others independently subsisting over against each other. On the
other hand, since its connection is that of absolute identity, it is the absolute conversion of its actuality into its possibility and its possibility into
its actuality. – Absolute necessity is therefore blind. On the one hand,
the two different terms determined as actuality and possibility have the
shape of immanent reflection as being; they are therefore free actualities,
neither of which reflectively shines in the other, nor will either allow in
it a trace of its reference to the other; grounded in itself, each is inherently necessary. Necessity as essence is concealed in this being; the reciprocal
contact of these actualities appears, therefore, as an empty externality; the
actuality of the one in the other is the possibility which is only possibility, contingency. For being is posited as absolutely necessary, as the self-mediation
19

In the preceding page, 11.390.

11.391

488

11.392

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

which is the absolute negation of mediation-through-other, or being which
is identical only with being; consequently, an other that has actuality
in being, is therefore determined as something merely possible, as empty
positedness.
But this contingency is rather absolute necessity; it is the essence of those
free, inherently necessary actualities. This essence is averse to light, because
there is no reflective shining in these actualities, no reflex – because they
are grounded purely in themselves, are shaped for themselves, manifest
themselves only to themselves – because they are only being. – But their
essence will break forth in them and will reveal what it is and what they are.
The simplicity of their being, their resting just on themselves, is absolute
negativity; it is the freedom of their reflectionless20 immediacy. This negative
breaks forth in them because being, through this same negativity which
is its essence, is self-contradiction; it will break forth against this being in
the form of being, hence as the negation of those actualities, a negation
absolutely different from their being; it will break forth as their nothing, as an
otherness which is just as free towards them as their being is free. – Yet this
negative was not to be missed in them. In their self-based shape they are
indifferent to form, are a content and consequently different actualities and a
determinate content. This content is the mark that necessity impressed upon
them by letting them go free as absolutely actual – for in its determination
it is an absolute turning back into itself. It is the mark to which necessity
appeals as witness to its right, and, overcome by it, the actualities now
perish. This manifestation of what determinateness is in its truth, that it is
negative self-reference, is a blind collapse into otherness; in the sphere of
immediate existence, the shining or the reflection that breaks out in it is a
becoming, a transition of being into nothing. But, conversely, being is equally
essence, and becoming is reflection or a shining. Thus the externality is its
inwardness; their connection is one of absolute identity; and the transition
of the actual into the possible, of being into nothing, is a self-rejoining;
contingency is absolute necessity; it is itself the presupposing of that first
absolute actuality.
This identity of being with itself in its negation is now substance. It is this
unity as in its negation or as in contingency; and so, as relation to itself, it
is substance. The blind transition of necessity is rather the absolute’s own
exposition, its movement in itself which, in its externalization, reveals itself
instead.
20

scheinlos.

c h a p ter 3

The absolute relation

Absolute necessity is not so much the necessary, even less a necessary, but
necessity – being simply as reflection. It is relation because it is a distinguishing whose moments are themselves the whole totality of necessity, and
therefore subsist absolutely, but do so in such a way that their subsisting is
one subsistence, and the difference only the reflective shine of the movement
of exposition, and this reflective shine is the absolute itself. – Essence as
such is reflection or a shining; as absolute relation, however, essence is the
reflective shine posited as reflective shine, one which, as such self-referring,
is absolute actuality. – The absolute, first expounded by external reflection,
as absolute form or as necessity now expounds itself; this self-exposition is
its self-positing, and is only this self-positing. – Just as the light of nature
is not a something, nor is it a thing, but its being is rather only its shining,
so manifestation is self-identical absolute actuality.
The sides of the absolute relation are not, therefore, attributes. In the
attribute the absolute reflectively shines only in one of its moments, as
in a presupposition that external reflection has simply assumed. But the
expositor of the absolute is the absolute necessity which, as self-determining,
is identical with itself. Since this necessity is the reflective shining posited
as reflective shining, the sides of this relation, because they are as shine,
are totalities; for as shine, the differences are themselves and their opposite,
that is, they are the whole; and, conversely, they thus are only shine because
they are totalities. Thus this distinguishing, this reflecting shining of the
absolute, is only the identical positing of itself.
This relation in its immediate concept is the relation of substance and
accidents, the immediate internal disappearing and becoming of the absolute reflective shine. If substance determines itself as a being-for-itself over
against an other or is absolute relation as something real, then we have
the relation of causality. Finally, when this last relation passes over into
reciprocal causality by referring itself to itself, we then have the absolute
relation also posited in accordance with the determination it contains;
489

11.393

490

11.394

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

this posited unity of itself in its determinations, which are posited as
the whole itself and consequently equally as determinations, is then the
concept.

a. the relation of substantiality
Absolute necessity is absolute relation because it is not being as such but
being that is because it is, being as the absolute mediation of itself with
itself. This being is substance; as the final unity of essence and being,
it is the being in all being. It is neither the unreflected immediate, nor
something abstract standing behind concrete existence and appearance,
but the immediate actuality itself, and it is this actuality as being absolutely
reflected into itself, as a subsisting that exists in and for itself. – Substance,
as this unity of being and reflection, is essentially the shining and the
positedness of itself. The shining is a self-referring shining, thus it is; this
being is substance as such. Conversely, this being is only the self-identical
positedness, and as such it is shining totality, accidentality.
This shining is identity as identity of form – the unity of possibility and
actuality. It is becoming at first, contingency as the sphere of coming-to-be
and passing-away; for in the determination of immediacy the connection
of possibility and actuality is the immediate conversion of the two into each
other as existents, of each into its other as only an other to it. – But because
being is shine, their relation is also one of identical terms or of terms
shining in one another, that is, reflection. The movement of accidentality,
therefore, exhibits in each of its moments the mutual reflective shine of
the categories of being and of the reflective determinations of essence. –
The immediate something has a content; its immediacy is at the same time
reflected indifference towards the form. This content is determinate, and
because this determinateness is one of being, the something passes over into
an other. But quality is also a determinateness of reflection; as such, it
is indifferent diversity. But this diversity is animated into opposition, and
returns to the ground which is the nothing, but also immanent reflection.
This reflection sublates itself; but it is itself also reflected in-itselfness: so
it is possibility, and this in-itselfness, in its transition which is equally
immanent reflection, is necessary actuality.
This movement of accidentality is the actuosity of substance as the tranquil coming forth of itself. It is not active against something, but only against
itself as a simple unresisting element. The sublating of a presupposition is
the disappearing shine; only in the act of sublating the immediate does this

The absolute relation

491

immediate itself come to be, or is that shining; the beginning that begins
from itself is first of all the positing of this itself from which the beginning
is made.
Substance, as this identity of the reflective shining, is the totality of the
whole and embraces accidentality in itself, and accidentality is the whole
substance itself. Its differentiation into the simple identity of being and the
flux of accidents within it is one form of its shining. That simple being
is the formless substance of the imagination for which the shine has not
determined itself as shine, but which holds on, as on an absolute, to this
indeterminate identity that has no truth but only is the determinateness
of immediate actuality, or equally so of in-itselfness or possibility – form
determinations that fall into accidentality. –
The other determination, the flux of accidents, is the absolute form-unity
of accidentality, substance as absolute power. – The ceasing-to-be of the
accident is its return as actuality into itself, as into its in-itself or into its
possibility; but this, its in-itself, is itself only a positedness and therefore also
actuality, and because these form determinations are equally determinations
of content, this possible is an actual differently determined also according to
content. Substance manifests itself through the actuality, with the content
of the latter into which it translates the possible, as creative power, and,
through the possibility to which it reduces the actual, as destructive power;
the creating is destructive and the destructing creative, for the negative and
the positive, possibility and negativity are in substantial necessity absolutely
united.
The accidents as such – and there are several of them, because plurality is
one of the determinations of being – have no power over each other. They
are the immediately existent something, or the something that immediately exists for itself; concretely existing things of manifold properties; or
wholes consisting of parts, self-subsisting parts; forces in need of reciprocal
solicitation and conditioning each other. In so far as such an accidental
being seems to exercise a power over an other, that power is that of substance that encompasses them both within itself and, as negativity, posits
an inequality of value: one it determines as ceasing-to-be and another as
having a different content and as coming-to-be, the one as passing over into
its possibility and the other into actuality accordingly – ever dividing itself
into this difference of form and content and ever purifying itself of this
one-sidedness, but in this purification ever falling back into determination
and division. – One accident thus drives out another only because its own
subsisting is this very totality of form and content into which it, as well as
its other, equally perishes.

11.395

492
11.396

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Because of this immediate identity and presence of substance in the
accidents, there is still no real difference present. In this first determination, substance is not yet manifested according to its whole concept.
When substance, as self-identical being-in-and-for-itself, is differentiated
from itself as a totality of accidents, it is substance itself, as power, that
mediates the difference. This power is necessity, the positive persistence of
the accidents in their negativity and their mere positedness in their subsistence; this middle is thus the unity of substantiality and accidentality
themselves, a middle whose extremes have no subsistence of their own.
Substantiality is, therefore, only the relation as immediately vanishing; it
refers to itself not as a negative and, as the immediate unity of power with
itself, is in the form only of its identity, not of its negative essence; only
one of its moments, that of negativity or of difference, vanishes altogether;
the other moment of identity does not. – Another way of considering the
matter is this. The shine or the accidentality is indeed in itself substance
by virtue of the power, but is not thus posited as this self-identical shine;
and therefore substance has only the accidentality, not itself, for its shape
or positedness; it is not substance as substance. The relation of substantiality is at first, therefore, only this, that substance manifests itself as a
formal power whose differences are not substantial; in fact, substance only
is as the inner of the accidents, and these only are in the substance. Or
this relation is only the shining of totality as becoming; but it is equally
reflection and, for this reason, the accidentality which substance is in
itself is also posited as such; it is thus determined as self-referring negativity over against itself, determined as self-referring simple identity with
itself; and it is substance that exists in and for itself, substance endowed with
power. Thus the relation of substantiality passes over into the relation of
causality.

b. the relation of causality

11.397

Substance is power – power reflected into itself, not transitive power but
power that posits determinations and distinguishes them from itself. As selfreferring in its determining, it is itself that which it posits as a negative or
makes into a positedness. This positedness is, as such, sublated substantiality,
the merely posited, the effect; the substance that exists for itself is, however,
cause.
This relation of causality is in the first place only this relation of cause
and effect; as such, it is the formal relation of causality.

The absolute relation

493

a. Formal causality
1. Cause is originative as against the effect. – As power, substance is the
reflective shining, or it has accidentality. But in this shining, as power, it
equally is an immanent reflection; it thus expounds its transition, and this
reflective shine is determined as reflective shine, or the accident is posited
as being just this, something posited. – But in its determining substance
does not proceed from accidentality, as if the latter were an other beforehand and were determined as determinateness only then, but the two are
one actuosity. Substance as power determines itself; but this determining is
immediately itself the sublation of the determining and a turning back.
It determines itself: substance, that which determines, is thus the immediate
and that which is itself already determined; in determining itself it therefore
posits the already determined as determined; and thus it has sublated the
positedness and has returned into itself. – Conversely, because this turning
back is the negative reference of substance to itself, it is itself a determining
or the repelling of itself from itself; it is through this turning back that the
determinate comes to be from which substance seems to begin and now to
posit as something which it has found already determined. – Absolute actuosity is thus cause – the power of substance in its truth as the manifestation
by which that which is in itself, the accident or the positedness, is immediately expounded in its becoming, is posited as positedness, as effect. – This
effect is, therefore, first the same as what the accidentality of the relation
of substance is, namely substance as positedness; but, second, an accident
is substantially such only by vanishing, only as transient; but as effect it
is positedness as self-identical; in the effect the cause is manifested as the
whole substance, that is to say, as reflected into itself in the positedness
itself as such.
2. Over against this positedness reflected into itself, this determined as
determined, there stands substance as the non-posited original. Because
substance is as absolute power a turning back into itself, yet this turning
back is itself a determining, it is no longer the mere in-itself of its accident
but is also posited as this in-itself. Substance has actuality, therefore, only
as cause. But this actuality in which its in-itself, its determinateness in the
relation of substantiality, is now posited as determinateness, is effect; therefore substance has the actuality which it has as cause only in its effect. –
This is the necessity which is cause. – It is actual substance, because as
power substance determines itself; but it is at the same time cause, because
it expounds this determinateness or posits it as positedness and thus
posits its actuality as positedness or effect. This is the other of cause, the

11.398

494

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

positedness as against the original and as mediated through it. But cause,
as necessity, equally sublates this mediating and, in determining itself as
the originally self-referring term, as against the mediated, turns back to
itself; for positedness is determined as positedness, and consequently as
self-identical; therefore, cause is truly actual and self-identical only in its
effect. – The effect is therefore necessary, because it is the manifestation of
the cause or is this necessity which the cause is. – Only as this necessity is
cause self-moving, self-initiating without being solicited by another, selfsubsisting source of production out of itself; it must effect; its originariness is
this, that it is because its immanent reflection is a positing that determines
and conversely; the two are one unity.
Consequently, an effect contains nothing whatever that the cause does not
contain. Conversely, a cause contains nothing that is not in its effect. A cause
is cause only to the extent that it produces an effect; to be cause is nothing
but this determination of having an effect, and to be effect is nothing but this
determination of having a cause. Cause as such entails its effect, and the
effect entails the cause; in so far as a cause has not acted yet or has ceased
to act, it is not a cause; and the effect, in so far as its cause is no longer
present, is no longer an effect but an indifferent actuality.
3. Now in this identity of cause and effect the form distinguishing them
respectively, as that which exists in itself and that which is posited, is
sublated. The cause is extinguished in its effect and the effect too is thereby
extinguished, for it only is the determinateness of the cause. Hence this
causality which has been extinguished in the effect is an immediacy which
is indifferent to the relation of cause and effect and comes to it externally.
b. The determinate relation of causality

11.399

1. The self-identity of cause in its effect is the sublation of its power and
negativity, hence a unity which is indifferent to differences of form, that
is to say, content. – This content, therefore, refers to form (here causality)
only implicitly. The two are thus posited as diverse, and with respect to
content the form is itself a causality which is only immediately efficient, a
contingent causality.
Further, the content is as thus determined an internally diversified content; and the cause is determined in accordance with its content, and so
is therefore also the effect. – The content, since reflectedness here is also
immediate actuality, is to this extent actual, but finite, substance.
This is now the relation of causality in its reality and finitude. As formal,
it is the infinite relation of absolute power, the content of which is pure

The absolute relation

495

manifestation or necessity. As finite causality, on the contrary, it has a given
content and, as an external difference, it runs its course here and there over
it, this identical content which in its determination is one and the same
substance.
Because of this identity of content, this causality is an analytic proposition. It is the same fact that comes up once as cause and then again as
effect, in one case as something subsisting on its own and in the other
as positedness or determination. Since these determinations of form are
an external reflection, it is up to the essentially tautological consideration
of a subjective understanding to determine an appearance as effect and to
rise from it to its cause in order to comprehend and explain it. The same
content is being repeated; there is nothing else in the cause which is not in
the effect. – For instance, rain is the cause of wetness which is its effect; “the
rain makes wet,” this is an analytical proposition; the same water which is
rain is wetness; as rain, this water is only in the form of a subject by itself;
as wetness or moisture, it is on the contrary in adjectival form, something
posited no longer meant to have a subsistence on its own; and the one
determination, just like the other, is external to water. – Again, the cause of
this color is a coloring agent, a pigment which is one and the same actuality,
once in the form of an agent external to it, that is, is externally linked to
an agent different from it; but again in the determination, equally external
to it, of an effect. – The cause of an act is the inner intention of the subject
who is the agent, and this intention is the same in content and value as the
existence which it attains through the action. If the movement of a body
is considered as effect, the cause of this effect is then a propulsive force;
but it is the same quantum of movement which is present before and after
the propulsion, the same concrete existence which the propulsive body
contained and which it communicated to the one propelled; and what it
communicated, it lost in equal measure.
The cause, say the painter or the propulsive body, does have yet another
content than, in the case of the painter, the colors and the form combining
these into a painting; and, in the other case, the movement of specific
strength and direction. But this further content is a contingent side-being
which has nothing to do with the cause; whatever other qualities the painter
might possess besides being the painter of this painting, this does not enter
into the painting; only those of his properties which are displayed in the
effect are present in him as cause; as for the rest, he is not a cause. Likewise,
whether the propulsive body is of stone or wood, green, yellow, and so
on, all this does not enter into its propulsion and, to this extent, is not a
cause.

11.400

496

11.401

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

It is worth noting in regard to this tautology of the relation of causality
that the tautology does not seem to occur whenever it is not the proximate,
but the remote cause which is at issue. The alteration of form which the
basic fact undergoes as it passes through several middle terms hides the
identity which it preserves across them. In this proliferation of causes
introduced between it and the last effect, that fact is linked to other things
and circumstances, so that it is not that first term, which is declared the
cause, but all these several causes together, that contain the complete effect. –
For instance, if a man developed his talents in circumstances due to the
loss of his father who was hit by a bullet in battle, then this shot (or still
further back, the war or some cause of the war, and on to infinity) could
be adduced as the cause of the man’s skillfulness. But it is clear that the
shot, for one, is not the cause by itself but only in conjunction with the
other efficient determinations. Or more precisely, the shot is not the cause
at all, but only a single moment that pertained to the circumstances of the
possibility.
But it is the inadmissible application of the relation of causality to the
relations of physico-organic and spiritual life that must be noted above all.
Here that which is called the cause does indeed show itself to be of a different
content than the effect, but this is because anything that has an effect on a
living thing is independently determined, altered, and transmuted by the
latter, for the living thing will not let the cause come to its effect, that is, it
sublates it as cause. Thus it is inadmissible to say that nourishment is the
cause of blood, or that such and such a dish, or chill and humidity, are the
causes of fever or of what have you; it is equally inadmissible to give the Ionic
climate as the cause of Homer’s works, or Caesar’s ambition as the cause of
the fall of Rome’s republican constitution. In history in general there are
indeed spiritual masses and individuals at play and influencing each other;
but it is of the nature of spirit, in a much higher sense than it is of the
character of living things, that it will not admit another originative principle
within itself, or that it will not let a cause continue to work its causality
in it undisturbed but will rather interrupt and transmute it. – But these
relations belong to the idea, and will come up for discussion then. – This
much can still be noted here, namely that in so far as the relation of cause
and effect is admitted, albeit in an inappropriate sense, the effect cannot
be greater than the cause. It has become a common witticism in history
to let great effects arise from small causes and to cite as the first cause of an
event of far-reaching and profound consequence an anecdote. Any such socalled first cause is to be regarded as no more than an occasion, an external
stimulus, of which the inner spirit of the event had no need, or could have

The absolute relation

497

used a countless number of others, in order to make its first appearance,
to give itself a first breath and announce itself. The converse is rather the
case. It is by the spirit that any such triviality and contingency is determined
in the first place to be the occasion of spirit. Historical arabesques that draw
a full-blown figure out of a slender stalk are no doubt an ingenious, but
highly superficial, practice. It is true that in the rise of the great out of
the small we witness everywhere the conversion that spirit works on the
external; but precisely for this reason the external is not the cause within
spirit; rather, that conversion itself sublates the relation of causality.
2. But this determinateness of the relation of causality, that content
and form are different and indifferent to each other, extends further. The
determination of form is also content determination; cause and effect, the
two sides of the relation, are therefore also another content. Or the content,
because it is only as the content of a form, has the difference of this form
within it and is essentially different. But this form of the content is the
relation of causality, which is a content identical in cause and the effect,
and consequently the different content is externally connected, on the one
hand with the cause and on the other with the effect; hence the content itself
does not enter into the effective action and into the relation.
This external content is therefore relationless – an immediate concrete
existence, or because it is as content the implicit identity of cause and effect,
it is also immediate, existent identity. This content is, therefore, anything
at all which has manifold determinations of its existence, among them also
this, that it is in some respect or other cause or also effect. In it, the form
determinations of cause and effect have their substrate, that is to say, their
essential subsistence – and each has a particular subsistence (since their
identity is their subsistence); but it is a subsistence which is at the same
time immediate, not their subsistence as unity of form or as relation.
But this thing is not only substrate but also substance, for it is identical
subsistence only as subsistence of the relation. Moreover, the substance is
finite substance, for it is determined as immediate over against its causality.
But it has causality at the same time, for it is just as much an identity as this
relation.21 – Now this substrate is, as cause, negative reference to itself. But
this “itself” to which it refers is, first, a positedness because it is determined
as immediately actual; this positedness, as content, is any determination
whatever. – Second, causality is external to the substrate and itself constitutes,
therefore, its positedness. Now since it is causal substance, its causality consists
in negatively referring itself to itself, hence to its positedness and external
21

sie eben so sehr nur das Identische als dieses Verhältnis ist.

11.402

498

11.403

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

causality. The effective action of this substance thus begins from something
external, frees itself from this external determination, and its turning back
into itself is the preservation of its immediate concrete existence and the
sublation of the one which is posited, and consequently of its causality as
such.
Take a stone that moves. It is a cause. Its movement is a determination
which it has. But, besides it, it contains yet many other determinations
(color, shape, and so on) that do not enter into its causality. Because
its immediate concrete existence is separated from its form-connection,
namely the form of causality, the latter is something external; the stone’s
movement and the causality attaching to it is in it only positedness. – But
the causality of the stone is also the stone’s own causality, as follows from
the fact that its substantial subsistence is the stone’s identical self-reference,
but that this is now determined as positedness and is therefore at the same
time negative self-reference. – Its causality, which is directed against itself as
a positedness or as an externality, consists therefore in sublating this and
through its removal in returning to itself – to this extent, therefore, in not
being self-identical in its positedness but only in restoring its originariness. –
Or again, rain is the cause of wetness, which is the same water as the rain.
This water has the determination of being rain and cause because this
determination has been posited in it by another; another force, or what
have you, has lifted it into the air and compressed it into a mass, the weight
of which makes it fall. Its being removed from the earth is a determination
alien to its original self-identity, to its gravity; its causality consists in
removing such determination and in restoring its original identity; but this
means also sublating its causality.
We now consider the second determinateness of causality which concerns
form; this relation is causality external to itself, as the originariness which is
within just as much positedness or effect. This union of opposite determination in an existent substrate constitutes the infinite regress from cause to
cause. – We start from an effect; the latter has as effect a cause; but this
cause has a cause in turn, and so on. Why does the cause have a cause in
turn? That is to say, why is the same side which was previously determined
as cause now determined as effect and therefore demands a new cause? –
Because the cause is something finite, a determinate in general; determined
as one moment of the form as against the effect; so it has its determinateness or negation outside it; but for this very reason it is itself finite, has its
determinateness within it and is thereby positedness or effect. Its identity as
this positedness is also posited, but it is a third term, the immediate substrate; causality is therefore external to itself, because its originariness is here

The absolute relation

499

an immediacy. The difference of form is therefore a first determinateness,
not yet determinateness posited as determinateness; it is existent otherness.
Finite reflection, on the one hand, stops short at this immediate, removes
the unity of form from it and makes it be cause in one respect and effect in
another; on the other hand, it transfers the unity of form into the infinite,
and through the endless progression expresses its impotence in attaining
and holding fast to this unity.
Exactly the same is the case of the effect, or rather the endless progression
from effect to effect is one and the same as the regression from cause to cause.
Just as in the latter a cause becomes an effect which has another cause
in turn, so too, conversely, the effect becomes a cause which has another
effect in turn. – The determinate cause under consideration begins from
an externality and returns in its effect back to itself, but not as cause;
on the contrary, it loses its causality in that process. But, conversely, the
effect arrives at a substrate which is substance, an original self-referring
subsistence; in it, therefore, that positedness becomes a positedness, that is
to say, this substance, as the effect is posited in it, behaves as cause. But
that first effect, the positedness that accrues to the substance externally, is
other than the second which the substance produces; for this second effect is
determined as the immanent reflection of substance whereas the first is in it
as an externality. – But because causality is here causality external to itself,
it also equally fails to return in its effect back to itself but becomes therein
external to itself; its effect becomes again a positedness in a substrate – as
in another substance which however equally makes this positedness into a
positedness, in other words, manifests itself as cause, again repels its effect
from itself, and so on, into bad infinity.
3. We now have to see what has resulted from the movement of determinate causality. – Formal causality expires in the effect and the element
of identity of these two moments emerges as a result, but it does so only
as an implicit unity of cause and effect to which the form connection is
external. – For this reason, the element of identity is immediate also with
respect to both of the two determinations of immediacy, first as in-itself,
as a content on which causality is deployed externally; second, as a concrete
existent substrate in which cause and effect inhere as different determinations of form. In this substrate, the two determinations are implicitly one,
but, on account of this implicitness or of the externality of form, each is
external to itself and hence, in its unity with the other, is also determined
as other with respect to it. Consequently, the cause has indeed an effect and
is at the same time itself effect; and the effect not only has a cause but is itself
also cause. But the effect which the cause has, and the effect which it is, are

11.404

500

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

different – as are also the cause which the effect has and the cause which it
is.
The outcome of the movement of the determinate relation of causality
is then this, that the cause does not just expire in the effect, and thereby the
effect as well, as in formal causality, but that by expiring in the effect the
cause comes to be again; that the effect vanishes in the cause, but equally
comes to be again in it. Each of these determinations sublates itself in its
positing, and posits itself in its sublating; what we have is not an external
transition of causality from one substrate to another, but its becomingother is at the same time its own positing. Causality thus pre-supposes itself
or conditions itself. The previously only implicit identity, the substrate, is
therefore now determined as presupposition or posited as against the efficient
causality, and the reflection hitherto only external to the identity is now in
relation to it.
c. Action and reaction

11.405

Causality is a presupposing activity. The cause is conditioned; it is a negative
reference to itself as a presupposed, as an external other which in itself, but
only in itself, is causality itself. This other is, as we have seen,22 the substantial
identity into which formal causality passes over, which now has determined
itself as against this causality as its negative. Or it is the same as the substance
of the causal relation, but a substance which is confronted by the power
of accidentality as itself substantial activity. – It is the passive substance. –
Passive is that which is immediate, or which exists-in-itself but is not also
for itself – pure being or essence in just this determinateness of abstract selfidentity. – Confronting the passive substance is the negatively self-referring
substance, the efficient substance. It is cause inasmuch as in determinate
causality it has restored itself out of the effect through the negation of itself –
a reflected being23 which in its otherness or as an immediate behaves
essentially as a positing activity and through its negation mediates itself.
Here, therefore, causality no longer has a substrate in which it inheres; it is
not a determination of form as against this identity but is itself substance,
or in other words, causality alone is at the origin. – The substrate is the
passive substance which causality has presupposed for itself.
This cause now acts, for it is the negative power over itself; at the same
time it is its own presupposition; thus it acts upon itself as upon an other,
22
23

Cf. above, 11.398.
“a reflected being” is added by Lasson. Hegel’s sentence does not otherwise parse.

The absolute relation

501

upon the passive substance. – Hence, it first sublates the otherness of this
substance and returns in it back to itself; second, it determines this same
substance, posits this sublation of its otherness or the substance’s turning
back into itself as a determinateness. This positedness, because it is at the
same time the substance’s turning back into itself, is at first its effect.
But conversely, because as presupposing it determines itself as its other, it
then posits the effect in this other, in the passive substance. – Or again,
because the passive substance is itself this double – namely a self-subsistent
other, and at the same time something presupposed and already implicitly
identical with the efficient cause – because of this, the action of the passive
substance is therefore itself double. It is at once both the sublation of
its determinateness, namely of its condition, or the sublation of the selfsubsistence of the passive substance; and also, in sublating its identity as
it sublates this substance, the pre-supposing of itself, that is, the positing
or supposing of itself as other. – Through this last moment, the passive
substance is preserved; that first sublation of it appears in this respect at
the same time also in this way, namely that only some determinations are
sublated in it, and its identity in the effect with the efficient cause occurs
in it externally.
To this extent it suffers violence. – Violence is the appearance of power,
or power as external. But power is something external only in so far as in its
action, that is, in the positing of itself, the causal substance is at the same
time a presupposing, that is, posits itself as sublated. Conversely, the act of
violence is therefore equally an act of power. The violent cause acts only on
an other which it presupposes; its effect on it is its negative self-reference,
or the manifestation of itself. The passive is the self-subsistent which is only
a posited, something internally fractured – an actuality which is condition,
though a condition that now is in its truth as an actuality that is only a
possible, or, conversely, an in-itself that is only the determinateness of the
in-itself, is only passive. To that which suffers violence, therefore, not only
is it possible to do violence, but violence must be done to it; that which
has dominion over an other, only has it because its power is that of the
other, a power which in that dominion manifests both itself and the other.
Through violence the passive substance is only posited as what it is in truth,
namely, that because it is the simple positive or the immediate substance,
for that very reason it is only something posited; the “pre-”24 that it has as
condition is the reflective shine of immediacy that the efficient causality
strips off from it.
24

das Voraus.

11.406

502

11.407

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Passive substance, therefore, is only given its due by the action on it of
another power. What it loses is the immediacy it had, the substantiality alien
to it. What comes to it as an alien something, namely that it is determined
as a positedness, is its own determination. – But now in being determined
in its positedness, or in its own determination, the result is that it is not
sublated but rather that it only rejoins itself and in its being determined
is, therefore, an originariness. – On the one hand, therefore, the passive
substance is preserved or posited by the active, namely in so far as the latter
sublates itself; but, on the other hand, it is the act of the passive substance
itself to rejoin itself and thus to make itself into what is originary and a
cause. The being posited by an other and its own becoming are one and the
same.
Now, because the passive substance has been converted into a cause, it
follows, first, that the effect is sublated in it; therein consists its reaction in
general. As passive substance, it is in itself as positedness; also, positedness
has been posited in it by the other substance, namely in so far as it received
its effect within it. Its reaction contains, therefore, a twofold aspect. For
one, what it is in itself is posited. And two, what it is as posited displays itself
as its in-itself; it is positedness in itself, hence through the other substance it
receives an effect within; but, conversely, this positedness is its own in-itself,
it is thus its own effect, it itself displays itself as a cause.
Second, the reaction is directed at the first efficient cause. For the effect
which the hitherto passive substance sublates within itself is precisely the
effect of that other cause. But a cause has its substantial actuality only in
its effect; inasmuch as this effect is sublated, so is also the causal substantiality of the other cause. This happens first in itself through itself, in that
the cause makes itself into an effect; its negative determination disappears
in this identity and the cause becomes passive; and, second, it happens
through the hitherto passive, but now reacting substance, which sublates its
effect. – Now in determinate causality the substance acted upon becomes
a cause, for it acts against the positing of an effect in it. But it did not
react against the cause of that effect but posited its effect rather in another
substance, and thus there arose the progression to infinity of effects –
for here the cause is only implicitly identical with itself in the effect, and
hence, on the one hand, it expires into an immediate identity as it comes
to rest, but, on the other hand, it revives in another substance. – In conditioned causality, on the contrary, the cause refers back to itself in the
effect, for the latter is as a condition, as a presupposition, its other, and its
act is therefore just as much a becoming as a positing and sublating of the
other.

The absolute relation

503

Further, causality behaves in all this as passive substance; but, as we
have seen,25 the latter becomes causal through the effect it incurs. That first
cause, the one which acts first and receives its effect back into itself as a
reaction, thus comes up again as a cause, whereby the activity which in
finite causality runs into the bad infinite progression is bent around and
becomes an action that returns to itself, an infinite reciprocal action.
c. reciprocity of action
In finite causality it is substances that actively relate to each other. Mechanism consists in this externality of causality, where the cause’s reflection
in its effect into itself is at the same time a repelling being, or where, in
the self-identity which the causal substance has in its effect, the substance
is equally immediately external to itself and the effect is transposed into
another substance. In reciprocity of action this mechanism is now sublated,
for it contains first the disappearing of that original persistence of immediate
substantiality; second, the coming to be of the cause, and hence originariness
mediating itself with itself through its negation.
At first, the reciprocity of action takes on the form of a reciprocal causality
of substances that are presupposed and that condition each other; each is with
respect to the other both active and passive substance. Since the two are thus
passive and active at once, their difference is thereby already sublated; it
is a totally transparent reflective shine; they are substances only in being
the identity of the active and the passive. The reciprocity of action is itself,
therefore, only a still empty way and manner, and all that is still needed
is merely the external bringing together of what is already there, both in
itself and as posited. First of all, it is no longer substrates that are referred to
each other but substances; in the movement of conditional causality, the
still left over presupposed immediacy has been sublated, and what conditions
the causing activity is only an influence, or its own passivity. But this
influence, moreover, does not come from another substance originating it
but from precisely a causality which is conditioned by influence, or one
which is mediated. This at first external factor that accrues to the cause
and constitutes the side of its passivity is therefore mediated through the
causality itself, is produced through its own activity and is, consequently,
a passivity posited by its own very activity. – Causality is conditioned and
conditioning. As conditioning, it is passive; but it is equally so as conditioned.
This conditioning or passivity is the negation of the cause through itself in
25

In the preceding page, 11.406.

11.408

504

11.409

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

that it makes itself essentially into an effect and is cause precisely for that
reason. Reciprocity of action is, therefore, only causality itself; the cause does
not just have an effect but, in the effect, refers as cause back to itself.
Causality has thereby returned to its absolute concept and has at the
same time attained the concept itself. At first, it is real necessity, absolute
self-identity in which the difference between it and the determinations
referring to each other within it are substances, free actualities, over against
one another. Necessity is in this way inner identity; causality is the manifestation of it in which its reflective shine of substantial otherness has been
sublated, and necessity is elevated to freedom. – In the reciprocity of action,
originative causality displays itself as arising from its negation, from passivity, and as passing away into it, as a becoming, but in such a way that
this becoming is at the same time equally only shining; the transition into
otherness is reflection-into-itself; negation, which is the ground of the cause,
is its positive rejoining with itself.
In the reciprocity of action, therefore, necessity and causality have disappeared; they contain both the immediate identity as combination and
reference and the absolute substantiality of the differences, consequently their
contingency, the original unity of substantial difference and therefore the
absolute contradiction. Necessity is being, because being is; it is the unity
of being with itself that has itself as ground, but, conversely, because this
being has a ground, it is not being; it is simply and solely reflective shining, reference or mediation. Causality is this posited transition of original
being, of cause, into reflective shine or mere positedness, and, conversely, of
positedness into originariness; but the identity itself of being and reflective
shine still is the inner necessity. This inwardness or this in-itself sublates
the movement of causality; the result is that the substantiality of the sides
that stand in relation is lost, and necessity unveils itself. Necessity does not
come to be freedom by vanishing but in that its still only inner identity is
manifested, and this manifestation is the identical movement immanent to
the different sides, the immanent reflection of shine as shine. – Conversely,
contingency thereby comes to be freedom at the same time, for the sides
of necessity, which have the shape of independent, free actualities that do
not reflectively shine into each other, are now posited as an identity, so that
now these totalities of immanent reflection, in their differences, also shine
as identical, in other words, they are also posited as only one and the same
reflection.
No longer, therefore, does absolute substance as self-differentiating absolute form repel itself as necessity from itself, nor does it fall apart as
contingency into indifferent, external substances, but, on the contrary, it

The absolute relation

505

differentiates itself: on the one hand, into the totality (the heretofore passive
substance) which is at the origin, as the reflection from internal determinateness, as simple whole that contains its positedness within itself and
in this positedness is posited as self-identical – this is the universal –; on the
other hand, into the totality (the hitherto causal substance) which is the
reflection, equally from internal determinateness, into the negative determinateness which, just as the self-identical determinateness, equally is the
whole, but posited as the self-identical negativity – the singular. But, because
the universal is self-identical only in that the determinateness that it holds
within is sublated, hence it is the negative as negative, it immediately is the
same negativity that singularity is. And the singularity, because it equally is
the determinedly determined, the negative as negative, immediately is the
same identity that universality is. This, their simple identity, is the particularity that, from the singular, holds the moment of determinateness; from the
universal, that of immanent reflection – the two in immediate unity. These
three totalities are therefore one and the same reflection that, as negative
self-reference, differentiates itself into the other two totalities – but as into
a perfectly transparent difference, namely into the determinate simplicity, or
into the simple determinateness, which is their one same identity. – This is
the concept, the realm of subjectivity or of freedom.

volume two

The Science of Subjective Logic or The
Doctrine of the Concept

12.5

foreword
This part of the Logic which contains the Doctrine of the Concept and
constitutes the third part of the whole is also issued under the particular
title of System of Subjective Logic. This is for the convenience of those
friends of this science who, of the materials covered by logic commonly so
called, normally take a greater interest in those treated here than in the first
two parts. – For these earlier parts I could claim the indulgence of the fair
critic because of the dearth of previous work that could have afforded me
some support, the materials and a guide on how to proceed. In the case of
the present part, I can rather claim this indulgence for the opposite reason;
for there already exists for the logic of the concept a fully ready and wellentrenched, one may even say ossified, material, and the task is to make it
fluid again, to revive the concept in such a dead matter. To build a new city
in a devastated land has its difficulties, even if there is no lack of material
at hand; but even greater are the obstacles, of a different kind, when the
task is to give a new layout to an ancient and solidly constructed city, with
established rights of ownership and domicile; one must also decide, among
other things, not to make use of much otherwise valued stock. –
But above all, it is the greatness of the subject matter itself that may be
adduced as an excuse for the imperfection in execution. For what subject
matter is there for cognition more sublime than truth itself? – Yet there is no
escaping the doubt that it is this very subject matter that needs excuse when
the sense in which Pilate put the question, “What is truth?,” comes to mind,
uttering it as he did, in the words of the poet, “ . . . with the courtier’s mien
that myopically yet smiling damns the cause of the earnest soul.”1 Pilate’s
question then carries the meaning, which we may view as a moment of
politeness, together with its reminder, that the goal of discovering the truth
1

Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock, Der Messias, seventh canto (slightly modified by Hegel who very likely
cited from memory).

507

12.6

508

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is, as everyone knows, something that has been given up, long since set
aside with a shrug; that the unattainableness of truth is recognized also by
philosophers and professional logicians. – But if in our times the question
raised in religion regarding the value of things, of insights and actions –
a question that in content carries the same implication as Pilate’s – is once
more reclaiming its rightful meaning, then philosophy can well hope that
it will no longer occur as so strange if it too once more begins to reassert
its goal in its immediate domain, and that, after having lapsed into the
ways of other sciences in renouncing truth, once more strives to rise up
to that goal. There is no excuse needed for this attempt; but as for the
execution of it, I may plead as excuse my official duties and other personal
circumstances that have allowed me to work but interruptedly at a science
that demands instead, and deserves, undistracted and undivided exertion.
12.11

Nürnberg, July 21, 1816

of the concept in general
What the nature of the concept is cannot be given right away, not any more
than can the concept of any other subject matter. It might perhaps seem
that, in order to state the concept of a subject matter, the logical element
can be presupposed, and that this element would not therefore be preceded
by anything else, or be something deduced, just as in geometry logical
propositions, when they occur applied to magnitudes and employed in
that science, are premised in the form of axioms, underived and underivable
determinations of cognition. Now the concept is to be regarded indeed,
not just as a subjective presupposition but as absolute foundation; but it
cannot be the latter except to the extent that it has made itself into one.
Anything abstractly immediate is indeed a first; but, as an abstraction, it is
rather something mediated, the foundation of which, if it is to be grasped
in its truth, must therefore first be sought. And this foundation will indeed
be something immediate, but an immediate which has made itself such by
the sublation of mediation.
From this aspect the concept is at first to be regarded simply as the third to
being and essence, to the immediate and to reflection. Being and essence are
therefore the moments of its becoming; but the concept is their foundation
and truth as the identity into which they have sunk and in which they are
contained. They are contained in it because the concept is their result, but
no longer as being and essence; these are determinations which they have

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

509

only in so far as they have not yet returned into the identity which is their
unity.
Hence the objective logic, which treats of being and essence, constitutes in
truth the genetic exposition of the concept. More precisely, substance already
is real essence, or essence in so far as it is united with being and has stepped
into actuality. Consequently, the concept has substance for its immediate
presupposition; substance is implicitly what the concept is explicitly. The
dialectical movement of substance through causality and reciprocal affection
is thus the immediate genesis of the concept by virtue of which its becoming
is displayed. But the meaning of its becoming, like that of all becoming, is
that it is the reflection of something which passes over into its ground, and
that the at first apparent other into which this something has passed over
constitutes the truth of the latter. Thus the concept is the truth of substance,
and since necessity is the determining relational mode of substance, freedom
reveals itself to be the truth of necessity and the relational mode of the concept.
The necessary forward course of determination characteristic of substance is the positing of that which is in and for itself. The concept is now
this absolute unity of being and reflection whereby being-in-and-for-itself
only is by being equally reflection or positedness, and positedness only is by
being equally in-and-for-itself. – This abstract result is elucidated by the
exposition of its concrete genesis which contains the nature of the concept
but had to precede its treatment. We must briefly sum up here, therefore,
the main moments of this exposition (which has been treated in detail in
Book Two of the Objective Logic).
Substance is the absolute, the actual in-and-for-itself: in itself, because it
is the simple identity of possibility and actuality; absolute, because it is the
essence containing all actuality and possibility within itself; for itself, because
it is this identity as absolute power or absolutely self-referring negativity. –
The movement of substantiality posited by these moments consists in the
following stages:
1. Substance, as absolute power or self-referring negativity, differentiates
itself into a relation in which what are at first only simple moments are
substances and original presuppositions. – Their specific relation is that
of a passive substance, of the originariness of the simple in-itself which,
powerless to posit itself, is only originary positedness, and of an active
substance, the self-referring negativity which has as such posited itself as
an other and refers to it. This other is precisely the passive substance
which the active substance, as originative power, has presupposed for itself
as its condition. – This presupposing is to be understood in the sense
that the movement of substance is at first in the form of one moment of

12.12

510

12.13

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

its concept, that of the in-itself – that the determinateness of one of the
substances standing in relation is itself also the determinateness of this
relation.
2. The other moment is the being-for-itself or the power positing itself as
self-referring negativity and thereby again sublating what it presupposes. –
The active substance is cause; it acts; this means that it is now a positing,
just as before it was a presupposing, that (a) power is also given the reflective
shine of power, positedness also the reflective shine of positedness. What
in the presupposition was the originary becomes in causality, by virtue
of the reference to an other, what it is in itself. The cause brings about
an effect. But it does so in another substance and it is now power with
reference to an other; it thus appears as cause but is cause only by virtue
of this appearing. – (b)2 The effect enters the passive substance and
by virtue of it the latter now also appears as positedness, but is passive
substance only in this positedness.
3. But there is more still present here than just this appearance, namely:
(a) the cause acts upon the passive substance, alters its determination;
but this determination is its positedness, for otherwise there is nothing else to alter; the other determination which it obtains is however
that of causality; the passive substance thus comes to be cause, power,
and activity;
(b) the effect is posited in it by the cause; but that which is posited by
the cause is the cause itself which, in acting, is identical with itself;
it is this cause that posits itself in the place of the passive substance.
Similarly, with respect to the active substance:
(a) the action is the translation of the cause into the effect, into its other,
the positedness;
(b) the cause reveals itself in the effect as what it is; the effect is identical
with the cause, is not an other; in acting the cause thus reveals the
positedness to be that which it (the cause) essentially is.
Each side, therefore, in accordance with how it refers to the other both
as identical with it and as the negative of it, becomes the opposite of
itself, but, in becoming this opposite, the other, and therefore also each,
remains identical with itself. – But both, the identical and the negative
reference, are one and the same; substance is self-identical only in its
opposite and this constitutes the absolute identity of the two substances
posited as two. It is by its act that active substance is manifested as cause
or originary substantiality, that is, by positing itself as the opposite of
2

The (b) is added by Lasson.

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

511

itself, a positing which is at the same time the sublating of its presupposed
otherness, of passive substance. Contrariwise, it is by being acted upon that
the positedness is manifested as positedness, the negative as negative, and
consequently the passive substance as self-referring negativity, and in this
other the cause simply rejoins itself. Through this positing, therefore, what
is presupposed, that is, the implicit originariness, becomes explicit; but this
being, which is now in and for itself, is only by virtue of a positing which
is equally the sublation of what is presupposed, or because the absolute
substance has returned to itself only out of, and in, its positedness and for
that reason is absolute. Hence this reciprocal action is appearance that
again sublates itself – the revelation that the reflective shine of causality, in
which the cause is as cause, is just that, that it is reflective shine. This infinite
immanent reflection – that the being-in-and-for-itself is only such by being
a positedness – is the consummation of substance. But this consummation
is no longer the substance itself but is something higher, the concept, the
subject. The transition of the relation of substantiality occurs through
its own immanent necessity and is nothing more than the manifestation
of itself, that the concept is its truth, and that freedom is the truth of
necessity.
Earlier, in Book Two of the Objective Logic (pp. 11.376ff., Remark), I
have already called attention to the fact that the philosophy that assumes
its position at the standpoint of substance and stops there is the system of
Spinoza. I have also indicated there the defect of this system, both with
respect to form and matter. Something else, however, is the refutation of
it. Elsewhere,3 in connection with the refutation of a philosophical system,
I have also remarked quite in general that we must get over the distorted
idea that that system has to be represented as if thoroughly false, and as
if the true system stood to the false as only opposed to it. It is on the basis
of the context within which the system of Spinoza is presented here that
we can see its true standpoint and ask whether the system is true or false.
The relation of substantiality was generated by the nature of essence; this
relation and also its exposition as an expanded totality in the form of system
is, therefore, a necessary standpoint at which the absolute positions itself.
Such a standpoint, therefore, is not to be regarded as just an opinion, an
individual’s subjective, arbitrary way of representing and thinking, as an
aberration of speculation; on the contrary, speculation necessarily runs into
it and, to this extent, the system is perfectly true. – But it is not the highest
standpoint. By itself alone, therefore, the system cannot be regarded as false,
3

In the Phenomenology of Spirit, cf. GW 9, 10.

12.14

512

12.15

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

as either requiring or being capable of refutation. This alone is rather to
be considered false in it: that it would be the highest standpoint. It also
follows that the true system cannot be related to it as just its opposite, for
as so opposed it would itself be one-sided. Rather, as the higher system, it
must contain it within as its subordinate.
Further, any refutation would have to come not from outside, that is, not
proceed from assumptions lying outside the system and irrelevant to it. The
system need only refuse to recognize those assumptions; the defect is such
only for one who starts from such needs and requirements as are based on
them. For this reason it has been said that there cannot be any refutation of
Spinozism for anyone who does not presuppose a commitment to freedom
and the independence of a self-conscious subject.4 Besides, a standpoint
so lofty and inherently so rich as that of the relation of substance does not
ignore those assumptions but even contains them: one of the attributes of
the Spinozistic substance is thought. The system knows how to resolve and
assimilate the determinations in which these assumptions conflict with it,
so that they re-emerge in it, but duly modified accordingly. The nerve,
therefore, of any external refutation consists solely in obstinately clinging
to the opposite categories of these assumptions, for example, to the absolute
self-subsistence of the thinking individual as against the form of thought
which in the absolute substance is posited as identical with extension.
Effective refutation must infiltrate the opponent’s stronghold and meet
him on his own ground; there is no point in attacking him outside his
territory and claiming jurisdiction where he is not. The only possible
refutation of Spinozism can only consist, therefore, in first acknowledging
its standpoint as essential and necessary and then raising it to a higher
standpoint on the strength of its own resources. The relation of substantiality,
considered simply on its own, leads to its opposite: it passes over into the
concept. The exposition in the preceding Book of substance as leading to
the concept is, therefore, the one and only true refutation of Spinozism. It is
the unveiling of substance, and this is the genesis of the concept the principal
moments of which we have documented above. – The unity of substance is
its relation of necessity. But this unity is thus only inner necessity. By positing
itself through the moment of absolute negativity, it becomes manifested
or posited identity, and also, therefore, the freedom which is the identity
of the concept. This concept, the totality resulting from the relation of
reciprocity, is the unity of the two substances that stand in that relation,
4

The allusion is, among others, to Fichte. See the whole §5 of the (First) Introduction to the
Wissenschaftslehre, English trans., pp. 15ff. GA I.2.191ff.

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

513

but in such a way now that the two belong to freedom: they no longer
possess their identity blindly, that is to say, internally; on the contrary, the
substances now explicitly have the determination that they are essentially
reflective shine or moments of reflection, and for that reason that each has
immediately rejoined its other or its positedness, that each contains this
positedness in itself and in its other, therefore, is posited simply and solely
as identical with itself.
In the concept, therefore, the kingdom of freedom is disclosed. The
concept is free because the identity that exists in and for itself and constitutes
the necessity of substance exists at the same time as sublated or as positedness,
and this positedness, as self-referring, is that very identity. Vanished is the
obscurity which the causally related substances have for each other, for the
originariness of their self-subsistence that makes them causes5 has passed
over into positedness and has thereby become self-transparently clear; the
“originary fact”6 is “originary” because it is a “self-causing fact,”7 and this is
the substance that has been let go freely into the concept.
The direct result for the concept is the following more detailed determination. Because being which is in and for itself is immediately a positedness,
the concept is in its simple self-reference an absolute determinateness which,
by referring only to itself, is however no less immediately simple identity.
But this self-reference of the determinateness in which the latter rejoins itself
is just as much the negation of determinateness,8 and thus the concept, as
this equality with itself, is the universal. But this identity equally has the
determination of negativity; it is a negation or determinateness that refers
to itself and as such the concept is the singular.9 Each, the universal and the
singular, is a totality; each contains the determination of the other within
it and therefore the two are just as absolutely one totality as their oneness
is the diremption of its self into the free reflective shine of this duality.
And this is a duality which in the differentiation of singular and universal
appears to be perfect opposition, but an opposition which is so much of a
reflective shine that, in that the one is conceptualized and said, immediately
the other is therein conceptualized and said.
5

6
8

9

I have glossed “that makes them causes” to bring out Hegel’s play on words which is otherwise lost
in English. “Cause” in German is Ursache, where the ur- indicates originariness. “Originariness” is
Ursprünglichkeit.
7 Ursache ihrer selbst.
Die ursprüngliche Sache. Cf. Ursache, i.e. “cause.”
The determinateness does not go past itself, even excludes the possibility of going past itself. In this
sense, because it precludes reference to anything else besides itself, it ceases to be a determinateness
and becomes a universal. It negates its own determinateness, i.e. itself as negation.
In precluding reference to anything besides itself, the universal regains negativity. It is just itself and
nothing else. In this sense, it is a universe by itself, a singular.

12.16

514

12.17

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

The foregoing is to be regarded as the concept of the concept. To some it
may seem to depart from the common understanding of “concept,” and
they might require that we indicate how our result fits with other ways of
representing or defining it. But, for one thing, this cannot be an issue
of proof based on the authority of ordinary understanding. In the science
of the concept, the content and determination of the latter can be proven
solely on the basis of an immanent deduction which contains its genesis,
and such a deduction lies behind us. And also, whereas the concept of the
concept as deduced here should in principle be recognized in whatever else
is otherwise adduced as such a concept, it is not as easy to ascertain what
others have said about its nature. For in general they do not bother at all
enquiring about it but presuppose that everyone already understands what
the concept means when speaking of it. Of late especially one may indeed
believe that it is not worth pursuing any such enquiry because, just as it
was for a while the fashion to say all things bad about the imagination,
then about memory, it became in philosophy the habit some time ago, and
is still the habit now, to heap every kind of defamation on the concept, to
hold it in contempt – the concept which is the highest form of thought –
while the incomprehensible and the non-comprehended are regarded as the
pinnacle of both science and morality.
I confine myself to one remark which may contribute to the comprehension of the concept here developed and facilitate one’s way into it. The
concept, when it has progressed to a concrete existence which is itself free,
is none other than the “I” or pure self-consciousness. True, I have concepts, that is, determinate concepts; but the “I” is the pure concept itself,
the concept that has come into determinate existence. It is fair to suppose,
therefore, when we think of the fundamental determinations which constitute the nature of the “I,” that we are referring to something familiar,
that is, a commonplace of ordinary thinking. But the “I” is in the first place
purely self-referring unity, and is this not immediately but by abstracting
from all determinateness and content and withdrawing into the freedom
of unrestricted equality with itself. As such it is universality, a unity that
is unity with itself only by virtue of its negative relating, which appears as
abstraction, and because of it contains all determinateness within itself as
dissolved. In second place, the “I” is just as immediately self-referring negativity, singularity, absolute determinateness that stands opposed to anything
other and excludes it – individual personality. This absolute universality
which is just as immediately absolute singularization – a being-in-andfor-itself which is absolute positedness and being-in-and-for-itself only by
virtue of its unity with the positedness – this universality constitutes the

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

515

nature of the “I” and of the concept; neither the one nor the other can
be comprehended unless these two just given moments are grasped at the
same time, both in their abstraction and in their perfect unity.
When I say of the understanding that I have it, according to ordinary
ways of speaking, what is being understood by it is a faculty or a property
that stands in relation to my I in the same way as the property of a thing
stands related to that thing – as to an indeterminate substrate which is not
the true ground or the determining factor of the property. In this view, I
have concepts, and I have the concept, just as I also have a coat, complexion,
and other external properties. – Kant went beyond this external relation
of the understanding, as the faculty of concepts and of the concept, to
the “I.” It is one of the profoundest and truest insights to be found in
the Critique of Reason that the unity which constitutes the essence of the
concept is recognized as the original synthetic unity of apperception, the
unity of the “I think,” or of self-consciousness.10 – This proposition is
all that there is to the so-called transcendental deduction of the categories
which, from the beginning, has however been regarded as the most difficult
piece of Kantian philosophy – no doubt only because it demands that we
should transcend the mere representation of the relation of the “I” and the
understanding, or of the concepts, to a thing and its properties or accidents,
and advance to the thought of it. – The object, says Kant in the Critique of
Pure Reason (2nd edn, p. 137), is that, in the concept of which the manifold
of a given intuition is unified. But every unification of representations
requires a unity of consciousness in the synthesis of them. Consequently, this
unity of consciousness is alone that which constitutes the reference of the
representations to an object, hence their objective validity, and that on
which even the possibility of the understanding rests. Kant distinguishes this
objective unity from the subjective unity of consciousness by which the
“I” becomes conscious of a manifold, whether simultaneously or successively
depending on empirical conditions.11 In contrast to this subjective unity,
the principles of the objective determination of representations are only to
be derived from the principle of the transcendental unity of apperception. It
is by virtue of the categories, which are these objective determinations, that
the manifold of given representations is so determined as to be brought
to the unity of consciousness.12 – On this explanation, the unity of the
concept is that by virtue of which something is not the determination of
mere feeling, is not intuition or even mere representation, but an object, and
this objective unity is the unity of the “I” with itself. – In point of fact,
10

B131ff.

11

B139.

12

B144.

12.18

516

12.19

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the conceptual comprehension of a subject matter consists in nothing else
than in the “I” making it its own, in pervading it and bringing it into its
own form, that is, into a universality which is immediately determinateness,
or into a determinateness which is immediately universality. As intuited
or also as represented, the subject matter is still something external, alien.
When it is conceptualized, the being-in-and-for-itself that it has in intuition
and representation is transformed into a positedness; in thinking it, the “I”
pervades it. But it is only in thought that it is in and for itself; as it
is in intuition or representation, it is appearance. Thought sublates the
immediacy with which it first comes before us and in this way transforms
it into a positedness; but this, its positedness, is its being-in-and-for-itself or
its objectivity. This is an objectivity which the subject matter consequently
attains in the concept, and this concept is the unity of self-consciousness into
which that subject matter has been assumed; consequently its objectivity
or the concept is itself none other than the nature of self-consciousness,
has no other moments or determinations than the “I” itself.
Accordingly, we find in a fundamental principle of Kantian philosophy
the justification for turning to the nature of the “I” in order to learn
what the concept is. But conversely, it is necessary to this end that we have
grasped the concept of the “I” as stated. If we cling to the mere representation
of the “I” as we commonly entertain it, then the “I” is only the simple thing
also known as the soul, a thing in which the concept inheres as a possession
or a property. This representation, which does not bother to comprehend
either the “I” or the concept, is of little use in facilitating or advancing the
conceptual comprehension of the concept.
The position of Kant just cited contains two other points which concern
the concept and necessitate some further comments. First of all, preceding
the stage of understanding are the stages of feeling and of intuition.13 It is
an essential proposition of Kant’s Transcendental Philosophy that concepts
without intuition are empty, and that they have validity only as references
connecting the manifold given by intuition.14 Second, the concept is given
as the objective element of cognition, consequently as the truth. Yet it is
taken to be something merely subjective, and we are not allowed to extract
reality from it,15 for by reality objectivity is to be understood, since reality
is contrasted with subjectivity. Moreover, the concept and anything logical
are declared to be something merely formal which, since it abstracts from
content, does not contain truth.
13
14

Hegel now has in mind the Transcendental Aesthetic section of the Critique of Pure Reason.
15 The allusion is to A603/B631.
Cf. B33, B143.

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

517

Now, in the first place, as regards the relation of the understanding or concept
to the stages presupposed by it, the determination of the form of these stages
depends on which science is being considered. In our science, which is pure
Logic, they are being and essence. In Psychology, the stages preceding the
understanding are feeling and intuition, and then representation generally.
In the Phenomenology of Spirit, which is the doctrine of consciousness,
the ascent to the understanding is made through the stages of sensuous
consciousness and then of perception. Kant places ahead of it only feeling
and intuition. But, for a start, he himself betrays the incompleteness of
this progression of stages by appending to the Transcendental Logic or the
Doctrine of the Understanding a treatise on the concepts of reflection – a
sphere lying between intuition and understanding, or being and concept.16
And if we consider the substance itself of these stages, it must first be
said that such shapes as intuition, representation, and the like, belong to
the self-conscious spirit which, as such, does not fall within the scope of
logical science. Of course, the pure determinations of being, essence, and
the concept, also constitute the substrate and the inner sustaining structure
of the forms of spirit; spirit, as intuiting as well as sensuous consciousness, is
in the form of immediate being, just as spirit as representational and also
perceptual consciousness has risen from being to the stage of essence or
reflection. But these concrete shapes are of as little interest to the science
of logic as are the concrete forms that logical determinations assume in
nature. These last would be space and time, then space and time as assuming
a content, as inorganic and then organic nature. Similarly, the concept is also
not to be considered here as the act of the self-conscious understanding,
not as subjective understanding, but as the concept in and for itself which
constitutes a stage of nature as well as of spirit. Life, or organic nature, is
the stage of nature where the concept comes on the scene, but as a blind
concept that does not comprehend itself, that is, is not thought; only as
self-aware and as thought does it belongs to spirit. Its logical form, however,
is independent of such shapes, whether unspiritual or spiritual. This is a
point which was already duly adumbrated in the Introduction,17 and one
that one must be clear about before undertaking Logic, not when one is
already in it.
But, in second place, how the forms that precede the concept might
ever be shaped depends on how the concept is thought in relation to them.
This relation, as assumed in ordinary psychology as well as in Kant’s
Transcendental Philosophy,18 is that the empirical material, the manifold
16

A260/B316ff.

17

Cf. GW 11, 22ff., i.e. 21.35ff.

18

Cf. B133ff.

12.20

518

12.21

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of intuition and representation, is at first just there by itself, and that the
understanding then comes into it, brings unity to it, and raises it through
abstraction to the form of universality. The understanding is in this way
an inherently empty form which, on the one hand, obtains reality only by
virtue of that given content, and, on the other, abstracts from it, that is
to say, discards it as something useless, but useless only for the concept.
In both operations, the concept is not the one which is independent, is
not what is essential and true about that presupposed material; rather, this
material is the reality in and for itself, a reality that cannot be extracted
from the concept.
Now it must certainly be conceded that the concept is as such not yet
complete, that it must rather be raised to the idea which alone is the unity
of the concept and reality; and this is a result which will have to emerge
in what follows from the nature of the concept itself. For the reality that
the concept gives itself cannot be picked up as it were from the outside
but must be derived from the concept itself in accordance with scientific
requirements. But the truth is that it is not the material given by intuition
and representation which must be validated as the real in contrast to the
concept. “It is only a concept,” people are wont to say, contrasting the
concept, as superior to it, not only with the idea, but with sensuous, spatial
and temporal, palpable existence. For this reason the abstract is then held to
be of less significance than the concrete, because so much of this palpable
material has been removed from it. In this view, to abstract means to
select from a concrete material this or that mark, but only for our subjective
purposes, without in any way detracting from the value and the status of
the many other properties and features that are left out; on the contrary,
by retaining them as reality, but yonder on the other side, still as fully
valid as ever. It is only because of its incapacity that the understanding
thus does not draw from this wealth and is forced rather to make do with
the impoverished abstraction. But now, to regard the given material of
intuition and the manifold of representation as the real, in contrast to what
is thought and the concept, is precisely the view that must be given up as
condition of philosophizing, and that religion, moreover, presupposes as
having already been given up. How could there be any need of religion, how
could religion have any meaning, if the fleeting and superficial appearance
of the sensuous and the singular were still regarded as the truth? But it
is philosophy that yields the conceptually comprehended 19 insight into the
status of the reality of sensuous being. Philosophy assumes indeed that the
19

“conceptually comprehended” = begriffene.

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

519

stages of feeling, intuition, sense consciousness, and so forth, are prior to
the understanding, for they are the conditions of the genesis of the latter,
but they are conditions only in the sense that the concept results from
their dialectic and their nothingness and not because it is conditioned by
their reality. Abstractive thought, therefore, is not to be regarded as the
mere discarding of a sensuous material which does not suffer in the process
any impairment of reality; it is rather the sublation and reduction of that
material as mere appearance to the essential, which is manifested only in
the concept. Of course, if what is to be taken up into the concept from the
concrete appearance is intended to serve only as a mark or sign, then it may
well be anything at all, any mere sensuous singular determination of the
subject matter will do, selected from the others because of some external
interest but of like kind and nature as the rest.
In this conjunction, the prevailing fundamental misunderstanding is
that the natural principle, or the starting point in the natural development
or the history of an individual in the process of self-formation, is regarded
as the truth and conceptually the first. Intuition or being are no doubt first
in the order of nature, or are the condition for the concept, but they
are not for all that the unconditioned in and for itself; on the contrary,
in the concept their reality is sublated and, consequently, so is also the
reflective shine that they had of being the conditioning reality. If it is not
the truth which is at issue but only narration, as it is the case in pictorial and
phenomenal thinking, then we might as well stay with the story that we
begin with feelings and intuitions, and that the understanding then extracts
a universal or an abstraction from their manifold, for which purpose it quite
understandably needs a substrate for these feelings and intuitions which,
in the process of abstraction, retains for representation the same complete
reality with which it first presented itself. But philosophy ought not to
be a narrative of what happens, but a cognition of what is true in what
happens, in order further to comprehend on the basis of this truth what in
the narrative appears as a mere happening.
If on the superficial view of what the concept is all manifoldness falls
outside it, and only the form of abstract universality or of empty reflective
identity stays with it, we can at once call attention to the fact that any
statement or definition of a concept expressly requires, besides the genus
which in fact is already itself more than just abstract universality, also a
specific determinateness. And it does not take much thoughtful reflection on
the implication of this requirement to see that differentiation is an equally
essential moment of the concept. Kant introduced this line of reflection
with the very important thought that there are synthetic judgments

12.22

520

12.23

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

a priori.20 His original synthesis of apperception is one of the most profound principles for speculative development; it contains the beginning of
a true apprehension of the nature of the concept and is fully opposed to any
empty identity or abstract universality which is not internally a synthesis. –
The further development, however, did not live up to this beginning. The
term itself, “synthesis,” easily conjures up again the picture of an external
unity, of a mere combination of terms that are intrinsically separate. Then,
again, the Kantian philosophy has never got over the psychological reflex
of the concept and has once more reverted to the claim that the concept is
permanently conditioned by the manifold of intuition. It has declared the
content of the cognitions of the understanding, and of experience, to be
phenomenal, not because of the finitude of the categories as such but, on the
ground of a psychological idealism, because they are only determinations
derived from self-consciousness. Here accordingly we have again the supposition that apart from the manifoldness of intuition the concept is without
content, empty, despite the fact that the concept is said to be a synthesis a
priori; as such, it surely contains determinateness and differentiation within
itself. And because this determinateness is the determinateness of the concept, and hence the absolute determinateness, singularity, the concept is the
ground and the source of all finite determinateness and manifoldness.
The formal position that the concept never abandons as understanding
is completed in Kant’s exposition of what reason is. One should expect that
in reason, which is the highest stage of thought, the concept would lose
the conditionality with which it still appears at the stage of understanding
and would attain perfect truth. But this expectation is disappointed. For
Kant defines the relation of reason to the categories as merely dialectical.
Indeed, he even takes the result of this dialectic to be simply and solely
an infinite nothingness, the result being that the synthesis is again lost, lost
also to the infinite unity of reason, and lost with it is whatever beginning
there was of a speculative, truly infinite, concept; reason becomes the wellknown, totally formal, merely regulative unity of the systematic employment
of the understanding. It is declared an abuse when Logic, which is supposed
to be a mere canon of judgment, is considered instead as an organon for
the production of objective insights. The concepts of reason, in which
we would have expected a higher power and a deeper content, no longer
possess anything constitutive as still do the categories; they are mere ideas
which we are of course are quite at liberty to use, provided that by these
intelligible entities in which all truth was to be revealed we mean nothing
20

A8/B12.

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

521

more than hypotheses to which it would be the height of arbitrariness and
recklessness to ascribe absolute truth, for they – cannot be found in any
experience.21 – Would anyone have ever thought that philosophy would
deny truth to intelligible entities on the ground that they lack the spatial
and temporal material of the senses?
Directly connected with this is the issue of how to view the concept
and the character of logic generally, the issue namely of the relation of
the concept and its science to truth itself. This is an issue on which the
Kantian philosophy holds the same position as is commonly taken. We
cited earlier from Kant’s deduction of the categories to the effect that,
according to it, the object in which the manifold of intuition is unified is
this unity only by virtue of the unity of self-consciousness.22 The objectivity of
thought is here, therefore, specifically defined: it is an identity of concept
and thing which is the truth. In the same way it is also commonly accepted
that, as thought appropriates a given subject matter, this subject matter
thereby undergoes an alteration and is made from something sensuous
into something thought. But nothing is changed in this alteration in so
far as the essentiality of the object goes; on the contrary, it is accepted that
the object is in its truth only in its concept, whereas in the immediacy in
which it is given it is only appearance and accidentality; that the cognition
conceptualizing the subject matter is a cognition of it as it is in and for itself,
and the concept is its very objectivity. But, on the other hand, it is also
equally claimed that we cannot know things as they are in and for themselves
and that truth is inaccessible to rational cognition; that the aforesaid truth
that would consist in the unity of the object and the concept is in fact
only appearance, again on the ground now that the content is only the
manifold of intuition. But we have just remarked, regarding this point,
that it is precisely in the concept that the manifold is sublated inasmuch
as it pertains to intuition as opposed to the concept, and that through the
concept the subject matter is reduced to its non-contingent essentiality;
the latter does enter into appearance, and this is why appearance is not
something merely essenceless but is the manifestation of essence. When
this manifestation of essence is set free, then we have the concept. – These
propositions that we are now recalling are not dogmatic assertions, for
they are results that obtained on their own out of the whole development
of essence. The present position to which this development has led is that
the form of the absolute which is higher than being and essence is the
concept. Viewed from this side, the concept has subjugated the spheres of
21

A324/B384–385.

22

Cf. above, 12.18 and note 10.

12.24

522

12.25

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

being and essence to which, from other starting points, feeling, intuition,
and representation, which appeared to be its antecedent conditions, also
belong; it has demonstrated itself to be their unconditional foundation. But
this is one side alone. There is a second side left to which this third book of
the Logic is devoted, namely the demonstration of how the concept forms
within and from itself the reality that has vanished in it. It is conceded, in
other words, that the cognition that does not go past the concept, purely
as concept, is still incomplete, that it has only arrived at abstract truth. But
its incompleteness does not lie in its lack of that alleged reality as would be
given in feeling and intuition, but in the fact that the concept has yet to give
to itself its own reality, one that it generates out of itself. The demonstrated
absoluteness of the concept as against the material of experience and, more
exactly, the categorial and the reflective determinations of it, consists in
this, that as this material appears outside and before the concept, it has no
truth but that it has it only in its ideality or in its identity with the concept.
The derivation of the real from the concept, if “derivation” is what we
want to call it, consists at first essentially in this, that the concept in its
formal abstraction reveals itself to be incomplete and through a dialectic
immanently grounded in it passes over into reality: it passes over into it,
however, as into something which it generates out of itself, not as if it
were falling back again onto a ready-made reality which it finds opposite
it, or as if it were taking refuge, because it sought for something better
but found none, into something that has already been proven to be the
unessential element of appearance. – It will always be a source of wonder
how the Kantian philosophy did acknowledge that the relation of thought
to sensuous existence (the relation at which it stopped) is only a relation of
mere appearance, and also well recognized in the idea in general a higher
unity of those two terms, even gave expression to it, as for example in the
idea of an intuitive understanding, and yet stopped short at that relative
relation and at the claim that the concept remains utterly separate from
reality – thus asserting as truth what it declared to be finite cognition, and
explaining away as extravagant and illegitimate figments of thought what
it recognized as truth and had specifically defined as such.
Since it is logic above all and not science generally whose relation to
truth is the issue here, it must be further conceded that logic as the formal
science cannot also contain, nor should contain, the kind of reality which
is the content of the other parts of philosophy, of the sciences of nature
and of spirit. These concrete sciences do attain to a more real form of the
idea than logic does, but not because they have turned back to the reality
which consciousness abandoned as it rose above the appearance of it to

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

523

science, or because they have again resorted to the use of such forms as
are the categories and the determinations of reflection, the finitude and
untruth of which were demonstrated in the logic. The logic rather exhibits
the rise of the idea up to the level from which it becomes the creator
of nature and passes over into the form of a concrete immediacy whose
concept, however, again shatters this shape also in order to realize itself as
concrete spirit. These sciences, just as they had the logic as their prototype,
hold on to its logical principle or the concept as in them their formative
factor. As contrasted with them, the logic is of course the formal science,
yet the science of the absolute form which is implicit totality and contains
the pure idea of truth itself. This absolute form has in it a content or reality
of its own; the concept, since it is not a trivial, empty identity, obtains its
differentiated determinations in the moment of negativity or of absolute
determining; and the content is only these determinations of the absolute
form and nothing else – a content posited by the form itself and therefore
adequate to it. – This form is for this reason of quite another nature than
logical form is ordinarily taken to be. It is truth already on its own account,
because this content is adequate to its form or this reality to its concept,
and it is pure truth, because the determinations of the content do not yet
have the form of an absolute otherness or of absolute immediacy. – When
Kant in the Critique of Pure Reason (p. 83),23 in connection with logic
comes to discuss the old and famous question: What is truth?, he starts by
passing off as a triviality the nominal definition that it is the agreement of
cognition with its subject matter – a definition which is of great, indeed of
supreme value. If we recall this definition together with the fundamental
thesis of transcendental idealism, namely that rational cognition is incapable
of comprehending things in themselves,24 that reality lies absolutely outside
the concept, it is then at once evident that such a reason, one which is
incapable of setting itself in agreement with its subject matter, and the things
in themselves, such as are not in agreement with the rational concept – a
concept that does not agree with reality and a reality that does not agree
with the concept – that these are untrue conceptions. If Kant had measured
the idea of an intuitive understanding against that first definition of truth,
he would have treated that idea which expresses the required agreement,
not as a figment of thought but rather as truth.
“What we would want to know,” Kant proceeds to say, “is a universal
and certain criterion of truth of any cognition whatever, one that would be
valid for all cognitions without distinction of their subject matters; but since
23

In fact, A58/B82.

24

Bxxvi.

12.26

524

12.27

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

any such criterion would abstract from all content of cognition (the reference
to its object), and truth has to do precisely with this content, it would be quite
impossible, even absurd, to ask for a mark of the truth of this content of
cognitions.”25 – Here we have, clearly expressed, the ordinary conception
of the formal function of logic which gives to the adduced argument the air
of convincing. But first of all it is to be noted what usually happens to this
kind of formal argumentation: it forgets as it speaks that on which it is based
and of which it speaks. It would be absurd, it says, to ask for a criterion
of the truth of the content of cognition. But according to the definition on
which it is based it is not the content that constitutes the truth, but the
agreement of it with the concept. Such a content as is here spoken of, one
without the concept, is something void of concept and therefore void of
essence; of course, we cannot ask of such a content for a criterion of truth,
but for the opposite reason, namely, not because it cannot be the required
agreement on account of its being void of concept, but because it cannot
be anything more than just another truthless opinion. – Let us leave aside
any talk about content, which is the cause of the confusion here – the
confusion in which formalism invariably falls, and which is responsible for
making it say, every time it tries to explain itself, the opposite of what it
wants to say – and let us just stay with the abstract view that the logic
is only formal, that it abstracts from all content. What we then have is a
one-sided cognition which is not supposed to contain any subject matter,
an empty form void of determination which is therefore just as little an
agreement (for it necessarily takes two for an agreement) as it is truth. –
In the a priori synthesis of the concept, Kant did have a higher principle in
which it was possible to recognize a duality and therefore what is required
for truth; but the material of the senses, the manifoldness of intuition, was
too strong for him to be able to wrest himself away from it and turn to a
consideration of the concept and the categories in and for themselves, and
to a speculative form of philosophizing.
Since logic is the science of the absolute form, this formal discipline,26
in order to be true, must have a content in it which is adequate to its
form; all the more so, because logical form is pure form and logical truth,
accordingly, the pure truth itself. This formal discipline must therefore
be thought of as inherently much richer in determinations and content,
and also of infinitely greater efficacy over the concrete, than it is normally
taken to be. The laws of logic by themselves (extraneous elements aside,
such as applied logic and the rest of the psychological and anthropological
25

Cf. A57–59/B82–83.

26

dieses Formelles.

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

525

material) are commonly restricted, apart from the law of contradiction, to
a few meager propositions concerning the conversion of judgments and the
forms of inference. And the forms, too, that come up in this context, as well
as their further specifications, are only taken up historically as it were, not
subjected to criticism to see whether they are in and for themselves true.
For example, the form of the positive judgment is accepted as something
perfectly correct in itself, and whether the judgment is true is made to
depend solely on the content. No thought is given to investigating whether
this form of judgment is a form of truth in and for itself; whether the
proposition it enunciates, “the individual is a universal,” is not inherently
dialectical. It is at once assumed that the judgment is capable of possessing
truth on its own account, and that every proposition expressed in a positive
judgment is true, even though it is patently evident that the judgment lacks
what is required by the definition of truth, namely the agreement of the
concept with its subject matter; for if the predicate, which here is the
universal, is taken as the concept, and the subject, which is the singular,
as the subject matter, then the concept does not agree with it. But if the
abstract universal which is the predicate does not yet amount to a concept
(for surely there is more that belongs to it); or if the subject, for its part,
still is not much more than a grammatical one, how should the judgment
possibly contain truth seeing that its concept and the intended object do
not agree, as also that the concept is missing and indeed the object as well? –
This rather is then where the impossible and the absurd lie, in the attempt
to grasp the truth in such forms as are the positive judgment or a judgment
in general. Just as the Kantian philosophy did not consider the categories
in and for themselves, but declared them to be finite determinations unfit
to hold the truth, on the only inappropriate ground that they are subjective
forms of self-consciousness, still less did it subject to criticism the forms
of the concepts that make up the content of ordinary logic. What it did,
rather, is to pick a portion of them, namely the functions of judgments,
for the determination of categories, and simply accepted them as valid
presuppositions. Even if there were nothing more to the forms of logic
than these formal functions of judgment, for that reason alone they would
already be worthwhile investigating to see how far, by themselves, they
correspond to the truth. A logic that does not perform this task can at most
claim the value of a natural description of the phenomena of thought as
they simply occur. It is an infinite merit of Aristotle, one that must fill us
with the highest admiration for the power of his genius, that he was the
first to undertake this description. But it is necessary to go further and
determine both the systematic connection of these forms and their value.

12.28

526
12.29

12.30

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
division

The concept, as considered so far, has demonstrated itself to be the unity of
being and essence. Essence is the first negation of being, which has thereby
become reflective shine; the concept is the second negation, or the negation
of this negation, and is therefore being which has been restored once more,
but as in itself the infinite mediation and negation of being. – In the concept, therefore, being and essence no longer have determination as being and
essence, nor are they only in such a unity in which each would reflectively
shine in the other. Consequently, the concept does not differentiate itself
into these determinations. The concept is the truth of the substantial relation in which being and essence attain their perfect self-subsistence and
determination each through the other. The truth of substantiality proved
to be the substantial identity, an identity that equally is, and only is, positedness. Positedness is determinate existence and differentiation; in the concept,
therefore, being-in-and-for-itself has attained a true existence adequate to
it, for that positedness is itself being-in-and-for-itself. This positedness
constitutes the difference of the concept in the concept itself; and because
the concept is immediately being-in-and-for-itself, its differences are themselves the whole concept – universal in their determinateness and identical in
their negation.
This is now the concept itself of the concept, but at first only the concept
of the concept or also itself only concept. Since the concept is being-in-andfor-itself by being a positedness, or is absolute substance, and substance
manifests the necessity of distinct substances as an identity, this identity must
itself posit what it is. The moments of the movement of the substantial
relation through which the concept came to be and the reality thereby
exhibited are only in the transition to the concept; that reality is not yet the
concept’s own determination, one that has emerged out of it; it fell in the
sphere of necessity whereas the reality of the concept can only be its free
determination, a determinate existence in which the concept is identical
with itself and whose moments are themselves concepts posited through the
concept itself.
At first, therefore, the concept is only implicitly the truth; because it is
only something inner, it is equally only something outer. It is at first simply
an immediate and in this shape its moments have the form of immediate,
fixed determinations. It appears as the determinate concept, as the sphere of
mere understanding. – Because this form of immediacy is an existence still
inadequate to the nature of the concept, for the concept is free and only
refers to itself, it is an external form in which the concept does not exist

The Science of Subjective Logic or The Doctrine of the Concept

527

in-and-for-itself, but can only count as something posited or subjective. –
The shape of the immediate concept constitutes the standpoint that makes
of the concept a subjective thinking, a reflection external to the subject
matter. This stage constitutes, therefore, subjectivity, or the formal concept.
Its externality is manifested in the fixed being of its determinations that
makes them come up each by itself, isolated and qualitative, and each only
externally referred to the other. But the identity of the concept, which is
precisely their inner or subjective essence, sets them in dialectical movement,
and through this movement their singleness is sublated and with it also
the separation of the concept from the subject matter, and what emerges
as their truth is the totality which is the objective concept.
Second, in its objectivity the concept is the fact itself as it exists in-andfor-itself. The formal concept makes itself into the fact by virtue of the
necessary determination of its form, and it thereby sheds the relation
of subjectivity and externality that it had to that matter. Or, conversely,
objectivity is the real concept that has emerged from its inwardness and has
passed over into existence. – In this identity with the fact, the concept
thus has an existence which is its own and free. But this existence is still a
freedom which is immediate and not yet negative. Being at one with the
subject matter, the concept is submerged into it; its differences are objective
determinations of existence in which it is itself again the inner. As the soul
of objective existence, the concept must give itself the form of subjectivity
that it immediately had as formal concept; and so, in the form of the free
concept which in objectivity it still lacked, it steps forth over against that
objectivity and, over against it, it makes therein the identity with it, which
as objective concept it has in and for itself, into an identity that is also posited.
In this consummation in which the concept has the form of freedom
even in its objectivity, the adequate27 concept is the idea. Reason, which is
the sphere of the idea, is the self-unveiled 28 truth in which the concept
attains the realization absolutely adequate to it, and is free inasmuch as in
this real world, in its objectivity, it recognizes its subjectivity, and in this
subjectivity recognizes that objective world.
27
28

Hegel uses the Latinate word “adäquate” to bring out the notion of truth, traditionally defined as
adaequatio rei et intellectus.
Hegel is playing on the Greek word for “truth,” which literally means an “unveiling.”

section i

Subjectivity

12.31

The concept is, to start with, formal, the concept in its beginning or as
the immediate concept. – In this immediate unity, its difference or its
positedness is, first, itself initially simple and only a reflective shine, so that
the moments of the difference are immediately the totality of the concept
and only the concept as such.
But, second, because it is absolute negativity, the concept divides and
posits itself as the negative or the other of itself; yet, because it is still
immediate concept, this positing or this differentiation is characterized by
the reciprocal indifference of its moments, each of which comes to be on
its own; in this division the unity of the concept is still only an external
connection. Thus, as the connection of its moments posited as self-subsisting
and indifferent, the concept is judgment.29
Third, although the judgment contains the unity of the concept that
has been lost in its self-subsisting moments, this unity is not posited. It
will become posited by virtue of the dialectical movement of the judgment
which, through this movement, becomes syllogistic inference,30 and this is
the fully posited concept, for in the inference the moments of the concept
as self-subsisting extremes and their mediating unity are both equally posited.
But since this unity itself, as unifying middle, and the moments, as selfsubsisting extremes, stand at first immediately opposite one another, this
contradictory relation that occurs in the formal inference sublates itself, and
the completeness of the concept passes over into the unity of totality; the
subjectivity of the concept into its objectivity.
29
30

Note the play on words: “division” and “judgment” are in German “Teilung” and “Urteil.”
“syllogistic inference” = Schluß.

528

c h a p ter 1

The concept

The faculty of concepts is normally associated with the understanding, and
the latter is accordingly distinguished from the faculty of judgment and
from the faculty of syllogistic inferences which is formal reason. But it is
particularly with reason that the understanding is contrasted, and it signifies
then, not the faculty of concepts in general, but the faculty of determinate
concepts, as if, as the prevailing opinion has it, the concept were only a
determinate. When distinguished in this meaning from the formal faculty
of judgment and from formal reason, the understanding is accordingly to
be taken as the faculty of the single determinate concept. For the judgment
and the syllogism or reason, as formal, are themselves only a thing of the
understanding,31 since they are subsumed under the form of the abstract
determinateness of the concept. Here, however, we are definitely not taking
the concept as just abstractly determined; the understanding is therefore
to be distinguished from reason only in that it is the faculty of the concept
as such.
This universal concept that we now have to consider contains the three
moments of universality, particularity, and singularity. The difference and
the determinations which the concept gives itself in its process of distinguishing constitute the sides formerly called positedness. Since this positedness is in the concept identical with being-in-and-for-itself, each of the
moments is just as much the whole concept as it is determinate concept and
a determination of the concept.
It is at first pure concept, or the determination of universality. But the
pure or universal concept is also only a determinate or particular concept
that takes its place alongside the other concepts. Because the concept is
a totality, and therefore in its universality or pure identical self-reference
is essentially a determining and a distinguishing, it possesses in itself the
norm by which this form of its self-identity, in pervading all the moments
31

“a thing of the understanding” = ein Verständiges.

529

12.32

530

12.33

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

and comprehending them within, equally determines itself immediately as
being only the universal as against the distinctness of the moments.
Second, the concept is thereby posited as this particular or determinate
concept, distinct from others.
Third, singularity is the concept reflecting itself out of difference into
absolute negativity. This is at the same time the moment at which it has
stepped out of its identity into its otherness and becomes judgment.

a. the universal concept
The pure concept is the absolutely infinite, unconditioned and free. It is
here, as the content of our treatise begins to be the concept itself, that we
must look back once more at its genesis. Essence came to be out of being, and
the concept out of essence, therefore also from being. But this becoming
has the meaning of a self-repulsion, so that what becomes is rather the unconditional and the originative. In passing over into essence, being became a
reflective shine or a positedness, and becoming or the passing over into an
other became a positing; conversely, the positing or the reflection of essence
sublated itself and restored itself to a non-posited, an original being. The
concept is the mutual penetration of these moments, namely, the qualitative and the originative existent is only as positing and as immanent turning back, and this pure immanent reflection simply is the becoming-other
or determinateness which is, consequently, no less infinite, self-referring
determinateness.
Thus the concept is absolute self-identity by being first just this, the
negation of negation or the infinite unity of negativity with itself. This
pure self-reference of the concept, which is such by positing itself through
the negativity, is the universality of the concept.
Universality seems incapable of explanation, because it is the simplest
of determinations; explanation must rely on determinations and differentiations and must apply predicates to its subject matter, and this would
alter rather than explain the simple. But it is precisely of the nature of the
universal to be a simple that, by virtue of absolute negativity, contains difference and determinateness in itself in the highest degree. Being is simple
as an immediate; for this reason we can only intend it without being able
to say what it is; therefore, it is immediately one with its other, non-being.
The concept of being is just this, that it is so simple as to vanish into its
opposite immediately; it is becoming. The universal is, on the contrary, a
simple that is at the same time all the richer in itself, for it is the concept.

The concept

531

First, therefore, it is simple self-reference; it is only in itself. But, second,
this identity is in itself absolute mediation but not anything mediated. Of
the universal which is mediated, that is to say, the abstract universal, the one
opposed to the particular and the singular, of that we shall have to speak
only in connection with the determinate concept. – Yet, even the abstract
universal entails this much, that in order to obtain it there is required the
leaving aside of other determinations of the concrete. As determinations in
general, these determination are negations, and leaving them aside is a further
negating. Even in the abstract universal, therefore, the negation of negation
is already present. But this double negation comes to be represented as if
it were external to it, both as if the properties of the concrete that are left
out were different from the ones that are retained as the content of the
abstraction, and as if this operation of leaving some aside while retaining
the rest went on outside them. With respect to this movement, the universal
has not yet acquired the determination of externality; it is still in itself that
absolute negation which is, precisely, the negation of negation or absolute
negativity.
Accordingly, because of this original unity, the first negative, or the
determination, is not, to begin with, a restriction for the universal; rather,
the latter maintains itself in it and its self-identity is positive. The categories
of being were, as concepts, essentially these identities of the determinations
with themselves in their restriction or their otherness; but this identity was
only implicitly the concept, was not yet made manifest. Consequently, the
qualitative determination perished as such in its other and had as its truth
a determination diverse from it. The universal, on the contrary, even when
it posits itself in a determination, remains in it what it is. It is the soul
of the concrete which it inhabits, unhindered and equal to itself in its
manifoldness and diversity. It is not swept away in the becoming but persists
undisturbed through it, endowed with the power of unalterable, undying
self-preservation.
It also does not simply shine reflectively in its other, as does the determination of reflection. This determination, as something relative, does not
refer only to itself but is a relating. It lets itself be known in its other, but
at first it only shines reflectively in it, and this reflective shining of each in
the other, or their reciprocal determination, has the form of an external
activity alongside their self-subsistence. – The universal is posited, on the
contrary, as the essence of its determination, as this determination’s own
positive nature. For the determination that constitutes the negative of the
universal is in the concept simply and solely a positedness; essentially, in
other words, it is at the same time the negative of the negative, and only

12.34

532

12.35

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is as this self-identity of the negative which is the universal. To this extent,
the universal is also the substance of its determinations, but in such a way
that what for the substance as such was an accident, is the concept’s own
self mediation, its own immanent reflection. But this mediation, which first
raises the accidental to necessity, is the manifested reference; the concept is
not the abyss of formless substance, or the necessity which is the inner identity of things or circumstances different from each other and reciprocally
constricting; rather, as absolute negativity, it is the informing and creative
principle, and since the determination is not as limitation but is just as
much simply sublated as determination, is positedness, so is the reflective
shine the appearance as appearance of the identical.
The universal is therefore free power; it is itself while reaching out to its
other and embracing it, but without doing violence to it; on the contrary,
it is at rest in its other as in its own. Just as it has been called free power, it
could also be called free love and boundless blessedness, for it relates to that
which is distinct from it as to itself; in it, it has returned to itself.
Mention has just been made of determinateness, even though the concept
has not yet progressed to it, being at first only as the universal and only selfidentical. But one cannot speak of the universal apart from determinateness
which, to be more precise, is particularity and singularity. For in its absolute
negativity the universal contains determinateness in and for itself, so that,
when speaking of determinateness in connection with the universal, the
determinateness is not being imported into the latter from outside. As
negativity in general, that is, according to the first immediate negation, the
universal has determinateness in it above all as particularity; as a second
universal, as the negation of negation, it is absolute determinateness, that
is, singularity and concreteness. – The universal is thus the totality of the
concept; it is what is concrete, is not empty but, on the contrary, has content
by virtue of its concept – a content in which the universal does not just
preserve itself but is rather the universal’s own, immanent to it. It is of
course possible to abstract from this content, but what we have then is not
the universal element of the concept but the abstract universal, which is an
isolated and imperfect moment of the concept, void of truth.
More precisely, the universal shows itself to be this totality as follows.
In so far as the universal possesses determinateness, this determinateness
is not only the first negation but also the reflection of this negation into
itself. According to that first negation, taken by itself, the universal is a
particular, and in this guise we shall consider it in a moment. In the other
determinateness, however, the universal is still essentially universal, and
this side we have here still to consider. – For this determinateness, as it

The concept

533

is in the concept, is the total reflection – a doubly reflective shine, both
outwards, as reflection into the other, and inwards, as reflection into itself.
The outward shining establishes a distinction with respect to an other; the
universal accordingly takes on a particularity which is resolved in a higher
universality. Inasmuch as it now is also only a relative universal, it does not
lose its character of universality; it preserves itself in its determinateness,
not just because it remains indifferent to it – for then it would be only
posited together with it – but because of what has just been called the inward
shining. The determinateness, as determinate concept, is bent back into itself;
it is the concept’s own immanent character, a character made essential by
being taken up into the universality and by being pervaded by it, just as
it pervades it in turn, equal in extension and identical with it. This is
the character that belongs to the genus as the determinateness which is
not separated from the universal. To this extent, it is not an outwardly
directed limitation, but is positive, for by virtue of the universality it stands
in free self-reference. Thus even the determinate concept remains in itself
infinitely free concept.
But in regard to the other side in which the genus is limited because of
its determinate character, we have just said that, as a lower genus, it has
its resolution in a higher universal. This universal can also be grasped as
a genus but as a more abstract one; it always pertains, however, only to
the side of the determinate concept which is outwardly directed. The truly
higher universal is the one in which this outwardly directed side is redirected
inwardly; this is the second negation in which the determinateness is present
simply and solely as something posited, or as reflective shine. Life, the “I,”
spirit, absolute concept, are not universals only as higher genera, but are
rather concretes whose determinacies are also not mere species or lower
genera but determinacies which, in their reality, are self-contained and selfcomplete. Of course, life, the “I,” finite spirit, are also only determinate
concepts. To this extent, however, their resolution is in a universal which,
as the truly absolute concept, is to be grasped as the idea of infinite spirit –
the spirit whose posited being is the infinite, transparent reality in which it
contemplates its creation and, in this creation, itself.
The true, infinite universal, the one which, immediately in itself, is just
as much particularity as singularity, is now to be more closely examined
as particularity. It determines itself freely; the process by which it becomes
finite is not a transition, the kind that occurs only in the sphere of being;
it is creative power as self-referring absolute negativity. As such, it differentiates itself internally, and this is a determining, because the differentiating
is one with the universality. Accordingly, it is a positing of differences

12.36

534

12.37

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

that are themselves universals, self-referring. They become thereby fixed,
isolated differences. The isolated subsistence of the finite that was earlier
determined32 as its being-for-itself, also as thinghood, as substance, is in
its truth universality, the form with which the infinite concept clothes its
differences – a form which is equally itself one of its differences. Herein
consists the creativity of the concept, a creativity which is to be comprehended only in the concept’s innermost core.
b. the particular concept

12.38

Determinateness as such belongs to being and the qualitative; as the determinateness of the concept, it is particularity. It is not a limit, as if it were
related to an other beyond it, but is rather, as just shown, the universal’s
own immanent moment; in particularity, therefore, the universal is not in
an other but simply and solely with itself.
The particular contains the universality that constitutes its substance;
the genus is unaltered in its species; these do not differ from the universal but only from each other. The particular has one and the same
universality as the other particulars to which it is related. The diversity
of these particulars, because of their identity with the universal, is as
such at the same time universal; it is totality. – The particular, therefore, does not only contain the universal but exhibits it also through its
determinateness; accordingly the universal constitutes a sphere that the particular must exhaust. This totality, inasmuch as the determinateness of
the particular is taken as mere diversity, appears as completeness. In this
respect, the species are complete simply in so far as there are no more
of them. There is no inner standard or principle available for them, for
their diversity is just the dispersed33 difference for which the universality,
which is for itself absolute unity, is a merely external reflex and an unconstrained, contingent completeness. But diversity passes over into opposition,
into an immanent connection of diverse moments. Particularity, however,
because it is universality, is this immanent connection, not by virtue of
a transition, but in and for itself. It is totality intrinsically, and simple
determinateness, essential principle. It has no other determinateness than
that posited by the universal itself and resulting from it in the following
manner.
The particular is the universal itself, but it is its difference or reference
to an other, its outwardly reflecting shine; but there is no other at hand from
32

Cf. above, 11.327ff., the various shapes of “appearance.”

33

Einheitslose.

The concept

535

which the particular would be differentiated than the universal itself. – The
universal determines itself, and so is itself the particular; the determinateness
is its difference; it is only differentiated from itself. Its species are therefore
only (a) the universal itself and (b) the particular. The universal is as concept
itself and its opposite, and this opposite is in turn the universal itself as
its posited determinateness; the universal overreaches it and, in it, it is
with itself. Thus it is the totality and the principle of its diversity, which is
determined wholly and solely through itself.
There is, therefore, no other true logical division than this, that the
concept sets itself on one side as the immediate, indeterminate universality;
it is this very indeterminateness that makes its determinateness, or that it
is a particular. The two are both a particular and are therefore coordinated.
Both, as particular, are also determinate as against the universal, and in
this sense they are subordinated to it. But even this universal, as against
which the particular is determined, is for that reason itself also just one
of the opposing sides. When we speak of two opposing sides, we must
repeat that the two constitute the particular, not just together, as if they
were alike in being particular only for external reflection, but because
their determinateness over against each other is at the same time essentially
only one determinateness; it is the negativity which in the universal is
simple.
Difference, as it presents itself here, is in its concept and therefore in
its truth. All previous difference has this unity in the concept. As it is
present immediately in being, difference is the limit of an other; as present
in reflection, it is relative, posited as referring essentially to its other; here is
where the unity of the concept thus begins to be posited; at first, however,
the unity is only a reflective shine in an other. – The true significance of the
transitoriness and the dissolution of these determinations is just this, that
they attain to their concept, to their truth; being, existence, something, or
whole and part, and so on, substance and accidents, cause and effect, are
thought determinations on their own; as determinate concepts, however,
they are grasped in so far as each is cognized in unity with its others or
in opposition to them. – Whole and parts, for example, or cause and
effect, and so on, are not yet diverse terms that are determined as particular
relatively to each other, for although they implicitly constitute one concept,
their unity has not yet attained the form of universality; thus the difference
as well which is in these relations, does not yet have the form of being
one determinateness. Cause and effect, for example, are not two diverse
concepts but only one determinate concept, and causality is, like every
concept, a simple concept.

12.39

536

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

With respect to completeness, we have just seen that the determinate
moment34 of particularity is complete in the difference of the universal and
the particular, and that only these two make up the particular species. To
be sure, there are more than two species to be found in any genus in nature,
and these many species cannot stand in the same relation to each other as
we have shown. This is the impotence of nature, that it cannot abide by
and exhibit the rigor of the concept and loses itself in a blind manifoldness
void of concept. We can wonder at nature, at the manifoldness of its genera
and species, in the infinite diversity of its shapes, for wonder is without
concept and its object is the irrational. It is allowed to nature, since nature
is the self-externality of the concept, to indulge in this diversity, just as
spirit, even though it possesses the concept in the shape of concept, lets
itself go into pictorial representation and runs wild in the infinite manifoldness of the latter. The manifold genera and species of nature must not
be esteemed to be anything more than arbitrary notions of spirit engaged
in pictorial representations. Both indeed show traces and intimations of
the concept, but they do not exhibit it in trustworthy copy, for they are the
sides of its free self-externality; the concept is the absolute power precisely
because it can let its difference go free in the shape of self-subsistent diversity, external necessity, accidentality, arbitrariness, opinion – all of which,
however, must not be taken as anything more than the abstract side of
nothingness.
As we have just seen, the determinateness of the particular is simple as
principle, but it is also simple as a moment of the totality, determinateness
as against the other determinateness. The concept, in determining or differentiating itself, behaves negatively towards its unity and gives itself the
form of one of its ideal moments of being; as a determinate concept, it has
a determinate existence in general. But this being no longer has the significance of mere immediacy, but has the significance rather of an immediacy
which is equal to itself by virtue of absolute mediation, an immediacy that
equally contains in itself the other moment of essence or of reflection. This
universality, with which the determinate clothes itself, is abstract universality. The particular has this universality in it as its essence; but in so far
as the determinateness of the difference is posited and thereby has being,
the universality is form in it, and the determinateness as such is its content. Universality becomes form inasmuch as the difference is something
essential, just as in the pure universal it is, on the contrary, only absolute
negativity and not a difference posited as such.
34

das Bestimmte.

The concept

537

Now the determinateness is indeed an abstraction, as against the other
determinateness; but the other determinateness is only universality itself,
and this too is therefore abstract universality; and the determinateness
of the concept, or particularity, is again nothing more than determinate
universality. In this universality, the concept is outside itself, and because it is
it, the concept, which is there outside itself, the abstract-universal contains all
the moments of the concept. It is (a) universality, (b) determinateness, (g)
the simple unity of the two; but this unity is immediate, and the particularity
is not therefore as totality. Implicitly it is this totality also, and mediation;
it is essentially a reference to the other excluding it, or the sublation of
negation, namely of the other determinateness – an other that lingers on
only as an intention, for it vanishes immediately revealing itself to be the
same as its other is supposed to be. Therefore, what makes this universality
an abstraction is that the mediation is only a condition, or is not posited
in it. Because it is not posited, the unity of the abstraction has the form of
immediacy, and the content has the form of indifference to its universality,
for the content is nothing but this totality which is the universality of
absolute negativity. Hence the abstract universal is indeed the concept, but
the unconceptualized concept, the concept not posited as such.
When we speak of the determinate concept, what we ordinarily mean is
precisely just this abstract universal. Even by concept as such, what is generally understood is only this unconceptualized concept, and the understanding is designated as its faculty. Demonstration belongs to this understanding
inasmuch as it proceeds by way of concepts, that is to say, only in determinations. This progression by way of concepts does not therefore reach
past finitude and necessity; the highest it reaches is the negative infinite,
the abstraction of the highest essence which is itself the determinateness
of the indeterminateness. Absolute substance, too, although not this empty
abstraction but on the contrary a totality according to content, is still
abstract, for since it is without absolute form, its innermost truth is not
constituted by the concept; although it is the identity of universality and
particularity, or of thought and externality, this identity is not the determinateness of the concept; there is rather an understanding outside it – an
understanding which is contingent precisely because it is outside it – in
which and for which substance exists in diverse attributes and modes.
Moreover, abstraction is not as empty as it is usually said to be; it is the
determinate concept; it has some determinateness or other for its content;
the highest essence also, the pure abstraction, has the determinateness of
indeterminateness, as just mentioned; but indeterminateness is a determinateness because it is supposed to stand opposite the determinate. But the

12.40

12.41

538

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

moment one says what it is, its intended meaning sublates itself by itself;
for it is spoken of on a par with determinateness, and from this abstraction
the concept and its truth are brought out. – To be sure, any determinate
concept is empty in so far as it does not contain the totality, but only a
one-sided determinateness. Even when it has otherwise concrete content
such as, for instance, humankind, the state, animal, etc., it remains an
empty concept inasmuch as its determinateness is not the principle of its
differentiation; the principle contains the beginning and the essence of its
development and realization; any other determinateness of the concept is
however otiose. To reproach the concept as such for being empty is to
ignore its absolute determinateness which is the difference of the concept
and the only true content in the element of the concept.
Here we have the circumstance that explains why the understanding
is nowadays held in such a low repute and is so much discredited when
measured against reason;35 it is the fixity which it imparts to determinacies
and consequently to anything finite. This fixity consists in the form of
the abstract universality just considered that makes them unalterable. For
qualitative determinateness, and also the determination of reflection, are
essentially limited, and because of their limitation they entail a reference
to their other; hence the necessity of their transition and passing away. But
the universality which they possess in the understanding gives them the
form of immanent reflection and, because this form removes from them
the reference to the other, they have become unalterable. Now although
this eternity belongs to the pure concept by nature, the determinations
of the concept are eternal essentialities only according to form; but their
content is not proportionate to this form and, therefore, they are not truth,
or imperishable. Their content is not proportionate to the form because it
is not the determinateness itself as universal, that is, not as totality of the
difference of the concept, or is not itself the whole form; the form of the
limited understanding is for this reason itself imperfect universality, that is
to say, abstract universality. – But further, we must pay due respect to the
infinite force of the understanding in splitting the concrete into abstract
35

This is the position that Jacobi forcefully defended in 1815, in the Preface to the second edition of his
dialogue David Hume which was intended to serve also as the Introduction to his collected works.
Here is one representative passage: “We assert that the faculty of feelings is the one that is exalted
above all others in man. It is this faculty alone that distinguishes him from all animals in species,
and incomparably elevates him above them, i.e. in kind, and not just in degree. We assert that
this faculty is one and the same as reason . . . As the senses direct the understanding to sensation,
so reason directs it to feeling. The representations of what we are directed to only in feeling we
call ideas.” Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Werke, Vol. 2 (Leipzig, 1815), p. 61. English trans., The Main
Philosophical Works, p. 564.

The concept

539

determinacies and plumbing the depth of the difference – this force which
alone is at the same time the mighty power causing the transition of
the determinacies. The concrete of intuition is a totality, but a sensuous
totality, a real material that subsists in space and time, part outside part,
each indifferent to the other; surely this lack of unity in a manifold that
makes it the content of intuition ought not to be credited as privileging it
over the universal of the understanding. The mutability that the manifold
exhibits in intuition already points to the universal; but all of the manifold
that comes to intuition is just more of the same, an equally alterable other –
not the universal that one would expect to appear and take its place. But
least of all should we reckon to the credit of such sciences as for example
Geometry and Arithmetic that their material carries an intuitive element
with it, or imagine that their propositions are grounded by it. On the
contrary, the presence of that element renders the material of these sciences
of an inferior nature; the intuition of figures or numbers is of no help to
the science of figures and numbers; only the thought of them produces this
science. – But if by intuition we understand not merely a sensuous material
but the objective totality, then the intuition is an intellectual one, that is,
its subject matter is not existence in its externalization but that element
in existence which is unalterable reality and truth – the reality only in so
far as it is essentially in the concept and is determined by it; the idea, of
whose more precise nature more will be said later. What intuition as such
is supposed to have over the concept is external reality, the reality that lacks
the concept and receives value only through the concept.
Consequently, since the understanding exhibits the infinite force that
determines the universal, or conversely, since it is the understanding that
through the form of universality imparts stable subsistence to the otherwise
inherent instability of determinateness, then it is not the fault of the
understanding if there is no further advance. It is a subjective impotence of
reason that allows these determinacies to remain so dispersed, and is unable
to bring them back to their unity through the dialectical force opposed
to that abstract universality, that is to say, through the determinacies’ own
nature which is their concept. To be sure, the understanding does give
them through the form of abstract universality a rigidity of being, so to
speak, which they do not otherwise possess in the qualitative sphere and in
the sphere of reflection; but by thus simplifying them, the understanding
at the same time quickens them with spirit, and it so sharpens them that
only at that point, only there, do they also obtain the capacity to dissolve
themselves and to pass over into their opposite. The ripest maturity, the
highest stage, that anything can attain is the one at which its fall begins.

12.42

540

12.43

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

The fixity of the determinacies which the understanding appears to run up
against, the form of the imperishable, is that of self-referring universality.
But this universality belongs to the concept as its own, and for this reason
what is found expressed in it, infinitely close at hand, is the dissolution of
the finite. This universality directly contradicts the determinateness of the
finite and makes explicit its disproportion with respect to it. – Or rather,
that disproportion is already at hand; the abstract determinate is posited as
one with universality and, for this reason, not for itself (for it would then
be only a determinate) but, on the contrary, only as the unity of itself and
the universal, that is, as concept.
Therefore the common practice of separating understanding and reason
is to be rejected on all counts. On the contrary, to consider the concept
as void of reason should itself be considered as an incapacity of reason to
recognize itself in the concept. The determinate and abstract concept is
the condition, or rather an essential moment, of reason; it is form quickened
by spirit in which the finite, through the universality in which it refers
to itself, is internally kindled, is posited as dialectical and thereby is the
beginning of the appearance of reason.
Since in the foregoing the determinate concept has been presented in its
truth, it is only left to indicate what, as so presented, it has already been
posited as. – Difference, which is an essential moment of the concept but
in the pure universal is not yet posited as such, receives its due in the determinate concept. Determinateness in the form of universality is united with
the latter to form a simple; determinate universality is self-referring determinateness, determinate determinateness or absolute negativity posited for
itself. But self-referring determinateness is singularity. Just as universality
immediately is particularity in and for itself, no less immediately is particularity also singularity in and for itself; this singularity is at first to be
regarded as the third moment of the concept, inasmuch as it is held fast
in opposition to the other two, but also as the absolute turning back of the
concept into itself, and at the same time as the posited loss of itself.
Remark
Universality, particularity, and singularity are, according to the foregoing, the three determinate concepts, that is, if one wants to count them.
We have already shown that number is a form unsuited to conceptual
determinations,36 but for the determination of the concept itself it is
unsuited the most; number, since the unit is its principle, turns the counted
36

Cf. GW 11, 129–130; above 21.203ff.

The concept

541

into totally separated units indifferent to each other. We have seen from the
foregoing that the diverse determinate concepts, rather than falling apart
as they do when counted, are only one and the same concept.
In the customary treatment of logic, a variety of classifications and species
of concepts are adduced. It immediately strikes one as inconsequential
that the species are introduced in this way: “There are, as regards quality,
quantity, etc., the following concepts.” The “there are” conveys no other
justification than that we find the named species and that they show up
in experience. What we have in this manner is an empirical logic – an odd
science indeed, an irrational cognition of the rational. In this the logic sets a
very bad precedent for compliance to its own teaching; it allows itself to do
the opposite of what it prescribes as a rule, namely, that concepts should be
derived, and scientific propositions (therefore also the proposition: “There
are such and such species of concepts”) demonstrated. – In this context,
the Kantian philosophy incurs a further inconsequence by borrowing the
categories for the transcendental logic, as so-called root concepts, from the
subjective logic where they were assumed empirically.37 Since the Kantian
philosophy admits the latter fact, it is hard to see why transcendental logic
resorts to borrowing from such a science rather than directly helping itself
from experience.
By way of example, concepts are normally classified according to their
clarity, namely, as clear and obscure, distinct and indistinct, adequate and
inadequate. We can also add to the list perfect and redundant and other
suchlike superfluities. – Now as regards this classification according to
clarity, it immediately transpires that this standpoint and its connected distinctions are taken from psychological and not logical determinations. The
so-called clear concept is supposed to be one that suffices to differentiate
one intended object from another. But this cannot be called a concept yet;
it is nothing more than a subjective representation. What an obscure concept
might be must be left to itself, for otherwise it would not be obscure but
a distinct concept. – The distinct concept is supposed to be one whose
mark can be given. But then it is, strictly speaking, the determinate concept.
The mark, when taken in its strict signification, is nothing else than the
determinateness or the simple content of the concept in so far as the latter is
distinguished from the form of universality. But the mark does not quite
have at first this more precise meaning; it is generally taken as only a determination by which a third party takes note of a subject matter or of the
concept; it can therefore be a very contingent circumstance. It expresses in
37

Cf. A80–81/B106–107.

12.44

542

12.45

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

general not so much the immanence and essentiality of a determination as
its reference to an external understanding. If the latter really is an understanding, then it has the concept before it and makes a note of it by nothing
else than by what is in the concept itself. In case the mark is different from the
concept, then the mark is a sign or some other determination that belongs
to the representation of the matter at hand, not to its concept. – What an
indistinct concept might be, this can be passed over as superfluous.
But the adequate concept is something higher; it properly denotes the
agreement of the concept with reality, and this is not the concept as such
but the idea.
If the mark of a distinct concept were really to be the determination
itself of the concept, then logic would have trouble with the simple concept
which, according to another classification, is opposed to the composite.
For if for a simple concept a true, that is, immanent mark is given, then
the concept is no longer regarded as simple; and if no mark is given for
it, then the concept is not distinct. But the clear concept now comes to
the rescue. Unity, reality, and suchlike determinations, are supposed to be
simple concepts, perhaps because logicians were unable to come up with a
determination for them and had to be content, therefore, with just a clear
concept of them, that is to say, with no concept at all. A definition, that
is, the statement of a concept, requires as a general rule the statement of
genus and specific difference. It thus presents the concept, not as something
simple, but in two enumerable components. Yet surely nobody will suppose
that the concept is for that reason a composite. – There is an allusion in the
mention of the simple concept to abstract simplicity, to a unity that does
not entail difference and determinateness – a unity, therefore, that does not
pertain to the concept. Inasmuch as an object is present in representation,
especially in memory, or is also an abstract thought determination, it can
be quite simple. Even the object that is richest in content, as for example
spirit, nature, world, even God, when non-conceptually apprehended in
a simple representation of the equally simple expression: spirit, nature,
world, God, is of course something simple at which consciousness can stop
short without proceeding to extract the proper determination or a defining
mark. But the objects of consciousness ought not to remain so simple,
ought not to remain representations or abstract thought determinations,
but should rather become conceptualized, that is, their simplicity should
be determined together with their inner difference. – A composite concept,
however, is but the equivalent of a wooden iron. We can of course have the
concept of a composition; but a composite concept would be something
worse than materialism, which assumes only the substance of the soul to be

The concept

543

a composite, yet takes thought to be simple. The uneducated reflection first
stumbles upon the notion of composition because it is the most completely
external connection, the worst form in which things can be considered; even
the lowest of natures must be an inner unity. That, to top it off, this form
of untruest existence would be extended to the “I,” to the concept, is more
than one should have expected and it must be regarded as an inept form
of barbarism.
Concepts are further divided into contrary and contradictory, a principal
division. – If the task of a treatise on the concept were to give all the
determinate concepts that there are, then we would have to cite all possible
determinations – for all determinations are concepts, hence determinate
concepts – and we would have to list as species of concepts all the categories
of being as well as all the determinations of essence. And this is what is done
in the textbooks on logic, where we are told – in greater or lesser detail,
according to the whim of the author – that there are affirmative, negative,
identical, conditional, necessary concepts. But these determinations have
already been left behind by the nature of the concept itself and are therefore
misplaced when applied to the concept itself, thus admitting only the kind
of superficial nominal definitions that are of no interest here. – The underlying basis of the distinction between contrary and contradictory concepts
with which we are specifically dealing here is the reflective determination
of diversity and opposition. They are viewed as two particular species, each
fixed for itself and indifferent towards the other, without any thought being
given to the dialectic and the inner nothingness of these differences, as if
that which is contrary would not equally have to be determined as contradictory. The nature and the transition essential to the forms of reflection
which they express have been considered in their proper place.38 In the
concept, identity has developed into universality, difference into particularity, opposition (which returns to the ground) into singularity. In these
forms, those determinations of reflection are present as they are in their
concept. The universal has proved itself to be not only the identical, but
at the same time the diverse or contrary as against the particular and the
singular, and then also to be opposed to them, or contradictory; but in this
opposition it is identical with them, and it is their true ground in which
they are sublated. The same applies to particularity and singularity, which
are likewise the totality of the determinations of reflection.
Concepts are further divided into subordinate and coordinate – a distinction that comes closer to a determination of the concept, namely that of
38

Cf. above, 11.267–278.

12.46

544

12.47

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the relation of universality and particularity, in the context of which we did
mention them albeit incidentally.39 But it is customary to consider them
like the rest as rigidly fixed relations, and then to produce several otiose
propositions regarding them. The most long-winded disquisition in this
regard has to do again with the connection of contrariety and contradiction
with subordination and coordination. Since judgment is the connection of
determinate concepts, the true relation will have to come first into view only
with reference to it. That fashion of comparing these determinations without a thought to their dialectic and to the continuing alteration of their
determination, or rather to the conjunction in them of opposite determinations, makes the whole disquisition of what may or may not be consonant in
them – as if this consonance or dissonance were something separate by itself
and permanent – into an otiose exercise void of content. – The great Euler,
infinitely fertile and sharp of mind in detecting and arranging the deep
relations of algebraic quantities,40 the dry, prosaic Lambert in particular,41
and others, have attempted to construct a notation for this class of relations
between determinations of the concept based on lines, figures, and the like,
the general intention being to elevate – or in fact rather to debase – the
logical modes of relation to the status of a calculus. One need only compare
the nature of a sign with what the sign ought to indicate immediately to
see that even the project of a logical notation is unworkable. The determinations of the concept, universality, particularity, and singularity, certainly
are, like lines or the letters of algebra, diverse; and they are also opposed
and allow, therefore, the signs of plus and minus. But they themselves and
especially their connections, even if we stop short at just subsumption and
inherence, are in their essential nature entirely different from algebraic letters, from lines and their connections, from the equality and diversity of
magnitudes, the plus and minus, or the superimposition of lines, or the
joining of them in angles and the resulting disposition of space that they
enclose. It is characteristic of objects of this kind, as contrasted with the
determinations of the concept, that they are mutually external, that they
have a fixed determination. Now when concepts are made to conform to
such signs, they cease to be concepts. Their determinations are not inert
things, like numbers and lines whose connections lie outside them; they
39
40
41

Cf above, 12.38.
See Leonhard Euler, Lettres à une princesse allemande sur divers sujets de physique et de philosophie
(Leipzig: Dyck, 1792–4), Letters 52–55.
See Johann Heinrich Lambert, Neues Organon oder Gedanken über die Erforschung und Bezeichnung
des Wahren und dessen Unterscheidung vom Irrtum und Schein, Vol. 1 (Berlin: Akademie, 1990),
§229f.

The concept

545

are living movements; the distinguished determinateness of the one side is
immediately also internal to the other side; what would be a complete
contradiction for numbers and lines is essential to the nature of the
concept. – The higher mathematics, which also proceeds to the infinite
and allows itself contradictions, can no longer employ its customary signs
for representing such determinations. In order to indicate the still conceptually uncomprehended representation of the infinite approximation of two
ordinates, or when it equates a curve to an infinite number of infinitely
small straight lines, all it does is to design two straight lines outside each
other or to draw straight lines inside but still distinct from a curve; for the
infinite, which is the point at issue here, higher mathematics falls back on
pictorial representation.
What first led to this wayward attempt is above all the quantitative
relation in which universality, particularity, and singularity are supposed
to stand to one another: universal means, more extensive than particular
and singular; and particular, more extensive than singular. The concept
is concrete and the richest in determination, because it is the ground and
the totality of the previous determinations, of the categories of being and
the determinations of reflection; these, therefore, are certain also to come
up in it. But its nature is totally misunderstood if such determinations are
retained in it in their former abstraction – if the wider extent of the universal
is understood to mean that the universal is a more, or a greater quantum,
than the particular and the singular. As absolute ground, it is the possibility
of quantity, but no less so of quality, that is, its determinations are no less
qualitatively distinct; therefore they are already viewed in contravention to
their truth when they are posited in the form of quantity alone. So, too,
a reflective determination is a relative, something in which the opposite
shines reflectively; unlike a quantum, its relation is not external. But the
concept is more than all this; its determinations are determinate concepts,
themselves essentially the totality of all determinations. It is, therefore,
entirely inappropriate, in order to grasp such an inner totality, to want to
apply numerical and spatial relations in which the terms fall apart; such
relations are rather the last and the worst medium that could be used.
Natural relations, as for instance “magnetism” or “color tonality” would
make infinitely higher and truer symbols for the purpose. Since the human
being has in language a means of designation that is appropriate to reason,
it is otiose to look for a less perfect means of representation to bother oneself
with. It is essentially only spirit that can grasp the concept as concept, for
the latter is not just the property of spirit but its pure self. It is futile to
want to fix it by means of spatial figures and algebraic signs for the sake

12.48

546

12.49

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of the outer eye and a non-conceptual, mechanical manipulation, such as a
calculus. Also anything else that might be supposed to serve as symbol, like
the symbols for the nature of God, can at best elicit only intimations and
echoes of the concept; if, however, one insists on employing such symbols
for expressing and cognizing the concept, then it is not their external nature
which is fit for the task; the reverse relation applies, namely that what in the
symbols is the echo of a higher determination is recognized to be such only
by virtue of the concept, and it is only by shedding the sensuous standbys
that were supposed to express it that one comes closer to the concept.
c. the singular
Singularity, as we have seen,42 is already posited through particularity; this
is determinate universality and hence self-referring determinateness, the
determinate determinate.
1. At first, therefore, singularity appears as the reflection of the concept out
of its determinateness into itself. It is the concept’s self-mediation by virtue of
which, since its otherness has once more been made into an other, it restores
itself as self-equal, but in the determination of absolute negativity. – The
negative in the universal, by virtue of which this universal is a particular,
was earlier determined as a doubly reflective shine.43 In so far as the reflective
shining is inward, the particular remains a universal; through the outward
shining, it is a determinate particular; the turning back of this side into the
universal is twofold, either by virtue of an abstraction that lets the particular
fall away and climbs to a higher and the highest genus, or by virtue of the
singularity to which the universality in the determinateness itself descends. –
Here is where the false start is made that makes abstraction stray away
from the way of the concept, abandoning the truth. Its higher and highest
universal to which it rises is only a surface that becomes progressively more
void of content; the singularity which it scorns is the depth in which the
concept grasps itself and where it is posited as concept.
Universality and particularity appeared, on the one hand, as moments of
the becoming of singularity. But it has already been shown that the two are
in themselves the total concept; consequently, that in singularity they do
not pass over into an other but that, on the contrary, what is posited in it is
what they are in and for themselves.44 The universal is for itself because it
is absolute mediation in itself, self-reference only as absolute negativity. It
is an abstract universal inasmuch as this sublating is an external act and so
42

Cf. above, 12.43.

43

Cf. above, 12.35.

44

Cf. above, 12.35, 37.

The concept

547

a dropping off of the determinateness. This negativity, therefore, attaches
indeed to the abstract universal, but it remains outside it, as a mere condition
of it; it is the abstraction itself that holds its universal opposite it, and so the
universal does not have singularity in itself and remains void of concept. –
Life, spirit, God, as well as the pure concept, are for this reason beyond
the grasp of abstraction, for abstraction keeps singularity away from its
products, and singularity is the principle of individuality and personality.
And so it comes to nothing but lifeless universalities, void of spirit, color,
and content.
But the unity of the concept is so indissoluble that these products of
abstraction also, though they are supposed to drop singularity, are rather
themselves singulars. For in elevating the concrete to universality, abstraction grasps the universal as only a determinate universality, and this is
precisely the singularity that presented itself as self-referring determinateness. Thus abstraction is a partitioning of the concrete and an isolating of its
determinations; only singular properties or moments are picked out by it,
for its product must contain what it itself is. But the difference between this
singularity of its products and the singularity of the concept is that in the
former the singular and the universal differ from each other as content and
form respectively, precisely because the content is not the absolute form, is
not the concept itself, or this form is not the totality of form. – However,
this closer consideration shows that the product of abstraction is itself the
unity of the singular content and of abstract universality, therefore that it
is something concrete, the opposite of what it is supposed to be.
The particular, for the same reason that makes it only a determinate universal, is also a singular, and conversely, because the singular is a determinate
universal, it is equally a particular. If we stay at this abstract determinateness, then the concept has the three particular determinations of universal,
particular, and singular, whereas earlier we gave only the universal and the
particular as species of the particular. Because singularity is the turning of
the concept as a negative back to itself, this turning back from abstraction,
which in the turning is truly sublated, can itself be placed as an indifferent
moment alongside the others and be counted with them.
If singularity is listed as one of the particular determinations of the
concept, then particularity is the totality which embraces them all and,
precisely as this totality, it is the concretion of the determinations or singularity itself. But it is a concrete also according to the previously mentioned
side, as determinate universality; and then it is the immediate unity in
which none of these moments is posited as distinct or as the determinant,
and in this form it will constitute the middle term of the formal syllogism.

12.50

548

12.51

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

It follows that each of the determinations established in the preceding
exposition of the concept has immediately dissolved itself and has lost
itself in its other. Each distinction is confounded in the course of the very
reflection that should isolate it and hold it fixed. Only a way of thinking that
is merely representational, for which abstraction has isolated them, is capable
of holding the universal, the particular, and the singular rigidly apart. Then
they can be counted; and for a further distinction this representation relies
on one which is entirely external to being, on their quantity, and nowhere
is such a distinction as inappropriate as here. – In singularity, the earlier
true relation, the inseparability of the determinations of the concept, is
posited; for as the negation of negation, singularity contains the opposition
of those determinations and this opposition itself at its ground or the unity
where the determinations have come together, each in the other. Because
in this reflection universality is in and for itself, singularity is essentially
the negativity of the determinations of the concept, but not merely as if it
stood as a third something distinct from them, but because what is now
posited is that positedness is being-in-and-for-itself; that is, what is posited is
that each of the distinct determinations is the totality. The turning back of
the determinate concept into itself means that its determination is to be in
its determinateness the whole concept.
2. Singularity is not, however, only the turning back of the concept into
itself, but the immediate loss of it. Through singularity, where it is internal to itself, the concept becomes external to itself and steps into actuality.
Abstraction, which is the soul of singularity and so the self-reference of the
negative, is, as we have seen,45 nothing external to the universal and the particular but is immanent in them, and these are concreted through it, they
become a content, a singular. But, as this negativity, singularity is the determinate determinateness, differentiation as such, and through this reflection
of the difference into itself, the difference becomes fixed; the determining
of the particular occurs only by virtue of singularity, for singularity is that
abstraction which, precisely as singularity, is now posited abstraction.
The singular, therefore, is as self-referring negativity the immediate identity of the negative with itself; it exists for itself. Or it is the abstraction
determining the concept as an immediate, according to its ideal moment of
being. – Thus the singular is a one which is qualitative, or a this. In accordance with this qualitative character, it is, first, the repulsion of itself from
itself by virtue of which many other ones are presupposed; second, it is now
a negative reference with respect to these presupposed others, and to this
45

i.e., just above, 12.49–50.

The concept

549

extent the singular is exclusive. Universality, when referred to these singulars
as indifferent ones – and it must be referred to them, for they are a moment
of the concept of singularity – is only their commonality. If by the universal
one understands that which is common to several singulars, the indifferent
subsistence of these singulars is then taken as the starting point, thus mixing
in the immediacy of being into the determination of the concept. The lowest conception one can have of the universal as connected with the singular
is this external relation that it has to the latter as a mere commonality.
The singular, which in the reflective sphere of concrete existence is as a
this, does not have the excluding reference to the other that is characteristic
of qualitative being-for-itself. A this is a one reflected into itself, without
repulsion; or the repulsion is in this reflection one with abstraction, a
reflective mediation present in the this that makes it a posited immediacy
pointed at by someone external to it. The this is; it is immediate, it is a
this, however, only in so far as it is pointed at. This “pointing at” is the
reflective movement that takes hold of itself and posits the immediacy, but
as something external to itself. – Now the singular surely is also a this,
as an immediate which is the result of mediation, but does not have this
mediation outside it; it is itself repelling separation, posited abstraction, yet
is, precisely in its separation, a positive connection.
This act of abstraction by the singular is, as the immanent reflection
of difference, the first positing of the differences as self-subsisting, reflected
into themselves. They exist immediately; but, further, this separating is
reflection in general, the reflective shining of one in the other; the differences
thus stand in essential relation. They are, moreover, not singulars that
just exist next to each other; a plurality of this kind belongs to being; the
singularity that posits itself as determinate does not posit itself in an external
difference but in a difference of the concept; singularity thus excludes the
universal from itself, but since this universal is a moment of it, it refers to
it just as essentially.
The concept, as this connection of its self-subsistent determinations, has
lost itself, for the concept itself is no longer the posited unity of these determinations, and these no longer are moments, the reflective shining of the
concept, but subsist rather in and for themselves. – As singularity, the concept returns in determinateness into itself, and therewith the determinate
has itself become totality. The concept’s turning back into itself is thus the
absolute, originative partition of itself, that is, as singularity it is posited as
judgment.46
46

There is a play on words here: “partition” = Teilung; “judgment” = Urteil.

12.52

ch a p ter 2

Judgment

12.53

Judgment is the determinateness of the concept posited in the concept itself.
The determinations of the concept, or, what amounts to the same thing
as shown,47 the determinate concepts, have already been considered on
their own; but this consideration was rather a subjective reflection or a
subjective abstraction. But the concept is itself this act of abstracting;
the positioning of its determinations over against each other is its own
determining. Judgment is this positing of the determinate concepts through
the concept itself.
Judging is therefore another function than conceiving; or rather, it is the
other function of the concept, for it is the determining of the concept through
itself. The further progress of judgment into a diversity of judgments is
this progressive determination of the concept. What kind of determinate
concepts there are, and how they prove to be necessary determinations of
it – this has to be exhibited in judgment.
Judgment can therefore be called the first realization of the concept,
for reality denotes in general the entry into existence as determinate being.
More precisely, the nature of this realization has presented itself in such
a way that the moments of the concept are totalities which, on the one
hand, subsist on their own through the concept’s immanent reflection or
through its singularity; on the other hand, however, the unity of the concept
is their connection.48 The immanently reflected determinations are determinate totalities that exist just as essentially disconnected, indifferent to each
other, as mediated through each other. The determining itself is a totality
only as containing these totalities and their connections. This totality is the
judgment. – The latter contains, therefore, the two self-subsistents which
go under the name of subject and predicate. What each is cannot yet be said;
they are still indeterminate, for they are to be determined only through the
judgment. Inasmuch as judgment is the concept as determinate, the only
47

Cf. above, 12.46.

48

Cf. above, 12.51.

550

Judgment

551

determination at hand is the difference that it contains between determinate
and still indeterminate concept. As contrasted to the predicate, the subject
can at first be taken, therefore, as the singular over against the universal, or
also as the particular over against the universal, or the singular over against
the particular; so far, they stand to each other only as the more determinate
and the more universal in general.
It is therefore fitting and unavoidable to have these names, “subject”
and “predicate,” for the determinations of the judgment; as names, they
are something indeterminate, still in need of determination, and therefore
nothing but names. It is partly for this reason that the determinations
themselves of the concept could not be used for the two sides of judgment;
but a still stronger reason is because of the nature of a concept determination
which is nothing abstract, nothing fixed, but contains its opposite in it,
explicitly posited there; since the sides of the judgment are themselves
concepts and therefore the totality of the determinations of the concept,
each side must run through all these determinations, exhibiting them
within whether in abstract or concrete form. But now, if in this altering of
determination we want to fix the two sides in some general way, names will
be the most useful means, for they can be kept the same throughout the
process. – But a name remains distinct from the fact or the concept, and this
is a distinction that transpires within the judgment as such; since the subject
is in general the determinate term and more, therefore, of an immediate
existent, whereas the predicate expresses the universal, the essence or the
concept, the subject as such is at first only a kind of name; what it is, is first
enunciated only by the predicate which contains being in the sense of the
concept. When we ask, “What is this?,” or “What kind of plant is this?,”
the being we are enquiring about is often just a name, and once we learn
this name, we are satisfied that we now know what the fact is. This is being
in the sense of the subject. The concept, however, or at least the essence and
the universal in general, is only given by the predicate, and when we ask for
it, we do it in the sense of the judgment. – God, therefore, or spirit, nature,
or what have you, is as the subject of a judgment only a name at first; what
any such subject is in accordance with the concept, is first found only in
the predicate. When we ask for the predicate that belongs to such subjects,
the required judgment must be based on a concept that is presupposed; yet
it is the predicate that first gives this concept. It is, therefore, the mere
representation that in fact makes up the presupposed meaning, and this
yields only a nominal definition whereby it is a mere accident, a historical
fact, what is understood by a name. So many disputes about whether a
predicate does or does not belong to a subject are, therefore, nothing more

12.54

552

12.55

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

than verbal disputes, for they proceed from this form; what lies at the base
(subjectum, Ëpokeimenon) is still nothing more than a name.
Secondly, we now have to examine more closely how the connection of
subject and predicate in judgment is determined, and how the two are
themselves thereby determined. Judgment has in general totalities for its
sides, totalities that are at first essentially self-subsistent. The unity of the
concept is at first, therefore, only a connection of self-subsistent terms; it is
not yet the concrete, the fulfilled unity that has returned into itself from this
reality but is a unity rather outside which the two terms persist as extremes
yet unsublated in it. – Now any consideration of the judgment can start
either from the originative unity of the concept or from the self-subsistence
of the extremes. Judgment is the self-diremption of the concept; therefore,
it is by starting from the unity of the concept as ground that the judgment is
considered in accordance with its true objectivity. In this respect, judgment
is the originative division (or Teilung, in German) of an originative unity; the
German word for judgment, Urteil (or “primordial division”), thus refers
to what judgment is in and for itself. But the concept is present in the
judgment as appearance, since its moments have attained self-subsistence
there, and it is to this side of externality that ordinary representation is more
likely to fasten.
From this subjective standpoint, the subject and the predicate are therefore treated as ready-made, each for itself outside the other – the subject as
a subject matter that would exist even if it did not have that predicate, and
the predicate as a universal determination that would exist even without
accruing to this subject. The act of judgment accordingly brings with it
the further reflection whether this or that predicate which is in someone’s
head can and should be attached to the subject matter that exists outside it
on its own; the judgment itself is simply the act that combines the predicate
with the subject, so that, if this combination did not occur, the subject
and predicate would still each remain what it is, the one concretely existing
as thing in itself, the other as a representation in someone’s head. – But
the predicate which is combined with the subject should also pertain to it,
which is to say, should be in and for itself identical with it. The significance
of their being combined is that the subjective sense of judgment, and the
indifferent external persistence of the subject and predicate, are again sublated. Thus in “this action is good,” the copula indicates that the predicate
belongs to the being of the subject and is not merely externally combined
with it. Of course, grammatically speaking this kind of subjective relation
that proceeds from the indifferent externality of subject and predicate is
perfectly valid, for it is words that are here externally combined. – It can also

Judgment

553

be mentioned in this context that a proposition can indeed have a subject
and predicate in a grammatical sense without however being a judgment
for that. The latter requires that the predicate behave with respect to the
subject in a relation of conceptual determination, hence as a universal with
respect to a particular or singular. And if what is said of a singular subject is itself only something singular, as for instance, “Aristotle died at the
age of 73 in the fourth year of the 115th Olympiad,” then this is a mere
proposition, not a judgment. There would be in it an element of judgment
only if one of the circumstances, say, the date of death or the age of the
philosopher, came into doubt even though the stated figures were asserted
on the strength of some ground or other. In that case, the figures would be
taken as something universal, as a time that, even without the determinate
content of Aristotle’s death, would still stand on its own filled with some
other content or simply empty. Likewise would the news that my friend
N. has died be a proposition, and a judgment only if there were a question
as to whether he is actually dead and not just apparently dead.
In the usual definition of judgment, that it is the combination of two
concepts, we may indeed accept the vague expression of “combination” for
the external copula, and also accept that the terms combined are at least
meant to be concepts. But the definition is otherwise a highly superficial
one. It is not just that in the disjunctive judgment, for instance, there are
more than two so-called concepts that are combined; more to the point is
rather that the definition is much better than the matter defined, for it is not
determinations of concepts, but determinations of representation that are in
fact meant; it was remarked in connection with the concept in general, and
with the concept as determinate, that what usually goes under this name
of concept does not deserve the name at all;49 where should concepts then
come from in the case of judgment? – Above all this definition of judgment
ignores what is essential to it, namely the difference of its determinations;
still less does it take into account its relation to the concept.
As regards the further determination of the subject and predicate, we
have remarked above50 that it is in judgment that they must first receive
their determination. But since judgment is the posited determinateness
of the concept, this determinateness possesses the given differences immediately and abstractly as singularity and universality. – But inasmuch as
judgment is in general the immediate existence or the otherness of the concept that has not yet restored itself to the unity through which it exists as
concept, there also emerges the determinateness that is void of concept,
49

Cf. above, 12.40.

50

Cf. above, 12.53, 54.

12.56

554

12.57

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the opposition of being and reflection or the in-itself. But since the concept
constitutes the essential ground of judgment, these determinacies are at least
indifferent in the sense that, when one accrues to the subject and the other
to the predicate, the converse relation equally holds. The subject, being
the singular, appears at first as the existent or as the one that exists for itself
with the determinate determinateness of a singular on which judgment is
passed – as an actual object even when it is such in representation only –
as for instance in the case of bravery, right, agreement, etc. The predicate,
which is the universal, appears on the contrary as the reflection of this
judgment on that object, or rather as the object’s immanent reflection that
transcends the immediacy of the judgment and sublates its determinacies
as mere existents – appears, that is, as the object’s in-itselfness. – In this way,
the start is made from the singular as the first, the immediate, and through
the judgment this singular is raised to universality, just as, conversely, the
universal that exists only in itself descends in the singular into existence or
becomes a being that exists for itself.
This significance of the judgment is to be taken as its objective meaning
and at the same time as the true significance of the previous forms of
transition. The existent comes to be and becomes another, the finite passes
over into the infinite and in it passes away; the existent comes forth into
appearance out of its ground and to this ground it founders; the accidents
manifest the wealth of substance as well as its might; in being, there is
transition into an other; in essence, there is the reflective shining in an
other that manifests the necessity of a connection. This transition and this
reflective shining have now passed over into the originative division of the
concept in judgment, and this division, in bringing the singular back to the
in-itselfness of its universality, equally determines the universal as something
actual. These two are one and the same – the positing of singularity in its
immanent reflection and of the universal as determinate.
But equally pertaining to this objective meaning is that the said differences, as they re-occur in the determinateness of the concept, are at the
same time posited as only appearing, that is to say, that they are nothing
fixed but accrue rather just as much to one determination of the concept as
to the other. The subject is therefore equally to be taken as the in-itself, and
the predicate as determinate existence in contrast to it. The subject without
the predicate is what the thing without properties, the thing-in-itself, is in
the sphere of appearance, an empty indeterminate ground; it is then the
implicit concept that receives a difference and a determinateness only in
the predicate; the predicate thus constitutes the side of the determinate
existence of the subject. Through this determinate universality the subject

Judgment

555

refers to the outside, is open to the influence of other things and thereby
confronts them actively. What is there comes forth from its in-itselfness into
the universal element of combination and relations, into negative references
and into the interplay of actuality which is a continuation of the singular
into other singulars and is, therefore, universality.
Yet the identity just indicated, the fact that the determination of the
subject accrues equally to the predicate and vice versa, is not just a matter
for our consideration; it is not only in itself but is also posited in the
judgment; for the judgment is the reference connecting the two; the copula
expresses that the subject is the predicate. The subject is the determinate
determinateness, and the predicate is this determinateness of the subject as
posited; the subject is determined only in its predicate, or is subject only in
it; in the predicate, it is turned back into itself and is therein the universal. –
Now in so far as the subject is the self-subsistent term, this identity has the
relation that the predicate does not possess a self-subsistence of its own but
has its subsistence only in the subject; it inheres in the subject. Accordingly,
since the predicate is distinguished from the subject, it is only a singularized
determinateness of the subject, only one of its properties; the subject itself
is however the concrete, the totality of manifold determinacies, just as the
predicate contains one of them; the subject is the universal. – But, on the
other hand, the predicate also is self-subsistent universality, and the subject
conversely only one determination of it. The predicate thus subsumes the
subject; the singularity and the particularity are not for themselves but
have their essence and their substance in the universal. The predicate
expresses the subject in its concept; the singular and the particular are to the
subject accidental determinations; the subject is their absolute possibility.
When by “subsumption” an external connection of subject and predicate
is thought, and the subject is represented as something self-subsistent,
then subsumption refers to the subjective act of judging mentioned above,
namely the judging that starts off from the self-subsistence of both subject
and predicate.51 Subsumption is then only the application of the universal to
a particular or singular posited under it in accordance with an indeterminate
representation, one of lesser quantity.
When we treat the identity of subject and predicate as meaning that at
one time one determination of the concept belongs to the subject and the
other to the predicate, and at another time the converse equally applies,
then the identity is as yet still implicit; on account of the self-subsistent
diversity of the two sides of judgment, their posited connection also has
51

Cf. above, 12.55.

12.58

556

12.59

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the two at first as diverse. But it is the identity void of difference that in fact
constitutes the true connection of the subject and predicate. The determination of the concept is itself essentially a connection, for it is a universal; the
same determinations, therefore, which the subject and the predicate each
have, are also had by their connection. The connection is universal, for it
is the positive identity of both, of the subject and predicate; but it is also
determinate, for the determinateness of the predicate is the determinateness
of the subject; it is singular as well, for in it the self-subsisting extremes are
sublated as in their negative unity. – In judgment, however, this identity
is not posited yet; the copula is as the still indeterminate connection of
being in general, “A is B,” for the self-subsistence of the concept’s determinacies, or the extremes, is in judgment the reality that the concept has
within. If the “is” of the copula were already posited as the determinate
and fulfilled unity of subject and predicate earlier mentioned,52 were
posited as their concept, it would then already be the conclusion of syllogistic
inference.53
To restore again this identity of the concept, or rather to posit it – this
is the goal of the movement of the judgment. What is already present in
the judgment is, on the one hand, the self-subsistence but also reciprocal
determinateness of the subject and predicate, and, on the other hand,
their still abstract connection. “The subject is the predicate” – this is what
the judgment says at first. But since the predicate is not supposed to be
what the subject is, a contradiction is at hand that must resolve itself, must
pass over into a result. Or rather, since the subject and predicate are in
and for themselves the totality of the concept, and judgment is the reality
of the concept, the judgment’s forward movement is only development;
what comes forth from it is already present in it, and to this extent the
demonstration is a display,54 a reflection as the positing of that which is already
at hand in the extreme terms of the judgment; but even this positing is
already present; it is the connection of the extremes.
First, as immediate, judgment is the judgment of existence; its subject is
immediately an abstract, existent singular, and the predicate is an immediate
determinateness or property of it, an abstract universal.
Second, as this qualitative character of the subject and predicate is sublated, the determination of the one begins to shine reflectively in the other;
the judgment is now the judgement of reflection.
52
54

53 “syllogistic inference” = Schluß.
Cf. above, 12.55.
“display” = Monstration. Hegel is playing on the Latinate words Demonstration and Monstration,
the Latin root of which means “displaying” or “exhibiting.”

Judgment

557

But this external combination passes over into the essential identity of a
substantial, necessary combination; and so we have, third, the judgment of
necessity.
Fourth, since in this essential identity the difference of subject and
predicate has become a form, the judgment becomes subjective; it entails
the opposition of the concept and its reality and the comparison of the two;
it is the judgment of the concept.
This emergence of the concept grounds the transition of judgment into
syllogistic inference.
a. the judgment of existence
In the subjective judgment we expect to see one and the same object double,
once in its singular actuality, and again in its essential identity or in its
concept: the singular raised into its universality or, what is the same thing,
the universal made singular into its actuality. The judgment is thus truth,
for it is the agreement of the concept and reality. But it is not at first
constituted in this way, for at first the judgment is immediate, since as yet
no reflection and no movement of the determinations has been found
in it. This immediacy renders the first judgment a judgment of immediate
existence; we can also call it a qualitative judgment, but only in so far as
quality does not apply to the determinateness of being alone but also extends
to the universality which, because of its simplicity, likewise has the form of
immediacy.
The judgment of existence is also the judgment of inherence because,
though immediacy is its determination, it is the subject that in the distinction between subject and predicate is the immediate and hence the first
and the essential term in the judgment, and the predicate consequently
takes on the form of something that does not subsist on its own but has its
foundation in the subject.
a. The positive judgment
1. The subject and predicate, as we have just said,55 are names at first that
receive their actual determination only as the judgment runs its course.
However, as sides of the judgment – the judgment being the posited determinate concept – they have the determination of moments of the concept,
but, on account of their immediacy, this determination is as yet quite
55

Cf. above, 12.54.

12.60

558

12.61

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

simple, still not enriched by mediation and also still caught up in the
abstract opposition of abstract singularity and abstract universality. – The
predicate, to speak of it first, is the abstract universal; this abstract is conditioned by mediation, by the sublation of singularity and particularity,
but so far such a mediation is here only a presupposition. In the sphere of
the concept there can be no other immediacy than the one that contains
mediation in and for itself and has arisen only through its sublation; this is
the immediacy of the universal. Thus qualitative being also is in its concept
a universal; as being, however, the immediacy is not yet posited as such;
it is only as universality that immediacy is the concept determination in
which it is posited that negativity essentially belongs to it. This connection
is given in the judgment in which universality is the predicate of a subject. –
Similarly the subject is an abstract singular, or the immediate which is supposed to be such and therefore the singular as a something in general. The
subject constitutes, therefore, the abstract side of the judgment, the side
in it according to which the concept has passed over into externality. – As
these two concept determinations are determined, so is also their connection, the “is” or the copula; it too can have no other meaning than that of
an immediate, abstract being. It is because of this connection, which still
does not contain any mediation or negation, that this judgment is called
“positive.”
2. The first pure expression of the positive judgment is, therefore, the
proposition: the singular is universal. This expression must not be put in
the form of “A is B,” for A and B are totally formless and hence meaningless
names, whereas judgment in general, and therefore already the judgment
of existence, has determinations of the concept for its extremes. “A is B”
can stand just as well for any mere proposition as for a judgment. But what
is asserted in every judgment, even one more richly determined in form,
is the proposition that has this determined content, namely, “the singular
is universal,” for every judgment is in principle also an abstract judgment.
(Regarding the negative judgment, how far it likewise comes under this
expression, of this we shall speak presently.)56 – However, if no thought
is given to the fact that with every judgment, the positive at least, the
assertion is made that the singular is universal, this happens either because
no attention is given to the determinate form differentiating subject and
object – for it is taken for granted that the judgment is nothing but the
connecting of two concepts – or also likely because the further content of
the judgment, “Gaius is learned,” or “the rose is red,” comes drifting in
56

Cf. below, 12.65.

Judgment

559

before the mind, and the latter, busy with the picture of Gaius etc., fails to
reflect on the form – even though, at least, such a content as “Gaius,” which
is the one that usually has to be dragged in as an example, is much less
interesting than the form, and is indeed chosen because it is uninteresting,
not to divert attention from the form to itself.
The objective meaning of the proposition stating that the singular is
universal conveys, as already incidentally noted,57 both the perishableness of
singular things and their positive subsistence in the concept in general. The
concept itself is imperishable, but that which emerges from it in its division
is subjected to alteration and to falling back into its universal nature. But
the universal, conversely, gives itself a determinate existence. Just as essence
goes out into reflective shine in its determinations; or ground into concrete
existence in appearance; and substance into manifestation in its accidents, so
does the universal resolve itself into the singular; judgment is this resolution
of the universal, the development of the negativity which, implicitly, it
already is. – This last circumstance is expressed by the converse proposition,
“the universal is singular,” which is also equally spoken in the positive
judgment. The subject, the immediate singular at first, is in the judgment
itself referred to its other, namely the universal; it is thereby posited as
the concrete – according to the category of being, as a something of many
qualities; or as the concrete of reflection, a thing of manifold properties, an
actual of manifold possibilities, a substance of precisely such accidents. Because
these manifolds here belong to the subject of the judgment, the something,
the thing, etc., is in its qualities, properties, or accidents, reflected into
itself, or continues across them, maintaining itself in them and them in
itself. Positedness or determinateness belongs to being which is in and
for itself. The subject is therefore inherently the universal. – The predicate,
on the contrary, being this universality not as real or concrete, but as
abstract, is in contrast to the subject the determinateness; it contains only
one moment of the subject’s totality to the exclusion of the others. On
account of this negativity, which as an extreme of the judgment is at the
same time self-referring, the predicate is an abstract singular. – For instance,
in the proposition, “the rose is fragrant,” the predicate expresses only one
of the many properties of the rose; it isolates it, whereas in the subject
the property is joined with the others; likewise in the dissolution of the
thing, the manifold properties that inhere in it become isolated in acquiring
self-subsistence as materials. From this side, then, the proposition of the
judgment says: the universal is singular.
57

Cf. above, 12.57.

12.62

560

12.63

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

By juxtaposing this reciprocal determination of subject and predicate in
the judgment, we thus obtain this twofold result. (1) Immediately, the
subject is indeed an existent or the singular, while the predicate is the
universal. But because the judgment connects the two, and the subject is
determined as universal by the predicate, the subject is then the universal.
(2) The predicate is determined in the subject, for it is not a determination
in general but the determination rather of the subject. “The rose is fragrant.”
This fragrance is not some indeterminate fragrance or other, but the fragrance of the rose. The predicate is therefore a singular. – Now since the
subject and predicate stand related in the judgment, they should retain
the opposition of concept determinations; likewise, in the reciprocity of
causality, before the latter attains its truth, the two sides are still supposed
to remain self-subsistent and mutually opposed as against the equality of
their determination. Therefore, when the subject is determined as universal,
the predicate should not also be taken in its determination of universality,
for then we would have no judgment; it must rather be taken only in its
determination of singularity. And if the subject is determined as singular,
then the predicate is to be taken as universal. – If we reflect on the mere
identity above, then we have these two identical propositions, “the singular
is singular,” “the universal is universal,” in which the sides of the judgment would have completely fallen apart; only the self-reference of each is
expressed while the reference connecting them to each other is dissolved;
and thus the judgment would be sublated. – Of the two propositions we
drew, the first, “the universal is singular,” expresses the judgment according
to its content, as an isolated determination in the predicate and as the totality of determinations in the subject. The other, “the singular is universal,”
expresses it according to form as immediately given through the judgment
itself. – In the immediate positive judgment, the extremes are still simple:
form and content are therefore still united. Or, in other words, it does not
consist of two propositions; the twofold connection that it yielded immediately constitutes the one positive judgment. For its extremes are (a) the
self-subsisting abstract determinations of judgment, and (b) each side of
the determination is determined through the other by virtue of the copula
connecting them. Implicitly, however, the difference of form and content
is for this reason present in it, as we have seen; and indeed, what the first
proposition contains, that the singular is universal, belongs to form, for the
proposition expresses the immediate determinateness of the judgment. The
relation, on the contrary, which the other proposition expresses, that the
universal is singular or that the subject is determined as universal whereas
the predicate is determined as particular or singular, concerns the content;

Judgment

561

for its determinations are only the result of an immanent reflection by
virtue of which the immediate determinacies of the judgment are sublated
and the form is thereby converted into an identity that has withdrawn into
itself and persists over against the distinction of form: it converts itself into
content.
3. If now the two propositions, the one of form and the other of content,
(Subject) (Predicate)
The singular is universal
The universal is singular,

were to be united because they are contained in the one positive judgment,
so that both, the subject as well as the predicate, were determined as the
unity of singularity and universality, then both the subject and predicate
would be the particular, and this must be recognized as implicitly their
inner determination. However, this combination would be arrived at only
through an external reflection; moreover, the proposition that results from
it, “the particular is the particular,” would no longer be a judgment but
an empty identical proposition as were the two propositions already found
in the positive judgment, “the singular is singular,” and “the universal
is universal.” – Singularity and universality cannot yet be united into
particularity, because in the positive judgment they are still posited as
immediate. – Or again, the judgment must still be distinguished according
to its form and its content, because the subject and predicate are themselves
still distinguished as immediacy and mediated, or because the judgment,
according to its connection, is both the self-subsistence of the connected
terms and their reciprocal determination or mediation.
In first place, then, the meaning of the judgment when considered according to its form is that the singular is universal. But in fact such an immediate
singular is definitely not universal; its predicate is of wider extension, does
not correspond to it. The subject is a being existing immediately for itself, and
hence the opposite of that abstraction, of that universality posited through
mediation that was supposed to be predicated of it.
In second place, if the judgment is considered according to its content,
or as the proposition, “the universal is singular,” then the subject is a
universe of qualities, an infinitely determined concrete universe, and since
its determinacies are as yet qualitites, properties, or accidents, its totality
is the bad infinite plurality of them. Such a subject, therefore, is not at
all the one single property that its predicate declares. Consequently, both
propositions must be united, and the positive judgment must be posited as
negative instead.

12.64

562

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
b. The negative judgment

12.65

1. We spoke earlier of the common notion that whether the content of
a judgment is true or false depends solely on the content itself, since
logical truth concerns only the form and its only requirement is that such
content shall not contradict itself.58 Nothing else is reckoned as the form
of judgment except that the latter is a connection of two concepts. But we
have seen that these two concepts are not just the relationless determination
of a sum, but that they relate to each other as singular and universal.59 These
are the determinations that constitute the truly logical content and also,
abstracted in that way, the content of the positive judgment; whatever
other content is in a judgment (“the sun is round,” “Cicero was a great
Roman orator,” “it is daytime now,” etc.) does not concern the judgment
as such; the judgment only says that the subject is predicate, or, since these
are only names, that the singular is universal and vice versa. – It is because
of this purely logical content that the positive judgment is not true but
has its truth in the negative judgment. – In judgment, so it is required,
the content simply ought not to contradict itself; but it does contradict
itself in the positive judgment, as we have just seen. – At any rate, it
makes absolutely no difference if that logical content is called form, and
by content is understood only the remaining empirical filling, for even
then the form would not contain a mere empty identity outside which the
content determination would then lie. The positive judgment has in fact
no truth through its form as positive judgment; whoever calls truth the
correctness of an intuition or a perception, the agreement of representation
with the subject matter, has for a minimum no expression left for that
which is the subject matter and the aim of philosophy. We should at least
say of these that they are the truth of reason, and it will surely be granted
that such judgments as “Cicero was a great orator,” that “it is daytime
now,” are definitely not truths of reason. But they are not such truths, not
because they have an empirical content as it were contingently, but because
they are only positive judgments that can have, and ought to have, no other
content than an immediate singular and an abstract determinateness.
The positive judgment first attains its truth in the negative judgment:
the singular is not abstractly universal – but rather, the predicate of the
singular, because it is such a predicate, or because, if considered by itself
without reference to the subject, it is an abstract universal, is for that very
reason itself something determinate; from the start, therefore, the singular
58

Cf. above, 12.27.

59

Cf. above, 12.61.

Judgment

563

is a particular. Furthermore, with respect to the other proposition that the
positive judgment contains, the meaning of the negative judgment is that
the universal is not abstractly singular but that this predicate, “singular,” by
the very fact that it is a predicate, or because it refers to a universal subject,
is more than just mere singularity, and the universal, accordingly, is from
the start equally a particular. – Since this universal, as subject, is itself in the
judgment determination of singularity, the two propositions both reduce
to one: “the singular is a particular.”
We may remark that (a) the particularity that here comes to the predicate has already come up for consideration before;60 here, however, it is not
posited by external reflection but has arisen rather as mediated by the negative connection indicated in the judgment. (b) This determination results
here only for the predicate. In the immediate judgment, the judgment of
existence, the subject is the underlying basis; the determination seems at
first, therefore, to occur in the predicate. But in fact this first negation cannot
as yet be a determination, or cannot truly be the positing of the singular, for
such a positing is only a second moment, the negative of the negative.
The singular is a particular: this is the positive expression of the negative
judgment. This expression, therefore, is not the positive judgment itself, for
the latter, because of its immediacy, has an abstraction for its extremes, while
the particular, precisely through the positing of the judgment connection,
results as the first mediated determination. – But this determination is not
to be taken only as a moment of the extremes, but also as the determination
of the connection, as it truly is from the start; in other words, the judgment
is also to be considered as negative.
This transition is founded on the relation of the extremes and on their
connection in the judgment as such. The positive judgment is the connection of the singular and the universal which are such immediately and each,
therefore, is not at the same time what the other is. The connection is therefore just as essentially separation, or negative; for this reason the positive
judgment was to be posited as negative. There was no need, therefore, for
the logicians to make such a fuss about the not of the negative judgment
being attached to the copula. In the judgment, the determination of the
extremes is equally a determinate connection. The judgment determination,
or the extreme, is not the purely qualitative one of immediate being that
only stands over against an other outside it. Nor is it the determination of
reflection, which, in accordance with its general form, behaves positively
and negatively, posited in either case as exclusive, only implicitly identical
60

Cf. above, 12.63.

12.66

564

12.67

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

with the other. The judgment determination, as the determination of the
concept, is a universal within, posited as extending continuously in its other.
Conversely, the judgment connection is the same determination as the
extremes have; for it is precisely this universality and continuous extension
of each into the other; in so far as these are distinguished, the connection
also has negativity in it.
The just stated transition from the form of the connection to the form of
the determination has the immediate consequence that the not of the copula
must just as equally be attached to the predicate and that the latter must be
determined as the not-universal. But, through a no less immediate consequence, the not-universal is the particular. – If the focus is on the negative
according to the totally abstract determination of immediate non-being,
then the predicate is the totally indeterminate not-universal. This is the
determination which is normally treated in logic in connection with the
contradictory concepts, and the further point is made – a point considered
important – that in the negative of a concept one should only focus on the
negative, taking it as the mere indeterminate extent of the other of the positive concept. Thus the mere not-white would be just as much red, yellow,
blue, etc. as black. White, however, is an unconceptualized determination
of intuition; the not of white is equally, then, unconceptualized not-being,
the abstraction that came in for consideration at the very beginning of the
Logic where becoming was recognized to be its closest truth. To use as an
example, in the consideration of judgment determinations, an unconceptualized content of this sort, drawn from intuition and the imagination,
and to take the determinations of being, and of reflection, as such judgment
determinations, is the same uncritical practice as when Kant applies the
concepts of the understanding to the infinite idea of reason, the so-called
thing-in-itself;61 the concept, to which the judgment proceeding from it also
belongs, is the true thing-in-itself or the rational; those other determinations belong to being and essence; they are not yet forms developed into the
shape where they are in their truth, in the concept. – If we stop at white,
red, as representations of the senses, then we call concept what is only a
determination of pictorial representation. This is common practice. But
then, surely, the not-white, the not-red, will be nothing positive, just as the
not-triangular will be something totally indeterminate, for a determination
based as such on number and quantum is essentially something indifferent,
void of concept. Yet, like non-being itself, such a sensuous content ought to
be conceptualized; ought to shed that indifference and abstract immediacy
61

Cf. B166, note.

Judgment

565

with which it is affected in the blind immobility of pictorial representation. Already in the sphere of immediate existence, the non-being which is
otherwise void of thought becomes limit, and by virtue of this limit the
something refers to an other despite itself. In the sphere of reflection, on the
other hand, it is the negative that refers essentially to a positive, and is thereby
determined; a negative is no longer that indeterminate non-being, for it is
posited to be only to the extent that the positive stands over against it, and
as third comes their ground; the negative is thus held circumscribed in a
sphere within which the non-being of one is something determinate. – But
it is all the more in the absolutely fluid continuity of the concept that the
not is immediately a positive, and the negation is not just determinateness
but is taken up into universality and is posited as identical with it. The
non-universal is therefore directly the particular.
2. Since negation has to do with the connection of judgment, and we are
considering the negative judgment still as such, the latter is in the first instance
still a judgment; we thus have the relation of subject and predicate, or of
singularity and universality, and their connection, the form of the judgment.
The subject, as the immediate underlying basis, remains untouched by the
negation; it retains, therefore, its determination of having a predicate, or its
reference to the universality. Consequently, what is negated in the predicate
is not the universality as such, but the abstraction or the determinateness
of the predicate that appeared as content in contrast to that universality. –
The negative judgment is not, therefore, total negation; the universal
sphere which contains the predicate remains standing; the connection
of subject and the predicate is therefore still essentially positive; the yet
remaining determination of the predicate is no less connection. – When
it is said that, for instance, the rose is not red, only the determinateness
of the predicate is thereby denied and thus separated from the universality which equally attaches to it; the universal sphere, color, is retained; if
the rose is not red, it is nonetheless assumed that it has a color, though
another color. From the side of this universal sphere, the judgment is still
positive.
“The singular is a particular.” This positive form of the negative judgment
immediately expresses that the particular contains universality. In addition,
it also expresses that the predicate is not just a universal but also one which
is still determinate. The negative form contains the same, for although
the rose, for instance, is not red, it is supposed, nevertheless, not only
still to retain the universal sphere of color as predicate, but to have some
other determinate color as well; the singularity of determinateness of the
rose is therefore only sublated; and not only is the universal sphere left

12.68

566

12.69

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

standing but determinateness too is retained, although transformed into
an indeterminate determinateness, a universal determinateness, that is to
say, into particularity.
3. The particularity that has resulted as the positive determination of the
negative judgment is the term mediating singularity and universality; so
the negative judgment is now that which provides in general the mediation
for the third step, that of the reflection of the judgment of existence into itself.
This judgment is according to its objective meaning only the moment of
the alteration of accidents, or, in the sphere of existence, of the singularized
properties of the concrete. Through this alteration, the full determinateness
of the predicate, or the concrete, emerges as posited.
“The singular is particular” is what the positive expression of the negative
judgment says. But the singular is also not particular, for particularity is of
wider extension than singularity; it is a predicate, therefore, that does not
correspond to the subject, one in which the latter, therefore, does not as yet
have its truth. “The singular is only a singular”: this is a negativity that refers
to nothing else, be it positive or negative, except itself. – The rose is not a
thing of some color or other, but one that only has the one determinate color
which is the rose-color. The singular is not an indeterminate determinate
but the determinate determinate.
This negation of the negative judgment appears, when one starts from
its positive form, to be again a first negation. But this is not what it is. The
negative judgment is again, in and for itself, already the second negation
or the negation of negation, and this, what it is in and for itself, is to be
posited. To wit: the judgment negates the determinateness of the predicate
of the positive judgment, its abstract universality, or, considered as content,
the singular quality that it possesses of the subject. But the negation of the
determinateness is already the second negation, hence the infinite turning
back of the singularity into itself. With this, therefore, the restoration of
the concrete totality of the subject has taken place, or rather, the subject
is now for the first time posited as singular, for through the negation and
the sublation of that negation it is mediated with itself. The predicate,
for its part, has thereby passed over from the first universality to absolute
determinateness and made itself equal to the subject. Thus the judgment
says: “the singular is singular.” – From the other side, since the subject
was equally to be taken as a universal, and since in the negative judgment
the predicate, which as against that subject is the singular, expanded into
particularity; moreover, since now the negation of this determinateness is
equally the purification of the universality contained in the predicate, this
judgment also says: “the universal is the universal.”

Judgment

567

In these two judgments, which were earlier obtained through external
reflection,62 the predicate is already expressed in its positivity. But the
negation of the negative judgment must itself first appear in the form of a
negative judgment. It has just been shown that there still remained in this
judgment a positive connection of subject and predicate as well the universal
sphere of the latter.63 From this side, the negative judgment thus contains
a universality which is more purified of limitation than was contained by
the positive judgment and is for this reason all the more to be negated of
the subject as a singular. In this manner, the whole extent of the predicate
is negated, and there is no longer any positive connection between it and
the subject. This is the infinite judgment.
c. The infinite judgment
The negative judgment is as little of a true judgment as the positive. But
the infinite judgment which is supposed to be its truth is, according to
its negative expression, the negative infinite, a judgment in which even
the form of judgment is sublated. – But this is a nonsensical judgment.
It ought to be a judgment, and hence contains a connection of subject
and predicate; but any such connection ought not at the same time to be
there. – The name of the infinite judgment does indeed occur in the common textbooks of logic, but without any clarification as to its meaning. –
Examples of negatively infinite judgments are easy to come by. It is a
matter of picking determinations, one of which does not contain not just
the determinateness of the other but its universal sphere as well, and of
combining them negatively as subject and predicate, as when we say, for
example, that spirit is not red, yellow, etc., is not acid, not alkali, etc., or that
the rose is not an elephant, the understanding is not a table, and the like. –
These judgments are correct or true, as it is said, and yet, any such truth
notwithstanding, nonsensical and fatuous. – Or, more to the point, they are
not judgments at all. – A more realistic example of the infinite judgment is
the evil action. In civil litigation, when a thing is negated as the property of
another party, it is still conceded that the same thing would indeed belong
to that party if the latter had a right to it. It is only under the title of right
that the possession of it is challenged; in the negative judgment, therefore,
the universal sphere, “right,” is still acknowledged and maintained. But
crime is the infinite judgment that negates, not only the particular right, but
the universal sphere, the right as right. It has correctness, in the sense that it
62

Cf. above, 12.63.

63

In the preceding page.

12.70

568

12.71

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is an effective action, but since it stands in a thoroughly negative fashion
with respect to the morality that constitutes its sphere, it is nonsensical.
The positive element of the infinite judgment, the negation of the negation, is the reflection of singularity into itself by virtue of which the singularity is first posited as the determinate determinate. “The singular is
singular” is what the infinite judgment said according to that reflection. In
the judgment of existence, the subject is as the immediate singular, hence
more of just a something in general. Through the mediation of the negative
and infinite judgment, it is posited as singular for the first time.
The singular is thus posited as expanding into its predicate, which is
identical with it; to the same extent, therefore, universality is also no longer
anything immediate but a summing of distincts. The positively infinite
judgment equally says, “the universal is universal,” and in this the universal
is posited also as a turning back into itself.
Now through the reflection of the judgment determinations into themselves, the judgment has sublated itself; in the negatively infinite judgment,
the difference is, so to speak, too great for it still to remain a judgment; subject and predicate have no positive connection whatsoever to each other; in
the positively infinite judgment, on the contrary, only identity is present,
and because of this total lack of difference there is no longer a judgment.
More precisely, it is the judgment of existence that has sublated itself and,
consequently, there is posited what the copula of the judgment contains,
namely that in its identity the qualitative extremes are sublated. But since
this unity is the concept, it is immediately torn apart and is a judgment, but
one whose terms are no longer immediately determined but are reflected
into themselves. The judgment of existence has passed over into the judgment
of reflection.
b. the judgment of reflection
In the judgment that has now arisen, the subject is a singular as such;
and similarly, the universal is no longer an abstract universality, or a singular property, but is posited as a universal that has collected itself together
into a unity through the connection of different terms, or, regarded from
the standpoint of the content of diverse determinations in general, as the
coalescing of manifold properties and concrete existences. – If examples
of predicates of judgments of reflection are to be given, they must be of
another kind than for the judgments of existence. It is only in the judgment
of reflection that we first have a determinate content strictly speaking, that is,
a content as such; for the content is the form determination reflected into

Judgment

569

identity as distinct from the form in so far as this is a distinct determinateness – as it still is as judgment. In the judgment of existence, the content
is merely an immediate, or abstract, indeterminate content. – These may
therefore serve as examples of judgments of reflection: the human being
is mortal, things are perishable, this thing is useful, harmful; hardness, elasticity of bodies, happiness, etc., are predicates of this particular kind. They
express an essentiality which is however a relational determination, or a
comprehensive universality. This universality, which will further determine
itself in the movement of the judgment of reflection, is still distinct from
the universality of the concept as such; although it is no longer the abstract
universality of the qualitative judgment, it still has a connection to the
immediate from which it proceeds and has the latter at the basis of its negativity. – The concept determines immediate existence, in the first instance,
to relational determinations that extend across the diverse multiplicity of
concrete existence, so that the true universal is indeed the inner essence of
that multiplicity, but is such in the sphere of appearance, and this relative
nature or even its mark is not as yet the element of the multiplicity that
exists in and for itself.
It may seem fitting to define the judgment of reflection as a judgment of
quantity, just as the judgment of existence was defined also as qualitative
judgment. But just as the immediacy in the latter was not just there, but was
an immediacy which is also essentially mediated and abstract, so, here also,
that same immediacy which is now sublated is not just sublated quality,
and therefore not merely quantity; on the contrary, just as quality is the
most external immediacy, so is quantity, in the same way, the most external
determination belonging to mediation.
Also to be noted concerning the determination as it appears in the movement of the judgment of reflection is that, in the judgment of immediate
existence, the movement of the determination showed itself in the predicate, for this kind of judgment was in the determination of immediacy and
its subject, therefore, appeared as the underlying basis. For a similar reason,
in the judgment of reflection the onward movement of determination runs
its course in the subject, for this judgment has the reflected in-itselfness for
its determination. Hence the essential is here the universal or the predicate,
and it is the latter, therefore, that constitutes the basis against which the
subject is to be measured and determined accordingly. – Yet the predicate
also receives a further determination through the further development of
the form of the subject, but it receives it indirectly, whereas the progression
of the subject manifests itself, for the reason just given, as a direct advance
in determination.

12.72

570

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

As regards the objective signification of the judgment, the singular enters
into existence by virtue of its universality, but it does so in an essential
determination which is relational, in an essentiality that maintains itself
across the manifold of appearance; the subject is supposed to be that which
is determined in and for itself; this is the determinateness which it has in its
predicate. The singular, for its part, is reflected into this predicate which is
its universal essence; to this extent, the subject is a concrete existence and a
phenomenal something.64 In this judgment, the predicate no longer inheres
in the subject, for it is rather the implicit being under which the singular
subject is subsumed as an accidental. If the judgments of existence can also
be defined as judgments of inherence, then the judgments of reflection are
by contrast judgments of subsumption.
a. The singular judgment

12.73

Now the immediate judgment of reflection is again, “the singular is universal,” but with the subject and predicate in the signification just explained.
More accurately, therefore, it can also be expressed thus, “this is an essential
universal.”
But a “this” is not an essential universal. That positive judgment – positive
according to form – must as judgment be taken negatively. But inasmuch
as the judgment of reflection is not merely something positive, the negation
does not directly affect the predicate – a predicate which does not inhere in
the subject but is rather its implicit being. On the contrary, it is the subject
that is alterable and needs determination. The negative judgment is therefore to be understood as saying: “‘not a this’ is a universal of reflection”;65
such an in-itself has a more universal concrete existence than it would have
in a “this.” Accordingly, the singular judgment has its proximate truth in
the particular judgment.
b. The particular judgment
The non-singularity of the subject that must be posited in the first judgment of reflection instead of the subject’s singularity is particularity. But
particularity is determined in the judgment of reflection as essential singularity; particularity cannot be, therefore, a simple, abstract determination in
which the singular would be sublated and the concrete existent dissolved,
but is rather only an extension of this singular in external reflection. Thus
the subject is: “these ones,” or “a particular number of singulars.”
64

“phenomenal something” = Erscheinende.

65

“Nicht ein Dieses” ist ein Allgemeines der Reflexion.

Judgment

571

The judgment, “some singulars are a universal of reflection,” appears at
first to be a positive judgment, but it is just as well also negative; for “some”
contains universality and may, accordingly, be regarded as comprehensive;
but since it is particularity, it is equally disproportionate with respect to
universality. The negative determination which the subject has obtained
through the transition of the singular judgment also is, as we have shown
above, the determination of the connection, the copula.66 – Implicated
in the judgment, “some humans are happy,” is the immediate consequence:
“some humans are not happy.” When some things are useful, then, precisely for that reason, there also are some that are not useful. The positive
and the negative judgment no longer fall outside one another, but the
particular immediately contains both at the same time, precisely because
it is a judgment of reflection. – But the particular judgment is therefore
indeterminate.
If, in the example of such a judgment, we consider further the subject,
“some humans,” “some animals,” etc., we find that it contains, besides the
particular form determination of “some,” also the content determination
of “humans,” etc. By the subject of the singular judgment one could mean,
“this human,” a singularity that properly pertains to external pointing; it
would best be expressed, therefore, by something like “Gaius.” But the
subject of the particular judgment can no longer be “some Gaiuses,” for
Gaius is supposed to be a singular as singular. To the “some,” therefore,
there is added a more universal content, say “humans,” “animals,” etc. This
is not a mere empirical content, but one which is determined by the form of
the judgment; it is universal, that is, because “some” contains universality,
and the latter must at the same time be separated from the singulars which
the reflected singularity has as a basis. More precisely, this universality is
also the universal nature or species “human,” “animal” – the universality
which is the result of the judgment of reflection, but anticipated; just as
the positive judgment, since it has the singular for subject, also anticipates
the determination which is the result of the judgment of existence.
Thus the subject that contains the singulars, their connection to particularity, and the universal nature, is already posited as the totality of the
determinations of the concept. But, to be precise, this consideration is an
external one. What is at first already posited in the subject by virtue of its
form, in reciprocal connection, is the extension of the “this” to particularity;
but this generalization is not commensurate to the “this”; the latter is perfectly determinate, but “some” is indeterminate. The extension ought to
66

i.e. in section a. immediately preceding: “But a ‘this’ is not an essential universal.”

12.74

572

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

be appropriate to the “this” and therefore, in conformity with it, it ought
to be completely determined; such an extension is totality, or, in the first
instance, universality in general.
This universality has the “this” for its basis, for the singular is here the
singular reflected into itself; its further determinations run their course,
therefore, outside it, and just as for this reason particularity determined itself
as a “some,” so the universality which the subject has attained is an “allness,”
and thus the particular judgment has passed over into the universal.
c. The universal judgment

12.75

The universality of the subject of the universal judgment is the external
universality of reflection, “allness”; the “all” is the all of all the singulars in
which the singular remains unchanged. This universality is therefore only
a commonality of self-subsisting singulars, an association of such singulars
as comes about only by way of comparison. – This is the association that
first comes to mind at a subjective level of representation when there is talk
of universality. The most obvious reason given for viewing a determination
as universal is because it fits many. – Also in analysis is this conception of
universality the one most prevalent, as when, for instance, the development
of a function in a polynomial is taken to have greater universal value than
its development in a binomial, because the polynomial displays more single
terms than the binomial. The demand that the function should be resolved
in its full universality would require, strictly speaking, a pantonomial, the
exhausted infinity. But here is where the limitation of that demand becomes
apparent, and where the display of the infinite number of terms must rest
satisfied with the ought it commands, and therefore also with a polynomial.
But in fact the binomial is already the pantonomial in those cases where
the method or the rule concerns only the dependence of one member on
another, and the dependence of several terms on those that precede them
does not particularize itself but remains one and the same underlying
function. It is the method or the rule which is to be regarded as the true
universal; in the progress of the development or in the development of a
polynomial, the rule is only repeated, so that it gains nothing in universality
through the increased number of terms. We have already spoken earlier of
the bad infinity and its deception;67 the universality of the concept is the
achieved beyond, whereas that bad infinity remains afflicted with a beyond
which is unattainable but remains a mere progression to infinity. If it is allness
67

Cf. GW 11, 79–81; above 21.127ff.

Judgment

573

that universality brings to mind, a universality that ought to be exhausted
in singulars as singulars, then there has been a relapse into that bad infinity;
or else it is mere plurality which is taken for allness. But plurality, however
great it might be, remains inescapably only particularity: it is not allness. –
Yet there is in all this an obscure intimation of the universality of the concept
as it exists in and for itself; it is the concept that violently strives to reach
beyond the stubborn singularity to which pictorial representation clings
and beyond the externality of its reflection, passing off allness as totality or
rather as the category of the in-and-for-itself.
This is apparent in other ways as well in the allness which is above all
empirical universality. Inasmuch as the singular is presupposed as something
immediate and is therefore pre-given and externally picked, the reflection
which collects it into an allness is equally external to it. But because the
singular, as a “this,” is absolutely indifferent to such a reflection, the universality and the collected singularity cannot combine to form a unity.
The empirical allness thus remains a task; it is an ought which, as such,
cannot be represented in the form of being. Now an empirically universal
proposition – for nevertheless such are advanced – rests on the tacit agreement that, if no instance of the contrary can be adduced, a plurality of cases
ought to count for an allness; or that a subjective allness, namely the known
cases, may be taken for an objective allness.
Now a closer examination of the universal judgment before us shows
that the subject, as we have just noted, contains the achieved universality as
presupposed; it even contains it as posited in it. “All humans” expresses, first,
the species “human”; second, this species in its singularization, but in such
a way that the singulars are at the same time expanded to the universality
of the species; conversely, through this conjunction with singularity, the
universality is just as perfectly determined as singularity, and the posited
universality has thereby become equal to what was presupposed.
But, strictly speaking, we should not anticipate the presupposed but
should rather consider the result for itself in the form determination. –
The singularity, inasmuch as it is expanded to allness, is posited as negativity, and this is identical self-reference. It has not remained, therefore, that
first singularity (of Gaius, for instance) but is a determination identical
with universality, or the absolute determinateness of the universal. – That
first singularity of the singular judgment was not the immediate singularity
of the positive judgment, but came about through the dialectical movement of the judgment of existence in general;68 it was already determined
68

Cf. above, 12.71.

12.76

574

12.77

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to be the negative identity of the determinations of that judgment. This is
the true presupposition in the judgment of reflection; as contrasted to the
positing that runs its course in that judgment, that first determinateness
of singularity was the latter’s in-itself; consequently, what singularity is in
itself, through the movement of the judgment of reflection is now posited –
posited, that is, as the identical self-reference of the determinate. Therefore
the reflection that expanded the singularity to allness is not external to it;
on the contrary, it only makes explicit what was before implicit. – Hence
the result is in truth the objective universality. The subject has thus shed the
form determination of the judgment of reflection that made its way from
the “this” to the “allness” through the “some.” Instead of “all humans,” we
now have to say “the human being.”69
The universality that has thereby arisen is the genus, or the universality
which is concrete in its universality. The genus does not inhere in the subject;
it is not one property of it or a property at all; it contains all singular
determinacies dissolved into its substantial purity. – Because it is thus
posited as this negative self-identity, it is for that reason essentially subject,
but one that is no longer subsumed under its predicate. Consequently the
nature of the judgment of reflection is now altogether altered.
This judgment was essentially a judgment of subsumption. The predicate was determined, in contrast to its subject, as the implicit universal;
according to its content, it could be taken as an essentially relational determination or also as a mark – a determination which makes the subject
essentially only an appearance. But when determined to objective universality, the subject ceases to be subsumed under such a relational determination
or the collecting grasp of reflection; with respect to this objective universality, a predicate of this sort is rather a particular. The relation of subject
and predicate has thus reversed itself, and to this extent the judgment has
at this point sublated itself.
This sublation of the judgment coincides with what the determination
of the copula becomes, as we still have to consider;70 the sublation of the
determinations of judgment and their transition into the copula are one
and same. – For inasmuch as the subject has raised itself to universality,
it has become in this determination equal to the predicate which, as the
reflected universality, also contains particularity within itself; subject and
predicate are therefore identical, that is, in the copula they have come to
coincide. This identity is the genus or the nature of a thing in and for itself.
Inasmuch as this identity, therefore, again divides, it is the inner nature by
69

der Mensch.

70

Cf. below, 12.89.

Judgment

575

virtue of which a subject and predicate are connected to each other. This
is a connection of necessity wherein the two terms of the judgment are only
unessential distinctions. – That what belongs to all the singulars of a genus
belongs to the genus by nature, is an immediate consequence. It expresses
what we have just seen – that the subject, e.g. “all humans,” sheds its form
determination and “the human being” is what it should say instead. –
This combination, implicit and explicit, constitutes the basis of a new
judgment – the judgment of necessity.
c. the judgment of necessity
The determination to which universality has advanced is, as we have seen,
the universality that exists in and for itself or the objective universality that
in the sphere of essence corresponds to substantiality. It is distinguished
from the latter because it belongs to the concept and for this reason is not
only the inner but also the posited necessity of its determinations, or in
other words, the distinction is immanent to it, whereas substance has its
distinction only in its accidents, does not have it as a principle within it.
In the judgment now, this objective universality is posited – first, posited
with this determinateness as essential to it, immanent to it; second, posited
with it as diverse from it, a particularity for which the said universality
constitutes the substantial basis. In this way the universality is determined
as genus and species.
a. The categorical judgment
The genus essentially divides or repels itself into species; it is genus only
in so far as it comprehends the species under it; the species is a species
only in so far as, on the one side, it exists in singulars, and, on the other
side, it possesses in the genus a higher universality. – Now the categorical
judgment has for predicate such a universality as in it the subject possesses
its immanent nature. But the categorical judgment is itself the first or
the immediate judgment of necessity; consequently, the determinateness
of the subject, by virtue of which the latter is a singular as contrasted to
the genus or the species, belongs to the immediacy of external concrete
existence. – But objective universality also has here only its first immediate
particularization; on the one hand, therefore, it is itself a determinate genus
with respect to which there are higher genera; on the other hand, it is not
the most proximate genus, that is, its determinateness is not directly the
principle of the specific particularity of the subject. But what is necessary in

12.78

576

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

it is the substantial identity of subject and predicate, in view of which the
distinguishing mark of each is only an unessential positedness or even only
a name; in its predicate, the subject is reflected into its being-in-and-foritself. Such a predicate ought not to be classed with the predicates of the
preceding judgments. For example, to throw together into one class these
judgments:
The rose is red,
The rose is a plant,
or This ring is yellow,
It is gold,

12.79

and thus to take such an external property as the color of a flower as a
predicate equal to its vegetable nature, is to overlook a difference which
the dullest mind would not miss. – The categorical judgment, therefore, is
definitely to be distinguished from the positive and the negative judgment;
in these, what is said of the subject is a singular accidental content; in the
former, the content is the totality of the form reflected into itself. In this
content, therefore, the copula has the meaning of necessity, whereas in that
of the other two it has only the meaning of abstract, immediate being.
The determinateness of the subject, which makes it a particular with
respect to the predicate, is at first still something contingent; subject and
predicate are not connected with necessity by the form or the determinateness;
the necessity is therefore still an inner one. – The subject is subject, however,
only as a particular, and to the extent that it possesses objective universality,
it has to possess it essentially in accordance with that at first immediate
determinateness. The objective universal, in determining itself, that is, in
positing itself in a judgment, is in a connection of identity with this repelled
determinateness as such – essentially, that is, this determinateness is not to
be posited as merely accidental. Only through this necessity of its immediate
being does the categorical judgment conform to its objective universality
and, in this way, has passed over into the hypothetical judgment.
b. The hypothetical judgment
“If A is, then B is”; or “The being of A is not its own being but the being
of an other, of B.” – What is posited in this judgment is the necessary
connectedness of immediate determinacies, a connectedness which in the
categorical judgment is not yet posited. – There are here two immediate,
or externally contingent concrete existences, of which in the categorical
judgment there is at first only one, the subject; but since one is external

Judgment

577

to the other, this other is immediately also external with respect to the
first. – On account of this immediacy, the contents of both sides are still
indifferent to each other; at first, therefore, this judgment is a proposition
of empty form. Now, first, the immediacy is as such indeed self-subsistent,
a concrete being; but, second, what is essential is its connection; this being
is therefore just as much mere possibility; the hypothetical judgment does
not say either that A is, or that B is, but only that if the one is, then the
other is; only the connectedness of the extremes is posited as existing, not
the extremes themselves. Indeed, each extreme is posited in this necessity
as equally the being of an other. – The principle of identity asserts that A is
only A, not B; and B is only B, not A. In the hypothetical judgment, on
the contrary, the being of finite things is posited through the concept in
accordance with their formal truth, namely that the finite is its own being,
but equally is not its own being but is the being of an other. In the sphere
of being, the finite alters and comes to be an other. In the sphere of essence,
it is appearance; its being is posited to consist in the reflective shining of an
other in it, and the necessity is the inner connection not yet posited as such.
But the concept is this: that this identity is posited; that the existent is not
abstract self-identity but concrete self-identity and is, immediately within it,
the being of an other.
The hypothetical judgment can be more closely determined in terms of
the relations of reflection as a relation of ground and consequence, condition and conditioned, causality etc. Just as substantiality is present in the
categorical judgment in the form of its concept, so is the connectedness
of causality in the hypothetical judgment. This and the other relations all
recur in it, but they are there essentially only as moments of one and the
same identity. – However, in it they are as yet not opposed as singular or
particular and universal according to the determinations of the concept,
but are only as moments in general at first. The hypothetical judgment,
therefore, has a shape which is more that of a proposition; just as the
particular judgment is of indeterminate content, so is the hypothetical of
indeterminate form, for the determination of its content does not conform
to the relation of subject and predicate. – Yet the being, since it is the
being of the other, is for that very reason in itself the unity of itself and
the other, and therefore universality; by the same token it is in fact only a
particular, for it is a determinate being and does not refer in its determinateness merely to itself. But it is not the simple, abstract particularity that
is posited; on the contrary, through the immediacy which the determinacies
possess, the moments of particularity are differentiated; at the same time,
through the unity of these moments as constituted by their connection,

12.80

578

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the particularity is also their totality. – In truth, therefore, what is posited
in this judgment is universality as the concrete identity of the concept
whose determinations do not have any subsistence of their own but are
only particularities posited in that identity. So it is the disjunctive judgment.
c. The disjunctive judgment

12.81

In the categorical judgment, the concept is objective universality and an
external singularity. In the hypothetical, the concept manifests its presence
in this externality, in its negative identity. Through this identity, the objective universality and the external singularity obtain the determinateness,
now posited in the disjunctive judgment, which in the hypothetical they
possess immediately. Hence the disjunctive judgment is objective universality at the same time posited in union with the form. It thus contains,
first, the concrete universality or the genus in simple form, as the subject;
second, the same universality but as the totality of its differentiated determinations. “A is either B or C.” This is the necessity of the concept in which,
first, the self-identity of the two extremes is of the same extent, content,
and universality. Second, they are differentiated according to the form of
conceptual determination, but, because of that identity, this determination
is a mere form. Third, the identical objective universality appears for that
reason reflected into itself as against the non-essential form, as a content
which however has the determinateness of form in it – once as the simple determination of genus; then again, as this determinateness developed
in its difference, and in this way it is the particularity of the species and
their totality, the universality of the genus. – The particularity constitutes in
its development the predicate, because, in containing the whole universal
sphere of the subject, and in containing it, however, also in the articulation
of particularity, it is to that extent the greater universal.
Upon closer consideration of this particularization, it is the genus that
constitutes first of all the substantial universality of the species; the subject
is thus B as well as C; this “as well as” indicates the positive identity of the
particular with the universal; this objective universal maintains itself fully
in its particularity. Secondly, the species mutually exclude one another; “A is
either B or C”; for they are the specific difference of the universal sphere.
This “either or” is their negative connection. In this negative connection
they are just as identical as in the positive; the genus is their unity as a unity
of determinate particulars. – If the genus were an abstract universality,
as in the judgments of existence, then the species would also have to
be taken as diverse and mutually indifferent; this universality, however, is

Judgment

579

not the external one that arises only through comparison and abstraction
but is, on the contrary, the universality which is immanent to the genus
and concrete. – An empirical disjunctive judgment is without necessity;
A is either B or C or D, etc., because the species B, C, D, etc., are
found beforehand; strictly speaking, therefore, there is no question here of
an “either or,” for the completeness of these species is only a subjective
one; of course, one species excludes the other, but the “either or” excludes
every other species and excludes within itself an entire sphere. This totality
has its necessity in the negative unity of the objective universal which
has dissolved singularity within itself and possesses, immanent in it, the
simple principle of differentiation by which the species are determined and
connected. The empirical species, on the contrary, have their differences
in some accidentality or other which is a principle external to them and
is not, therefore, their principle, and consequently also not the immanent
determinateness of the genus; for this reason, they are also not reciprocally
connected according to their determinateness. – Yet it is by virtue of
their determinateness that the species constitute the universality of the
predicate. – Here is where the so-called contrary and contradictory concepts
should find their proper place, for the disjunctive judgment is where the
essential difference of the concept is posited; but here they also equally find
their truth, namely that contrariness and contradictoriness are themselves
differentiated both as contraries and as contradictory. Species are contrary
inasmuch as they are merely diverse, that is to say, inasmuch as they possess
an immediate existence as subsisting in and for themselves by virtue of
the genus which is their nature. They are contradictory, inasmuch as they
exclude one another. But each of these determinations is by itself one-sided
and void of truth. In the “either or” of the disjunctive judgment, their
unity is posited as their truth, which is that the independent subsistence of
the species as concrete universality is itself also the principle of the negative
unity by which they mutually exclude one another.
Through the identity just demonstrated of subject and predicate in
accordance with the negative unity, the genus is determined in the disjunctive judgment as the proximate genus. This expression indicates at first
the mere quantitative difference of the more or less determinations which
a universal contains as contrasted to a particularity coming under it. On
this account, which is the truly proximate genus remains contingent. But
then, if the genus is taken as a universal arrived at by the mere abstraction
of determinations, it cannot strictly speaking form a disjunctive judgment;
for it is contingent whether, as it were, there is still left in it the determinateness that constitutes the principle of the “either or”; the genus would

12.82

580

12.83

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

not be displayed in the species according to its determinateness, and these
would only be capable of contingent completeness. In the categorical judgment, the genus stands at first over against the subject only in this abstract
form – is not, therefore, necessarily its proximate genus and, to this extent,
is external to it. But when the genus is a concrete, essentially determined
universality, then, as simple determinateness, it is the unity of the moments
of the concept – moments that, only sublated in that simplicity, have their
real difference in the species. Hence the genus is the proximate genus of a
species, for the latter possesses its specific difference in the essential determinateness of the genus, and the species have as such the determination
differentiating them in the nature of the genus.
What we have just considered constitutes the identity of subject and
predicate from the aspect of determinateness in general. This is an aspect
that was posited by the hypothetical judgment, the necessity of which is
an identity of immediate and diverse things and is, therefore, essentially a
negative unity. It is this negative unity that in principle separates subject
and predicate but is now posited as itself differentiated – in the subject,
as simple determinateness; in the predicate, as totality. That parting of
subject and predicate is the difference of the concept; the totality of the
species in the predicate can then be none other than this difference. – The
reciprocal determination of the disjunctive terms is therefore hereby given.
It reduces to the difference of the concept, for it is the concept alone
that disjoins itself and manifests in its determination its negative unity.
Of course, the species comes up for consideration here only under the
aspect of its simple conceptual determinateness, not according to the shape
in which, proceeding from the idea, it steps into a further self-subsistent
reality. This reality is of course dropped in the simple principle of the genus;
but the essential differentiation must be a moment of the concept. In the
judgment here considered, it is really now the concept’s own progressive
determination that itself posits its disjunction, just as was the case for the
concept itself, as we saw when it was determined in and for itself and was
differentiated into determinate concepts.71 – Now because the concept is
the universal, the positive as well as the negative totality of the particulars,
for that reason it is immediately itself also one of its disjunctive members; the
other member, however, is this universality resolved into its particularity, or
the determinateness of the concept as determinateness, in which the very
universality displays itself as totality. – If the disjunction of a genus into
species has not yet attained this form, this is proof that the disjunction has
71

Cf. above, 12.38–39.

Judgment

581

not risen to the determinateness of the concept and has not proceeded from
it. – Color is either violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, or red; even
empirically, the confusion and impurity of such a disjunction are at once
apparent; it is a barbarism even from this standpoint. If color is conceived
as the concrete unity of light and darkness, then this genus has within it the
determinateness that constitutes the principle of its particularization into
species. Of these, however, one must be the utterly simple color that holds
the opposition in balance, contained and negated in the color’s intensity;
the relation of the opposition of light and darkness must then take its
place over against it, and, since this relation is a natural phenomenon,
the indifferent neutrality of the opposition must be further added to it. –
Taking for genus such mixtures as violet, and orange, or shades of difference
like indigo blue and light blue, betrays a totally inconsiderate procedure
that shows too little reflection even for empiricism.72 – But this is not
the place to discuss the different and more finely determined forms that
disjunction may indeed assume in the element of nature or spirit.
In the first instance, the disjunctive judgment has the members of the
disjunction in the predicate. But the judgment is itself equally disjoined;
its subject and predicate are the members of the disjunction; they are the
moments of the concept posited in their determinateness but at the same
time as identical – identical, (a) in the objective universality which is in
the subject as the simple genus, and in the predicate as the universal sphere
and totality of the moments of the concept; and (b) in the negative unity,
the developed connectedness of necessity, in accordance with which the
simple determinateness in the subject has fallen apart into the difference of
the species and these, in this very difference, have their essential connection
and self-identity.
This unity, the copula of this judgment in which the extremes have
come together through their identity, is thus the concept itself, indeed the
concept as posited; the mere judgment of necessity has thereby risen to the
judgment of the concept.
d. the judgment of the concept
To know how to form judgments of existence, such as “the rose is red,” “the
snow is white,” etc., hardly counts as a sign of great power of judgment.
The judgments of reflection are more in the nature of propositions; to be sure,
72

The criticism is directed at Goethe’s theory of colors. See Goethe, Zur Farbenlehre: Didaktischer
Teil in Goethes Werke, Vol. 13 (Hamburg: Christian Wegner, 1966), §175.

12.84

582

12.85

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

in the judgment of necessity the subject matter is present in its objective
universality, but it is only in the judgment now to be considered that its
connection with the concept is to be found. The concept is at the basis of this
judgment, and it is there with reference to the subject matter, as an ought to
which reality may or may not conform. – This is the judgment, therefore,
that first contains true adjudication; the predicates, “good,” “bad,” “true,”
“right,” etc., express that the fact is measured against the concept as an
ought which is simply presupposed, and is, or is not, in agreement with it.
The judgment of the concept has been called the judgment of modality,
and has been regarded as containing the form of the connection of subject
and predicate as this obtains in an external understanding, and as concerned
with the value of the copula only in connection with thought.73 Accordingly,
judgment is said to be problematic when the affirmation or negation is
taken as optional or possible; assertoric, when it is taken as true, that is,
actual, and apodictic when it is taken as necessary. – It is easy to see why it
would be an easy step in this judgment to go outside the judgment itself
and to regard its determination as something merely subjective. For it is the
concept here, the subjective, that comes into play again in judgment and
relates to an immediate actuality. But this subjectivity is not to be confused
with external reflection, which is of course also something subjective but in
a different sense than the concept itself; on the contrary, the concept that
has again emerged out of the disjunctive judgment is the very opposite of
a mere mode or manner. The earlier judgments are subjective in this sense,
for they rest on an abstract one-sidedness in which the concept is lost.
But the judgment of the concept is instead objective and, as contrasted
with the others, it is the truth, for it rests on the concept precisely in its
determinateness as concept, not in some external reflection or with reference
to some subjective, that is, accidental, thought.
In the disjunctive judgment, the concept was posited as the identity of
universal nature and its particularization, and with that the relation of the
judgment was sublated. This concretion of universality and particularization
is at first a simple result; it must now further develop itself into totality,
for its moments have at first collapsed into it and do not as yet stand over
against each other in determinate self-subsistence. – The shortcoming of
that result may also be stated more incisively by saying that although in
the disjunctive judgment the objective universality has attained completion
in its particularization, the negative unity of the latter has only retreated
into it and has not as yet determined itself as the third moment, that of
73

Cf. A74/B99ff.

Judgment

583

singularity. – But to the extent that the result is itself negative unity, it is
already this singularity; it is then this one determinateness alone that must
now posit its negativity, that must part itself into extremes and in this way
concludes its development in the syllogistic conclusion.74
The proximate diremption of this unity is the judgment in which the
unity is posited first as subject, as an immediate singular, and then as
predicate, as the determinate connection of its moments.
a. The assertoric judgment
The judgment of the concept is at first immediate; as such, it is the assertoric
judgment. The subject is a concrete singular in general, and the predicate
expresses this same singular as the connection of its actuality, its determinateness or constitution, to its concept. (“This house is bad,” “this action
is good.”) More closely considered, it contains, therefore, (a) that the subject ought to be something; its universal nature has posited itself as the
self-subsistent concept; (b) that particularity is something constituted or an
external concrete existence, not only because of its immediacy, but because it
expressly differs from its self-subsisting universal nature; its external concrete existence, for its part, because of this self-subsistence of the concept, is
also indifferent with respect to the universal and may or may not conform
to it. – This constitution is the singularity which in the disjunctive judgment escapes the necessary determination of the universal, a determination
that exists only as the particularization of the species and as the negative
principle of the genus. Thus the concrete universality that has come out
of the disjunctive judgment divides in the assertoric judgment into the
form of extremes to which the concept itself, as the posited unity connecting
them, is still lacking.
For this reason the judgment is so far only assertoric; its credential is only
a subjective assurance. That something is good or bad, right, suitable or
not, hangs on an external third. But to say that the connectedness is thus
externally posited is the same as saying that it is still only in itself or internal. –
When we say that something is good or bad, etc., we certainly do not mean
to say that it is good only in a subjective consciousness but may perhaps
be bad in itself, or that “good and bad,” “right,” “suitable,” etc. may not
be predicates of the object itself. The merely subjective character of the
assertion of this judgment consists, therefore, in the fact that the implicitly
present connectedness of subject and predicate has not been posited yet, or,
74

There is in German a play on words here. Schluß means both “conclusion” and “syllogism.”

12.86

584

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

what amounts to the same thing, that it is only external; the copula still is
an immediate abstract being.
Thus the assurance of the assertoric judgment can with right be confronted by an opposing one. When the assurance is given that “this action
is good,” the opposite, “this action is bad,” has equal justification. – Or,
considering the judgment in itself, since its subject is an immediate singular,
in this abstraction it still does not have, posited in it, the determinateness
that would contain its connection with the universal concept; it still is a
contingent matter, therefore, whether there is or there is not conformity to
the concept. Essentially, therefore, the judgment is problematic.

b. The problematic judgment

12.87

The problematic judgment is the assertoric judgment in so far as the latter
must be taken positively as well as negatively. – According to this qualitative
side, the particular judgment is likewise a problematic one, for it has
positive just as much as negative value (equally problematic is also the
being of the subject and predicate in the hypothetical judgment), and also
posited through this side is that the singular judgment and the categorical
are still something merely subjective. In the problematic judgment as such,
however, this positing is more immanent than it is in these others, for in
it the content of the predicate is the connection of the subject to the concept –
here, therefore, the determination of the immediate as something contingent
is itself present.
Whether the predicate ought to be or not to be coupled with a certain subject appears at first only as problematic, and to this extent the
indeterminateness falls on the side of the copula. The predicate has no
determination to gain from this coupling, since it is already the objective, concrete universality. The problematic element falls, therefore, on the
immediacy of the subject, which is thereby determined as a contingency. –
But further, we must not for that reason abstract from the singularity of
the subject; purified of such a singularity, the subject would be only a
universal, whereas the predicate entails precisely this, that the concept of
the subject ought to be posited with reference to its singularity. – We may
not say, “the house or a house is good,” but, “so indeed it is in the way
it is made.” – The problematic element in the subject itself constitutes its
moment of contingency, the subjectivity of the fact it expresses as contrasted
with its objective nature or its concept, its mere mode and manner or its
constitution.

Judgment

585

Consequently the subject is itself differentiated into its universality or
objective nature, that is, its ought, and the particularized constitution
of immediate existence. It thereby contains the ground for being or not
being what it ought to be. In this way, it is equated with the predicate. –
Accordingly, the negativity of the problematic character of the judgment,
inasmuch as it implicates the immediacy of the subject, only amounts to
this original partition of the latter into its moments of universal and particular of which it is already the unity – a partition which is the judgment
itself.
One more comment that can be made is that both sides of the subject, its
concept and the way it is constituted, could each be called its subjectivity.
The concept is the universal essence of a fact, withdrawn into itself, the
fact’s negative self-unity; this unity constitutes the fact’s subjectivity. But a
fact is also essentially contingent and has an external constitution; this last
may also be called its mere subjectivity, as contrasted with the objectivity of
the concept. The fact consists just in this, that its concept, as self-negating
unity, negates its universality and projects itself into the externality of
singularity. – As this duplicity, the subject of the judgment is here posited;
the truth of those two opposite meanings of subjectivity is that they are in
one. – The meaning of subjective has itself become problematic by having
lost the immediate determinateness that it had in the immediate judgment
and its determinate opposition to the predicate. – These opposite meanings
of subjectivity that surface even in the ratiocination of ordinary reflection
should by themselves at least call attention to the fact that subjectivity has
no truth in one of them alone. The duplicity of meaning is the manifestation
of the one-sidedness of each when taken by itself.
When this problematic character of the judgment is thus posited as the
character of the fact, the fact with its constitution, the judgment itself is no
longer problematic but apodictic.
c. The apodictic judgment
The subject of the apodictic judgment (“the house, as so and so constituted,
is good,” “the action, as so and so constituted, is right”) includes, first, the
universal, or what it ought to be; second, its constitution; the latter contains
the ground why a predicate of the judgment of the concept does or does
not pertain to it, that is, whether the subject corresponds to its concept or
not. This judgment is now truly objective; or it is the truth of the judgment
in general. Subject and predicate correspond to each other, and have the
same concept, and this content is itself posited concrete universality; that is

12.88

586

12.89

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to say, it contains the two moments, the objective universal or the genus
and the singularized universal. Here we have, therefore, the universal that
is itself and continues through its opposite, and is a universal only in unity
with the latter. – Such a universal, like “good,” “fitting,” “right,” etc., has
an ought for its ground, and contains at the same time the correspondence
of existence; it is not the ought or the genus by itself, but this correspondence
which is the universality that constitutes the predicate of the apodictic
judgment.
The subject likewise contains these two moments in immediate unity as
fact. The truth of the latter, however, is that it is internally fractured into
its ought and its being; this is the absolute judgment on all actuality.75 – That
this original partition, which is the omnipotence of the concept, is equally
a turning back into the concept’s unity and the absolute connection of
“ought” and “being” to each other, is what makes the actual into a fact; the
fact’s inner connection, this concrete identity, constitutes its soul.
The transition from the immediate simplicity of the fact to the correspondence which is the determinate connection of its ought and its being – the
copula – now shows itself upon closer examination to lie in the particular
determinateness of the fact. The genus is the universal existing in and for
itself which, to that extent, appears as unconnected; the determinateness,
however, is that which in that universality is reflected into itself but at the
same time into an other. The judgment, therefore, has its ground in the
constitution of the subject and is thereby apodictic. Consequently, we now
have the determinate and accomplished copula which hitherto consisted in
the abstract “is” but has now further developed into ground in general. It
first attaches to the subject as immediate determinateness, but it is equally
the connection to the predicate – a predicate that has no other content than
this correspondence itself, or the connection of the subject to the universality.
Thus the form of judgment has passed away, first, because subject and
predicate are in themselves the same content; but, second, because through
its determinateness the subject points beyond itself and connects itself to
the predicate; but again, third, this connecting has equally passed over into
the predicate, only constitutes the content of it, and so it is the connecting
as posited or the judgment itself. – The concrete identity of the concept
that was the result of the disjunctive judgment and constitutes the inner
foundation of the judgment of the concept – the identity that was posited
at first only in the predicate – is thus recovered in the whole.
75

Like the Greek kr©siv (cf. crisis), the German Urteil (judgment) connotes “partition.”

Judgment

587

On closer examination, the positive factor in this result which is responsible for the transition of the judgment into another form is that, as we
have just seen,76 the subject and predicate are in the apodictic judgment
each the whole concept. – The unity of the concept, as the determinateness
constituting the copula that connects them, is at the same time distinct
from them. At first, it stands only on the other side of the subject as the
latter’s immediate constitution. But since its essence is to connect, it is not
only that immediate constitution but the universal that runs through the
subject and predicate. – While subject and predicate have the same content, it is the form of their connection that is instead posited through the
determinateness of the copula, the determinateness as a universal or the particularity. – Thus it contains in itself both the form determinations of the
extremes and is the determinate connection of the subject and predicate:
the accomplished copula of the judgment, the copula replete of content, the
unity of the concept that re-emerges from the judgment wherein it was lost
in the extremes. – By virtue of this repletion of the copula, the judgment has
become syllogism.
76

In the preceding section 12.88.

c h a p ter 3
12.90

The syllogism

The syllogism is the result of the restoration of the concept in the judgment,
and consequently the unity and the truth of the two. The concept as such
holds its moments sublated in this unity; in judgment, the unity is an
internal or, what amounts to the same, an external one, and although the
moments are connected, they are posited as self-subsisting extremes. In the
syllogism, the determinations of the concept are like the extremes of
the judgment, and at the same time their determinate unity is posited.
Thus the syllogism is the completely posited concept; it is, therefore, the
rational. – The understanding is taken to be the faculty of the determinate
concept which is held fixed for itself by virtue of abstraction and the form
of universality. But in reason the determinate concepts are posited in their
totality and unity. Therefore, it is not just that the syllogism is rational but
that everything rational is a syllogism. Syllogistic inference has long since
been ascribed to reason; but, on the other hand, reason in and for itself,
and rational principles and laws, are so spoken of that no light is thrown
on why the one reason that syllogizes, and the other which is the source
of laws and otherwise eternal truths and absolute thoughts, hang together.
If the former is supposed to be only a formal reason while the latter is
supposed to be the one that generates content, then one would expect on
this distinction that precisely the form of reason, the inference, would not
be missing in the latter. And yet, the two are commonly held so far apart,
the one without mention of the other, that it seems as though the reason
of absolute thoughts were ashamed, so to speak, of inferential reason, and
the syllogism were listed as also an activity of reason merely as matter of
tradition. But surely, as we have just remarked, logical reason must be
essentially recognizable, when regarded as formal, also in the reason that
is concerned with a content; indeed, no content can be rational except
by virtue of the rational form. In this matter we cannot rely on what is
commonly said about reason, for common views fail to tell us what we are
to understand by reason; this would-be rational wisdom is so busy with its
588

The syllogism

589

objects that it forgets to pay attention to reason itself but only identifies it
by characterizing it through the objects that it is said to have. If reason is
supposed to be a cognition that would know about God, freedom, right and
duty, the infinite, the unconditional, the suprasensible, or even gives only
representations and feelings of such objects, then for one thing these objects
are only negative, and for another the original question still stands, what
is there in all these objects that makes them rational? – The answer is that
the infinitude in them is not the empty abstraction from the finite, is not a
universality which is void of content and determination, but is the fulfilled
universality, the concept which is determined and is truly in possession of its
determinateness, namely, in that it differentiates itself internally and is the
unity of its thus intelligible and determined differences. Only in this way
does reason rise above the finite, the conditioned, the sensuous, or however
one might define it, and is in this negativity essentially replete with content,
for as unity it is the unity of determinate extremes. And so the rational is
nothing but the syllogism.
Now the syllogism, like judgment, is at first immediate; as such, its
determinations (termini) are simple, abstract determinacies; it is then the
syllogism of the understanding. If one stays at this configuration of the
syllogism, then its rationality, though present there and posited, is not
apparent. The essential element of the syllogism is the unity of the extremes,
the middle term that unites them and the ground that supports them.
Abstraction, by holding fast to the self-subsistence of the extremes, posits this
unity opposite them, as a determinateness with just as fixed an existence of its
own, thus grasping it more as a non-unity than as a unity. The expression,
“middle term” (medius terminus), is derived from spatial representation,
and has its share of responsibility for why we stop short at the externality
of the terms. Now if the syllogism consists in the positing in it of the unity
of the extremes, but if this unity is simply taken on the one hand as a
particular by itself, and on the other hand as only an external connection,
and non-unity is made the essential relation of syllogism, then the reason
of the syllogism is of no help to rationality.
First, the syllogism of existence, in which the terms are thus immediately
and abstractly determined, demonstrates internally that, since like judgment it is the connection of those terms, these are not in fact abstract but
each contains in it the reference connecting it to the others, and the determination of the middle term is not just a determinateness opposed to the
determinations of the extremes but contains these extremes posited in it.
Through this dialectic, the syllogism of existence becomes the syllogism
of reflection, the second syllogism. Its terms are such that in each the other

12.91

12.92

590

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

shines essentially reflected in it, or are posited as mediated, as they are indeed
supposed to be in accordance with the nature of syllogistic inference in
general.
Third, inasmuch as this reflective shining or this mediatedness is reflected
into itself, syllogism is determined as the syllogism of necessity, one in which
the mediating factor is the objective nature of the fact. As this syllogism
determines the extremes of the concept also as totalities, it has attained the
correspondence of its concept (or the middle term) and its existence (or
the difference of the extremes). It has attained its truth – and with that it
has stepped forth out of subjectivity into objectivity.
a. the syllogism of existence

12.93

1. The syllogism in its immediate form has for its moments the determinations of the concept as immediate. Accordingly, these are the abstract
determinacies of form, such as have not yet been developed by mediation
into concretion but are only singular determinacies. The first syllogism is thus
the one which is strictly formal. The formalism of syllogistic inference consists in stopping short at the form of this first syllogism. The concept, when
partitioned into its abstract moments, has singularity and universality for its
extremes, and itself appears as the particularity that stands between them.
Because of their immediacy, these determinacies only refer to themselves,
one and all a single content. Particularity constitutes at first the middle term
by uniting within itself, immediately, the two moments of singularity and
universality. Because of its determinateness, on the one hand it is subsumed
under the universal; on the other hand, the singular with respect to which it
possesses universality is subsumed under it. This concretion is at first, however, only a double-sidedness; the middle term, because of the immediacy
that affects it in the immediate syllogism, is a simple determinateness, and
the mediation which it constitutes is not as yet posited. Now the dialectical
movement of the syllogism of existence consists in positing the moments
of the mediation that alone constitutes the syllogism.
a. First figure of the syllogism
S-P-U is the general schema of the determinate syllogism. Singularity connects with77 universality through particularity; the singular is not universal
immediately but by means of particularity; and conversely, universality is
77

schliesst . . . zusammen: note the schliessen which is connected with Schluss, “syllogism,” “conclusion,”
“inference.” There is a constant play on words in this section which is difficult to render in English
without departing from the text too far.

The syllogism

591

likewise not singular immediately but lowers itself to it through particularity. – These determinations stand over against each other as extremes and are
one in a third term which is diverse from them. The two are both determinateness; in this they are identical; this, their universal determinateness, is
particularity. But they are no less extremes with respect to this particularity
than they are to each other, for each is in its immediate determinateness.
The general meaning of this syllogism is that the singular, which as such
is infinite self-reference and consequently would be only an inwardness,
emerges through the medium of particularity into existence, into a universality wherein it no longer belongs just to itself but stands in external
conjunction; conversely, since in its determinateness the singular sets itself
apart as particularity, in this separation it is a concreted term and, because
of the self-reference of the determinateness, it is a self-referring universal,
and consequently also a true singular; in the extreme of universality the
singular has gone from externality into itself. – The objective significance
of the syllogism is in this first figure only superficially present at first, for the
determinations are not as yet posited in it as the unity which constitutes
the essence of the syllogistic inference. The syllogism is still something
subjective inasmuch as the abstract meaning which its terms have has no
being in and for itself but is rather only in a subjective consciousness, and
is thus isolated. – Moreover, as we have seen,78 the relation of singularity,
particularity, and universality is the necessary and essential form-relation of
the determinations of the syllogism; the deficiency does not rest in the
determinateness of the form but in that each single determination is not
at the same time richer under it. – Aristotle confined himself rather to
the mere relation of inherence by defining the nature of the syllogism as
follows: When three terms are so related to each other that the one extreme
is in the entire middle term, and this middle term is in the entire other
extreme, then these two extremes are necessarily united in the conclusion.79
What is here expressed is the repetition of the equal relation of inherence
of the one extreme to the middle term, and then again of this last to the
other extreme, rather than the determinateness of the three terms to each
other. – Now since the syllogistic inference rests on this determinateness of
the terms to each other, it is immediately apparent that the other relations
of terms as are given by the other figures can have validity as inferences of
the understanding only to the extent that they let themselves be reduced to
that original relation; these other are not diverse species of figures that stand
alongside the first but, on the one hand, to the extent that they are assumed
78

In section 12.92.

79

Prior Analytics, 25b32–35.

12.94

592

12.95

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

to be correct inferences, they rest on the form of syllogistic inference in
general; and, on the other hand, to the extent that they deviate from it,
they are variant forms into which the first abstract form necessarily passes
over and thereby further determines itself and becomes totality. How this
occurs, we must now see in greater detail.
S-P-U is thus the general schema of the syllogism in its determinateness.
The singular is subsumed under the particular and the particular under the
universal; therefore, the singular is also subsumed under the universal. Or
the particular inheres in the singular and the universal in the particular;
therefore, the universal also inheres in the singular. With respect to the side
of the universal, the particular is the subject; with respect to that of the
singular, it is predicate; or as against the one it is singular, as against the
other it is universal. Since both these determinations are united in it, by
virtue of this unity of determinations the extremes are joined together. The
“therefore” appears as an inference that has taken place in the subject and
derives from the subjective insight into the relation of the two immediate
premises. Since subjective reflection expresses the two connections of the
middle to the extremes as particular and indeed immediate judgments or
propositions, the conclusion as the mediated connection is of course also a
particular proposition, and the “hence” or the “therefore,” is the expression
that it is the one which is mediated. But this “therefore” is not to be
regarded as a determination which is external to this proposition, one that
would have its ground and seat in subjective reflection, but as grounded
rather in the nature of the extremes themselves whose connection is again
enunciated as a mere judgment or proposition only for the sake of, and by
virtue of, abstractive reflection, but whose true connection is posited as the
middle term. – “Therefore S is A”: that this is a judgment is a merely
subjective circumstance; that it is not a merely subjective judgment, that is,
not a connection drawn through the mere copula or the empty “is” but one
drawn rather through a determinate middle which is replete with content,
that is precisely the meaning of the syllogistic inference.
For this reason, to regard the syllogism as merely consisting of three judgments is a formalistic view that ignores the relation of the determinations
which alone is at issue in the inference. It is altogether a merely subjective
reflection that splits the connection of the terms into isolated premises and
a conclusion distinct from them:
All humans are mortal,
Gaius is a human
Therefore Gaius is mortal.

The syllogism

593

One is immediately seized by boredom the moment one hears this inference being trotted out, a boredom brought on by the futility of a form that
by means of separate propositions gives the illusion of a diversity which
is immediately dissolved in the fact itself. It is mostly because of this subjective attire that the inference appears as a subjective expedient in which
reason or understanding take refuge when they are incapable of immediate
cognition. – The nature of things, the rational, certainly does not operate
in this way, first by drawing up a major premise for itself, the connection of
some particularity to a subsistent universal; then by discovering in a second
moment the separate connection of a singularity to the particularity, out
of which in a third and final moment a new proportion comes to light. –
This syllogistic inference from one separate proposition to another is nothing but a subjective form; the nature of the fact is that its various determinations are united in a unity of essence. This rationality is not an expedient;
on the contrary, in contrast to the immediacy of the connection that still
obtains in judgment, it is the objective element; it is the prior immediacy
of cognition that rather is mere subjectivity, in contrast to the syllogistic
inference which is the truth of the judgment. – All things are a syllogism, a
universal united through particularity with singularity; surely not a whole
made up of three propositions.
2. In the immediate syllogism of the understanding, the terms have the
form of immediate determinations; we must now consider that syllogism
from this side, according to which the terms are content. We may then
regard it as qualitative, just as we did the judgment of existence80 which
has the same side of qualitative determination. The terms of this syllogism,
just like the terms of that judgment, are accordingly singular determinacies,
for the determinateness is posited because of its self-reference as indifferent
to form and hence as content. The singular is some immediate concrete
subject matter or other; particularity, one of its determinacies, properties
or relations; universality, a yet more abstract, more singularized determinateness in the particular. – Since the subject, as something immediately
determined, is as yet not posited in its concept, its concretion is not reduced
to its essential determinacies; its self-referring determinateness is therefore
indeterminate, an infinite manifoldness. In this immediacy, the singular
has an infinite multitude of determinacies that belong to its particularity
and any may serve in a syllogism as the middle term for it. Through each
middle term, however, the singular attaches to another universal; through
each of its properties it enters into a different arrangement and context of
80

Cf. above, 12.60.

12.96

594

12.97

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

existence. – Moreover, in comparison with the universal, the middle term
is also a concreted term; it itself contains several predicates, and through
the same middle term the singular can again attach to several universals.
In general, therefore, it is entirely accidental and arbitrary which of the
many properties of a thing is taken for the purpose of connecting it with a
predicate; other middle terms are transitions to other predicates, and even
the same middle term may by itself be the transition to different predicates,
for as a particular against the universal it contains several determinations.
But not only is an indeterminate number of syllogisms equally possible
for a subject and not only is any single syllogism contingent as regards
content, but these syllogisms that concern the same subject must also run
into contradiction. For difference as such, which is at first an indifferent
diversity, is in essence equally opposition. The concrete is no longer merely
phenomenal but is concrete through the unity in the concept of opposites
that have determined themselves as moments of the latter. Now inasmuch
as in the formal syllogism, in keeping with the qualitative nature of the
terms, the concrete is taken according to one of the single determinations
that pertain to it, the syllogistic inference assigns to it the predicate corresponding to this middle term; but inasmuch as from another side the
opposite determinateness is inferred, the previous conclusion turns out to
be false, even though its premises and equally so its consequences are by
themselves quite correct. – If from the middle term that a wall was painted
blue it is concluded that it is blue, this is a correct inference. But, this conclusion notwithstanding, the wall can be green if it was also covered over
with a yellow color, a circumstance from which alone it would follow that
the wall is yellow. – If from the senses as middle term it is concluded that
the human being is neither good nor bad, for neither the one nor the other
can be predicated of the senses, the inference is correct; yet the conclusion
is wrong, because to the human being, taken concretely, spirituality also
applies as the middle term. – From the middle term of the gravitation of
the planets, the satellites and comets towards the sun, it follows correctly
that these bodies fall into the sun; but they do not fall into it, because they
are equally their own center of gravity or, as it is said, are driven by
the centrifugal force. Likewise, from sociability as the middle term, the
community of goods among citizens can be inferred; however, from individuality as the middle term, if the term is pressed with equal abstractness,
there follows the dissolution of the state, as for example it did follow for
the German Empire from adhering to that middle term.– It is only fair
to hold that nothing is as unsatisfactory as such a formal syllogism, since
which middle term is employed is a matter of chance or arbitrariness. No

The syllogism

595

matter how elegantly a deduction is run through inferences of this kind,
however fully its correctness is to be conceded, all this still amounts to
nothing, for the possibility is still there that other middle terms may be
found from which the opposite can be deduced with equal correctness. –
Kant’s antinomies of reason amount to nothing more than that from a
concept one of its determinations is laid down as ground at one time, and
another determination at another time, both with equal necessity.81 – The
insufficiency and contingency of an inference must not be blamed in these
cases on the content, as if they were independent of the form and the latter
alone were the concern of logic. On the contrary, it lies in the form of the
formal syllogism that the content is such a one-sided quality; the content
is destined to this one-sidedness because of the form’s abstractness. It is,
namely, one single quality of the many qualities or determinations of a
concrete subject matter, or of a concept, because according to the form it
is not supposed to be anything more than just such an immediate, single
determinateness. The extreme of singularity is, as abstract singularity, the
immediate concrete, consequently an infinite or indeterminate manifold;
the middle term is the equally abstract particularity, consequently a single one of these manifold qualities, and likewise the other extreme is the
abstract universal. It is therefore because of its form that the formal syllogism is totally contingent as regards its content, not indeed because to the
syllogism it is accidental whether this or that subject matter is subject to it
(logic abstracts from content), but because, in so far as a subject is laid at
its basis, it is contingent which content determinations it will infer from it.
3. The determinations of the syllogism are determinations of content
inasmuch as they are immediate and abstract determinations reflected
into themselves. But their essence is to be, not immanently reflected and
mutually indifferent determinations, but determinations of form, and to this
extent they are essentially connections. These connections are, first, those
of the extremes to the middle term. These are immediate connections, the
propositiones præmissæ – namely, the connection of the particular to the
universal, the propositio major, and that of the singular to the particular,
the propositio minor. Second, there is the connection of the extremes to one
another, and this is the mediated connection, the conclusio. The immediate
connections, the premises, are propositions or judgments in general, and
they contradict the nature of the syllogism, for according to the latter the
different concept determinations should not be immediately connected
but also their unity should be posited; the truth of the judgment is the
81

For the antinomies, cf. A426/B454ff.

12.98

596

12.99

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

syllogistic conclusion. And there is all the more reason why the premises
cannot remain immediate connections as their content is made up of
immediately differentiated determinations which, as such, are not in and
for themselves identical – unless the premises are identical propositions,
that is, empty tautologies that lead to nothing.
Accordingly, the normal expectation is that the premises will be proved,
that is, that they ought likewise to be exhibited as conclusions. The two
premises, therefore, yield two further syllogisms. But these two new syllogisms together yield four premises that require four new syllogisms; these
have eight premises whose eight conclusions yield in turn sixteen conclusions
for their sixteen premises, and so on in a geometrical progression to infinity.
Thus we have again the progress to infinity that occurred in the lower
sphere of being but we would not expect now in the domain of the concept,
the domain of the absolute reflection from the finite to the self, the region of
free infinity and truth. It was shown in the sphere of being82 that whenever
the bad infinity that runs away into a progression raises its head, what we
have is the contradiction of a qualitative being and of an impotent ought
that would transcend it; the progression itself is the repeated demand that
there be unity that intervenes to confront the qualitative, and the constant
fall back into the limitation which is inadequate to the demand. Now in
the formal syllogism the immediate connection or the qualitative judgment
is the basis, and the mediation of the syllogism is the higher truth posited
over against it. The infinite progression of the proof of the premises does
not resolve this contradiction but only perpetually renews it and is the
repetition of one and the same original deficiency. – The truth of the
infinite progression is rather the sublation of it and of the form which the
progression itself has already determined as deficient. – This form is that
of the mediation S-P-U. The two connections, S-P and P-U are supposed
to be mediated; if this is done in the same manner, only the deficient form
S-P-U is replicated, and so on to infinity. With respect to S, P also has the
form determination of a universal; and with respect to U that of a singular,
for these connections are as such judgments. As such, they are in need
of mediation; but in that form of mediation, only the relation that was
supposed to be sublated comes up again.
The mediation must therefore occur in some other way. For the mediation of P-U, there is S available; hence the mediation must be given the
shape of P-S-U. To mediate S-P, there is U available; accordingly, this
mediation becomes S-U-P.
82

Cf. GW 11.79; above 21.127ff.

The syllogism

597

If this transition is examined more closely in light of its concept, then,
as was shown earlier,83 the mediation of the formal syllogism is in the first
instance contingent according to content. The immediate singular has in
its determinacies an indeterminate number of middle terms, and these
have in general equally as many determinacies in turn; it is, therefore,
entirely a matter of external arbitrary choice, or in general of an external
circumstance and accidental determination, as to which universal the subject
of the syllogism should be annexed. As regards its content, therefore, the
mediation is not anything necessary, nor universal; it is not grounded in
the concept of the fact but the basis of the inference is something external
to it, that is, the immediate; but of the determinations of the concept, it is
the singular which is the immediate.
With respect to form, the mediation likewise presupposes the immediacy
of connection; the mediation itself is thus mediated – mediated indeed
by means of the immediate, that is, the singular. – More precisely, the
singular has become a mediating term through the conclusion of the first
syllogism. That conclusion is S-U; the singular is thereby posited as a
universal. In one premise, that is, the minor S-P, it is already as a particular;
consequently, the singular is that in which these two determinations are
united. – Or the conclusion expresses in and for itself the singular as a
universal, and it does it, not in any immediate manner, but mediatedly,
hence as a necessary connection. The simple particularity was the middle
term; in the conclusion, this particularity is posited as developed as the
connection of singular and universality. But the universal is still a qualitative
determinateness, the predicate of the singular; in being determined as
universal, the singular is posited as the universality of the extremes or as
the middle; it is for itself the extreme of singularity, but since it is now
determined as a universal, it is at the same time the unity of the two
extremes.
b. The second figure: P-S-U
1. The truth of the first qualitative syllogism is that something is not in
and for itself united to a qualitative determinateness which is a universal,
but is united to it by means of a contingency or in a singularity. The subject
of the syllogism has not returned in such a quality to its concept but is
conceived only in its externality; the immediacy constitutes the basis of the
connection and hence the mediation; to this extent, the singular is in truth
the middle.
83

Cf. above, 12.97.

12.100

598

12.101

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

But further, the syllogistic connection is the sublation of the immediacy;
the conclusion is a connection drawn not immediately but through a third
term; therefore, it contains a negative unity; therefore, the mediation is
now determined as containing a negative moment within it.
In this second syllogism, the premises are: P-S and S-U; only the first
of these premises is still an immediate one; the second, S-U, is already
mediated, namely through the first syllogism; the second syllogism thus
presupposes the first just as, conversely, the first presupposes the second. –
The two extremes are here determined, the one as against the other, as
particular and universal. The latter thus retains its place; it is predicate.
But the particular has exchanged places; it is subject or is posited in the
determination of the extreme of singularity, just as the singular is posited
with the determination of the middle term or of particularity. The two no
longer are, therefore, the abstract immediacies which they were in the first
syllogism. However, they are not yet posited as concrete somethings; in
standing in the place of the other, each is thereby posited – in its own
determination and at the same time, although only externally – into that
of the other.
The determinate and objective meaning of this syllogism is that the
universal is not in and for itself a determinate particular (it is rather the
totality of its particulars) but that it is one of its species through the mediation
of singularity; the rest of its species are excluded from it by the immediacy
of externality. Likewise the particular is not for its part immediately, and
in and for itself, the universal; the negative unity is rather what removes
the determinateness from it and thereby raises it to universality. – The
singularity thus relates to the particular negatively in so far as it is supposed
to be its predicate; it is not the predicate of the particular.
2. But the terms are at first still immediate determinacies; they have not
advanced of their own to any objective signification; the positions which
two of them have exchanged and now occupy is the form, and this is as yet
only external to them. Therefore they are still, as in the first syllogism, each
a content indifferent as such to the other – two qualities linked together,
not in and for themselves, but through the mediation of an accidental
singularity.
The syllogism of the first figure was the immediate syllogism, or again,
the syllogism in so far as its concept is an abstract form that has not yet
realized itself in all its determinations. The transition of this pure form into
another figure is on the one hand the beginning of the realization of the
concept, in that the negative moment of the mediation, and thereby one
further determinateness of the form, is posited in the originally immediate,

The syllogism

599

qualitative determinateness of the terms. – But, on the other hand, this
is at the same time an alteration of the pure form of the syllogism; the
latter no longer conforms to it fully, and the determinateness posited in its
terms is at variance with that original form determination. – In so far as
it is regarded as only a subjective syllogism that runs its course in external
reflection, we can then take it as a species of syllogistic inference that should
conform to the genus, namely the general schema S-P-U. But it does not
at the moment conform to it; its two premises are P-S or S-P and S-U; the
middle term is in both cases the one which is subsumed or is the subject
in which the two other terms thus inhere – is not therefore a middle
term that in one case would subsume or be predicate, and in the other
would be subsumed or be subject, or a middle in which one of the terms
would inhere but would itself inhere in the other. – The true meaning
of this syllogism’s lack of conformity to the general form of the syllogism
is that the latter has passed over into it, for its truth consists in being a
subjective, contingent conjoining of terms. If the conclusion in this second
figure is correct (that is, without recurring to the restriction, to which we
shall presently turn, that makes of it something indeterminate), then it is
correct because it is so on its own, not because it is the conclusion of this
syllogism. But the same is the case for the conclusion of the first figure;
it is this, the truth of that first figure, which is posited by the second. –
On the view that the second figure is only one species, we overlook the
necessary transition of the first figure into this second and stop short at the
first as the true form. Hence, if in the second figure (which from ancient
custom is referred to, without further ground, as the third) we are equally
supposed to find a correct syllogism in this subjective sense, this syllogism
would have to be commensurate with the first; consequently, since the one
premise S-U has the relation of the subsumption of the middle term under
one extreme, then it would have to be possible for the other premise S-P to
receive the opposite relation to that which it has, and for P to be subsumed
under S. But such a relation would be the sublation of the determinate
judgment S is P, and could only occur in an indeterminate judgment, a
particular judgment; consequently, the conclusion in this figure can only
be particular. But the particular judgment, as we remarked above,84 is
positive as well as negative – a conclusion, therefore, to which no great
value can be ascribed. – Since the particular and universal are also the
extremes, and are immediate determinacies indifferent to each other, their
relation itself is indifferent; each can be the major or the minor term,
84

Cf. above, 12.73.

12.102

600

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

indifferently the one or the other, and consequently either premise can also
be taken as major or minor.
3. Since the conclusion is positive as well as negative, it is a connection which for that reason is indifferent to these determinacies, hence a
universal connection. More precisely, the mediation of the first syllogism
was implicitly a contingent one; in the second syllogism, this contingency is
posited. Consequently, the mediation is self-sublating; it has the determination of singularity and immediacy; what this syllogism joins together must,
on the contrary, be in itself and immediately identical, for that mediating
middle, the immediate singularity, is an infinitely manifold and external
determining. Posited in it, therefore, is rather the self-external mediation.
The externality of singularity, however, is universality; that mediation by
means of the immediate singular points beyond itself to the mediation
which is the other than it, one which therefore occurs by means of the
universal. – In other words, what is supposed to be united by means of
the second syllogism, must be immediately conjoined; the immediacy on
which it is based does not allow any definite conclusion. The immediacy
to which this syllogism points is the opposite of its own: it is the sublated
first immediacy of being, therefore the immediacy reflected into itself or
the abstract universal existing in itself.
From the standpoint of the present consideration, the transition of
this syllogism was like the transition of being an alteration, for its base
is qualitative; it is the immediacy of singularity. But according to the
concept, singularity conjoins the particular and the universal by sublating
the determinateness of the particular – and this is what presents itself as the
contingency of this syllogistic inference. The extremes are not conjoined
by the specific connective which they have in the middle term; this term
is not, therefore, their determinate unity, and the positive unity that yet
pertains to it is abstract universality. But inasmuch as the middle term is
posited in this determination which is its truth, we have another form of
the syllogism.
c. The third figure: S-U-P

12.103

1. This third syllogism no longer has any single immediate premise; the
connection S-U has been mediated by the first syllogism; the connection
P-U by the second. It thus presupposes both these syllogisms; but conversely
it is presupposed by them, just as in general each presupposes the other
two. In this third figure, therefore, it is the determination of the syllogism
as such that is brought to completion. – This reciprocal mediation means

The syllogism

601

just this, that each syllogism, although for itself a mediation, does not
possess the totality of mediation but is affected by an immediacy whose
mediation lies outside it.
Considered in itself, the syllogism S-U-P is the truth of the formal
syllogism; it expresses the fact that its mediating middle is the abstract
universal and that the extremes are not contained in it according to their
essential determinateness but only according to their universality – that
precisely that is not conjoined in it, which was supposed to be mediated.
Posited here, therefore, is that wherein the formalism of the syllogism
consists – that its terms have an immediate content which is indifferent
towards the form, or, what amounts to the same, that they are such form
determinations as have not yet reflected themselves into determinations of
content.
2. The middle of this syllogism is indeed the unity of the extremes,
but a unity in which abstraction is made from their determinateness, the
indeterminate universal. But in so far as this universal is at the same time
distinguished from the extremes as the abstract from the determinate, it is
itself also a determinate as against them, and the whole is a syllogism whose
relation to its concept needs examining. As the universal, the middle term is
with respect to both its extremes the term that subsumes or the predicate –
not a term for once also subsumed or the subject. Now as a species of
syllogism, it ought to conform to the latter, and this can only happen
on condition that, inasmuch as the one connection S-U already possesses
the appropriate relation, the other connection P-U contains it too. This
occurs in a judgment in which the relation of subject and predicate is an
indifferent one, in a negative judgment. Thus does the syllogism become
legitimate, but the conclusion is necessarily negative.
Consequently, also indifferent is now which of the two determinations
of this proposition is taken as predicate or subject, and whether the determination is taken in the syllogism as the extreme of singularity or the
extreme of particularity, hence as the minor or major term. Since on the
usual assumption which of the premises is supposed to be the major or
the minor depends on this distinction, this too has now become a matter
of indifference. – This is the ground of the customary fourth figure of the
syllogism which was unknown to Aristotle and has to do with an entirely
void and uninteresting distinction. In it the immediate position of the
terms is the reverse of their position in the first figure; since from the point
of view of the formal treatment of judgment the subject and predicate of
the negative conclusion do not have the determinate relation of subject
and predicate, but each can take the place of the other, it is a matter of

12.104

602

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

indifference which term is taken as subject and which as predicate; and just
as indifferent is therefore which premise is taken as the major and which as
the minor. – This indifference, to which the determination of particularity
also contributes (especially if it is noted that this particularity can be taken
in a comprehensive sense), makes of this fourth figure something totally
idle.
3. The objective significance of the syllogism in which the universal is
the middle is that the mediating term, as the unity of the extremes, is
essentially a universal. But since the universality is at first only qualitative or
abstract, the determinateness of the extremes is not contained in it; their
being conjoined in the conclusion, if the conjunction is to take place, must
likewise have its ground in a mediation that lies outside this syllogism and
is, with respect to the latter, just as contingent as it is in the preceding forms
of the syllogism. But now, since the universal is determined as the middle
term, and since the determinateness of the extremes is not contained in
this middle, the latter is posited as one which is wholly indifferent and
external. – It is here, by virtue indeed of a bare abstraction, that a fourth
figure of the syllogism arose in the first place, namely the figure of the
relationless syllogism, U-U-U, which abstracts from the qualitative differentiation of the terms and therefore has their merely external unity, their
equality, for its determination.
d. The fourth figure: U-U-U, or the mathematical syllogism

12.105

1. The mathematical syllogism goes like this: if two things or two determinations are equal to a third, then they are equal to each other. – The relation
of inherence or subsumption of terms is done away with.
A “third” is in general the mediating term; but this third has absolutely
no determination as against the extremes. Each of the three terms can
therefore be the mediating term just as well as any other. Which is needed
for the job, which of the three connections are therefore to be taken as
immediate, and which as mediated, depends on external circumstances
and other conditions, namely which two of the three are immediately
given. But this determination does not concern the syllogism and is wholly
external.
2. The mathematical syllogism ranks in mathematics as an axiom, as a first
self-explanatory proposition which is neither capable nor in need of proof,
i.e of any mediation – which neither presupposes anything else nor can be
derived from anything else. – If we take a closer look at this prerogative that
the proposition claims, of being immediately self-evident, we find that it lies

The syllogism

603

in its formalism, in the fact that it abstracts from every qualitative diversity
of determinations and only admits their quantitative equality or inequality. But for this very reason it is not without presupposition or mediation;
the quantitative determination, which alone comes into consideration in
it, is only by virtue of the abstraction from qualitative differentiation and
from the concept determinations. – Lines, figures, posited as equal to each
other, are understood only according to their magnitude. A triangle is
posited as equal to a square, not however as triangle to square but only
according to magnitude, etc. Nor does the concept and its determinations
enter into this syllogism; there is in it, therefore, no conceptual comprehension at all; the understanding is also not faced here by even the formal,
abstract determinations of the concept. The self-evidence of this syllogism
rests, therefore, solely on the indigence and abstractness of its mode of
thought.
3. But the result of the syllogism of existence is not just this abstraction
from all determinateness of the concept; the negativity of the immediate
and abstract determinations that emerged from it has yet another positive
side, namely that in the abstract determinateness its other has been posited
and the determinateness has thereby become concrete.
In the first place, the syllogisms of existence all have one another for
presupposition, and the extremes conjoined in the conclusion are truly
conjoined, in and for themselves, only inasmuch as they are otherwise
united by an identity grounded elsewhere; the middle term, as constituted
in the syllogisms we have examined, ought to be the conceptual unity of
these syllogisms but is in fact only a formal determinateness that is not
posited as their concrete unity. But what is thus presupposed by each and
every of these mediations is not merely a given immediacy in general, as is
the case for the mathematical syllogism, but is itself a mediation, namely
of each of the other two syllogisms. Therefore, what is truly present here
is not a mediation based on a given immediacy, but a mediation based on
mediation. And this mediation is not quantitative, not one that abstracts
from the form of mediation, but is rather a self-referring mediation, or the
mediation of reflection. The circle of reciprocal presupposing which these
syllogisms bring to closure is the turning back of this presupposing into
itself – a presupposing that in this turning back forms a totality, and has
the other to which every single syllogism refers, not outside by virtue of
abstraction, but included within the circle.
Further, from the side of the single determinations of form it has been
shown that in this whole of formal syllogisms each single determination
has in turn occupied the place of the middle term. As immediate, this term

12.106

604

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

was determined as particularity; thereupon, through dialectical movement
it determined itself as singularity and universality. Likewise did each of
these determinations occupy the places of both of the two extremes. The
merely negative result is the dissolution of the qualitative determinations
of form into the merely quantitative, mathematical syllogism. But what
we truly have here is the positive result, namely that mediation occurs, not
through any single qualitative determinateness of form, but through the
concrete identity of the determinacies. The deficiency and formalism of the
three figures of the syllogism just considered consists precisely in this, that
one such single determinateness was supposed to constitute the middle
term in it. – Mediation has thus determined itself as the indifference of the
immediate or abstract determinations of form and the positive reflection
of one into the other. The immediate syllogism of existence has thereby
passed over into the syllogism of reflection.
Remark
In the account here given of the nature of the syllogism and its various
forms, passing reference was also made to what constitutes in the ordinary
examination and treatment of the syllogisms the main object of interest,
namely how the right conclusion may be drawn in each figure; but only
the main point came in for consideration, and no mention was made of
the cases and the intricacies that arise when the distinction of positive
and negative judgment is also brought in alongside the determination
of quantity, of particularity especially. – A few comments on how the
syllogism is ordinarily viewed and treated in logic have their place here. –
This doctrine was famously elaborated to such precision of detail that its
hair-splittings, as they came to be called, have been the object of universal
aversion and disgust. The natural understanding85 in asserting itself over
the unsubstantial forms of reflection in all areas of humanistic culture also
turned against this artificial knowledge of the forms of reason, believing
that it could dispense with the science of such forms on the ground that
it performed the individual operations of thought treated there naturally
and spontaneously, without specialized training. Indeed, with respect to
rational thinking, if its pre-condition were the laborious study of syllogistic
formulas, humankind would be in just as sorry a state as they would (as we
already remarked in the Preface)86 if they could not walk or digest without
the previous study of anatomy and physiology. But if we admit that there
might be some use to the study of these sciences for dietary purposes,
85

The reference here is to common-sense philosophy.

86

Cf. GW 11, 6; above, 21.6.

The syllogism

605

surely we must credit the study of the forms of reason with an even more
important influence on the correctness of thinking. But without going
here into this aspect of the study that concerns the education of subjective
thinking and hence, strictly speaking, pedagogics, it must be granted that
a study that has for its subject matter the modes of operation and the laws
of reason must be of the greatest interest in and of itself – an interest at
least not inferior to the knowledge of the laws and the particular shapes
of nature. If it is not reputed a small matter to have discovered some sixty
species of parrots, one hundred and thirty-seven species of veronica, and
so on, much less ought it to be reputed a small matter to have discovered
the forms of reason. Is not the figure of a syllogism something infinitely
higher than a species of parrot or veronica?
Yet, although contempt for the knowledge of the forms of reason must
be viewed as nothing short of barbarism, it must equally be granted that the
customary exposition of the syllogism and of its particular configurations
is not a rational cognition, not an exposition of them as forms of reason,
and that syllogistic wisdom has by its own unworthiness brought upon
itself the disparagement that it has experienced. Its deficiency consists in
the fact that it simply stops short at the form which the understanding
gives to the syllogism and in which the determinations of the concept are
taken as abstract formal determinations. It is all the more inconsequent
to cling to them as abstract qualities, since in the syllogism it is their
connections that constitute the essential element, and the inherence and the
subsumption already imply that the singular, since the universal inheres in
it, is itself universal, and the universal, since it subsumes the singular, is
itself singular; more to the point, the syllogism expressly posits this very
unity as the middle term, and its determination is mediation itself, that
is, the concept determinations no longer have, as they did in judgment,
their reciprocal externality for their basis, but rather their unity. – It is
thus the concept of the syllogism that gives away the imperfection of the
formal syllogism in which the middle is supposed to be held fixed, not
as the unity of the extremes, but as a formal and abstract determination,
qualitatively at variance with them. – The treatment is made even more
vacuous by the fact that such connections or judgments in which the
formal determinations become indifferent, as in negative and particular
judgments, and which therefore approximate propositions, are also still
regarded as perfect relations. – Now since the qualitative form S-P-U is
generally accepted as ultimate and absolute, the dialectical treatment of the
syllogism falls entirely by the wayside, and the rest of the syllogisms are
thereby treated, not as necessary alterations of that form, but as species. – It is

12.107

606
12.108

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

then indifferent whether the first formal syllogism is regarded as itself only
one species alongside the others or as rather genus and species at the same
time. This last is the case when the rest of the syllogisms are reduced to the
first. But even when this reduction is not explicitly carried out, the basis is
yet always the same formal relation of external subsumption expressed by
the first figure.
This formal syllogism is the contradiction that the middle term ought
to be the determinate unity of the extremes – not, however, as this unity
but as a determination qualitatively distinct from the terms whose unity
it ought to be. Because the syllogism is this contradiction, it is inherently
dialectical. Its dialectical movement displays it in the full range of the
moments of the concept, so that not only the said relation of subsumption
or particularity, but just as essentially the negative unity and the universality,
are moments in the process of closing this unity. In so far as each of these
equally is by itself only a one-sided moment of particularity, they are
likewise imperfect middle terms, but at the same time they constitute the
developed determinations of the middle term; the entire course across the
three figures displays this middle in each of these determinations, one after
the other, and the true result that emerges from it is that the middle is not
any single one of them but the totality of them all.
The deficiency of the formal syllogism does not rest, therefore, in the
form of the syllogism (which is, on the contrary, the form of rationality) but
in that the form is only an abstract one, and hence void of the concept. It
was shown that the abstract determination, on account of its abstract selfreference, can equally be regarded as content.87 But then, all that the formal
syllogism achieves is that a connection of subject and predicate follows or
does not follow from only this middle term. It does not help to prove a
proposition by means of it; on account of the abstract determinateness of
the middle term which is a quality without concept, there can just as well be
other middle terms from which the opposite would follow; even from the
same middle term opposite predicates can also be deduced in turn through
further middle terms. – Besides being of little use, the formal syllogism is
also something very simple; the many rules that have been fabricated are
already tiresome because they contrast so strongly with the simplicity of
the fact at issue, but then also because they apply to cases where the formal
worth of the syllogism is especially diminished by the externality of the
form determination, notably that of particularity (especially because for
87

Hegel is very likely referring to the classical “atoms” which, as empty self-references, acquire an
immediate, external, existence. Cf. the Remark above, 21.153ff.; GW 11, 93.

The syllogism

607

this purpose the latter must be taken in a comprehensive sense), and where
even with respect to the form only totally empty results are produced. –
But the most justified and important aspect of the disfavor into which
syllogistic theory has fallen is that, as such a long-drawn-out occupation
with a subject matter whose single content is none other than the concept,
it is itself without concept. – The many syllogistic rules remind one of the
procedure of the arithmeticians who also give a great many rules about
arithmetical operations, all of which presuppose that one has not the
concept of operation. – But numbers are a material with no concept and
the operations of arithmetic are an external combining or separating, a
mechanical procedure – indeed, calculating machines have been invented
that execute these operations perfectly well. The form determinations of
the syllogism are on the contrary concepts, and it is the most glaring of
scandals when they are treated as a material with no concept.
The extreme example of this mechanical treatment of the concept determinations of the syllogism is surely that of Leibniz.q He subjected the
syllogism to a combinatory calculus, thereby reckoning the number of
possible positions of the syllogism – that is, with respect to the distinction of positive and negative, then of universal, particular, indeterminate
and singular judgments. He found that there are 2,048 such possible combinations, of which, after the exclusion of the useless figures, 24 useful
ones remain. – Leibniz makes much of the usefulness of this combinatory analysis, not only in order to discover the forms of the syllogism but
also the combinations of other concepts. The operation by which this is
accomplished is the same as calculating how many combinations of letters an alphabet allows, how many throws are possible in a game of dice,
how many plays with an ombre card, etc. We see here the determinations of the syllogism thus placed in the same class as the points of the
dice and the ombre card; we see the rational treated as something dead
and empty of concept, the neglect of that which characterizes the concept
and its determinations most, namely that these, as spiritual essences, enter
into connections and thereby sublate their immediate determination. – This
Leibnizian application of combinatory calculus to the syllogism and to the
combination of other concepts differs from the disreputable Art of Lully89
solely because it is more methodical on the numerical side, but for the rest
it equals it in meaninglessness. – Connected with this was an idea dear to
q
88
89

Opp. Tom. II, P. I.88
Leibniz, Dissertatio de arte combinatoria, Opera (ed. Dutens), Tomus II, Pars I, 352–361.
Raymond Lully, c. 1232–1315. His calculation tables were reproduced in the Ars magna sciendi (1669)
by the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher.

12.109

608

12.110

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Leibniz, one which he conceived in his youth and, despite its immaturity
and shallowness, never abandoned even in later life.90 This was the idea of
a characteristica universalis of concepts – a standard language in which each
concept is presented as a connection of other concepts or as connecting
with others – as if in a rational combination, which is essentially dialectical,
a content would still retain the same determinations that it has when fixed
in isolation.
Ploucquet’s calculus has undoubtedly hit upon the most consequent
method for preparing the syllogistic relation to be subjected to calculus.91
It is based on abstracting in a judgment from the difference of relation,
the difference of singularity, particularity, and universality, and restricting
oneself to the abstract identity of subject and predicate whereby the two
are in mathematical equality – a connection that makes of the syllogistic
inference a totally empty and tautological construal of propositions. – In
the proposition, “the rose is red,” the predicate is taken to mean not the
universal red but only the determinate red of the rose; in the proposition, “all
Christians are human beings,” the predicate is taken to mean only those
humans who are Christian, from which proposition and the proposition,
“the Jews are not Christian,” there follows the conclusion (which did not
recommend this syllogistic calculus to Mendelssohn) that “therefore the
Jews are not humans” (namely, not those humans that the Christians
are). – Ploucquet states as a consequence of his invention: posse etiam rudes
mechanice totam logicam doceri, uti pueri arithmeticam docentur, ita quidem,
ut nulla formidine in ratiociniis suis errandi torqueri, vel fallaciis circumveniri
possint, si in calculo non errant.92 – This recommendation, that by means
of calculus the whole of logic can mechanically be made available to the
uneducated, is surely the worst that can be said of an invention that bears
on the presentation of the science of logic.
90

91

92

See Leibniz, Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement par l’auteur du système de l’harmonie préestablie, in
Die philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Vol. 5, ed. C. J. Gerhardt (Hildesheim:
Georg Olms, 1960), pp. 365f.; New Essays on Human Understanding, trans., ed. Peter Remnant and
Jonathan Bennett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), pp. 384f.
Gottfried Plouquet (1716–1790), Expositiones Philosophiæ Theoreticæ, Logik (1782), ed., trans. into
German (original Latin text included), Michael Franz, Studien und Materialen zur Geschichte der
Philosophie (Hildesheim: Olms, 2006).
“I can teach the whole logic mechanically even to the uneducated, just as children are taught
arithmetic, so that, if there is no error of calculation, it would be possible not to be tormented by
the fear of erring in reasoning or of being deceived by falsities.” According to the editors of the
critical edition, this quote is not taken directly from Plouquet. GW 12, 347 (to page 110.14–18). In
§70 of the 1782 edition (see previous note 91), Plouquet only says that “by means of this [following]
theory, the whole business of syllogistic discovery and judgment . . . can be taken care of with the
greatest facility and be reduced without fear of error to a logical calculus.”

The syllogism

609

b. the syllogism of reflection
The course of the qualitative syllogism has sublated the abstractness of
its terms; the syllogistic term has thus posited itself as a determinateness in which also the other determinateness shines reflectively. Besides
the abstract terms, there is also present in the syllogism the connection of
the terms, and in the conclusion this connection is posited as one which
is mediated and necessary; in truth, therefore, each determinateness is
posited, not singly by itself, but with reference to the others, as concrete
determinateness.
The middle term was the abstract particularity, an isolated simple determinateness, and was a middle only externally and relative to the selfsubsisting extremes. This term is now posited as the totality of the determinations; thus it is the posited unity of the extremes; but this unity
is at first that of a reflection embracing the extremes within itself –
an embracing which, as a first sublating of immediacy and a first connecting of the determinations, is not yet the absolute identity of the
concept.
The extremes are the determinations of the judgment of reflection,
singularity proper, and universality as a determination of relation, or a
reflection that embraces a manifold within itself. But, as was shown in
connection with the judgment of reflection,93 the singular subject also
contains, besides the mere singularity that belongs to form, determinateness
as universality absolutely reflected into itself, as presupposed, that is, here
still immediately assumed, genus.
From this determinateness of the extremes, which belongs to the
course of the determination of the judgment, there results the more precise content of the middle, which is what counts most in the syllogism,
for it is the middle that distinguishes the syllogism from judgment. The
middle contains (1) singularity; (2) but singularity expanded into universality, as an “all”; (3) the universality that lies at the basis, uniting
singularity and abstract universality in itself, the genus. – The syllogism
of reflection is thus the first to possess genuine determinateness of form,
for the middle is posited as the totality of determinations; the immediate syllogism is by contrast indeterminate because the middle is still only
abstract particularity in which the moments of its concept are not yet
posited. – This first syllogism of reflection may be called the syllogism of
allness.
93

Cf. above, 12.73–74.

12.111

610

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
a. The syllogism of allness

12.112

1. The syllogism of allness is the syllogism of the understanding in its
perfection, but more than that it is not yet. That the middle in it is not
abstract particularity but is developed into its moments and is therefore
concrete, is indeed an essential requirement of the concept. But at first the
form of the allness gathers the singular into universality only externally, and
conversely the singular behaves in the universality still as an immediate that
subsists on its own. The negation of the immediacy of the determinations
which was the result of the syllogism of existence is only the first negation,
not yet the negation of the negation, or absolute immanent reflection. The
singular determinations that the universality of reflection holds within still
lie, therefore, at the basis of that universality – in other words, allness is
not yet the universality of the concept, but the external universality of
reflection.
The syllogism of existence was contingent because its middle term was
one single determinateness of the concrete subject and as such admitted
of a multitude of other such middle terms, and consequently the subject
could be conjoined in conclusion with an indeterminate number of other
predicates, with opposite predicates as well. But since the middle term
now contains singularity and is thereby itself concrete, only a predicate that
concretely belongs to the subject can be attached to the latter by means of
it. – For instance, if from the middle term “green” the conclusion is made to
follow that a painting is pleasing, because green is pleasing to the eye, or if a
poem, a building, etc., is said to be beautiful because it possesses regularity,
the painting, the poem, the building, etc., may nonetheless still be ugly on
account of other determinations from which this predicate “ugly” might
be deduced. By contrast, when the middle term has the determination of
allness, it contains the green, the regularity, as a concreted term which for
that very reason is not the abstraction of a mere green, a mere regular, etc.;
only predicates commensurate with concrete totality may now be attached to
this concreted term. – In the judgment, “what is green or regular is pleasing,”
the subject is only the abstraction of green, regularity; in the proposition,
“all things green or regular are pleasing,” the subject is on the contrary all
actual concrete things that are green or regular – things, therefore, that are
intended as concreted with all the properties that they may also have besides
the green or the regularity.
2. However, this very reflective perfection of the syllogism makes of
it a mere illusion. The middle term has the determinateness of “all,” to
which there is immediately attached in the major the predicate which in the

The syllogism

611

conclusion is then conjoined with the subject. But the “all” is “all singulars”;
in it, therefore, the subject already possesses that predicate immediately –
it does not first obtain it by means of the syllogistic inference. – Or again,
the subject obtains a predicate as a consequence through the conclusion;
but the major premise already contains this conclusion in it; therefore the
major premise is not correct on its own account, or is not an immediately
presupposed judgment, but itself already presupposes the conclusion of which
it should be the ground. – In the much cited syllogism:
All humans are mortal,
Now Gaius is a human,
Therefore Gaius is mortal,

the major premise is correct only because and to the extent that the conclusion is correct; were Gaius by chance not mortal, the major premise would
not be correct. The proposition which was supposed to be the conclusion
must be correct on its own, immediately, for otherwise the major premise
would not include all singulars; before the major premise can be accepted
as correct, the antecedent question is whether the conclusion may not be a
counter-instance of it.
3. It followed from the concept of the syllogism, with regard to the
syllogism of existence, that the premises, as immediate, contradicted the
conclusion, that is to say, contradicted the mediation that the concept
of the syllogism requires; that the first syllogism thus presupposed other
syllogisms, and conversely these presupposed the first.94 In the syllogism
of reflection this result is posited in the syllogism itself: the major premise
presupposes its conclusion, for it contains the union of the singular with a
predicate that would have to be a conclusion first.
What we have here in fact can therefore be expressed by saying that
the syllogism of reflection is only an external, empty reflective semblance
of syllogistic inference; that therefore the essence of the inference rests on
subjective singularity; this singularity thus constitutes the middle term and
is to be posited as such: singularity which is singularity as such and possesses universality only externally. – Or what has been shown on closer
inspection of the content of the syllogism of reflection is that the singular stands connected to its predicate immediately, not by way of an
inference, and that the major premise, the union of a particular with a
universal, or more precisely of a formal universal with a universal in itself,
is mediated through the connection of the singularity that is present in
94

Cf. above, 12.97–98.

12.113

612

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the formal universal, of singularity as allness. But this is the syllogism of
induction.
b. The syllogism of induction
1. The syllogism of allness comes under the schema of the first figure, S-P-U;
the syllogism of induction under that of the second, U-S-P, because it again
has singularity for its middle term, not abstract singularity but singularity
as completed, that is to say, posited with its opposite determination, that of
universality. – The one extreme is some predicate or other which is common
to all these singulars; its connection with them makes up the kind of
immediate premises, of which one was supposed to be the conclusion in
the preceding syllogism. – The other extreme may be the immediate genus,
as it is in the middle term of the preceding syllogism, or in the subject
of the universal judgment, and which is exhausted in the collection of
singulars or also species of the middle term. Accordingly, the syllogism has
this configuration:
s
s
U– –P
s
s
ad
infinitum.

12.114

2. The second figure of the formal syllogism, U-S-P, does not correspond
to this schema, because the S that constitutes the middle term did not
subsume or was not a predicate. In induction this deficiency is eliminated;
here the middle term is “all singulars”; the proposition, U-S, which contains
as the subject the objective universal or the genus set apart as an extreme,
has a predicate which is of at least equal extension as the subject and is
consequently identical with it for external reflection. Lion, elephant, etc.,
constitute the genus of quadruped; the difference, that the same content
is posited once in singularity and again in universality, is thus just an
indifferent determination of form – an indifference which in the syllogism
of reflection is the posited result of the formal syllogism and is posited here
through the equality of extension.
Induction, therefore, is not the syllogism of mere perception or of contingent existence, like the second figure corresponding to it, but the syllogism
of experience – of the subjective gathering together of singulars in the genus,

The syllogism

613

and of the conjoining of the genus with a universal determinateness on
the ground that the latter is found in all singulars. It also has the objective
significance that the immediate genus has determined itself through the
totality of singularity as a universal property and possesses its existence
in a universal relation or mark. – But the objective significance of this
syllogism, as it was of the others, is at first only its inner concept, and is
not as yet posited in it.
3. On the contrary, induction is essentially still a subjective syllogism.
The middle terms are the singulars in their immediacy, the collecting of
them into a genus through the allness is an external reflection. Because of
the persisting immediacy of the singulars and because of the externality that
derives from it, the universality is only completeness, or rather, it remains
a task. – In induction, therefore, there recurs the progression into the bad
infinity; singularity ought to be posited as identical with universality, but
since the singulars are equally posited as immediate, the intended unity
remains only a perpetual ought; it is a unity of likeness; the terms which are
supposed to be identical are at the same time supposed not to be identical.
The a, b, c, d, e, constitute the genus only further on, in the infinite;
they do not yield a complete experience. The conclusion of induction thus
remains problematic.
But induction, by expressing that perception, in order to become experience, ought to be carried on to infinity, presupposes that the genus is in
and for itself conjoined with its determinateness. In this, it in fact rather
presupposes its conclusion as something immediate, just as the syllogism
of allness presupposes the conclusion for one of its premises. – An experience that rests on induction is assumed as valid even though the perception
is admittedly not complete; it may be assumed, however, that there is no
counter-instance to the experience only if the latter is true in and for itself.
Inference by induction, therefore, is based indeed on an immediacy, but
not on the immediacy on which it is supposed to be based, not on a
singularity that exists immediately, but on one that exists in and for itself,
on the universal. – The fundamental character of induction is that it is a
syllogistic inference; if singularity is taken as the essential determination of
the middle term, but universality as only the external determination, then
the middle term would fall apart into two disjoined parts, and there would
be no inference; this externality belongs rather to the extremes. Singularity
can only be a middle term if immediately identical with the universality;
such a universality is in truth objective universality, the genus. – The matter
can also be viewed in this way: universality is external but essential to the
determination of the singularity which is at the basis of the middle term of

12.115

614

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

induction; such an external is just as much immediately its opposite, the
internal. – The truth of the syllogism of induction is therefore a syllogism
that has for its middle term a singularity which is immediately in itself
universality. This is the syllogism of analogy.
c. The syllogism of analogy
1. This syllogism has the third figure of the immediate syllogism, S-U-P, for
its abstract schema. But its middle term is no longer some single quality or
other but a universality which is the immanent reflection of a concreted term
and is therefore its nature; and conversely, since it is thus the universality of
a concreted term, it is at the same time in itself this concreted term. – Here,
therefore, a singular is the middle term, but a singular taken in its universal
nature; there is moreover another singular, an extreme term, which has the
same universal nature as the other which is the middle term. For example:
The earth has inhabitants,
The moon is an earth,
Therefore the moon has inhabitants.95

12.116

2. Analogy is all the more superficial, the more the universal in which the
two extremes are united, and in accordance with which the one extreme
becomes the predicate of the other, is a mere quality or, since quality is a
matter of subjectivity, is some distinctive mark or other and the identity of
the extremes is therein taken as just a similarity. But this kind of superficiality to which a form of understanding or of reason is reduced by being
debased to the sphere of mere representation should have no place in logic. –
Also unacceptable is to present the major premise of this syllogism as though
it should run: “That which is similar to an object in one distinctive mark
is similar to it in other such marks as well.” On this formulation, the form
of the syllogism is expressed in the shape of a content while the empirical
content, the content properly so called, is together relegated to the minor
premise. So, for example, could also the whole form of the first syllogism
be expressed as its major premise: “That which is subsumed under another
thing in which a third thing inheres has that third thing inhering in it
too; but now . . . etc.” But what matters in the syllogism as such is not the
95

This example is not original with Hegel and very likely was a common trope at the time. One can
find it, for instance, in Antonio Genovesi, Elementa artis logico-criticæ, Liber V (Venice, 1749), p. 179,
and also, by the same author, Gli elementi dell’arte logico-critica, 2nd edn (Venice, 1783), p. 148.
In Genovesi’s treatise, syllogism of analogy follows immediately upon the treatment of probability,
exactly as it does in Hegel.

The syllogism

615

empirical content, and to make its own form the content of a major premise
makes just as little difference as to take any other empirical content for that
purpose. Nothing of consequence follows for the syllogism of analogy from
a content that contains nothing but the form peculiar to that syllogism,
just as nothing of consequence would have followed for the first syllogism
from having as its content the form that makes the syllogism a syllogism. –
What counts is always the form of the syllogism, whether the latter has
itself or something else for its empirical content. So the syllogism of analogy is a form peculiarly its own, and it is vacuous not to want to regard it
as such on the ground that that form could be made into the content or
matter of a major premise whereas matter is no concern in logic. – What
might tempt one to this view in regard to the syllogism of analogy, and
perhaps in regard to the syllogism of induction too, is that the middle term
in them, and also the extremes, are more determined than they are in the
merely formal syllogism, and therefore the determinations of form, since
they are no longer simple and abstract, must also take on the appearance
of a content determination. But that the form determines itself to content is
first of all a necessary advance on the part of the formal side, and therefore
an advance that touches the nature of the syllogism essentially; secondly,
such a content determination cannot, therefore, be regarded as any other
empirical content, and abstraction cannot be made from it.
When we consider the syllogism of analogy with its major premise
expressed as above, namely, “if two subject matters agree in one or more
properties, then a further property of one also belongs to the other,” it may
seem that this syllogism contains four terms, the quaternio terminorum –
a circumstance that brings with it the difficulty of how to bring analogy
into the form of a formal syllogism. – There are two singulars; for a third,
a property immediately assumed as common, and, for a fourth, the other
properties that one singular possesses immediately but the other first comes
to possess only by means of the syllogism. – This is so because, as we have
seen, in the syllogism of analogy the middle term is posited as singularity but
immediately also as the true universality of the singularity. – In induction,
the middle term is, apart from the extremes, an indeterminate number of
singulars; this syllogism, therefore, required the enumeration of an infinite
number of terms. – In the syllogism of allness the universality in the
middle term is still only the external form determination of the allness;
in the syllogism of analogy, on the contrary, it is as essential universality.
In the above example, the middle term, “the earth,” is taken as something
concrete which, in truth, is just as much a universal nature or genus as it is
a singular.

12.117

616

12.118

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

From this aspect, the quaternio terminorum would not make analogy
an imperfect syllogism. But it would make it so from another aspect; for
although the one subject has the same universal nature as the other, it is
undetermined whether the determinateness, which is inferred to pertain
also to the second subject, pertains to the first because of its nature in
general or because of its particularity; for example, whether the earth has
inhabitants as a heavenly body in general or only as this particular heavenly
body. – Analogy is still a syllogism of reflection inasmuch as singularity
and universality are united in its middle term immediately. Because of this
immediacy, the externality of the unity of reflection is still there; the singular
is the genus only in itself, implicitly; it is not posited in this negativity by
which its determinateness would be the genus’s own determinateness. For
this reason the predicate that belongs to the singular of the middle term
is not already the predicate of the other singular, even though the two
singulars both belong to the one genus.
3. S-P (“the moon is inhabited”) is the conclusion; but the one premise
(“the earth is inhabited”) is likewise S-P; in so far as S-P is supposed to
be a conclusion, it entails the requirement that that premise also be S-P.
This syllogism is thus in itself the demand to counter the immediacy that it
contains; or again, it presupposes its conclusion. One syllogism of existence
has its presupposition in the other syllogism of existence. In the syllogisms
just considered, the presupposition has been moved into them, because
they are syllogisms of reflection. Since the syllogism of analogy is therefore
the demand that it be mediated as against the immediacy with which its
mediation is burdened, what it demands is the sublation of the moment of
singularity. Thus there remains for the middle term the objective universal,
the genus purified of immediacy. – In the syllogism of analogy the genus
was a moment of the middle term only as immediate presupposition; since
the syllogism itself demands the sublation of the presupposed immediacy,
the negation of singularity and hence the universal is no longer immediate
but posited. – The syllogism of reflection contained the first negation of
immediacy; the second has now come on the scene, and with it the external universality of reflection is determined as existing in and for itself. –
Regarded from the positive side, the conclusion shows itself to be identical
with the premises, the mediation to have rejoined its presupposition, and
what we have is thus an identity of the universality of reflection by virtue
of which it becomes a higher universality.
Reviewing the course of the syllogism of reflection, we find that mediation is in general the posited or concrete unity of the form determinations of
the extremes; reflection consists in this positing of the one determination

The syllogism

617

in the other; the mediating middle is thus allness. But it is singularity that
proves to be the essential ground of mediation while universality is only as
an external determination in it, as completeness. But universality is essential
to the singular if the latter is to be the conjoining middle term; the singular
is therefore to be taken as an implicitly existing universal. But the singular
is not united with it in just this positive manner but is sublated in it and
is a negative moment; thus the universal is the genus posited as existing in
and for itself, and the singular as immediate is rather the externality of the
genus, or it is an extreme. – The syllogism of reflection, taken in general,
comes under the schema P-S-U in which the singular is still as such the
essential determination of the middle term; but since its immediacy has
been sublated, the syllogism has entered under the formal schema S-U-P,
and the syllogism of reflection has thus passed over into the syllogism of
necessity.
c. the syllogism of necessity
The mediating middle has now determined itself (1) as simple determinate
universality, like the particularity in the syllogism of existence, but (2) as
objective universality, that is to say, one that, like the allness of the syllogism
of reflection, contains the whole determinateness of the different extremes;
this is a completed but simple universality, the universal nature of the fact,
the genus.
This syllogism is full of content, because the abstract middle term of
the syllogism of existence has posited itself to be determinate difference, in
the way it is as the middle term of the syllogism of reflection, but this
difference has again reflected itself into simple identity. – This syllogism
is for this reason the syllogism of necessity, because its middle term is not
any adventitious immediate content but is the immanent reflection of the
determinateness of the extremes. These have their inner identity in the
middle term, whose content determinations are the form determinations
of the extremes. – Consequently, what differentiates the terms is a form
which is external and unessential and the terms themselves are as moments
of a necessary existence.
This syllogism is at first immediate and formal in the sense that what
holds the terms together is the essential nature, as content, and this content
is in the distinguished terms only in different form, and the extremes are
by themselves only an unessential subsistence. – The realization of this
syllogism is a matter of determining it in such a way that the extremes are
equally posited as this totality which initially the middle term is, and the

12.119

618

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

necessity of the connection, which is at first only the substantial content,
shall be a connection of the posited form.
a. The categorical syllogism

12.120

1. The categorical syllogism has the categorical judgment for one or for
both of its premises. – Associated with this syllogism, just as with that
judgment, is the more specific signification that its middle term is the
objective universality. Superficially, the categorical syllogism is also taken
for nothing more than a mere syllogism of inherence.
Taken in its full import, the categorical syllogism is the first syllogism
of necessity, one in which a subject is conjoined with a predicate through
its substance. But when elevated to the sphere of the concept, substance
is the universal, so posited to be in and for itself that it has for its form
or mode of being, not accidentality, as it has in the relation specific to
it, but the determination of the concept. Its differences are therefore the
extremes of the syllogism, specifically universality and singularity. This
universality, as contrasted with the genus that more closely defines the
middle term, is abstract or is a universal determinateness: it is the accidentality of substance summed up in a simple determinateness which
is, however, the substance’s essential difference, its specific difference. –
Singularity, for its part, is the actual, in itself the concrete unity of genus
and determinateness – though here, in the immediate syllogism, it is
immediate singularity at first, accidentality summed up in the form of
a subsistence existing for itself. – The connection of this extreme term
to the middle term constitutes a categorical judgment; but since the
other extreme term also, as just determined, expresses the specific difference of the genus or its determinate principle, this other premise is also
categorical.
2. This syllogism, as the first and therefore immediate syllogism of necessity, comes in the first instance under the schema of the formal syllogism,
S-P-U. – But since the middle term is the essential nature of the singular
and not just one or other of its determinacies or properties, and likewise the
extreme of universality is not any abstract universal, nor just any singular
quality either, but is rather the universal determinateness of the genus, its
specific difference, we no longer have the contingency of a subject being conjoined with just any quality through just any middle term. – Consequently,
since the connections of the extremes with the middle term also do not
have the external immediacy that they have in the syllogism of existence,
we do not have coming into play the demand for proof in the sense in

The syllogism

619

which it occurred in the case of that other syllogism and led to an infinite
progression.
Further, this syllogism does not presuppose its conclusion for its
premises, as in the syllogism of reflection. The terms, in keeping with
the substantial content, stand to one another in a connection of identity
that exists in and for itself; we have here one essence running through
the three terms – an essence in which the determinations of singularity,
particularity, and universality are only formal moments.
To this extent, therefore, the categorical syllogism is no longer subjective;
in that connection of identity, objectivity begins; the middle term is the
identity, full of content, of its extremes, and these are contained in it in their
self-subsistence, for their self-subsistence is the said substantial universality
which is the genus. The subjective element of the syllogism consists in the
indifferent subsistence of the extremes with respect to the concept or the
middle term.
3. But there is still a subjective element in this syllogism, for that identity
is still the substantial identity or content but is not yet identity of form at the
same time. The identity of the concept still is an inner bond and therefore,
as connection, still necessity; the universality of the middle term is solid,
positive identity, but is not equally the negativity of its extremes.
The immediacy of this syllogism, which is not yet posited as what it is in
itself, is more precisely present in this way. The truly immediate element
of the syllogism is the singular. This singular is subsumed under its genus
as middle term; but subsumed under the same genus are also an indeterminate number of many other singulars; it is therefore contingent that only
this singular is posited as subsumed under it. – But further, this contingency does not belong only to an external reflection that finds the singular
posited in the syllogism to be contingent by comparison with others; on
the contrary, it is because the singular is itself connected to the middle
term as its objectivity universality that it is posited as contingent, as a subjective actuality. From the other side, because the subject is an immediate
singular, it contains determinations that are not contained in the middle
term as the universal nature; it also has, therefore, a concrete existence
which is indifferent to the middle term, determined for itself and with a
content of its own. Therefore, conversely, this other term also has an indifferent immediacy and a concrete existence distinct from the former. –
The same relation also obtains between the middle term and the
other extreme; for this too likewise has the determination of immediacy, hence of a being which is contingent with respect to the middle
term.

12.121

620

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Accordingly, what is posited in the categorical syllogism are, on the
one hand, extremes that are so related to the middle term that they have
objective universality or self-subsistent nature in themselves, and are at the
same time immediate actualities, hence indifferent to one another. On the
other hand, they are equally contingent, or their immediacy is as sublated in
their identity. But this identity, because of the self-subsistence and totality
of the actuality, is only formal, inner identity, and the syllogism of necessity
has thereby determined itself to the hypothetical syllogism.
b. The hypothetical syllogism
1. The hypothetical judgment contains only the necessary connection without the immediacy of the connected terms. “If A is, so is B”; or, the being
of A is also just as much the being of an other, of the B; with this, it is not
as yet said either that A is, or that B is. The hypothetical syllogism adds
this immediacy of being:
If A is, so is B,
But A is,
Therefore B is.

12.122

The minor premise expresses by itself the immediate being of the A.
But it is not only this that is added to the judgment. The conclusion
contains the connection of subject and predicate, not as the abstract copula,
but as the accomplished mediating unity. The being of the A is to be
taken, therefore, not as mere immediacy but essentially as middle term of the
syllogism. This needs closer examination.
2. In the first place, the connection of the hypothetical judgment is
the necessity or the inner substantial identity associated with the external
diversity of concrete existence – an identical content lying internally as its
basis. The two sides of the judgment are both, therefore, not an immediate
being, but a being held in necessity, hence one which is at the same time
sublated or only being as appearance. The two behave, moreover, as sides
of the judgment, as universality and singularity; the one, therefore, is the
above content as totality of determinations, the other as actuality. Yet it is
a matter of indifference which side is taken as universality and which as
singularity. That is to say, inasmuch as the conditions are still the inner,
abstract element of an actuality, they are the universal, and it is by being
held together in one singularity that they step into actuality. Conversely, the
conditions are a dismembered and dispersed appearance that gains unity and
meaning, and a universally valid existence, only in actuality.

The syllogism

621

The relation that is here being assumed between the two sides of condition and conditioned may however also be taken to be one of cause and
effect, ground and consequence. This is a matter of indifference here. The
relation of condition, however, corresponds more closely to the one that
obtains in the hypothetical judgment and syllogism inasmuch as condition is essentially an indifferent concrete existence, whereas ground and
cause are inherently a transition; moreover, condition is a more universal
condition in that it comprehends both sides of the relation, since effect,
consequence, etc., are just as much the condition of cause and ground as
these are the condition of them. –
Now A is the mediating being in so far as it is, first, an immediate being,
an indifferent actuality, but, second, in so far as it is equally inherently contingent, self-sublating being. What translates the conditions into the actuality
of the new shape of which they are the conditions is the fact that they
are not being as an abstract immediacy, but being according to its concept –
becoming in the first instance, but more determinedly (since the concept
is no longer transition) singularity as self-referring negative unity. – The
conditions are a dispersed material awaiting and requiring application; this
negativity is the mediating means, the free unity of the concept. It determines itself as activity, for this middle term is the contradiction of objective
universality, or of the totality of the identical content and the indifferent
immediacy. – This middle term is no longer, therefore, merely inner but
existent necessity; the objective universality contains its self-reference as simple immediacy, as being. In the categorical syllogism this moment is at first
a determination of the extremes; but as against the objective universality
of the middle term, it determines itself as contingency, hence as something
which is only posited and also sublated, something that has returned into
the concept or into the middle terms as unity, a unity which is now in its
objectivity also being.
The conclusion, “therefore B is,” expresses the same contradiction – that
B exists immediately but at the same time through an other or as mediated.
According to its form, it is therefore the same concept that the middle term
is, distinguished from necessity only as the necessary, in the totally superficial
form of singularity as contrasted with universality. The absolute content of
A and B is the same; for ordinary representation, they are two different
names for the same basic thing, since representation fixes the appearances
of the diversified shape of existence and distinguishes the necessary from
its necessity; but to the extent that necessity were to be separated from B,
the latter would not be the necessary. What we have here, therefore, is the
identity of the mediating term and the mediated.

12.123

622

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

3. The hypothetical syllogism is the first to display the necessary connection
as a connectedness through form or negative unity, just as the categorical
syllogism displays it through positive unity, the solid content, the objective
universality. But necessity merges with the necessary; the form-activity of translating the conditioning actuality into the conditioned is in itself the unity
into which the determinacies of the oppositions previously let free into
indifferent existence are sublated, and where the difference of A and B is an
empty name. The unity is therefore a unity reflected into itself, and hence an
identical content, and is this content not only implicitly in itself but, through
this syllogism, it is also posited, for the being of A is also not its own being
but that of B and vice versa, and in general the being of the one is the being
of the other and, as determined in the conclusion, their immediate being or
indifferent determinateness is a mediated one – therefore, their externality
has been sublated, and what is posited is their unity withdrawn into itself.
The mediation of the syllogism has thereby determined itself as singularity, immediacy, and self-referring negativity, or as a differentiating identity
that retrieves itself into itself out of this differentiation – as absolute form,
and for that very reason as objective universality, self-identical existent
content. In this determination, the syllogism is the disjunctive syllogism.
c. The disjunctive syllogism

12.124

As the hypothetical syllogism comes in general under the schema of the
second figure of the formal syllogism, U-S-P, so the disjunctive comes
under the schema of the third, S-U-P. The middle term, however, is a
universality replete with form; it has determined itself as totality, as developed
objective universality. The middle term, therefore, is universality as well as
particularity and singularity. As that universality, it is in the first place the
substantial identity of the genus, but this identity is secondly one in which
particularity is included, but again, included as equal to it – therefore as a
universal sphere that contains its total particularity, the genus sorted out
in its species, an A which is B as well as C and D. But particularization is
differentiation and as such equally the either-or of B, C, D – negative unity,
the reciprocal exclusion of the determinations. – This excluding, moreover,
is now not just reciprocal, the determination not merely relative, but is also
just as much self-referring determination, the particular as singularity to the
exclusion of the others.
A is either B or C or D,
But A is B,
Therefore A is neither C nor D.

The syllogism

623

Or also:
A is either B or C or D,
But A is neither C nor D,
Therefore A is B.

A is subject not only in the two premises but also in the conclusion. It
is a universal in the first premise and in its predicate the universal sphere
particularized in the totality of its species; in the second premise, it is as a
determinate, or as a species; in the conclusion it is posited as the excluding,
singular determinateness. – Or again, in the minor it is already exclusive
singularity, and in the conclusion it is positively posited as the determinate
that it is.
Consequently, what as such appears to be meditated is the universality of
A with the singularity. But the mediating means is this A which is the universal sphere of its particularizations and is determined as a singular. What
is posited in the disjunctive syllogism is thus the truth of the hypothetical
syllogism, the unity of the mediator and the mediated, and for that reason
the disjunctive syllogism is equally no longer a syllogism at all. For the
middle term which is posited in it as the totality of the concept itself contains the two extremes in their complete determinateness. The extremes,
as distinct from this middle term, are only a positedness to which there no
longer accrues any proper determinateness of its own as against the middle
term.
If we consider the matter with narrower reference to the hypothetical
syllogism, we find that there was in the latter a substantial identity as the
inner bond of necessity, and a negative unity distinct from it, namely the
activity or the form that translated one existence into another. The disjunctive syllogism is in general in the determination of universality, its middle
term is the A as genus and as perfectly determined; also posited through this
unity is the earlier inner content and, conversely, the positedness or the
form is not the external negative unity over against an indifferent existence
but is identical with that solid content. The whole form determination of
the concept is posited in its determinate difference and at the same time in
the simple identity of the concept.
In this way the formalism of the syllogistic inference, and consequently
the subjectivity of the syllogism and of the concept in general, has sublated itself. This formal or subjective factor consisted in that the middle
mediating the extremes is the concept as an abstract determination and is
therefore distinct from the terms whose unity it is. In the completion of the
syllogism, where the objective universality is equally posited as the totality

12.125

624

12.126

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of the form determinations, the distinction of mediating and mediated has
on the contrary fallen away. That which is mediated is itself an essential
moment of what mediates it, and each moment is the totality of what is
mediated.
The figures of the syllogism exhibit each determinateness of the concept singly as the middle term, a middle term which is at the same time
the concept as an ought, the requirement that the mediating factor be the
concept’s totality. The different genera of the syllogism exhibit instead the
stages in the repletion or concretion of the middle term. In the formal syllogism the middle is posited as totality only through all the determinacies,
but each singly, discharging the function of mediation. In the syllogism of
reflection, the middle term is the unity gathering together externally the
determinations of the extremes. In the syllogism of necessity the middle
has determined itself as a unity which is just as developed and total as it is
simple, and the form of the syllogism, which consisted in the difference of
the middle term over against its extremes, has thereby sublated itself.
With this the concept in general has been realized; more precisely, it
has gained the kind of reality which is objectivity. The first reality was that
the concept, in itself negative unity, partitions itself and as judgment posits
its determinations in determinate and indifferent difference, and in the
syllogism it then sets itself over against them. Since it is still in this way the
inwardness of this now acquired externality, in the course of the syllogisms
this externality is equated with the inner unity; the different determinations
return into the latter through the mediation that unites them at first in
a third term, and as a result the externality exhibits, in itself, the concept
which, for its part, is no longer distinct from it as inner unity.
Conversely, however, that determinateness of the concept which was
considered as reality is equally a positedness. For the identity of the concept’s inwardness and externality has been exhibited as the truth of the
concept not only in this result; on the contrary, already in the judgment
the moments of the concept remain, even in their reciprocal indifference,
determinations that have significance only in their connection. The syllogism is mediation, the complete concept in its positedness. Its movement is
the sublation of this mediation in which nothing is in and for itself, but
each thing is only through the meditation of an other. The result is therefore an immediacy that has emerged through the sublation of the mediation,
a being which is equally identical with mediation and is the concept that
has restored itself out of, and in, its otherness. This being is therefore a fact
which is in and for itself – objectivity.

section ii

Objectivity

In Book One of the Objective Logic, abstract being was presented as passing
over into existence, but at the same time as retreating into essence. In Book
Two, essence shows itself as determining itself as ground, thereby stepping
into concrete existence and realizing itself as substance, but at the same
time retreating into the concept. Of the concept, we have now first shown
that it determines itself as objectivity. It should be obvious that this latter
transition is essentially the same as the proof from the concept, that is to
say, from the concept of God to his existence, that was formerly found in
Metaphysics, or the so-called ontological proof. – Equally well known is that
Descartes’s sublimest thought, that God is that whose concept includes his
being within itself,1 after having degenerated into the bad form of the formal
syllogism, namely into the form of the said proof, finally succumbed to
the Critique of Reason and to the thought that existence cannot be extracted
from the concept.2 Some elucidations concerning this proof have already
been made earlier. In Volume I, pp. 47 ff.,3 where being has vanished into
its closest opposite, non-being, and becoming has shown itself to be the
truth of both, attention was called to the confusion that arises in the case
of a determinate existence when we concentrate, not on its being, but on
its determinate content, and then imagine – if we compare this determinate
content (e.g. one hundred dollars) with another determinate content (e.g.
the context of my perception, of my financial situation) and discover that
it makes indeed a difference whether the one content is added to the other
or not – that we are dealing with the distinction of being and non-being, or
even the distinction of being and the concept. Further, in the same Volume
1

2

See René Descartes, Meditationes de prima philosophia in Oeuvres de Descartes, Vol. 7, ed. Charles
Adam and Paul Tannery (Paris: J. Vrin, 1964), pp. 66, 69; Meditations on First Philosophy in The
Philosophical Writings of Descartes, Vol. 2, trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald
Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 46, 47 (this English edition also uses the
pagination of Adam and Tannery).
3 Cf. GW 11, 46ff.; above, 21.70ff.
A599/B627.

625

12.127

626

12.128

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

on pp. 64ff. and on p. 289 of Volume II, the definition of a sum-total of
all reality which occurs in the ontological proof was elucidated.4 – But
the essential subject matter of that proof, the connectedness of concept and
existence, is the concern of the treatment of the concept just concluded and of
the entire course that the latter traverses in determining itself to objectivity.
The concept, as absolutely self-identical negativity, is self-determining; it
was noted that the concept, in resolving itself into judgment in singularity,
already posits itself as something real, an existent; this still abstract reality
completes itself in objectivity.
Now it might appear that the transition from the concept into objectivity
is quite another thing than the transition from the concept of God to
God’s existence. But, on the one hand, it must be borne in mind that the
determinate content, God, makes no difference in a logical progression, and
that the ontological proof is only one application of this logical progression
to that particular content. On the other hand, it is essential to be reminded
of the remark made above5 that the subject obtains determinateness and
content only in its predicate; that prior to the predicate, whatever that
content might otherwise be for feeling, intuition, and representation, so
far as conceptual cognition is concerned it is only a name; but in the
predicate, with determinateness, there begins at the same time the process
of realization in general. – The predicates, however, must be grasped as
themselves still confined within the concept, hence as something subjective
with which no move to existence has yet been made; even for this reason,
in judgment the realization of the concept is certainly not completed yet.
But there is the further reason that the mere determination of a subject
matter through predicates, without this determination being at the same
time the realization and objectification of the concept, remains something
so subjective that it is not even a true cognition and determination of the
concept of the subject matter – “subjective” in the sense of abstract reflection
and non-conceptual representation. – God as living God, and better still as
absolute spirit, is only recognized in what he does. Humankind were directed
early to recognize God in his works; only from these can the determinations
proceed that can be called his properties, and in which his being is also
contained. It is thus the conceptual comprehension of God’s activity, that
is to say, of God himself, that recognizes the concept of God in his being and
his being in his concept. Being by itself, or even existence, are such a poor and
restricted determination, that the difficulty of finding them in the concept
may well be due to not having considered what being or existence themselves
4

Cf. GW 11, 64–65, and above, 11.289, 21.74ff.

5

Cf. above, 12.54.

Objectivity

627

are. – Being as entirely abstract, immediate self-reference, is nothing but the
abstract moment of the concept; it is its moment of abstract universality
that also provides what is required of being, namely that it be outside the
concept, for inasmuch as universality is a moment of the concept, it is
also its difference or the abstract judgment wherein the concept opposes
itself to itself. The concept, even as formal, already immediately contains
being in a truer and richer form, in that, as self-referring negativity, it is
singularity.
But of course the difficulty of finding being in the concept in general, and
equally so in the concept of God, becomes insuperable if we expect being to
be something that we find in the context of external experience or in the form
of sense-perception, like the one hundred dollars in the context of my finances,
as something graspable only by hand, not by spirit, essentially visible to
the external and not the internal eye; in other words, if the name of being,
reality, truth, is given to that which things possess as sensuous, temporal,
and perishable. – The consequence of a philosophizing that in regard to
being fails to rise above the senses is that, in regard to the concept, it also
fails to let go of merely abstract thought; such thought stands opposed to
being.
The customary practice of regarding the concept as something just as
one-sided as abstract thought will already stand in the way of accepting what
has just been suggested, namely, that we regard the transition of the concept
of God to his being as an application of the logical course of objectification
of the concept presented above. Yet if it is granted, as it commonly is,
that the logical element, as the formal element, constitutes the form for
the cognition of every determinate content, then that application at least
would have to be conceded, unless even at the opposition of concept and
objectivity in general one stops short at the untrue concept and an equally
untrue reality as an ultimate. – But in the exposition of the pure concept it
was further indicated that the latter is the absolute divine concept itself.6
In truth, therefore, what takes place is not a relation of application but
the immediate display in the logical course of God’s self-determination as
being. But on this point it is to be remarked that inasmuch as the concept
is to be presented as the concept of God, it ought be apprehended as it is
when already taken up in the idea. The said pure concept passes through
the finite forms of the judgment and the syllogism precisely because it is
not yet posited in and for itself as one with objectivity, but is conceived
rather only in the process of becoming that objectivity. The latter, too, is
6

Cf. above, 12.24.

12.129

628

12.130

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

not yet the divine concrete existence, not yet the reality reflectively shining
in the idea. And yet objectivity is just that much richer and higher than the
being or existence of the ontological proof, as the pure concept is richer and
higher than that metaphysical vacuum of the sum-total of all reality. – But
I reserve for another occasion the task of elucidating in greater detail the
manifold misunderstanding brought upon the ontological proof of God’s
existence, and also on the rest of the other so-called proofs, by logical
formalism. We shall also elucidate Kant’s critique of such proofs in order
to establish their true meaning and thus restore the thoughts on which
they are based to their worth and dignity.7
We have previously called attention to the several forms of immediacy
that have already come on the scene, but in different determinations.8 In
the sphere of being, immediacy is being itself and existence; in the sphere of
essence, it is concrete existence and then actuality and substantiality; in the
sphere of the concept, besides being immediacy as abstract universality, it is
now objectivity. – These expressions, when the exactitude of philosophical
conceptual distinctions is not at stake, may be used as synonymous; but
the determinations are derived from the necessity of the concept. Being
is as such the first immediacy, and existence is the same immediacy with
a first determinateness. Concrete existence, along with the thing, is the
immediacy that proceeds from ground, from the self-sublating mediation
of the simple reflection of essence. But actuality and substantiality are the
immediacy that proceeds from the sublated difference of the still unessential
concrete existence as appearance and its essentiality. Finally, objectivity is the
immediacy as which the concept has determined itself by the sublation of its
abstraction and mediation. – It is the privilege of philosophy to choose such
expressions from the language of ordinary life, which is made for the world
of imaginary representations, as seem to approximate the determinations
of the concept. There is no question of demonstrating for a word chosen
from ordinary life that in ordinary life too the same concept is associated
with that for which philosophy uses it, for ordinary life has no concepts,
only representations of the imagination, and to recognize the concept in
what is otherwise mere representation is philosophy itself. It must therefore
suffice if representation, for those of its expressions that philosophy uses
for its definitions, has only some rough approximation of their distinctive
difference; it may also be the case that in these expressions one recognizes
pictorial adumbrations which, as approximations, are close indeed to the
corresponding concepts. – One will be hard pressed, perhaps, to concede
7

Cf. Encyclopedia (1830), §51.

8

Cf. above, 11.324.

Objectivity

629

that something can be without actually existing; but at least nobody will
mistake, for instance, being as the copula of the judgment for the expression
“to exist actually,” and nobody will say that “this article exists dear, suitable,
etc.,” “gold exists a metal or metallic,” instead of “this article is dear, suitable,
etc.,” “gold is a metal.”r And surely it is common to distinguish being from
appearing, appearance from actuality, as also being as contrasted to actuality,
and still more all these expressions from objectivity. – But even if such
expressions were used synonymously, philosophy would in any case have
the freedom to take advantage of such empty superfluity of language for
the purpose of its distinctions.
Mention was made in connection with the apodictic judgment – where
judgment attains completion and the subject thus loses its determinateness
as against the predicate – of the double meaning of subjectivity originating
from it, namely the subjectivity of the concept and equally so of the externality and contingency confronting the concept.9 A similar objectivity also
appears for the double meaning, of standing opposed to the self-subsistent
concept yet of also existing in and for itself.10 In the former sense, the object
stands opposed to the “I = I” which in subjective idealism is declared to be
the absolute truth. It is then the manifold world in its immediate existence
with which the “I” or the concept is engaged in endless struggle, in order,
by the negation of the inherently nullity of this other, to give to its first
certainty of being a self the actual truth of its equality with itself. – In a
broader sense, it means a subject matter in general for whatever interest or
activity of the subject.
In the opposite sense, however, the objective signifies that which exists
in and for itself, without restriction and opposition. Rational principles,
perfect works of art, etc., are said to be objective to the extent that they are
free and above every accidentality. Although rational principles, whether
theoretical or ethical, only belong to the sphere of the subjective, to consciousness, this aspect of the latter of existing in and for itself is nonetheless
called objective; the cognition of truth is made to rest on the cognition of
the object as free of any addition by subjective reflection, and right conduct
on the adherence to objective laws, such as are not of subjective origin and
r

9
10

In a French report in which the officer in command states that before making for land he would
wait for the wind, which in the region of the island usually arose towards morning, we find the
expression: “le vent ayant été longtemps sans exister”; here the distinction simply arises from the
other common idiom as, for example, in “il a été longtemps sans m’écrire.”
Cf. above, 12.87.
The allusion is to Fichte. Cf. Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre (1794/95). English trans.,
pp. 95–96. GA I.2257–258, see especially point (5) in § 1.

12.131

630

12.132

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

are immune to arbitrariness and to treatment that would compromise their
necessity.
At the present standpoint of our treatise, objectivity has the meaning
first of all of the being in and for itself of the concept that has sublated
the mediation posited in its self-determination, raising it to immediate
self-reference. This immediacy is therefore itself immediately and entirely
pervaded by the concept, just as its totality is immediately identical with
its being. But further, since the concept equally has to restore the free
being-for-itself of its subjectivity, it enters with respect to objectivity into
a relation of purpose in which the immediacy of the objectivity becomes
a negative for it, something to be determined through its activity. This
immediacy thus acquires the other significance, namely that in and for
itself, in so far as it stands opposed to the concept, it is a nullity.
First, then, objectivity is in its immediacy. Its moments, on account of
the totality of all moments, stand in self-subsistent indifference as objects
each outside the other, and as so related they possess the subjective unity of
the concept only as inner or as outer. This is mechanism.
But, second, inasmuch as in mechanism that unity reveals itself to be
the immanent law of the objects, their relation becomes one of nonindifference, each specifically different according to law; a connection in
which the objects’ determinate self-subsistence is sublated. This is chemism.
Third, this essential unity of the objects is thereby posited as distinct
from their self-subsistence. It is the subjective concept, but posited as
referring in and for itself to the objectivity, as purpose. This is teleology.
Since purpose is the concept posited as within it referring to objectivity,
and through itself sublating its defect of being subjective, the at first external
purposiveness becomes, through the realization of the purpose, internal. It
becomes idea.

c h a p ter 1

Mechanism

12.133

Since objectivity is the totality of the concept that has returned into its
unity, an immediate is thereby posited which is in and for itself that
totality, and is also posited as such, but in it the negativity of the concept
has as yet not detached itself from the immediacy of the totality; in other
words, the objectivity is not yet posited as judgment. In so far as it has
the concept immanent in it, the difference of the concept is present in it;
but on account of the objective totality, the differentiated moments are
complete and self-subsistent objects that, consequently, even in connection
relate to one another as each standing on its own, each maintaining itself
in every combination as external. – This is what constitutes the character
of mechanism, namely, that whatever the connection that obtains between
the things combined, the connection remains one that is alien to them,
that does not affect their nature, and even when a reflective semblance
of unity is associated with it, the connection remains nothing more than
composition, mixture, aggregate, etc. Spiritual mechanism, like its material
counterpart, also consists in the things connected in the spirit remaining
external to one another and to spirit. A mechanical mode of representation,
a mechanical memory, a habit, a mechanical mode of acting, mean that the
pervasive presence that is proper to spirit is lacking in what spirit grasps
or does. Although its theoretical or practical mechanism cannot take place
without its spontaneous activity, without an impulse and consciousness,
the freedom of individuality is still lacking in it, and since this freedom
does not appear in it, the mechanical act appears as a merely external
one.
a. the mechanical object
The object is, as we have seen, the syllogism whose mediation has attained
equilibrium and has therefore come to be immediate identity. It is therefore
in and for itself a universal – universality, not in the sense of a commonality
631

12.134

632

12.135

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of properties, but a universality that pervades particularity and in it is
immediate singularity.
1. To begin with, therefore, the object does not differentiate itself into
matter and form, matter being its presumed self-subsistent universal aspect
and form the particular and singular instead; according to its concept,
any such abstract differentiation of singularity and universality has no place
in the object; if regarded as matter, the object must then be taken to be in
itself informed matter. One can just as well take it as a thing with properties,
as a whole consisting of parts, as substance with accidents, or as determined
by the other relations of reflection. But these are all past relations that in the
concept have come to an end. The object, therefore, has neither properties
nor accidents, for these are separable from the thing or the substance,
whereas in the object particularity is absolutely reflected into the totality.
In the parts of a whole, there is indeed present that self-subsistence that
pertains to the differences of the object, but these differences are at once
themselves essentially objects, totalities which, unlike parts, are not such
as against the whole.
At first, therefore, the object is indeterminate, for it has no determinate opposition within, because it is the mediation that has collapsed into
immediate identity. Inasmuch as the concept is essentially determined, the
object has in it the determinateness of a manifold which, although complete, is otherwise indeterminate, that is, relationless, one that constitutes
a totality also not further determined at first; sides or parts that may be
distinguished within it belong to an external reflection. This totally indeterminate difference thus amounts just to this, that there are several objects,
each of which only contains its determinateness reflected into its universality and does not reflectively shine outwardly. – Because this indeterminate
determinateness is essential to the object, the object is in itself a plurality,
and must therefore be regarded as a composite, an aggregate. – Yet it does not
consist of atoms, for atoms are not objects because they are not totalities.
Leibniz’s monad would be more of an object. It is a total representation
of the world which, shut up within its intensive subjectivity, in essence at
least is supposed to be a one. Yet the monad, determined as an exclusive
one, is a principle only assumed by reflection. It is an object, however, both
because the ground of its manifold representations – of the developed, that
is, the posited determinations of its merely implicit totality – lies outside
it, and because it is equally a matter of indifference for the monad that it
constitutes an object together with other objects; in fact, therefore, it is not
exclusive, not self-determined for itself.
2. Since the object is now a totality of determinateness, yet, because of
its indeterminateness and immediacy, it is not the totality’s negative unity,

Mechanism

633

it is indifferent towards the determinations as singulars, determined in and
for themselves, just as these are themselves indifferent to each other. These,
therefore, are not comprehensible from it nor from one another; the object’s
totality is the form of the overall reflectedness of its manifoldness into a
singularity in general which is not in itself determinate. The determinacies,
therefore, which are in it do indeed pertain to it; but the form that constitutes their difference and combines them into a unity is an external one,
indifferent to them; whether it be a mixture, or again an order, a certain
arrangement of parts and sides, these are combinations that are indifferent
to what they connect.
Consequently, like an existence in general, the object has the determinateness of its totality outside it, in other objects, and these again outside
them, and so forth to infinity. The immanent turning back of this progression in infinitum must indeed be likewise assumed, and it must be
represented as a totality, as a world, but one which is nothing but a universality brought to closure through a singularity that remains indeterminate,
a universe.
Since the object is thus determinate yet indifferent to its determinateness,
through itself it points for its determinateness outside and beyond itself,
constantly to objects for which it is however likewise a matter of indifference
that they do the determining. Consequently, nowhere is a principle of selfdetermination to be found. Determinism, which is the standpoint that
cognition adopts when it assumes as truth the object as we first have it
here, assigns for each determination of the object that of another object;
but this other object is likewise indifferent both to its determinateness and
its determining. – For this reason determinism is itself so indeterminate as
to be bound to an infinite progression; it can halt at will anywhere, and be
satisfied there, because the object to which it has progressed, being a formal
totality, is shut up within itself and indifferent to its being determined by
another. For this reason to explain the determination of an object, and
to this end to extend the representation of it beyond it, is only an empty
word, for there is no self-determination in the other object to which the
explanation has been extended.
3. Now since the determinateness of an object lies in an other, there is
no determinate diversity separating the two; the determinateness is merely
doubled, once in the one object and then again in the other; it is something
utterly identical and the explanation or comprehension is, therefore, a
tautology. This tautology is an external back and forth movement; since
the determinateness fails to obtain from objects that are indifferent to it
any proper differentiation and is therefore only identical, there is only
one determinateness at hand, and that it should be doubled only expresses

12.136

634

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

precisely the externality and vacuity of a difference. But the objects are
at the same time self-subsistent in regard to one another; in that identity,
therefore, they remain utterly external. – Thus there arises the contradiction
of a perfect indifference of objects to one another and of an identity of
determinateness of such objects, or of the objects’ perfect externality in the
identity of their determinateness. This contradiction is consequently the
negative unity of a plurality of objects reciprocally repelling each other in
the unity. This is the mechanical process.
b. the mechanical process

12.137

If objects are regarded only as self-enclosed totalities, they cannot act on
one another. Regarded in this way, they are the same as the monads which,
precisely for that reason, were thought of as having no influence on each
other. But the concept of a monad is for just this reason a deficient reflection. For, in the first place, the monad is a determinate representation of its
only implicit totality; as a certain degree of development and positedness of its
representation of the world, it is determinate; but since it is a self-enclosed
totality, it is also indifferent to this determinateness and is, therefore, not its
own determinateness but a determinateness posited through another object.
In second place, it is an immediate in general, for it is supposed to be just a
mirroring;11 its self-reference is therefore abstract universality and hence an
existence open to others. – It does not suffice, in order to gain the freedom of
substance, to represent the latter as a totality that, complete in itself, would
have nothing to receive from the outside. On the contrary, a self-reference
that grasps nothing conceptually but is only a mirroring11 is precisely a
passivity towards the other. – Likewise the determinateness, whether we now
take it as the determinateness of a being that exists or that mirrors,11 as a
degree of the monad’s own internally generated development, is something
external; the degree that the development achieves has its limit in an other.
To project the reciprocal influence of substances into a predetermined harmony means nothing more than to make it a presupposition, in effect to
remove it from the scope of the concept. – The need to avoid the interaction of substances was founded on the moment of absolute self-subsistence
and originariness which was made a fundamental assumption. But since
the positedness, the degree of development, does not correspond to this
assumed in-itselfness, it has for this reason its ground in an other.
11

vorstellendes.

Mechanism

635

In connection with the relation of substantiality, we showed that it passes
over into the relation of causality.12 But now the existent no longer has the
determination of a substance but that of an object; the causal relation has
come to an end in the concept; the originariness of one substance vis-à-vis
another has shown itself to be a reflective shine, the substance’s action a
transition into the opposite substance. This relation has therefore no objectivity. Hence in so far as one object is posited in the form of subjective
unity, as efficient cause, this no longer counts as an originary determination
but as something mediated; the active object has this determination only
by means of another object. – Mechanism, since it belongs to the sphere of
the concept, has that posited within it which proved to be the truth of the
relation of causality, namely, that the cause which is supposed to be something existing in and for itself is in fact effect just as well, positedness. In
mechanism, therefore, the originary causality of the object is immediately a
non-originariness; the object is indifferent to this determination attributed
to it; that it is a cause is therefore something accidental to it. – To this
extent, it can be said that the causality of substances is only the product
of representation. But precisely this causality as product of representation
is what mechanism is; for mechanism is this, that causality, as identical
determinateness of a diversity of substances and hence as the foundering
into this identity of their self-subsistence, is mere positedness; the objects
are indifferent to this unity and maintain themselves in the face of it. But
this also, their indifferent self-subsistence, is a mere positedness, and for this
reason they are capable of mixing and aggregating, and as an aggregate of
becoming one object. Through this indifference both to their transition and
to their self-subsistence, the substances are objects.
a. The formal mechanical process
The mechanical process is the positing of that which is contained in
the concept of mechanism, hence the positing in the first place of a
contradiction.
1. It follows from the just indicated concept that the interaction of objects
is the positing of their identical connection. This positing consists simply in
giving to the determinateness which is generated the form of universality –
and this is communication, which occurs without transition into the
opposite. – Spiritual communication, which however takes place in an
element of universality in the form of universality, is an idealized connection for itself, one in which a determinateness continues undisturbed from
12

Cf. above, 11.396.

12.138

636

12.139

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

one person to another, generalizing itself unaltered – like a scent freely
spreading in the unresisting atmosphere. But also in the communication
between material objects does their determinateness widen, so to speak,
in an equally idealizing manner; personality is an infinitely more intensive
hardness than objects possess. The formal totality of an object in general – a
totality indifferent to determinateness and hence not a self-determination –
renders the object indistinct from another object and thus makes interaction at first an unimpeded continuing of the determinateness of the one
into the other.
Now in the region of the spirit there is an infinitely manifold content
capable of communication, for by being taken up into intelligence the
content receives this form of universality in which it becomes communicable. But that which is a universal not only by virtue of form, but in and
for itself, is the objective as such, both in the region of the spirit and of
the body, and as against it the singularity of external objects, as of persons
also, is an unessential factor unable to offer any resistance to it. Laws,
morals, rational conceptions in general, are in the region of the spirit communicable entities of this kind; they pervade individuals unconsciously
imposing themselves on them. In the region of the body, such entities
are motion, heat, magnetism, electricity, and the like, all of which, even
when one wants to imagine them as stuffs or materials, must be termed as
imponderable agents, for they lack that aspect of materiality that grounds
its singularization.
2. Now although in the interaction of objects their identical universality
is posited first, it is equally necessary to posit the other moment of the
concept, that of particularity; the objects thus also demonstrate their selfsubsistence; they hold themselves outside each other, and in that universality
they produce singularity. This production is reaction in general. To begin
with, this reaction is not to be conceived of as a mere sublation of action
and of the communicated determinateness; what is communicated is as
universal positively present in the particular objects and particularizes itself
only in their diversity. To this extent, therefore, what is communicated
remains what it is, only distributed among the objects or determined by
their particularity. – The cause gets lost in its other, in the effect; the activity
of the causal substance in its action; but the active object only becomes a
universal; its action is from the start not a loss of its determinateness but
a particularization by virtue of which the object, which was at first that
whole determinateness present in it as single, now becomes a species of it, and
the determinateness is thereby posited for the first time as a universal. The
two – the raising in communication of the singular determinateness into

Mechanism

637

universality; and the particularization of it in distribution, the reduction
of what was only a one to a species – are one and the same.
Now reaction is equal to action. – First, this is manifested by the other
object taking over the entire universal; and so it is now active against the
first. Thus its reaction is the same as the action, a reciprocal repulsion of
the impulse. Second, what is communicated is the objective; it therefore
remains the substantial determination of the object on the presupposition of their diversity; the universal thus at the same time specifies itself
in them, and consequently each object does not simply give back the
whole action but possesses its specific share. But, third, reaction is a wholly
negative action in so far as each object, because of the elasticity of its selfsubsistence, repels within it the positedness of an other and retains its selfreference. The specific particularity of the determinateness communicated
in the objects, what was before called species, returns to singularity, and
the object asserts its externality as against the communicated universality.
The action thereby passes over into rest. It proves to be only a superficial, transient alteration within the self-enclosed indifferent totality of the
object.
3. This return constitutes the product of the mechanical process. Immediately, the object is presupposed as a singular; then as a particular as against
another particular; but finally as indifferent towards its particularity, as
universal. The product is the totality of the concept previously presupposed
but now posited. It is the conclusion in which the communicated universal
is united with singularity through the particularity of the object. In rest,
however, the mediation is posited at the same time as sublated; or again,
what is posited is that the product is indifferent to this determining of it
and that the received determinateness is external in it.
Accordingly the product is the same as the object that first enters the
process. But at the same time that object is first determined through this
movement; the mechanical object is, as such, an object only as product,
for what it is, is only by virtue of the mediation of an other in it. It is as
product that it thus is what it was supposed to be in and for itself, a
composite, a mixture, a certain arrangement of parts, in general such that its
determinateness is not self-determination but something posited.
Yet the result of the mechanical process is not already there ahead of that
process itself; its end is not in its beginning, as in the case of purpose. The
product is in the object a determinateness which is externally posited in
it. Hence this product is indeed according to its concept the same as what
the object already is at the beginning. But at the beginning the external
determinateness is not yet there as posited. The result is therefore something

12.140

638

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

quite other than the first existence of the object, and is something utterly
accidental for it.
b. The real mechanical process

12.141

The mechanical process passes over into rest. That is to say, the determinateness that the object obtains through that process is only an external
one. Just as external to it is this rest, for although the latter is a determinateness opposed to the activity of the object, the two are each indifferent
to the object. Rest can also be viewed, therefore, as brought about by an
external cause, just as much as it was indifferent to the object to be active.
Now further, since the determinateness is a posited one, and the concept
of the object has gone back to itself through the process of mediation, the
object contains the determinateness as one that is reflected into itself.
Hence in the mechanical process the objects and the process itself now
have a more closely determined relation. They are not merely diverse, but
are determinedly differentiated as against one another. Consequently the
result of the formal process, on the one hand a determinationless rest, is,
on the other hand, through the immanently reflected determinateness, the
distribution among several objects mechanically relating to one another of
the opposition which is in the object as such. The object that on the one
hand lacks all determination, showing no elasticity and no self-subsistence
in its relations, has, on the other hand, a self-subsistence impenetrable to
other objects. Objects now have also as against one another this more
determined opposition of the self-subsistent singularity and the non-selfsubsistent universality. – The precise difference between any two may be
had merely quantitatively as a difference in a body of diverse magnitudes of
mass, or of intensity, or in various other ways. But in general the difference
cannot be fixed at just this abstract level; also as objects, both are positively
self-subsistent.
Now the first moment of this real process is, as before, communication.
The weaker can be seized and invaded by the stronger only in so far as
it accepts the stronger and constitutes one sphere with it. Just as in the
material realm the weaker is secured against the disproportionately strong
(as a sheet hanging freely in the air is not penetrated by a musket ball; a
weak organic receptivity is not as vulnerable to strong stimuli as it is to
weak), so is the wholly feeble spirit safer facing the strong than one who
stands closer to the strong. Imagine, if you will, someone dull-witted and
ignoble; lofty intelligence will make no impression on such a one, nor
will nobility. The one single effective defense against reason is not to get

Mechanism

639

involved with it at all. – To the extent that an object that has no standing
of its own is unable to make contact with one which is self-subsistent, and
no communication can take place between them, the latter is also unable
to offer resistance, that is, cannot specify the communicated universal for
itself. – If they were not in the same sphere, their mutual connection would
be an infinite judgment and no process would be possible between them.
Resistance is the precise moment of the overpowering of the one object
by the other, for it is the initial moment in the distribution of the communicated universal and in the positing of the self-referring negativity, of
the singularity to be established. Resistance is overpowered when its determinateness is not commensurate to the communicated universal which the
object has accepted and which is supposed to be singularized in the latter.
The object’s relative lack of self-subsistence is manifested in the fact that its
singularity lacks the capacity for what is communicated to it and is therefore
shattered by it, for it is unable to constitute itself as subject in this universal,
cannot make the latter its predicate. – Violence against an object is for the
latter something alien only according to this second aspect. Power becomes
violence when power, an objective universality, is identical with the nature
of the object, yet its determinateness or negativity is not the object’s own
immanent negative reflection according to which the object is a singular.
In so far as the negativity of the object is not reflected back into itself in
the power, and the latter is not the object’s own self-reference, the negativity, as against the power, is only abstract negativity whose manifestation is
extinction.
Power, as objective universality and as violence against the object is what is
called fate – a concept that falls within mechanism in so far as fate is called
blind, that is, its objective universality is not recognized by the subject in
its own specific sphere. – To add a few more remarks on the subject, the
fate of a living thing is in general the genus, for the genus manifests itself
through the fleetingness of the living individuals that do not possess it as
genus in their actual singularity. Merely animate natures, as mere objects,
like other things at lower levels on the scale of being, do not have fate.
What befalls them is a contingency; however, in their concept as objects
they are self-external; hence the alien power of fate is simply and solely
their own immediate nature, externality and contingency itself. Only selfconsciousness has fate in a strict sense, because it is free, and therefore in the
singularity of its “I” it absolutely exists in and for itself and can oppose itself
to its objective universality and alienate itself from it. By this separation,
however, it excites against itself the mechanical relation of a fate. Hence,
for the latter to have violent power over it, it must have given itself some

12.142

640

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determinateness or other over against the essential universality; it must
have committed a deed. Self-consciousness has thereby made itself into a
particular, and this existence, like abstract universality, is at the same time
the side open to the communication of its alienated essence; it is from this
side that it is drawn into the process. A people without deeds is without
blame; it is wrapped up in objective, ethical universality, is dissolved into
it, is without the individuality that moves the unmoved, that gives itself
a determinateness on the outside and an abstract universality separated
from the objective universality; yet in this individuality the subject is also
divested of its essence, becomes an object and enters into the relation of
externality towards its nature, into that of mechanism.
c. The product of the mechanical process

12.143

The product of formal mechanism is the object in general, an indifferent
totality in which determinateness is as posited. The object has hereby entered
the process as a determinate thing, and, in the extinction of this process,
the result is, on the one hand, rest, the original formalism of the object, the
negativity of its determinateness-for-itself. But, on the other hand, it is the
sublation of the determinateness, the positive reflection of it into itself, the
determinateness that has withdrawn into itself, or the posited totality of the
concept, the true singularity of the object. The object, determined at first in
its indeterminate universality, then as particular, is now determined as an
objective singular, so that in it that reflective semblance of singularity, which
is only a self-subsistence opposing itself to the substantial universality, is
sublated.
This resulting immanent reflection, the objective oneness of the objects,
is now a oneness which is an individual self-subsistence – the center.
Secondly, the reflection of negativity is the universality which is not a
fate standing over against determinateness, but a rational fate, immanently
determined – a universality that particularizes itself from within, the difference that remains at rest and fixed in the unstable particularity of the objects
and their process; it is the law. This result is the truth, and consequently
also the foundation, of the mechanical process.
c. absolute mechanism
a. The center
The empty manifoldness of the object is now gathered first into objective singularity, into the simple self-determining middle point. Secondly,

Mechanism

641

in so far as the object retains as an immediate totality its indifference
to determinateness, the latter too is present in it as unessential or as an
outside-one-another of many objects. As against this immediate totality,
the prior or the essential determinateness constitutes the real middle term
between the many interacting objects; it unites them in and for themselves and is their objective universality. Universality exhibited itself first in
the relation of communication, as present only through positing; as objective universality, however, it is the pervading immanent essence of the
objects.
In the material world it is the central body which is the genus or rather
the individualized universality of the single objects and their mechanical
process. The unessential single bodies relate to one another by impact
and pressure; this kind of relation does not hold between the central body
and the objects of which it is the essence; for their externality no longer
constitutes their fundamental determination. Hence their identity with the
central body is rather rest, namely the being at their center; this unity is their
concept existing in and for itself. It nevertheless remains only an ought, since
the objects’ externality, still posited at the same time, does not conform
to that unity. The striving which the objects consequently have towards
the center is their absolute universality, one which is not posited through
communication; it constitutes the true rest, itself concrete and not posited from
the outside, into which the process of instability must find its way back. – It
is for this reason an empty abstraction to assume in mechanics that a body
set in motion would go on moving in a straight line to infinity if it did not
lose movement because of external resistance. Friction, or whatever other
form resistance takes, is only a phenomenon of centrality; it is the latter
that in principle brings the body back to itself, since that against which
the body rubs and incurs friction has its power of resistance only because
it is united with the center. – In things spiritual the center, and the union
with it, assume higher forms; but the unity of the concept and the reality
of that unity, which is here in a first instance mechanical centrality, must
there too constitute the fundamental determination.
The central body has therefore ceased to be a mere object, for in the latter
the determinateness is something unessential, whereas now the central body
no longer has only being-in-itself, in-itselfness, but also has the being-for-itself
of the objective totality. For this reason it can be regarded as an individual.
Its determinateness is essentially different from a mere order or arrangement
and external combination of diverse parts; as a determinateness that exists
in and for itself it is an immanent form, a self-determining principle to
which the objects inhere and in virtue of which they are bound together
in a true One.

12.144

642

12.145

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

But this central individual is at first only a middle term that as yet has no
true extremes; as the negative unity of the total concept it dirempts itself
rather into such extremes. Or again: the previously non-self-subsistent,
self-external objects become likewise determined as individuals by the
retreat of the concept; the self-identity of the central body, still a striving,
is burdened by an externality to which, in being taken up into the body’s
objective singularity, the latter is communicated. The objects, through this
centrality of their own, are positioned outside the original center and are
themselves centers for the non-self-subsistent objects. These second centers
and the non-self-subsistent objects are brought into unity by the absolute
middle term.
But the relative individual centers themselves also constitute the middle
term of a second syllogism. This middle term is on the one hand subsumed
under a higher extreme, the objective universality and power of the absolute
center; on the other hand, it subsumes under it the non-self-subsistent
objects whose superficiality and formal singularization it supports. – These
non-self-subsistent objects are in turn the middle term of a third syllogism,
the formal syllogism, for since the central individuality obtains through
them the externality by virtue of which, in referring to itself, is also strives
towards an absolute middle point, those non-self-subsistent objects are the
link between absolute and relative central individuality. The formal objects
have for their essence the identical gravity of their immediate central body
in which they inhere as in their subject and the extreme of singularity;
through the externality which they constitute, this immediate central body
is subsumed under the absolute central body; they therefore are the formal
middle term of particularity. – But the absolute individual is the objectively
universal middle term that brings into unity and holds firm the inwardness
of the relative individual and its externality. – Similarly, the government, the
individual citizens, and the needs or the external life of these, are also three
terms, of which each is the middle term of the other two. The government is
the absolute center in which the extreme of the singulars is united with their
external existence; the singulars are likewise the middle term that incites
that universal individual into external concrete existence and transposes
their ethical essence into the extreme of actuality. The third syllogism is
the formal syllogism, the syllogism of reflective shine in which the singular
citizens are tied by their needs and external existence to this universal
absolute individuality; this is a syllogism that, as merely subjective, passes
over into the others and has its truth in them.
This totality, whose moments are themselves the completed relations of
the concept, the syllogisms in which each of the three different objects runs

Mechanism

643

through the determination of the middle term and the extreme, constitutes free mechanism. In it the different objects have objective universality
for their fundamental determination, the pervasive gravity that persists
self-identical in the particularization. The connections of pressure, impact,
attraction, and the like, as also of aggregations or mixtures, belong to the
relation of externality which is at the basis of the third of the three syllogisms. Order, which is the merely external determinateness of the objects,
has passed over into immanent and objective determination. This is the
law.
b. The law
In law, the more specific difference of the idealized reality of objectivity
versus the external reality comes into view. The object, as the immediate
totality of the concept, does not yet possess an externality differentiated
from the concept, and the latter is not posited for itself. Now that through
the mediation of the process the object has withdrawn into itself, there
has arisen the opposition of simple centrality as against an externality now
determined as externality, that is, one posited as not existing in and for itself.
That moment of identity or idealization of individuality is, on account
of the reference to externality, an ought; it is the unity of the concept,
determined in-and-for-itself and self-determining, to which that external
reality does not correspond, and therefore does not go past the mere striving
towards it. But individuality is, in and for itself, the concrete principle of
negative unity, and as such is itself totality; it is a unity that dirempts itself
into the specific differences of the concept while abiding within its self-equal
universality; it is thus the central point expanded inside its pure ideality by
difference. – This reality that corresponds to the concept is the idealized
reality, distinct from the reality that is only a striving; it is difference, earlier
a plurality of objects but now in its essential nature, and taken up into pure
universality. This real ideality is the soul of the hitherto developed objective
totality, the identity of the system which is now determined in and for itself.
The objective being-in-and-for-itself thus manifests itself more precisely
in its totality as the negative unity of the center, a unity that divides into
subjective individuality and external objectivity, maintains the former in the
latter and determines it in an idealized difference. This self-determining
unity that absolutely reduces external objectivity to ideality is a principle
of self-movement; the determinateness of this animating principle, which
is the difference of the concept itself, is the law. – Dead mechanism
was the mechanical process of objects above considered that immediately

12.146

644

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

appeared as self-subsisting, but precisely for that reason are in truth nonself-subsistent and have their center outside them; this process that passes
over into rest exhibits either contingency and indeterminate difference or
formal uniformity. This uniformity is indeed a rule, but not law. Only
free mechanism has a law, the determination proper to pure individuality
or to the concept existing for itself. As difference, the law is in itself the
inexhaustible source of a self-igniting fire and, since in the ideality of its
difference it refers only to itself, it is free necessity.
c. Transition of mechanism

12.147

This soul is however still immersed in its body. The now determined but
inner concept of objective totality is free necessity in the sense that the
law has not yet stepped in opposite its object; it is concrete centrality as
a universality immediately diffused in its objectivity. Such an ideality does
not have, therefore, the objects themselves for its determinate difference;
these are self-subsistent individuals of the totality, or also, if we look back
at the formal stage, non-individual, external objects. The law is indeed
immanent in them and it does constitute their nature and power; but
its difference is shut up in its ideality and the objects are not themselves
differentiated in the idealized non-indifference of the law. But the object
possesses its essential self-subsistence solely in the idealized centrality and its
laws; it has no power, therefore, to put up resistance to the judgment of the
concept and to maintain itself in abstract, indeterminate self-subsistence
and remoteness. Because of the idealized difference which is immanent in
it, its existence is a determinateness posited by the concept. Its lack of selfsubsistence is thus no longer just a striving towards a middle point, with
respect to which, precisely because its connection with it is only that of a
striving, it still has the appearance of a self-subsistent external object; it is
rather a striving towards the object determinedly opposed to it; and likewise
the center has itself for that reason fallen apart and its negativity has passed
over into objectified opposition. Centrality, therefore, is now the reciprocally
negative and tense connection of these objectivities. Thus free mechanism
determines itself to chemism.

ch a p ter 2

Chemism

In objectivity as a whole chemism constitutes the moment of judgment, of
the difference that has become objective, and of process. Since it already
begins with determinateness and positedness, and the chemical object is
at the same time objective totality, the course it follows next is simple and
perfectly determined by its presupposition.
a. the chemical object
The chemical object is distinguished from the mechanical in that the latter
is a totality indifferent to determinateness, whereas in the chemical object
the determinateness, and hence the reference to other, and the mode and
manner of this reference, belong to its nature. – This determinateness is
at the same time essentially a particularization, that is, it is taken up into
universality; thus it is a principle – a determinateness which is universal, not
only the determinateness of the one singular object but also of the other.
In the chemical object there is now, therefore, a distinction in its concept,
between the inner totality of the two determinacies and the determinateness
that constitutes the nature of the singular object in its externality and
concrete existence. Since in this way the object is implicitly the whole concept,
it has within it the necessity and the impulse to sublate its opposed, onesided subsistence, and to bring itself in existence to the real whole which it
is according to its concept.
Regarding the expression “chemism” for the said relation of the nonindifference of objectivity, it may be further remarked that the expression
is not to be understood here as though the relation were only to be found
in that form of elemental nature that strictly goes by that name. Already
the meteorological relation must be regarded as a process whose parts have
more the nature of physical than chemical elements.13 In animate things,
13

This is a strange sentence. One would expect Hegel to say the opposite, namely that the meteorological relation already is more chemical than physical.

645

12.148

646
12.149

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the sex relation falls under this schema, and the schema also constitutes the
formal basis for the spiritual relations of love, friendship, and the like.
On closer examination, the chemical object is at first a self-subsistent
totality in general, one reflected into itself and therefore distinct from
its reflectedness outwards – an indifferent basis, the individual not yet
determined as non-indifferent; the person, too, is in the first instance a basis
of this kind, one that refers only to itself. But the immanent determinateness
that constitutes the object’s non-indifference is, first, reflected into itself in
such a manner that this retraction of the reference outwards is only a formal
abstract universality; the outwards reference is thus a determination of the
object’s immediacy and concrete existence. From this side the object does
not return, within it, to individual totality: the negative unity has its two
moments of opposition in two particular objects. Accordingly, a chemical
object is not comprehensible from itself, and the being of one object is the
being of another. – But, second, the determinateness is absolutely reflected
into itself and is the concrete moment of the individual concept of the
whole which is the universal essence, the real genus of the particular objects.
The chemical object, which is thus the contradiction of its immediate
positedness and its immanent individual concept, is a striving to sublate the
immediate determinateness of its existence and to give concrete existence
to the objective totality of the concept. Hence it does still remain a nonself-subsistent object, but in such a way that it is by nature in tension with
this lack of self-subsistence and initiates the process as a self-determining.
b. the process

12.150

1. It begins with the presupposition that the objects in tension, as much as
they are tensed against themselves, just as much are they by that very fact
at first tensed against each other – a relation which is called their affinity.
Each stands through its concept in contradiction to its concrete existence’s
own one-sidedness and each consequently strives to sublate it, and in this
there is immediately posited the striving to sublate the one-sidedness of
the other and, through this reciprocal balancing and combining, to posit a
reality conformable to the concept that contains both moments.
Since each is posited within it as self-contradictory and self-sublating,
they are held apart from each other and from their reciprocal complementation only by external violent force. The middle term whereby these extremes
are now concluded into a unity is, first, the implicitly existent nature of both,
the whole concept containing both within. But, second, since in concrete
existence the two stand over against each other, their absolute unity is also a

Chemism

647

still formal element that concretely exists distinct from them – the element
of communication wherein they enter into external community with each
other. Since the real difference belongs to the extremes, this middle term
is only the abstract neutrality, the real possibility of those extremes – the
theoretical element, as it were, of the concrete existence of the chemical
objects, of their process and its result. In the realm of bodies, water fulfills
the function of this medium; in that of spirit, inasmuch as there is in it an
analog of such a relation, the sign in general, and language more specifically,
can be regarded as fulfilling it.
The relation of the objects, as mere communication in this element, is
on the one hand a tranquil coming-together, but on the other it is equally
a negative relating, for in communication the concrete concept which is
their nature is posited in reality, and the real differences of the object are
thereby reduced to its unity. Their prior self-subsistent determinateness
is thus sublated in the union that conforms to the concept, which is one
and the same in both; their opposition and tension are thereby blunted,
with the result that in this reciprocal complementation the striving attains
its tranquil neutrality.
The process is in this way dissolved; since the contradiction between
concept and reality has been resolved, the extremes of the syllogism have
consequently lost their opposition and have ceased to be extremes as against
each other and the middle term. The product is something neutral, that
is, something in which the ingredients, which can no longer be called
objects, are no longer in tension and therefore no longer have the properties
that accrued to them in tension, though in the product the capacity for
their prior self-subsistence and tension is retained. For the negative unity
of the neutral product proceeds from a presupposed non-indifference; the
determinateness of the chemical object is identical with its objectivity; it
is original. Through the process just considered, this non-indifference is
only immediately sublated; the determinateness, therefore, is not as yet
absolutely reflected into itself, and consequently the product of the process
is only a formal unity.
2. In this product the tension of opposition, and the negative unity
which is the activity of the process, are now indeed dissolved. But since
this unity is essential to the concept and has also itself come into concrete
existence, it is still present but has stepped outside the neutral object. The
process does not spontaneously re-start itself, for it had non-indifference
only as its presupposition – it did not posit it. – This self-subsistent negativity
outside the object, the concrete existence of the abstract singularity whose
being-for-itself has its reality in the non-indifferent object, is in itself now in

648
12.151

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

tension with its abstraction, an inherently restless activity outwardly bent
on consuming. It connects immediately with the object whose tranquil
neutrality is the real possibility of an opposition to this neutrality; the same
object is now the middle term of the prior formal neutrality, now concrete
in itself and determined.
The more precise immediate connection of the extreme of negative unity
with the object is in that the latter is determined by it and is thereby
disrupted. This disruption may at first be regarded as the restoration of
the opposition of the objects in tension with which chemism began. But
this determination does not constitute the other extreme of the syllogism
but belongs to the immediate connection of the differentiating principle
with the middle in which this principle gives itself its immediate reality;
it is the determinateness which the middle term, besides at the same time
being the universal nature of the subject matter, possesses in the disjunctive
syllogism, whereby that object is both objective universality and determinate particularity. The other extreme of the syllogism stands opposed to the
external self-subsistent extreme of singularity; it is, therefore, the equally selfsubsisting extreme of universality; hence the disruption that the real neutrality of the middle term undergoes in it is that it breaks up into moments
that are not non-indifferent but, on the contrary, neutral.14 Accordingly
these moments are, on the one side, the abstract and indifferent15 base,
and, on the other, this base’s activating principle which, separated from it,
equally attains the form of indifferent objectivity.
This disjunctive syllogism is the totality of chemism in which the same
objective whole is exhibited as self-standing negative unity; then, in the
middle term, as real unity; and finally as the chemical reality resolved
into its abstract moments. In these moments the determinateness has
not reached its immanent reflection in an other as in the neutral product, but has in itself returned into its abstraction, an originally determined
element.
3. These elemental objects are therefore liberated from chemical tension;
in them, the original basis of that presupposition with which chemism began
has been posited through the real process. Now further, their inner determinateness is as such essentially the contradiction of their simple indifferent
subsistence and themselves as determinateness, and is the outward impulse
that disrupts itself and posits tension in its determined object and in an
other, in order that the object may have something to which it can relate as
non-indifferent, with which it can neutralize itself and give to its simple
14

indifferente.

15

gleichgültige.

Chemism

649

determinateness an existent reality. Consequently, on the one hand
chemism has gone back to its beginning in which objects in a state of
reciprocal tension seek one another and then combine in a neutral product
by means of a formal and external middle term; and, on the other hand,
by thus going back to its concept, chemism sublates itself and has gone over
into a higher sphere.

12.152

c. transition of chemism
Even ordinary chemistry shows examples of chemical alterations in which
a body, for example, imparts a higher oxidation to one part of its mass and
thereby reduces another part to a lower degree of the same, at which degree
alone it can enter into a neutral combination with another differing body
brought into contact with it, a combination to which it would not have
been receptive at that other first immediate degree. What happens here
is that the object does not connect with another in accordance with an
immediate, one-sided determinateness, but, in accordance with the inner
totality of an original relation, posits the presupposition which it needs for a
real connection and thereby gives itself a middle term by virtue of which it
unites its concept with its reality in conclusion; it is a singularity determined
in and for itself, the concrete concept as the principle of the disjunction
into extremes whose re-union is the activity of that same negative principle
that thereby returns to its first determination, but returns to it objectified.
Chemism is itself the first negation of the indifferent objectivity and
of the externality of determinateness; it is still burdened, therefore, by the
immediate self-subsistence of the object and with externality. Consequently
it is not yet for itself that totality of self-determination that proceeds from it
and in which it is rather sublated. – The three syllogisms that have resulted
constitute its totality. The first has formal neutrality for its middle term and
for extremes the objects in tension. The second has for its middle term the
product of the first, real neutrality; and for extremes the disrupting activity
and its product, the indifferent element. But the third is the self-realizing
concept that posits for itself the presupposition by virtue of which the
process of its realization is conditioned – a syllogism that has the universal
for its essence. Yet, on account of the immediacy and externality by which
the chemical objectivity is still determined, these three syllogisms fall apart.
The first process whose product is the neutrality of the tensed objects is
extinguished in this product and is re-activated only by a differentiation
that comes to it from outside; conditioned by an immediate presupposition,
the process is exhausted in it. – The excretion out of the neutral product

12.153

650

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of the non-indifferent extremes, as also their decomposition into their
abstract elements, must likewise proceed from conditions and stimulations
of activity brought in from the outside. But the two essential moments of
the process, neutralization on the one hand and dissolution and reduction
on the other, since they too are bound together in one and the same process
and the union blunting the tension of the extremes is also a separation into
these, constitute on account of the still underlying externality two diverse
sides; the extremes that are separated in that same process are other than the
objects or matters uniting in it; in so far as the former proceed from it again
as non-indifferent, they must turn outwards; their renewed neutralization
is a process other than the one that took place in the first.
But these various processes, which have demonstrated themselves to be
necessary, are equally so many stages by which externality and conditionality
are sublated, and from which the concept emerges as determined in and
for itself, a totality unconditioned by externality. In the first process, what
is sublated is the externality of the mutually non-indifferent extremes that
constitute the whole reality, or the distinction between the implicitly determinate concept and its existing determinateness. Sublated in the second
process is the externality of the real unity, union as merely neutral. Or
more precisely, the formal activity sublates itself in bases that are equally
formal, neutral16 determinacies whose inner concept is now the absolute
activity that has withdrawn into itself and now realizes itself internally, that
is, posits the determinate difference within itself and through this mediation constitutes itself as real unity; this is a mediation which is thus the
concept’s own mediation, its self-determination and, considering that in it
the concept reflects itself back into itself, an immanent presupposing. The
third syllogism, which on the one hand is the restoration of the preceding
processes, sublates on the other hand the last remaining moment of indifferent bases: it sublates the whole abstract external immediacy that becomes
in this way the concept’s own moment of self-mediation. The concept that
has thus sublated as external all the moments of its objective existence, and
has posited them in its simple unity, is thereby completely liberated from
the objective externality to which it refers only as an unessential reality.
This objective free concept is purpose.
16

indifferente.

c h a p ter 3

Teleology

Where there is the perception of a purposiveness, an intelligence is assumed
as its author; required for purpose is thus the concept’s own free concrete
existence. Teleology is above all contrasted with mechanism, in which the
determinateness posited in the object, being external, is one that gives
no sign of self-determination. The opposition between causæ efficientes and
causæ finales, between merely efficient and final causes, refers to this distinction, just as, at a more concrete level, the enquiry whether the absolute
essence of the world is to be conceived as blind mechanism or as an intelligence that determines itself in accordance with purposes also comes down
to it. The antinomy of fatalism, along with determinism, and freedom is
equally concerned with the opposition of mechanism and teleology; for
the free is the concept in its concrete existence.
Earlier metaphysics has dealt with these concepts as it dealt with others.
It presupposed a certain picture of the world and strived to show that
one or the other concept of causality was adequate to it, and the opposite
defective because not explainable from the presupposed picture, all the while
not examining the concept of mechanical cause and that of purpose to see
which possesses truth in and for itself. If this is established independently, it
may turn out that the objective world exhibits mechanical and final causes;
its actual existence is not the norm of what is true, but what is true is rather
the criterion for deciding which of these concrete existences is its true one.
Just as the subjective understanding exhibits also errors in it, so the objective
world exhibits also aspects and stages of truth that by themselves are still
one-sided, incomplete, and only relations of appearances. If mechanism
and purposiveness stand opposed to each other, then by that very fact they
cannot be taken as indifferent concepts, as if each were by itself a correct
concept and had as much validity as the other, the only question being
where the one or the other may apply. This equal validity of the two rests
only on the fact that they are, that is to say, that we have them both. But
since they do stand opposed, the necessary first question is, which of the
651

12.154

652
12.155

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

two concepts is the true one; and the higher and truly telling question is,
whether there is a third which is their truth, or whether one of them is the
truth of the other. – But purposive connection has proved to be the truth of
mechanism. – Regarding chemism, what came under it can be taken together
with mechanism, for purpose is the concept in free concrete existence, and
the concept’s state of unfreedom, its being sunk into externality, stands
opposed to it in any form. Both, mechanism as well as chemism, are
therefore included under natural necessity: mechanism, because in it the
concept does not exist in the object concretely, for as mechanical the latter
lacks self-determination; chemism, either because the concept has in it a
one-sided concrete existence in a state of tension, or because, emerging
as the unity that creates in the neutral object a tension of extremes, it is
external to itself in so far as it sublates this divide.
The closer the teleological principle is associated with the concept of an
extra-mundane intelligence, and the more it has therefore enjoyed the favor
of piety, all the more it has seemed to depart from the true investigation
of nature, which aims at a cognition of the properties of nature not as
extraneous, but as immanent determinacies, and accepts only such cognition
as a valid conceptual comprehension. Since purpose is the concept itself
in its concrete existence, it may seem strange that a cognition of objects
based on their concept rather appears as an unjustified trespass into a
heterogeneous element, whereas mechanism, for which the determinateness
of an object is posited in it externally and by an other, is accepted as a more
immanent view of things than teleology. Of course mechanism, at least the
ordinary unfree mechanism, and chemism as well, must be regarded as an
immanent principle in so far as the externally determining object is itself
again just another such object, externally determined and indifferent to its
being determined, or, in the case of chemism, in so far as the other object
must likewise be one that is chemically determined; in general, in so far
as an essential moment of the totality always lies in something external.
These principles remain confined, therefore, within the same natural form
of finitude; but although they do not wish to transcend the finite and,
as regards appearances, lead only to finite causes that themselves demand
further causes, they nonetheless equally expand themselves, partly into a
formal totality in the concept of force, cause, or of such determinations of
reflection that are supposed to signify originariness, and partly, through the
medium of abstract universality, also into a sum total of forces, a whole of
reciprocal causes. Mechanism thus reveals itself to be a striving for totality
by the very fact that it seeks to comprehend nature by itself as a whole that

Teleology

653

has no need of an other for its concept – a totality that is not found in
purpose and the extra-mundane intelligence associated with it.
Now purposiveness presents itself from the first as something of a generally higher nature, as an intelligence that externally determines the manifoldness of objects through a unity that exists in and for itself, so that the
indifferent determinacies of the objects become essential by virtue of this
connection. In mechanism they become so through the mere form of necessity that leaves their content indifferent, for they are supposed to remain
external and only the understanding as such is expected to find satisfaction
by recognizing its principle of union, the abstract identity. In teleology,
on the contrary, the content becomes important, for teleology presupposes
a concept, something determined in and for itself and consequently selfdetermining, and has therefore extracted from the connection of differences
and their reciprocal determinateness, from the form, a unity that is reflected
into itself, something that is determined in and for itself and is consequently
a content. But if this content is otherwise finite and insignificant, then it
contradicts what it is supposed to be, for according to its form purpose is
a totality infinite within itself – especially when the activity operating in
accordance with it is assumed to be an absolute will and intelligence. For
this reason has teleology drawn the reproach of triviality so much upon
itself, for the purposes that it has espoused are, as the case may be, more
important or more trivial [than the content], and it was inevitable that
the connection of purposiveness in objects would so often appear just a
frivolity, since it appears external and therefore contingent. Mechanism,
on the contrary, leaves to the determinacies of the objects, as regards their
content, their status as accidents indifferent to the object, and these determinacies are not supposed to have, whether for the objects or the subjective
understanding, any value higher than that. This principle, combined with
external necessity, yields therefore a consciousness of infinite freedom that
contrasts with teleology, which sets up as something absolute bits of its
content that are trivial and even contemptible, where the more universal
thought can only find itself infinitely constricted, even to the point of
feeling disgust.
The formal disadvantage from which this teleology immediately suffers
is that it only goes as far as external purposiveness. The content of concept,
since the latter is thereby posited as something formal, is for teleology also
externally given to it in the manifoldness of the objective world – in those
very determinacies that are also the content of mechanism, but are there as
something external and accidental. Because of this commonality of content,

12.156

654
12.157

12.158

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

only the form of purposiveness constitutes by itself the essential element of
the teleological. In this respect, without as yet considering the distinction
between external and internal purposiveness, the connection of purpose in
general has proven itself to be the truth of mechanism. – Teleology possesses
in general the higher principle, the concept in its concrete existence, which
is in and for itself the infinite and absolute – a principle of freedom which,
utterly certain of its self-determination, is absolutely withdrawn from the
external determining of mechanism.
One of Kant’s greatest services to philosophy was in drawing the distinction between relative or external purposiveness and internal purposiveness;
in the latter he opened up the concept of life, the idea, and with that he
positively raised philosophy above the determinations of reflection and the
relative world of metaphysics, something that the Critique of Reason does
only imperfectly, ambiguously, and only negatively. – We have remarked
that the opposition of teleology and mechanism is first of all the general
opposition of freedom and necessity.17 Kant treated the opposition in this
form, among the antinomies of reason, namely, as the third conflict of the
transcendental ideas.18 – I cite his exposition, to which reference was made
earlier,19 very briefly because its essential point is so simple that it does
not need extensive explanation – and moreover, the peculiarities of Kant’s
antinomies have been elucidated in greater detail elsewhere.
The thesis of the antinomy now in question runs thus: Causality according to the laws of nature is not the only one from which the appearance of
the world can exhaustively be derived. For their explanation, it is necessary
to assume yet another causality through freedom.
The antithesis: There is no freedom, but everything in the world happens
solely according to laws of nature.
As in the other antinomies, the proof starts off apagogically by assuming
the opposite of each thesis; secondly, in order to show the contradiction of
this assumption, its opposite – which is then the proposition to be proved –
is assumed in turn and presupposed as valid. This whole roundabout proof
could therefore be spared, for the proof consists in nothing but the assertoric
assertion of the two opposite propositions.
Thus to prove the thesis we should first assume that there is no other
causality than that according to the laws of nature, that is, according to
the necessity of mechanism in general, chemism being included. This
proposition contradicts itself, because the law of nature consists just in
this, that nothing happens without a cause sufficiently determined a priori, a
17

Cf. above, 12.154.

18

A472/B472ff.

19

Cf. GW 11, 114–120; above, 21.179–189.

Teleology

655

cause that would have to contain an absolute spontaneity within it, that is,
the assumption opposed to the thesis is contradictory, for the reason that
it contradicts the thesis.
In support of the proof of the antithesis we should assume that there is a
freedom as a particular kind of causality for absolutely initiating a situation,
and together with it also a series of consequences following upon it. But
now, since such a beginning presupposes a situation that has no causal link
with the one preceding it, it contradicts the law of causality that alone
makes the unity of experience and experience in general possible – that is,
the assumption of the freedom that is opposed to the antithesis cannot be
made, for the reason that it contradicts the antithesis.
We find in essence the same antinomy in the Critique of the Teleological
Judgement as the opposition between the proposition that every generation
of material things happens according to merely mechanical laws, and the
proposition that some cases of generation of material things are not possible
according to such laws.20 – Kant’s resolution of this antinomy is the same
as the general resolution of the rest, namely that reason cannot prove
either the one or the other proposition because we cannot have a priori
any determining principle of the possibility of things according to merely
empirical laws of nature; further, that therefore the two propositions must
be regarded not as objective propositions but as subjective maxims; that
I ought to reflect on the events of nature every time according to the
principle of the mechanism of nature alone, but that this does not prevent,
when occasion permits, following up certain natural forms in accordance
with another maxim, namely in accordance with the principal of final
causes – as if now these two maxims, which moreover are supposed to be
necessary only for human reason, did not stand in the same opposition as
the two propositions in antinomy. – Missing in all this, as we remarked
above,21 is the one thing that alone is of philosophical interest, namely
the investigation of which of the two principles has truth in and for
itself. On this standpoint, it makes no difference whether the principles
should be regarded as objective, which means here, as externally existing
determinations of nature, or as mere maxims of a subjective cognition; what
is subjective here is rather the contingent cognition that applies one or the
other maxim as occasion demands, indeed, according to whether it deems
them fitting for given objects, but for the rest does not ask about the truth
of these determinations themselves, whether they both are determinations
of the objects or of cognition.
20

Critique of Judgement, §70.

21

Cf. above, 12.154.

12.159

656

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

However unsatisfactory is for this reason Kant’s discussion of the teleological principle with respect to its essential viewpoint, still worthy of note
is the place that Kant assigns to it. Since he ascribes it to a reflective faculty of
judgment, he makes it into a mediating link between the universal of reason
and the singular of intuition;22 further, he distinguishes this reflective judgment from the determining judgment, the latter one that merely subsumes
the particular under the universal.23 Such a universal that only subsumes
is an abstraction that becomes concrete only in an other, in the particular.
Purpose, on the contrary, is the concrete universal containing within itself
the moment of particularity and of externality; it is therefore active and
the impulse to repel itself from itself. The concept, as purpose, is of course
an objective judgment in which one determination, the subject, namely the
concrete concept, is self-determined, while the other is not only a predicate
but external objectivity. But for that reason the connection of purpose is
not a reflective judgment that considers external objects only according to
a unity, as though an intelligence had given them to us for the convenience
of our faculty of cognition; on the contrary, it is the truth that exists in
and for itself and judges objectively, determining the external objectivity
absolutely. The connection of purpose is therefore more than judgment; it
is the syllogism of the self-subsistent free concept that through objectivity
unites itself with itself in conclusion.
Purpose has resulted as the third to mechanism and chemism; it is their
truth. Inasmuch as it still stands inside the sphere of objectivity or of the
immediacy of the total concept, it is still affected by externality as such and
has an objective world over against it to which it refers. From this side,
mechanical causality, to which chemism is also in general to be added,
still makes its appearance in this purposive connection which is the external
one, but as subordinated to it and as sublated in and for itself. As regards
the more precise relation, the mechanical object is, as immediate totality,
indifferent to its being determined and consequently, conversely, to its
being a determinant. This external determinateness has now progressed to
self-determination and accordingly the concept that in the object was only
inner or, which amounts to the same, only outer, is now posited; purpose
is, in the first instance, precisely this concept which is external to the
mechanical object. And so for chemism also, purpose is the self-determining
which brings the external determinateness conditioning it back to the unity
of the concept. – We have here the nature of the subordination of the two
preceding forms of the objective process. The other, which in those forms
22

Critique of Judgement, §61, AK 5.360.

23

Critique of Judgement, AK 5.179.

Teleology

657

lies in the infinite progress, is the concept posited at first as external to them,
and this is purpose; not only is the concept their substance but externality
is for them also an essential moment constituting their determinateness.
Thus mechanical or chemical technique, because of its character of being
externally determined, naturally offers itself to the connection of purpose,
which we must now examine more closely.

12.160

a. the subjective purpose
In the centrality of the objective sphere, which is an indifference to determinateness, the subjective concept has first rediscovered and posited the
negative point of unity, and in chemism it has first rediscovered and posited
the objectivity of the determinations of the concept by which it is first posited
as concrete objective concept. Its determinateness or its simple difference now
has the determinateness of externality within it, and its simple unity is therefore the unity that repels itself from itself and in this repelling maintains
itself. Purpose, therefore, is the subjective concept as an essential striving
and impulse to posit itself externally. In this, it is exempt from transition.
It is neither a force expressing itself, nor a substance or a cause manifesting
itself in its accidents or effects. To the extent that force has not expressed
itself, it is only an abstract inner; or again, it first has existence in an externalization to which it has to be solicited. The same applies to cause and to
substance. Since they have actuality only in the accidents and in the effects,
their activity is a transition against which they do not maintain themselves
in freedom. Purpose can of course also be defined as a force or a cause, but
these expressions cover only an incomplete side of its signification; if they
are to be said of purpose according to its truth, this can be done only in a
way that sublates their concept – as a cause that solicits itself to expression,
or a cause that is a cause of itself or whose effect is immediately the cause.
When purposiveness is attributed to an intelligence, as was said above,24
this is done with specific reference to a certain content. But, as such,
purpose is to be taken as the rational in its concrete existence. It manifests
rationality by being the concrete concept that holds the objective difference
in its absolute unity. Within, therefore, it is essentially syllogism. It is the
self-equal universal; more precisely, inasmuch as it contains self-repelling
negativity, it is universal though at first still indeterminate activity. But since
this activity is negative self-reference, it determines itself immediately and
gives itself the moment of particularity, and this particularity, as likewise
24

Cf. above, 12.154, 155.

12.161

658

12.162

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the totality of the form reflected into itself, is content as against the posited
differences of the form. The same negativity, through its self-reference, is
just as immediately the reflection of the form into itself and singularity.
From the one side, this reflection is the inner universality of the subject;
from the other side, however, it is outwards reflection; and to this extent
purpose is still something subjective, its activity still directed to an external
objectivity.
For purpose is the concept that has come to itself in objectivity; the
determinateness that it has given itself there is that of objective indifference
and externality of determinateness; its self-repelling negativity is therefore
one whose moments, being only determinations of the concept itself, also
have the form of objective indifference to one another. – Already in the
formal judgment are subject and predicate determined as self-subsistent over
against each other; but their self-subsistence is still only abstract universality.
It has now attained the determination of objectivity, but, as a moment of
the concept, this complete difference is enclosed within the simple unity
of the concept. Now in so far as purpose is this total reflection of objectivity
into itself and is such immediately, in the first place, the self-determination
or the particularity as simple reflection into itself is distinguished from the
concrete form, and is a determinate content. Accordingly, purpose is finite,
even though according to form it is equally infinite subjectivity. Secondly,
since its determinateness has the form of objective indifference, it has the
shape of a presupposition, and from this side its finitude consists in its
having before it an objective, mechanical and chemical world to which
its activity is directed as to something already there; its self-determining
activity is in its identity thus immediately external to itself, reflection into
itself just as much as reflection outwards. To this extent purpose still has
a truly extra-mundane concrete existence – to the extent, namely, that this
objectivity stands opposed to it, just as the latter, as a mechanical and
chemical whole still not determined and not pervaded by purpose, stands
on its side opposed to it.
Consequently, the movement of purpose can now be expressed as being
directed at sublating its presupposition, that is, the immediacy of the object,
and at positing it as determined by the concept. This negative relating to
the object is equally a negative attitude towards itself, a sublating of the
subjectivity of purpose. Positively, this is the realization of purpose, namely
the unification of the objective being with it, so that this being, which as a
moment of purpose is immediately the determinateness identical with it,
shall be as external determinateness, and conversely the objective, as presupposition, shall be posited rather as determined by the concept. – Purpose

659

Teleology

is in it the impulse to its realization; the determinateness of the moments of
the concept is externality; the simplicity of these moments within the unity
of the concept is however incommensurable with what this unity is, and the
concept therefore repels itself from itself. This repulsion is in general the
resolution25 of the self-reference of the negative unity by virtue of which
the latter is exclusive26 singularity; but by this excluding27 the unity resolves
itself, that is to say, it discloses itself,28 for it is self-determination, the positing of itself. On the one hand, in determining itself, subjectivity makes
itself into particularity, gives itself a content which, enclosed within the
unity of the concept, is still an inner content; but this positing, the simple
reflection into itself, is, as we have seen,29 at the same time immediately
a presupposing; and at the same moment in which the subject of purpose
determines itself, it is referred to an indifferent, external objectivity which
is to be made equal by it with the determinateness of that inner content,
that is to say, posited as something determined by the concept – first of all as
means.
b. the means
The first immediate positing in purpose is equally the positing of something internally determined, that is, determined as posited, and, at the
same time, the presupposing of an objective world, one indifferent to the
determination of purpose. But the subjectivity of purpose is the absolutely
negative unity; its second determining is, therefore, the sublation of this presupposition as such; this sublation is an immanent turning back inasmuch
as that moment of the first negation which is the positing of the negative
over against the subject, the external object, is sublated by it. But as against
the presupposition or the immediacy of the determining, as against the
objective world, it is as yet only the first, itself immediate and hence external negation. This positing is therefore not yet the realized purpose itself
but only the beginning of this realization. The object so determined is now
the means.
Through a means the purpose unites with objectivity and in objectivity
unites with itself. This means is the middle term of the syllogism. Purpose is
in need of a means for its realization, because it is finite – in need of a means,
that is to say, of a middle term that has at the same time the shape of an
external existence indifferent towards the purpose itself and its realization.
The absolute concept has mediation within itself in such a manner that the
25

Entschluß.

26

auschliessende.

27

Ausschliessen.

28

schließt auf.

29

Cf. above, 11.251.

12.163

660

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

first positing of it is not a presupposition in whose object the fundamental
determination would be an indifferent externality; on the contrary, the
world as creation has only the form of such an externality; it is its negativity
and the positedness that rather constitute its fundamental determination. –
Accordingly, the finitude of purpose consists in this, that its determining
is as such external to itself; accordingly, its first determining, as we have
seen,30 falls apart into a supposing and a presupposing; the negation of
this determining is therefore only according to one side already immanent
reflection; according to the other side, it is rather only first negation. Or
again, the immanent reflection is itself also self-external and a reflection
outwards.
The means is therefore the formal middle term of a formal syllogism;
it is something external to the extreme of the subjective purpose as also,
therefore, to the extreme of the objective purpose; just as particularity in
the formal syllogism is an indifferent medius terminus that can be replaced
by others. Moreover, just as this particularity is a middle term by virtue
of being determinateness with reference to one extreme but universality
with reference to the other extreme, and therefore obtains its mediating
determination by being related to an other, so too the means is a mediating
middle term only because it is, first, an immediate object, and, second,
because it is a means by virtue of a reference connecting it with the extreme
of purpose external to it – a reference which is for it a form to which it is
indifferent.
Concept and objectivity, therefore, are in the means only externally
linked; hence the means is only a merely mechanical object. The reference
of the object to purpose is a premise or the immediate reference which,
as we have seen,31 is with respect to purpose an immanent reflection; the
means is an inhering predicate; its objectivity is subsumed under the determination of purpose which, on account of its concreteness, is universality.
Through this purposive determination present in it, the means is now
also subsumptive with respect to the other extreme, the at the moment
still indeterminate objectivity. – Conversely, as contrasted with the subjective purpose, the means has as immediate objectivity a universality of
existence which the subjective singularity of purpose still misses. – Thus,
since purpose is in the means as only an external determinateness at first, it
is itself, as the negative unity, outside the means; the means, for its part, is
a mechanical object that possesses purpose only as a determinateness, not
as the simple concretion of totality. But as the unifying means, the middle
30

Cf. above, 12.161.

31

Cf. above, 12.161.

Teleology

661

term must itself be the totality of the purpose. It has been shown that the
determination of purpose is in the middle term at the same time immanent
reflection;32 as this reflection, it is a formal self-reference, since the determinateness is posited as real indifference, as the objectivity of the middle term.
But precisely for this reason this subjectivity, which is in one respect pure
subjectivity, is at the same time also activity. – In the subjective purpose the
negative self-reference is still identical with determinateness as such, with
the content and the externality. However, in the initial objectification of
purpose which is a becoming-other of the simple concept, those moments
come apart, each outside the other, or, conversely, the becoming-other or
the externality itself consists in this coming apart.
This whole middle term is thus the totality of the syllogism in which
the abstract activity and the external means constitute the extremes, while
the determinateness of the object through the purpose, by virtue of which
it is a means, constitutes the middle term. – But further, universality is the
connection of purposiveness and the means. This means is object, in itself
the totality of the concept; it does not have with respect to purpose any
of the power of resistance that it initially has against another immediate
object. To the purpose, therefore, which is the posited concept, it is utterly
penetrable, and it is receptive to this communication because it is in itself
identical with it. But it is now also posited that it is penetrable by the
concept, for in centrality it is an object striving towards negative unity;
in chemism, too, whether as neutral or non-indifferent, it is no longer
self-subsistent. – Its non-self-subsistence consists precisely in its being the
totality of the concept only implicitly; but the concept is being-for-itself.
Consequently, with respect to purpose the object has the character of being
powerless and of serving it; purpose is the subjectivity or soul of the object
that has in the latter its external side.
The object, immediately subjected to purpose in this way, is not an
extreme of the syllogism; on the contrary, this connection between the two
constitutes a premise of it. But the means has also one side from which
it still has self-subsistence as against the purpose. The objectivity which
in the means is bound with the purpose is still external to it, because
it is only immediately so connected; and therefore the presupposition still
persists. The activity of the purpose through the means is for that reason
still directed against this presupposition, and the purpose is activity, no
longer mere impulse and striving, because in the means the moment of
32

Cf. above, 12.162.

12.164

662
12.165

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

objectivity is posited in its determinateness as something external, and the
simple unity of the concept now has this objectivity as such within it.
c. the realized purpose 33
1. Purpose is in its connection to the means already reflected into itself,
but its objective immanent turning back is not yet posited. The activity of
purpose through its means is still directed against objectivity as an initial
presupposition; this is precisely what that activity is, to be indifferent to
determinateness. If it were again to consist in determining the immediate
objectivity, the product would again be only a means, and so forth into
infinity; only a purposeful means would result, but not the objectivity of
the purpose itself. In being active in its means, therefore, purpose must not
determine the immediate object as something external to it, and the object,
accordingly, must merge with it in the unity of the concept through itself;
or again, the otherwise external activity of purpose through its means must
determine itself as mediation and thus sublate itself as external.
The connection of the activity of purpose with the external object
through the means is first of all the second premise of the syllogism –
an immediate connection of the middle term with the other extreme. It is
immediate because the middle term has within it an external object and
the other extreme is likewise an external object. The means is effective and
potent against this latter object because its own is linked with the selfdetermining activity, whereas for the other the immediate determinateness
that it possesses is an indifferent one. Their process in this connection is
none other than the mechanical or chemical one; the previous relations
come up again in this objective externality, but under the dominance of
purpose. – But these processes, as they themselves showed, return into
purpose on their own.34 If, therefore, the connection of the means to the
external object which it has to work upon is at first an immediate one, that
connection has earlier exhibited itself already as a syllogism, for purpose
proved to be their true middle term and unity. Since the means is therefore
the object that stands on the side of purpose and has the latter’s activity
within it, the mechanism that occurs here is at the same time the turning
back of objectivity into itself, into the concept which, however, is already
presupposed as purpose; the negative attitude of the purposeful activity
33
34

Der ausgeführte Zwecke: the purpose as carried out or executed. I use “realized” for the sake of
simplicity, and Hegel occasionally also uses realisiert.
Cf. above, 12.153.

Teleology

663

towards the object is therefore not an external attitude but, on the contrary,
the objectivity’s own alteration and internal transition into it.
That the purpose immediately refers to an object and makes it into
a means, as also that through this means it determines another object,
may be regarded as violence inasmuch as purpose appears of an entirely
different nature than the object, and the two objects are in like matter
mutually independent totalities. But that the purpose posits itself in a
mediate connection with the object, and between itself and this object inserts
another object, may be regarded as the cunning of reason. As remarked,
the finitude of rationality has this side, that purpose relates to the object
as a presupposition, that is, as external. In an immediate connection with
that object, purpose would itself enter into the sphere of mechanism and
chemism and would therefore be subject to accidentality and to the loss
of its determining vocation35 to be the concept that exists in and for itself.
But in this way, by sending an object as a means ahead of it, it lets it do
the slavish work of externality in its stead, abandons it to the wear and tear
while preserving itself behind it against mechanical violence.
Since it is finite, the purpose further has a finite content; accordingly, it
is not rational absolutely, or simply in and for itself. But the means is the
external middle term of the syllogism which is the realization of purpose;
in the means, therefore, the rationality in the purpose manifests itself as
such by maintaining itself in this external other, and precisely through this
externality. To this extent the means is higher than the finite purposes of
external purposiveness: the plough is more honorable than are immediately
the enjoyments which it procures and which are the purposes. The tool
lasts while the immediate enjoyments pass away and are forgotten. It is
in their tools that human beings possess power over external nature, even
though with respect to their purposes they are subjected to it.
But the purpose does not just keep outside the mechanical process; on
the contrary, it keeps itself in it and is its determination. For purpose –
as the concept that concretely exists freely over against the object and its
process, and is self-determining activity – since it is equally the truth of
mechanism existing in and for itself, in the latter only rejoins itself. The
power of purpose over the object is this identity existing for itself, and
its activity is the manifestation of this identity. The purpose as content is
the determinateness as it exists in and for itself, present in the object as
indifferent and external; but the activity of the purpose is the truth of the
process on the one side, and, as negative unity, the sublation of the reflective
35

Bestimmung.

12.166

664

12.167

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

shine of externality. The indifferent determinateness of the object is one
that can abstractly be replaced by another just as externally; but the truth of
the simple abstraction of the determinateness is the totality of the negative,
the concrete concept that posits the externality within itself.
The content of the purpose is its negativity as simple determinateness
reflected into itself, distinguished from its totality as form. On account of
this simplicity, the determinateness of which is in and for itself the totality
of the concept, the content appears as that which remains identical in the
realization of the purpose. The teleological process is the translation of
the concept that concretely exists distinctly as concept into objectivity;
as we see, this translation into a presupposed other is the rejoining of
the concept through itself with itself. The content of the purpose is now
this identity concretely existing in the form of the identical. In every
transition the concept maintains itself; for instance, when the cause comes
to effect, it is the cause that in the effect only comes to itself. But in
the teleological transition, what maintains itself is the concept that as
such already concretely exists as cause, as the free concrete unity as against
objectivity and its external determinateness. The externality into which
the purpose translates itself is, as we have seen,36 itself already posited as
a moment of the concept, as the form of its inner differentiation. In the
externality, therefore, the purpose has its own moment; and the content, as
the content of the concrete unity, is its simple form that does not remain
in its different moments only implicitly equal with itself (as subjective
purpose, as means and mediating activity, and as objective purpose) but
also exists concretely as abidingly self-equal.
Of the teleological activity one can say, therefore, that in it the end
is the beginning, the consequence the ground, the effect the cause; that
it is a becoming of what has become; that in it only that which already
concretely exists comes into existence, and so on; that is to say, that quite
in general all the relation determinations that belong to the sphere of
reflection or of immediate being have lost their distinction, and what, like
end, consequence, effect, and so on, is spoken of as an other, no longer has
in purpose this determination of other, but is rather posited as identical
with the simple concept.
2. If we now examine the product of teleological activity more closely,
we see that purpose comes to it only externally if we take it as an absolute
presupposition over against a purpose which is subjective, that is to say,
in so far as we stop short at a purposive activity that relates to the object
36

Cf. above, 12.165.

Teleology

665

through its means only mechanically, positing in place of one indifferent
determinateness of the object an other which is just as external to it. A
determinateness such as an object possesses through purpose differs in
general from one which is merely mechanical in that it is a moment of
a unity and consequently, although external to the object, is yet not in
itself something merely external. The object that exhibits such a unity is a
whole with respect to which its parts, its own externality, are indifferent;
it is a determinate, concrete unity that unites different connections and
determinacies within itself. This unity, which cannot be comprehended
from the specific nature of the object and, as regards determinate content,
is of another content than the object’s own, is for itself not a mechanical
determinateness, yet still is in the object mechanically. Just as in this product
of purposive activity the content of the purpose and the content of the
object are external to each other, so too do the determinations in the other
moments of the syllogism relate to each other externally – in the connecting
middle, the purposive activity and the object which is the means; and in the
subjective purpose, which is the other extreme, the infinite form as totality
of the concept and the content of the concept. According to the connection
by which the subjective purpose is syllogistically united with objectivity,
both premises are an immediate connection – namely the connection of
the object determined as middle term with the still external object, and the
connection of the subjective purpose with the object made into means. The
syllogism is therefore affected by the deficiency of the formal syllogism in
general, namely that the connections in which it consists are not themselves
conclusions or mediations but already presuppose the conclusion for the
production of which they are supposed to serve as means.
If we consider the one premise, that of the immediate connection of the
subjective purpose and the object that thereby becomes a means, then the
purpose cannot connect with the object immediately, for the latter is just
as immediate as the object of the other extreme in which the purpose is
to be realized through mediation. Since the two are thus posited as diverse,
a means for their connection must be interjected between this objectivity
and the subjective purpose; but such a means is equally an object already
determined by purpose, and between this objectivity and the teleological
determination a new means is to be interjected, and so on to infinity. The
infinite progress of mediation is thereby set in motion. – The same happens
as regards the other premise, the connection of the means with the yet
indeterminate object. Since the two terms are utterly self-subsistent, they
can be united only in a third, and so on to infinity. – Or conversely,
since the premises already presuppose the conclusion, the latter can only be

12.168

666

12.169

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

imperfect, for it is based on those only immediate premises. The conclusion
or the product of the purposive activity is nothing but an object determined
by a purpose that is external to it; thus it is the same as what the means is.
In such a product itself, therefore, only a means has been derived, not a
realized purpose; or again: purpose has not truly attained any objectivity in
it. – It is therefore entirely a matter of indifference whether we consider
an object determined by external purpose as realized purpose or only as
means; what we have is not an objective determination but a relative one,
external to the object itself. All objects in which an external purpose is
realized equally are, therefore, only a means of purpose. Anything which
is intended for the realization of a purpose and is taken essentially as a
means, is such a means by virtue of its vocation37 that it be used up. But
also the object that is supposed to contain the realized purpose and show
itself to be its objectivity is perishable; it likewise fulfills its purpose not by
a tranquil, self-preserving existence, but only to the extent that it is worn
out, for only to this extent does it conform to the unity of the concept,
namely in so far as its externality, that is, its objectivity, sublates itself in
that unity. – A house, a clock, may appear as purposes with respect to
the instruments employed in their production; but the stones, the crossbeams, or the wheels, the axles, and the rest that make up the actuality
of the purpose, fulfill this purpose only through the pressure which they
suffer, through the chemical processes to which they are exposed with air,
light, and water, and from which they shield the human being; through
their friction, and so on. They fulfill their vocation, therefore, only through
their being used up and worn out, and only by virtue of their negation do
they correspond to what they are supposed to be. They are not united with
purpose positively, because they possess self-determination only externally
and are only relative purposes, or essentially only means.
These purposes thus in general have a restricted content; their form is
the infinite self-determination of the concept, which through that content
has restricted itself to external singularity. The restricted content renders
these purposes inadequate to the infinity of the concept, relegating them to
untruth; such a determinateness is through the sphere of necessity, through
being, already at the mercy of becoming and alteration and passes away.
3. The result now is that external purposiveness, which only has so far
the form of teleology, only goes so far as to be a means, not to be an objective purpose, because subjective purpose remains an external, subjective
determination. Or in so far as purpose is active and attains completion,
37

Bestimmung.

Teleology

667

albeit only in a means, it is still bound up with objectivity immediately; it
is sunk into it. Purpose is itself an object and, as one may say, it does not
attain a means because its realization is needed before such a realization
can be brought about through a means.
But the result is in fact not only an external purposive connection, but
the truth of such a connection, inner purposive connection and an objective
purpose. The self-subsistence of the object over against the concept that
purpose presupposes is posited in this presupposition as an unessential
reflective shine and as already sublated in and for itself; the activity of the
purpose truly is, therefore, only the exposure of this reflective shine and the
sublation of it. – As the concept has demonstrated,38 the first object becomes
by virtue of communication a means, for it implicitly is the totality of the
concept, and its determinateness, which is none other than the externality
itself, is posited as something only external and unessential – is posited
in purpose itself, therefore, as the latter’s own moment, not as anything
that stands on its own over against it. As a result, the determination of the
object as a means is altogether immediate. There is no need, therefore, for
the subjective purpose to exercise any violence to make the object into a
means, no need of extra reinforcement; the resolution,39 the resolve,40 this
determination of itself, is the only posited externality of the object, which is
therein immediately subjected to purpose, and has no other determination
as against it than that of the nothingness of the being-in-and-for-itself.
The second sublating of objectivity through objectivity differs from
this first sublation in that the latter, being the first, is the purpose in
objective immediacy; the second, therefore, is not only the sublating of a
first immediacy but of both, of the objective as something merely posited
and of the immediate. The negativity thus returns to itself in such a way
that it is equally the restoration of objectivity, but of an objectivity which
is identical with it, and in this it is at the same time also the positing of it
as an external objectivity which is only determined by purpose. Because of
this positing, the product remains as before also a means; because of the
identity with negativity, the product is an objectivity which is identical with
the concept, is the realized purpose in which the side of being a means is
the reality itself of purpose. In the completed purpose the means disappears
because it would be simply and solely the objectivity immediately subsumed
under that purpose, an objectivity which in the realized purpose is the
turning back of the purpose into itself; further, there also disappears with
it mediation itself, as the relating of an external; it disappears into both
38

Cf. above, 12.164.

39

Entschluß.

40

Aufschluß.

12.170

668

12.171

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the concrete identity of objective purpose, and into the same identity as
abstract identity and immediacy of existence.
Herein is also contained the mediation that was required for the first
premise, the immediate connection of the purpose with the object. The
realized purpose is also a means; conversely, the truth of the means is just
this, to be the real purpose itself, and the first sublation of objectivity
is already also the second, just as the second proved to contain the first
also.41 For the concept determines itself, its determinateness is the external
indifference which is immediately determined in the resolution as sublated,
that is to say, as inner, subjective indifference and at the same time as presupposed object. Its further procession out of itself that appeared – namely
as the immediate communication and subsumption of the presupposed
object under it – is at one and the same time the sublating of that determinateness of externality which was internal, shut up in the concept, that is,
posited as sublated, and the sublating of the presupposition of an object;
consequently, this apparently first sublating of the indifferent objectivity is
already the second as well, an immanent reflection that has gone through
mediation, and the realized purpose.
Since the concept is here, in the sphere of objectivity where its determinateness has the form of indifferent externality, in reciprocal action with
itself, the exposition of its movement becomes doubly difficult and intricate, for such a movement is itself immediately doubled and a first is always
also a second. In the concept taken for itself, that is, in its subjectivity, the
difference of itself from itself is as an immediate identical totality on its
own; but since its determinateness here is indifferent externality, its selfidentity is in this externality immediately also self-repulsion again, so that
what is determined as external and indifferent to the identity is rather this
identity itself, and the identity as identity, as self-reflected, is rather its
other. Only by firmly attending to this shall we comprehend the objective
turning back of the concept into itself, that is, its true objectification; only
then shall we see that every one of the single moments through which this
mediation runs its course is itself the whole syllogism of the mediation.
Thus the original inner externality of the concept, by virtue of which the
concept is self-repelling unity, purpose and the striving of purpose towards
objectivity, is the immediate positing or the presupposition of an external object; the self-determination is also the determination of an external
object not determined by the concept; and conversely this determination
is self-determination, that is, the sublated externality posited as inner, or
41

Cf. above, 12.168.

669

Teleology

the certainty of the unessentiality of the external object. – Of the second
connection, that of the determination of the object as a means, we have
just shown42 how it is within itself the self-mediation of purpose in the
object. – Likewise the third mode of connection, mechanism, which proceeds under the dominance of purpose and sublates the object by virtue
of the object, is on the one hand the sublating of the means, of the
object already posited as sublated, and consequently a second sublation
and immanent reflection, and on the other hand a first determining of
the external object. This last, as we remarked,43 is in the realized purpose
again the production of only a means; the subjectivity of the finite concept,
by contemptuously rejecting the means, has attained nothing better in its
goal. But this reflection, namely that purpose is attained in the means and
that the means and the mediation are preserved in the fulfilled purpose, is
the final result of the external connection of purpose – a result in which this
connection has sublated itself and which it has exhibited as its truth. – The
last considered third syllogism differs from the rest in that it is in the first
instance the subjective purposive activity of the preceding syllogism, but
also the sublation of external objectivity and consequently of externality in
general; it is this through itself, and is, therefore, the totality in its positedness.
We have now seen subjectivity, the being-for-itself of the concept, pass over
into the concept’s being-in-itself, into objectivity, and then the negativity of
that being-for-itself reassert itself in objectivity; the concept has so determined itself in that negativity that its particularity is an external objectivity,
or has determined itself as the simple concrete unity whose externality is its
self-determination. The movement of purpose has now attained this much,
namely that the moment of externality is not just posited in the concept,
the purpose is not just an ought and a striving, but as a concrete totality is
identical with immediate objectivity. This identity is on the one hand the
simple concept, and the equally immediate objectivity, but, on the other
hand, it is just as essentially mediation, and it is that simple immediacy only
through this mediation sublating itself as mediation. Thus the concept is
essentially this: to be distinguished, as an identity existing for itself, from
its implicitly existent objectivity,44 and thereby to obtain externality, but in
this external totality to be the totality’s self-determining identity. So the
concept is now the idea.
42

i.e., in the preceding page.

43

Cf. above, 12.168.

44

ansichseiende Objectivität.

12.172

section iii

The idea

12.173

The idea is the adequate1 concept, the objectively true, or the true as such.
If anything has truth, it has it by virtue of its idea, or something has truth
only in so far as it is idea. – The expression “idea” has otherwise also
often been used in philosophy as well as in ordinary life for “concept,”
or even for just a “representation.” To say that I still have no idea of this
lawsuit, this building, this region, means nothing more than I still have
no representation of it. It is Kant who reclaimed the expression “idea”
for the “concept of reason.”2 – Now according to Kant the concept of
reason should be the concept of the unconditional, but a concept which is
transcendent with respect to appearances, that is, one for which no adequate
empirical use can be made. The concepts of reason are supposed to serve
for the comprehension of perceptions, those of the understanding for the
understanding of them.3 – In fact, however, if these last concepts of the
understanding are truly concepts, then they are comprehensions, which means
concepts;4 they will make comprehending5 possible, and an understanding of
perceptions through concepts of the understanding will be a comprehending.
But if understanding is only the determining of perceptions by categories
such as whole and parts, force, cause, and the like, then it signifies only
a determining by means of reflection, just as by understanding one may
mean only the determinate representation of a fully determined sensuous
content; as when someone is being shown the way, that at the end of the
wood he must turn left, and he replies “I understand,” understanding means
nothing more than a grasp in pictorial representation and in memory. –
“Concept of reason,” too, is a somewhat clumsy expression; for the concept
is in general something rational, and in so far as reason is distinguished
from the understanding and the concept as such, it is the totality of the
1

2

Hegel uses adäquate, a Latinate word obviously intended to bring to mind the traditional definition
of truth as adequatio rei et intellectus. It is in the “idea” that this conformity of objectivity and
subjectivity is achieved.
3 A310/B367.
4 Begriffe.
5 begreifen.
A310ff./B366ff.

670

The idea

671

concept and objectivity. – The idea is the rational in this sense; it is the
unconditioned, because only that has conditions which essentially refers to
an objectivity that it does not determine itself but which still stands over
against it in the form of indifference and externality, just as the external
purpose had conditions.
If we now reserve the expression “idea” for the objective or real concept
and we distinguish it from the concept itself and still more from mere
representation, then we must also even more definitely reject that estimate
of it according to which the idea is something with no actuality, and true
thoughts are accordingly said to be only ideas. If thoughts are something
merely subjective and contingent, then they certainly have no further value;
but in this they do not stand lower than the temporal and contingent
actualities which likewise have no further value than that of accidentalities
and appearances. But if, on the contrary, the idea is supposed not to have the
value of truth because in regard to appearances it is transcendent, because no
congruent object can be given for it in the world of the senses, then this is
indeed an odd misunderstanding, for objective validity is being denied to it
on the ground that it lacks precisely what makes of appearances the untrue
being of the objective world. In regard to the practical ideas, Kant recognizes
that “nothing can be more harmful and unworthy of a philosopher than
the vulgar appeal to experience, which supposedly contradicts the idea.
Any such alleged contradiction would not be there at all if, for example,
political institutions were set up at the right time in accordance with ideas,
and if crude concepts, crude just because they are drawn from experience, had
not usurped the place of ideas thus thwarting all good intentions.”6 Kant
regards the idea as something necessary, the goal which, as the archetype, we
must strive to set up as a maximum and to which we must bring actuality
as it presently stands ever closer.
But since the result now is that the idea is the unity of the concept and
objectivity, the true, we must not regard it as just a goal which is to be
approximated but itself remains always a kind of beyond; we must rather
regard everything as being actual only to the extent that it has the idea in
it and expresses it. It is not just that the subject matter, the objective and
the subjective world, ought to be in principle congruent with the idea; the
two are themselves rather the congruence of concept and reality; a reality
that does not correspond to the concept is mere appearance, something
subjective, accidental, arbitrary, something which is not the truth. When
it is said that there is no subject matter to be found in experience which
6

Cf. A316–317/B373.

12.174

672

12.175

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

is perfectly congruent with the idea, the latter is opposed to the actual as
a subjective standard; but there is no saying what anything actual might
possibly be in truth, if its concept is not in it and its objectivity does
not measure up to this concept; it would then be a nothing. Indeed, the
mechanical and the chemical object, like a subject devoid of spirit and a
spirit conscious only of finitude and not of its essence, do not, according
to their various natures, have their concept concretely existing in them in
its own free form. But they can be something at all true only in so far as
they are the union of their concept and reality, of their soul and their body.
Wholes like the state and the church cease to exist in concreto when the
unity of their concept and their reality is dissolved; the human being, the
living thing, is dead when soul and body are parted in it; dead nature, the
mechanical and the chemical world – that is, when “the dead” is taken
to mean the inorganic world, for the expression would otherwise have no
positive meaning at all – this dead nature, then, if it is separated into its
concept and its reality, is nothing but the subjective abstraction of a thought
form and a formless matter. Spirit that were not idea, not the unity of the
concept with itself, not the concept that has the concept itself as its reality,
would be dead spirit, spiritless spirit, a material object.
Since the idea is the unity of the concept and reality, being has attained the
significance of truth; it now is, therefore, only what the idea is. Finite things
are finite because, and to the extent that, they do not possess the reality of
their concept completely within them but are in need of other things for it –
or, conversely, because they are presupposed as objects and consequently
the concept is in them as an external determination. The highest to which
they attain on the side of this finitude is external purposiveness. That actual
things are not congruent with the idea constitutes the side of their finitude,
of their untruth, and it is according to this side that they are objects, each
in accordance with its specific sphere, and, in the relations of objectivity,
determined as mechanical, chemical, or by an external purpose. That the
idea has not perfectly fashioned their reality, that it has not completely
subjugated it to the concept, the possibility of that rests on the fact that
the idea itself has a restricted content; that, as essentially as it is the unity
of the concept and reality, just as essentially it is also their difference; for
only the object is the immediate unity, that is, the unity that only exists in
itself. But if a subject matter, say the state, did not at all conform to its idea,
that is to say, if it were not rather the idea of the state; if its reality, which is
the self-conscious individuals, did not correspond at all to the concept, its
soul and body would have come apart; the soul would have taken refuge
in the secluded regions of thought, the body been dispersed into singular

The idea

673

individualities. But because the concept of the state is essential to the nature
of these individualities, it is present in them as so mighty an impulse that
they are driven to translate it into reality, be it only in the form of external
purposiveness, or to to put up with it as it is, or else they must needs perish.
The worst state, one whose reality least corresponds to the concept, in so
far as it still has concrete existence, is yet idea; the individuals still obey the
power of a concept.
But the idea has not only the general meaning of true being, of the unity of
concept and reality, but also the more particular one of the unity of subjective
concept and objectivity. For the concept is as such itself already the identity of
itself and reality; for the indeterminate expression “reality” means nothing
but determinate being, and this the concept possesses in its particularity
and singularity. Objectivity, moreover, is likewise the total concept that
has withdrawn into identity with itself out of its determinateness. In the
subjectivity of the concept, the determinateness or the difference of the
latter is a reflective shine which is immediately sublated, withdrawn into
being-for-itself or into negative unity, an inhering predicate. But in this
objectivity the determinateness is posited as immediate totality, as external
whole. Now the idea has shown itself to be the concept liberated again
into its subjectivity from the immediacy into which it has sunk in the
object; it is the concept that distinguishes itself from its objectivity –
but an objectivity which is no less determined by it and possesses its
substantiality only in that concept. This identity has therefore rightly been
designated as a subject-object, for it is just as well the formal or subjective
concept as it is the object as such.7 But this is a point that needs further
precision. The concept, inasmuch as it has truly attained its reality, is
this absolute judgment whose subject distinguishes itself as self-referring
negative unity from its objectivity and is the latter’s being-in-and-for-itself;
but it refers to it essentially through itself and is, therefore, self-directed
purpose and impulse. For this very reason, however, the subject does not
possess objectivity immediately in it (it would then be only the totality of
the object as such, a totality lost in the objectivity) but is the realization
of the purpose – an objectivity posited by virtue of the activity of the
purpose, one which, as positedness, has its subsistence and its form only as
7

Cf. Fichte, according to whom “ideas are problems or tasks for thinking.” The fundamental task is
to think of a reciprocal determination of the subjective and the objective, a reciprocity which we
find already realized in the thought of a “drive” (Trieb). Cf. Das System der Sittenlehre nach den
Prinzipien der Wissenschaftslehre (1798); English trans., Daniel Breazeale and Günter Zöller, Johann
Gottlieb Fichte: The System of Ethics. According to the Principles of the Wissenschaftslehre (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2005); see pp. 67, 50–51, 46–47.

12.176

674

12.177

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

permeated by its subject. As objectivity, it has the moment of the externality
of the concept in it and is in general, therefore, the side of finitude, of
alteration and appearance; but this side retreats into the negative unity of
the concept and there it perishes; the negativity whereby its indifferent
externality of being8 manifests itself as unessential and as a positedness is
the concept itself. Despite this objectivity, the idea is therefore absolutely
simple and immaterial, for the externality has being only as determined
by the concept and as taken up into its negativity; in so far as it exists as
indifferent externality, it is not only abandoned to mechanism in general
but exists only as the transitory and untrue. – Thus although the idea
has its reality in a materiality,9 the latter is not an abstract being standing
over against the concept but, on the contrary, it exists only as becoming,
as simple determinateness of the concept by virtue of the negativity of the
indifferent being.
This yields the following closer determinations of the idea. – First,
the idea is the simple truth, the identity of concept and objectivity as a
universal in which the opposition, the presence of the particular, is dissolved
in its self-identical negativity and is equality with itself. Second, it is the
connection of the subjectivity of the simple concept, existing for itself, and
of the concept’s objectivity which is distinguished from it; the former is
essentially the impulse to sublate this separation, and the latter is indifferent
positedness, subsistence which in and for itself is null. As this connection,
the idea is the process of disrupting itself into individuality and into the
latter’s inorganic nature, and of then bringing this inorganic nature again
under the controlling power of the subject and back to the first simple
universality. The identity of the idea with itself is one with the process; the
thought that liberates actuality from the seeming of purposeless mutability
and transfigures it into idea must not represent this truth of actuality as
dead repose, as a mere picture, numb, without impulse and movement, as
a genius or number, or as an abstract thought; the idea, because of the
freedom which the concept has attained in it, also has the most stubborn
opposition within it; its repose consists in the assurance and the certainty
with which it eternally generates that opposition and eternally overcomes
it, and in it rejoins itself.
But the idea is at first again only immediate or only in its concept; the
objective reality is indeed conformable to the concept but has not yet been
liberated into the concept, and it does not concretely exist explicitly as
the concept. Thus the concept is indeed the soul, but the soul is in the
8

ihr gleichgültiges Aussereinandersein.

9

Materiatur.

The idea

675

guise of an immediate, that is, it is not determined as soul itself, has not
comprehended itself as soul, does not have its objective reality within itself;
the concept is as a soul that is not yet fully animated.10
Thus the idea is, first of all, life. It is the concept which, distinct from its
objectivity, simple in itself, permeates that objectivity and, as self-directed
purpose, has its means within it and posits it as its means, yet is immanent
in this means and is therein the realized purpose identical with itself. –
The idea, on account of its immediacy, has singularity for the form of its
concrete existence. But the reflection within it of its absolute process is
the sublating of this immediate singularity; thereby the concept, which
as universality is in this singularity the inner, transforms externality into
universality, or posits its objectivity as a self-equality.
Thus is the idea, in second place, the idea of the true and the good, as
cognition and will. It is at first finite cognition and finite will, where the
true and the good are still distinguished and the two are at first only as a
goal. The concept has first liberated itself into itself, giving itself only a still
abstract objectivity for its reality. But the process of this finite cognition and
this finite action transforms the initially abstract universality into totality,
whereby it becomes complete objectivity. – Or considered from the other
side, finite, that is, subjective spirit, makes for itself the presupposition of an
objective world, such a presupposition as life only has; but its activity is
the sublating of this presupposition and the turning of it into something
posited. Thus its reality is for it the objective world, or conversely the
objective world is the ideality in which it knows itself.
Third, spirit recognizes11 the idea as its absolute truth, as the truth that
is in and for itself: the infinite idea in which cognizing12 and doing are
equalized, and which is the absolute knowledge13 of itself.
10

seelenvoll.

11

erkennt.

12

erkennen.

13

wissen.

12.178

c h a p ter 1
12.179

Life

The idea of life has to do with a subject matter so concrete, and if you will so
real, that in dealing with it one may seem according to the common notion
of logic to have overstepped its boundaries. Needless to say, if the logic were
to contain nothing but empty, dead forms of thought, then there could be
no talk in it at all of such a content as the idea, or life, are. But if the subject
matter of logic is the absolute truth, and truth as such lies essentially in
cognition, then cognition at least would have to come in for consideration. –
It is common practice to have the so-called pure logic be followed by an
applied logic – a logic that has to do with concrete cognition, quite apart from
all the psychology and anthropology that is commonly deemed necessary to
interpolate into logic. But the anthropological and psychological side of
cognition is concerned with the form in which cognition appears when the
concept does not as yet have an objectivity equal to it, that is, when it
does not have itself as object. The part of the logic that deals with this
concrete cognition does not belong to applied logic as such; if it did, then
every science would have to be dragged into logic, for each is an applied
logic in so far as it consists in apprehending its subject matter in forms of
thought and of concepts. – The subjective concept has presuppositions that
are exhibited in psychological, anthropological, and other forms. But the
presuppositions of the pure concept belong in logic only to the extent that
they have the form of pure thoughts, of abstract essentialities, such as are the
determinations of being and essence. The same goes for cognition, which is
the concept’s comprehension of itself: no other shape of its presupposition
but the one which is itself idea is to be dealt with in the logic; this, however,
is a presupposition which is necessarily treated in logic. This presupposition
is now the immediate idea; for while cognition is the concept, in so far as
the latter exists for itself but as a subjectivity referring to an objectivity,
then the concept refers to the idea as presupposed or as immediate. But the
immediate idea is life.
676

Life

677

To this extent the necessity of considering the idea of life in logic would
be based on the necessity, itself recognized in other ways, of treating the
concrete concept. But this idea has arisen through the concept’s own
necessity; the idea, that which is true in and for itself, is essentially the
subject matter of the logic; since it is first to be considered in its immediacy,
so that this treatment be not an empty affair devoid of determination, it is
to be apprehended and cognized in this determinateness in which it is life.
A comment may be in order here to differentiate the logical view of life
from any other scientific view of it, though this is not the place to concern
ourselves with how life is treated in non-philosophical sciences but only
with how to differentiate logical life as idea from natural life as treated in
the philosophy of nature, and from life in so far as it is bound to spirit. – As
treated in the philosophy of nature, as the life of nature and to that extent
exposed to the externality of existence, life is conditioned by inorganic nature
and its moments as idea are a manifold of actual shapes. Life in the idea is
without such presuppositions, which are in shapes of actuality; its presupposition is the concept as we have considered it, on the one hand as subjective,
and on the other hand as objective. In nature life appears as the highest stage
that nature’s externality can attain by withdrawing into itself and sublating
itself in subjectivity. It is in logic the simple in-itselfness which in the idea
of life has attained the externality truly corresponding to it; the concept
that came on the scene earlier as a subjective concept is the soul of life itself;
it is the impulse that gives itself reality through a process of objectification.
Nature, as it reaches this idea starting from its externality, transcends itself;
its end is not its beginning but is for it as a limit in which it sublates itself. –
Similarly, in the idea of life the moments of life’s reality do not receive the
shape of external actuality but remain enveloped in conceptual form.
In spirit, however, life appears both as opposed to it and as posited as at
one with it, in a unity reborn as the pure product of spirit. For life is here
to be taken generally in its proper sense as natural life, for what is called
the life of spirit as spirit, is spirit’s own peculiar nature that stands opposed
to mere life; just as we speak of the nature of spirit, even though spirit is
nothing natural but stands rather in opposition to nature. Thus life as such
is for spirit in one respect a means, and then spirit holds it over against
itself; in another respect, spirit is an individual, and then life is its body; in
yet another respect, this unity of spirit and its living corporeality is born
of spirit into ideality. None of these connections of life to spirit concerns
logical life, and life is to be considered here neither as the instrument of
a spirit, nor as a living body, nor again as a moment of the ideal and of
beauty. – In both cases, as natural life and as referring to spirit, life obtains a

12.180

12.181

678

12.182

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determinateness from its externality, in one case through its presuppositions,
such as are other formations of nature, and in the other case through the
purposes and the activity of spirit. The idea of life by itself is free from both
the conditioning objectivity presupposed in the first case and the reference
to subjectivity of the second case.
Life, considered now more closely in its idea, is in and for itself absolute
universality; the objectivity which it possesses is throughout permeated by
the concept, and this concept alone it has as substance. Whatever is distinguished as part, or by some otherwise external reflection, has the whole
concept within it; the concept is the soul omnipresent in it, a soul which is
simple self-reference and remains one in the manifoldness that accrues to
the objective being. This manifoldness, as self-external objectivity, has an
indifferent subsistence which in space and time, if these could already be
mentioned here, is a mutual externality of entirely diverse and atomistic
matters. But externality is in life at the same time as the simple determinateness of its concept; thus the soul flows omnipresently in this manifold
but remains at the same time the simple oneness of the concrete concept
with itself. – That way of thinking that clings to the determinations of
reflective relations and of the formal concept, when it comes to consider
life, the unity of its concept in the externality of objectivity, the absolute
multiplicity of atomistic matter, finds that all its thoughts are absolutely of
no avail; the omnipresence of the simple in the manifold externality is for
reflection an absolute contradiction and also, since it cannot at the same
time avoid witnessing this omnipresence in the perception of life and must
therefore grant the actuality of this idea, an incomprehensible mystery – for
reflection does not grasp the concept, nor does it grasp it as the substance
of life. – But this simple life is not only omnipresent; it is the one and
only subsistence and immanent substance of its objectivity; but as subjective
substance it is impulse, more precisely the specific impulse of particular difference, and no less essentially the one and universal impulse of the specific
that leads its particularization back to unity and holds it there. Only as this
negative unity of its objectivity and particularization is life self-referring, life
that exists for itself, a soul. As such, it is essentially a singular that refers to
objectivity as to an other, an inanimate nature. The originative judgment of
life consists therefore in this, that it separates itself off as individual subject
from the objective and, since it constitutes itself as the negative unity of
the concept, makes the presupposition of an immediate objectivity.
First, life is therefore to be considered as a living individual that is for itself
the subjective totality and is presupposed as indifferent to an objectivity
that stands indifferent over against it.

Life

679

Second, it is the life-process of sublating its presupposition, of positing
as negative the objectivity indifferent to it, and of actualizing itself as the
power and negative unity of this objectivity. By so doing, it makes itself
into the universal which is the unity of itself and its other.
Third, consequently life is the genus-process, the process of sublating
its singularization and relating itself to its objective existence as to itself.
Accordingly, this process is on the one hand the turning back to its concept
and the repetition of the first forcible separation, the coming to be of a
new individuality and the death of the immediate first; but, on the other
hand, the withdrawing into itself of the concept of life is the becoming of
the concept that relates itself to itself, of the concept that exists for itself,
universal and free, the transition into cognition.
a. the living individual
1. The concept of life or universal life is the immediate idea, the concept that
has an objectivity corresponding to it; but the objectivity corresponds to it
only to the extent that the concept is the negative unity of this externality,
that is to say, posits it as corresponding to it. The infinite reference of
the concept to itself is as negativity a self-determining, the diremption of
itself within itself as subjective singularity and itself as indifferent universality.
The idea of life in its immediacy is as yet only the creative universal soul.
Because of this immediacy, the first internal negative reference of the idea
is the self-determination of itself as concept – an implicit positing which is
explicit only as a turning back into itself; this is the creative presupposing.
By virtue of this self-determining, universal life is particularized; it has
thus split itself into the two extremes of the judgment which immediately
becomes syllogism.
The determinations of the opposition are the universal determinations
of the concept, for the splitting into two is the affair of the concept; the
filling of them, however, is the idea. One determination is the unity of
the concept and of reality, which is the idea as the immediate unity that
earlier assumed the form of objectivity. Here, however, it is in another
determination. There, it was the unity of the concept and of reality in
so far as the concept has gone over into reality and is lost in it; it did
not stand opposite to it, or, since it is for the reality only an inner, it is
itself for it only an external reflection. That earlier objectivity is therefore
the immediate itself in immediate mode. Here, on the contrary, it has
proceeded only from the concept, so that its essence is positedness, or that
it exists as negative. – It is to be regarded as the side of the universality of

12.183

680

12.184

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the concept, hence as an abstract universality, essentially only inhering in
the subject and in the form of immediate being which, posited for itself, is
indifferent to the subject. Hence the totality of the concept that attaches
to the objectivity is, as it were, only lent to it; the last self-subsistence that
objectivity has over against the subject is this being whose truth is only
that moment of the concept in which the latter, as a presupposing, is in the
first determinateness of a positing that exists implicitly and is not yet as
positing, as immanently reflected unity. Having proceeded from the idea,
self-subsisting objectivity is therefore immediate being only as the predicate
of the judgment of the concept’s self-determination – a being that is indeed
distinct from the subject but is at the same time essentially posited as a
moment of the concept.
According to content, this objectivity is the totality of the concept – a
totality, however, that has the subjectivity of the concept, or its negative
unity, standing over against it, and this subjectivity or negativity is what
constitutes the true centrality, that is to say, the concept’s free unity with
itself. This subject is the idea in the form of singularity, as simple but
negative self-identity – the living individual.
This individual is in the first place life as soul, as the concept of itself,
fully determined within itself, the initiating self-moving principle. In its
simplicity the concept contains determinate externality, as a simple moment
enclosed within itself. – But, further, this soul is in its immediacy immediately external, and has an objective being within it – a reality which is
subjugated to purpose, the immediate means, at first the objectivity which
is predicated of the subject, but then also the middle term of the syllogism,
for the corporeity of the soul is that whereby the soul links itself to external objectivity. – The living being has this corporeity at first as a reality
immediately identical with the concept; to this extent, the corporeity has
this reality in general by nature.
Now because this objectivity is the predicate of the individual and is
taken up in the subjective unity, the earlier determinations of the objects
do not attach to it, not the relation of mechanism or of chemism, and
even less so the reflective relations of whole and part, and the like. As
externality, it is indeed capable of such relations, but to that extent it is no
longer a living being; when a living thing is taken to be a whole consisting
of parts, something exposed to the action of mechanical or chemical causes,
itself a mechanical or chemical product (whether merely as such or as also
determined by some external purpose), then the concept is taken as external
to it, the individual itself as something dead. Since the concept is immanent
in it, the purposiveness of the living being is to be grasped as inner; it is

681

Life

present in it as a determinate concept, distinguished from its externality
but, in thus distinguishing itself from it, pervading it thoroughly and selfidentical. This objectivity of the living being is the organism; it is the means
and instrument of purpose, fully purposive, for the concept constitutes
its substance; but precisely for this reason this means and instrument
is itself the accomplished purpose in which the subjective purpose thus
immediately closes in upon itself.14 As for its externality, the organism is
a manifold, not of parts but of members. (a) These members exist as such
only in the individuality; they are separable inasmuch as they are external
and can be grasped in this externality, but as thus separated they revert to
the mechanical and chemical relations of common objectivity. (b) Their
externality is opposed to the negative unity of the living individuality. This
individuality is therefore the impulse to posit as a concretely real15 difference
the otherwise abstract moment of the determinateness of the concept; and
since this concretely real difference exists as immediate, it is the impulse
of each singular, specific moment to produce itself and equally to raise its
particularity to universality, to sublate the other moments external to it
and promote itself at their cost, but no less to sublate itself and make itself
a means for the other.
2. This process of the living individuality is restricted to itself and still
falls entirely within the individuality. – The first premise of the syllogism
of external purposiveness, where the purpose immediately refers to objectivity and makes it a means, was earlier16 taken in the sense that although
in it the purpose remains self-equal and has gone back into itself, the
objectivity has not yet sublated itself within, and consequently the purpose
is not in it in and for itself but becomes such only in the conclusion.
The process of the living being with itself is this same premise, but in
so far as the premise is also the conclusion, in so far as the immediate
reference of the subject to the objectivity, by virtue of which the latter
becomes means and instrument, is at the same time the negative unity of
the concept within itself, the purpose realizes itself in this externality by
being the subjective power over it and the process in which the externality displays its self-dissolution and its return into this negative unity of
the purpose. The unrest and the mutability of the external side of the
living being is the manifestation in it of the concept, and the concept,
as in itself negativity, has objectivity in so far as this objectivity’s indifferent subsistence shows itself to be self-sublating. Thus the concept produces itself through its impulse in such a way that the product, being its
14

mit sich selbst zusammen geschlossen ist.

15

concretely real = reell.

16

Cf. above, 12.168.

12.185

682

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

essence, is itself the producing factor: is product, in other words, only
as an externality that equally posits itself negatively, or as the process of
production.
3. Now the idea as just considered is the concept of the living subject and
of its process; the determinations that stand in relation to one another are
the self-referring negative unity of the concept and the objectivity which is
the concept’s means but also where the concept has returned into itself.
But since these moments of the idea of life do not go past the concept
of life, they are not the determinate conceptual moments of the living
individual in its reality. This individual’s objectivity or its corporeity is
a concrete totality; those moments are the sides out of which the living
reality17 constitutes itself; they are not, therefore, the moments of this
reality as already constituted by the idea. But the living objectivity of the
individual, since as objectivity it is ensouled by the concept and has the
latter for its substance, has also in it, for its essential difference, such
determinations as pertain to the concept, universality, particularity, and
singularity; hence the shape in which the determinations in it are externally differentiated is divided or incised (insectum) in accordance with
these.
Thus that shape is in this instance universality, the purely internal pulsating of living reality, sensibility. The concept of universality, as we saw it
earlier, is the simple immediacy which is such, however, only as inherently
absolute negativity. This concept of absolute difference with its negativity
dissolved into simplicity and self-equal, is brought to intuition in sensibility.
It is the in-itselfness not as abstract simplicity, but as an infinite determinable receptivity that does not become in its determinateness anything
manifold and external but is absolutely reflected into itself. Determinateness is present in this universality as simple principle; the singular external
determinateness, the so-called impression, goes back from its external and
manifold determination into this simplicity of self-feeling. Sensibility may
therefore be regarded as the external existence of the inward soul, for it
takes in all externality but reduces it to the complete simplicity of self-equal
universality.
The second determination of the concept is particularity. This is the
moment of posited difference, the opening up of the negativity otherwise
locked up in simple self-feeling or present in it as abstractly ideal, not yet
concretely real determinateness. It is irritability. Because of the abstraction
17

living reality = Lebendigkeit.

Life

683

of its negativity, feeling is impulse; it determines itself; the self-determination
of the living being is its judgment or the self-limiting whereby it refers to
the outside as to a presupposed objectivity with which it is in reciprocal
activity. – The living being, as a particular, now stands on one side as one
species next to other species; the formal reflection of this indifferent diversity
into itself is the formal genus and its systematization; but the individual
reflection is this, that as outwardly directed the particularity, the negativity
of the living being’s determinateness, is the self-referring negativity of the
concept.
According to this third determination, the living being is a singular. This
immanent reflection further determines itself in such a way that in irritability the living being is the externality of itself as against itself, as against the
objectivity that it possesses immediately as its means and instrument and
which is externally determinable. The immanent reflection sublates this
immediacy: on the one side as theoretical reflection, that is, in so far as the
negativity is the simple moment of sensibility as was considered in the latter, and which constitutes feeling; on the other side as real reflection, in that
the unity of the concept posits itself in its externality as negative unity, and
this is reproduction. – The two first moments, sensibility and irritability, are
abstract determinations; in reproduction life is something concrete and vital;
in it alone does it also have feeling and power of resistance. Reproduction
is the negativity as simple moment of sensibility, and irritability is only a
vital power of resistance, so that the relation to the external is reproduction
and identity of the individual with itself. Each singular moment is essentially the totality of all; their difference constitutes the ideal determination
of form which is posited in reproduction as the concrete totality of the
whole. On the one hand, therefore, this whole is opposed to the previous
determinate totalities as a third, namely as a concretely real totality; on the
other hand, however, it is their implicit essentiality and also that in which
they are comprehended as moments and where they have their subject and
subsistence.
With reproduction as a moment of singularity, the living being posits
itself as actual individuality, a self-referring being-for-itself; but it is at the
same time a real outward reference, the reflection of particularity or irritability as against an other, as against the objective world. The life-process
enclosed within the individual passes over into a reference to the presupposed objectivity as such, by virtue of the fact that, as the individual posits
itself as subjective totality, the moment of its determinateness, its reference to
externality, also becomes a totality.

12.186

684
12.187

12.188

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
b. the life-process

In shaping itself inwardly, the living individual comes into tension with
its original presupposing and, as a subject existing in and for itself, sets
itself in opposition to the presupposed objective world. The subject is a
purpose unto itself, the concept that has its means and subjective reality
in the objectivity subjugated to it. As such, it is constituted as the idea
existing in and for itself and as an essentially self-subsistent being, as against
which the presupposed external world has the value only of something
negative and without self-subsistence. In its self-feeling the living being
has the certainty of the intrinsic nullity of the otherness confronting it. Its
impulse is the need to sublate this otherness and to give itself the truth
of this certainty. At first the individual is, as subject, only the concept
of the idea of life; its inner subjective process in which it feeds upon
itself, and the immediate objectivity which it posits as a natural means
in conformity with its concept, are mediated by the process that refers to
the fully posited externality, to the objective totality standing indifferently
alongside it.
This process begins with need, that is, the twofold moment of selfdetermination of the living being by which the latter posits itself as negated
and thereby refers itself to an other than it, to the indifferent objectivity, but
in this self-loss it is equally not lost, preserves itself in it and remains the
identity of the self-equal concept. The living being is thereby the impulse
to posit as its own this world which is other than it, to posit itself as equal
to it, to sublate the world and objectify itself. Its self-determination has
therefore the form of objective externality, and since it is at the same time
self-identical, it is the absolute contradiction. The immediate shape of the
living being is the idea in its simple concept, the objectivity conforming
to the concept; as such the shape is good by nature. But since its negative
moment realizes itself as an objective particularity, that is, since the essential
moments of its unity are each realized as a totality for itself, the concept
splits into two, becoming an absolute inequality with itself; and since even
in this rupture the concept remains absolute identity, the living being is for
itself this rupture, has the feeling of this contradiction which is pain. Pain
is therefore the prerogative of living natures; since they are the concretely
existing concept, they are an actuality of infinite power, so that they are
in themselves the negativity of themselves, that this their negativity exists
for them, that in their otherness they preserve themselves. – It is said that
contradiction cannot be thought; but in the pain of the living being it is
even an actual, concrete existence.

Life

685

This internal rupture of the living being, when taken up into the simple
universality of the concept, in sensibility, is feeling. From pain begin the
need and the impulse that constitute the transition by which the individual,
in being for itself the negation of itself, also becomes for itself identity – an
identity which only is as the negation of that negation. – The identity which
is in the impulse as such is the individual’s subjective certainty of itself,
in accordance with which it relates to the indifferent, concrete existence
of its external world as to an appearance, to an actuality intrinsically void
of concept and unessential. This actuality is to obtain its concept only
through the subject, which is the immanent purpose. The indifference
of the objective world to determinateness and hence to purpose is what
constitutes its external aptitude to conform to the subject; whatever other
specifications there might be in it, its mechanical determinability, the lack
of the freedom of the immanent concept, constitute its impotence in
preserving itself against the living being. – In so far as the object confronts
the living being at first as something external and indifferent, it can affect
it mechanically, but without in this way affecting it as a living thing; and
in so far as it does relate to it as a living thing, it does not affect it as a cause
but it rather excites it. Because the living being is an impulse, externality
impinges upon it and penetrates it only to the extent that in principle it
is already in it; hence the effect on the subject consists only in that the
latter finds that the externality at its disposal accords with it. And should
this externality not accord with it as a totality, then it must at least accord
with a particular side of it – a possibility lodged in the very fact that, in its
relation to the outside, the subject is a particular.
Now the subject, in so far as in being determined in its need it connects
with the outside and consequently is itself something external or an instrument, exercises violence over the object. Its particular character, its finitude
in general, falls into the more determinate appearance of this relation. – The
external factor in this is the process of objectivity in general, mechanism
and chemism. But this same process is immediately interrupted and the
externality transformed into interiority. The external purposiveness which
is at first elicited in the indifferent object by the activity of the subject is
thereby sublated, for as against the concept the object is not a substance:
the concept, therefore, cannot become for it just an external form but must
rather posit itself as its essence and as the determinateness immanently pervading it through and through in conformity with the concept’s original
identity.
By seizing hold of the object, the mechanical process passes over into
an internal process by which the individual appropriates the object in such

12.189

686

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

a manner that it takes away from it its distinctive make-up, makes it into
a means, and confers upon it its own subjectivity as its substance. This
assimilation thus coincides with the individual’s process of reproduction
considered above;18 in this process the individual feeds on itself, in the sense
that it makes its own objectivity its object; the mechanical and chemical
conflict of its members with external things is an objective moment of
itself. The mechanical and chemical factor in the process is a beginning of
the dissolution of the living thing. Since life is the truth of these processes,
and as a living being it is therefore the concrete existence of this truth and
the power over the processes, it infringes upon the latter, permeates them
as their universality, and their product is entirely determined by it. This
transformation of them into the living individual constitutes the turning
back of this individual into itself, with the result that the production that
as such would be the transition into an other becomes reproduction, a
reproduction in which the living being posits itself as self-identical for
itself.
The immediate idea is also the immediate identity of concept and reality
but one that does not exist for itself; through the objective process, the
living being gives itself its feeling of self; for in that process it posits itself
as it is in and for itself, namely, as self-identical in an otherness posited as
indifferent to it, as the negative unity of the negative. The individual, in thus
rejoining the objectivity at first presupposed as indifferent to it, has equally
constituted itself as actual singularity and has sublated its particularity,
raising it to universality. Its particularity consisted in the disruption whereby
life posited the individual life and the objectivity external to it as its species.
Through the external life-process, it has consequently posited itself as real
universal life, as genus.
c. the genus

12.190

The living individual, at first cut off from the universal concept of life,
is a presupposition yet unproven through itself. Through its process with
the simultaneously presupposed world, it has posited itself for itself as the
negative unity of its otherness, as the foundation of itself; thus it is the
actuality of the idea, so that the individual now brings itself forth out
of actuality, whereas before it proceeded only from the concept, and its
coming to be, which was a presupposing, now becomes its production.
18

Cf. above, 12.186.

Life

687

But the further determination that it has attained by the sublation
of the opposition is that it is genus, identity of itself with its hitherto
indifferent otherness. This idea of the individual, since it is this essential
identity, is essentially the particularization of itself. This particularization,
its disruption, in keeping with the totality from which it proceeds, is the
duplication of the individual – the presupposing of an objectivity which
is identical with it, and a relating of the living being to itself as to another
living being.
This universal is the third stage, the truth of life in so far as life is still
shut up within itself. This stage is the process of the individual as it refers
to itself, where the externality is the individual’s immanent moment and
is, besides, itself a living totality, an objectivity which for the individual is
the individual itself – an externality in which the individual has certainty
of itself not as being sublated, but as subsisting.
Now because the relation of genus is the identity of individual self-feeling
in such a one who is at the same time another self-subsistent individual,
it is a contradiction; accordingly, the living being is once more impulse. –
The genus is indeed now the completion of the idea of life, but at first it is
still within the sphere of immediacy; this universality is therefore actual in
a singular shape; it is the concept whose reality has the form of immediate
objectivity. And consequently the individual, although it is the genus, it is
the genus in itself rather than for itself; what is for it is as yet only another
living individual; the concept distinguished from itself has for object, with
which it is identical, not itself as concept, but a concept rather that as a
living being has at the same time external objectivity for it, a form which
is therefore immediately reciprocal.
The identity with the other individual, the universality of the individual,
is thus still only inner or subjective; it therefore has the longing to posit
this identity and to realize itself as universal. But this impulse of the genus
can realize itself only through the sublation of the singular individualities
which are still particular to each other. At first, in so far as it is these
individualities which, in themselves universal, themselves satisfy the tension
of their longing and dissolve themselves into the universality of their genus,
their realized identity is the negative unity of the genus reflecting itself into
itself out of its rupture. To this extent, it is the individuality of life itself,
no longer generated out of its concept but out of the actual idea. At first, it
is itself only the concept that still has to objectify itself, but a concept which
is actual – the germ of a living individual. To ordinary perception what the
concept is, and that the subjective concept has external actuality, are visibly
present in it. For the germ of the living being is the complete concretion

12.191

688

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of individuality: it is where all the living being’s diverse sides, its properties
and articulated differences, are contained in their entire determinateness;
where the at first immaterial, subjective totality is present undeveloped,
simple and non-sensuous. Thus the germ is the whole living being in the
inner form of the concept.
From this side the genus obtains actuality through its reflection into
itself, for the moment of negative unity and individuality is thereby posited
in it – the propagation of the living species. The idea, which as life is still
in the form of immediacy, thus falls back into actuality, and its reflection
is now only the repetition and the infinite process in which it does not
step outside the finitude of its immediacy. But this going back to its first
concept also has the higher side that the idea has not only run through the
mediation of its processes inside immediacy, but, just because it has run
through them, has sublated this immediacy and has thereby elevated itself
to a higher form of its existence.
That is to say, the process of the genus in which the single individuals
sublate in one another their indifferent, immediate, concrete existence,
and in this negative unity die away, has further the realized genus that has
posited itself as identical with the concept for the other side of its product. –
In the process of the genus, the isolated singularities of individual life perish;
the negative identity in which the genus turns back into itself is on the
one side the generation of singularity just as it is also, on the other side,
the sublation of it – is thus the genus rejoining itself, the universality of the
idea as it comes to be explicitly for itself. In copulation,19 the immediacy of
living individuality perishes; the death of this life is the coming to be of
spirit. The idea, implicit as genus, becomes explicit in that it has sublated its
particularity that constituted the living species, and has thereby given itself
a reality which is itself simple universality; thus it is the idea that relates itself
to itself as idea, the universal that has universality for its determinateness
and existence. This is the idea of cognition.
19

Begattung; cf. Gattung, which means “genus.”

ch a p ter 2

The idea of cognition

Life is the immediate idea, or the idea as its still internally unrealized
concept. In its judgment, the idea is cognition in general.
The concept is for itself as concept inasmuch as it freely and concretely
exists as abstract universality or a genus. As such, it is its pure self-identity
that internally differentiates itself in such a way that the differentiated is
not an objectivity but is rather equally liberated into subjectivity or into the
form of simple self-equality; consequently, the object facing the concept is
the concept itself. Its reality in general is the form of its existence; all depends
on the determination of this form; on it rests the difference between what
the concept is in itself, or as subjective, and what it is when immersed in
objectivity, and then in the idea of life. In this last, the concept is indeed
distinguished from its external reality and posited for itself; however, this
being-for-itself which it now has, it has only as an identity that refers to itself
as immersed in the objectivity subjugated to it, or to itself as indwelling,
substantial form. The elevation of the concept above life consists in this,
that its reality is the concept-form liberated into universality. Through this
judgment the idea is doubled, into the subjective concept whose reality is
the concept itself, and the objective concept which is as life. – Thought,
spirit, self-consciousness, are determinations of the idea inasmuch as the latter
has itself as the subject matter, and its existence, that is, the determinateness
of its being, is its own difference from itself.
The metaphysics of the spirit or, as was more commonly said in the past,
of the soul, revolved around the determinations of substance, simplicity,
immateriality. These were determinations for which spirit was supposed to
be the ground, but as a subject drawn from empirical consciousness, and
the question then was which predicates agreed with the perceived facts.
But this was a procedure that could go no further than the procedure
of physics, which reduces the world of appearance to general laws and
determinations of reflection, for it is spirit still as phenomenal that is taken
as the foundation. In fact, in so far as scientific stringency goes, it also
689

12.192

690

12.193

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

had to fall short of physics. For not only is spirit infinitely richer than
nature; since its essence is constituted by the absolute unity in the concept
of opposites, and in its appearance, therefore, and in its connection with
externality, it exhibits contradiction at its most extreme form, it must be
possible to adduce an experience in support of each of the opposite determinations of reflection, or, starting from experiences, to proceed by way
of formal inference to the opposite determinations. Since the predicates
immediately drawn from the appearances still belong to empirical psychology, so far as metaphysical consideration goes, all that is in truth left are
the entirely inadequate determinations of reflection. – In his critique of
rational psychology,20 Kant insists that, since this metaphysics is supposed
to be a rational science, the least addition of anything drawn from perception to the universal representation of self-consciousness would alter it
into an empirical science, thus compromising its rational purity and its
independence from all experience. – Accordingly, all that is left on this
view is the simple representation “I,” a representation entirely devoid of
content, of which one cannot even say that it is a concept, but must say that
it is a mere consciousness, one that accompanies every concept. Now, as Kant
argues further, this “I,” or, if you prefer, this “it” (the thing) that thinks,
takes us no further than the representation of a transcendental subject of
thoughts = x, a subject which is known only through the thoughts that
are its predicates, and of which, taken in isolation, we cannot ever have
the least concept. This “I” has the associated inconvenience that, as Kant
expresses it, in order to judge anything about it, we must every time already
make use of it, for it is not so much one representation by which a particular
object is distinguished, as it is rather a form of representation in general, in
so far as representation can be said to be cognition. – Now the paralogism
that rational psychology incurs, as Kant expresses it, consists in this: that
modes of self-consciousness in thinking are converted into concepts of the
understanding, as if they were the concepts of an object; that that “I think”
is taken to be a thinking being, a thing-in-itself; that in this way, because I
am present in consciousness always as a subject, am indeed as a singular subject, identical in all the manifoldness of representation, and distinguishing
myself from this manifoldness as external to it, the illegitimate inference
is thereby drawn that I am a substance, and a qualitatively simple being on
top of that, and a one, and a being that concretely exists independently of the
things of space and time.21
20

A343/B401ff.

21

B406–409.

The idea of cognition

691

I have cited this position in some detail because one can clearly recognize
in it both the nature of the former metaphysics of the soul and also, more to
the point, of the Critique that put an end to it. – The former was intent on
determining the abstract essence of the soul; it went about this starting from
observation, and then converting the latter’s empirical generalizations, and
the determination of purely external reflection attaching to the singularity
of the actual, into the form of the determinations of essence just cited. –
What Kant generally has in mind here is the state of the metaphysics of
his time which, as a rule, stayed at these one-sided determinations with no
hint of dialectic; he neither paid attention to, nor examined, the genuinely
speculative ideas of older philosophers on the concept of spirit. In his
critique of those determinations he then simply abided by the Humean
style of skepticism; that is to say, he fixes on how the “I” appears in
self-consciousness, but from this “I,” since it is its essence (the thing in
itself ) that we want to cognize, he removes everything empirical; nothing
then remains but this appearance of the “I think” that accompanies all
representations and of which we do not have the slightest concept. – It must
of course be conceded that, as long as we are not engaged in comprehending
but confine ourselves to a simple, fixed representation or to a name, we
do not have the slightest concept of the “I,” or of anything whatever, not
even of the concept itself. – Peculiar indeed is the thought (if one can call
it a thought at all) that I must make use of the “I” in order to judge the
“I.” The “I” that makes use of self-consciousness as a means in order to
judge: this is indeed an x of which, and also of the relation involved in this
“making use,” we cannot possibly have the slightest concept. But surely it is
laughable to label the nature of this self-consciousness, namely that the “I”
thinks itself, that the “I” cannot be thought without the “I” thinking it, an
awkwardness and, as if it were a fallacy, a circle. The awkwardness, the circle,
is in fact the relation by which the eternal nature of self-consciousness and
of the concept is revealed in immediate, empirical self-consciousness – is
revealed because self-consciousness is precisely the existent and therefore
empirically perceivable pure concept; because it is the absolute self-reference
that, as parting judgment, makes itself into an intended object and consists
in simply making itself thereby into a circle. – This is an awkwardness that
a stone does not have. When it is a matter of thinking or judging, the stone
does not stand in its own way; it is dispensed from the burden of making
use of itself for the task; something else outside it must shoulder that effort.
The defect, which these surely barbarous notions place in the fact that
in thinking the “I” the latter cannot be left out as a subject, then also
appears the other way around, in that the “I” occurs only as the subject of

12.194

692

12.195

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

consciousness, or in that I can use myself only as a subject, and no intuition
is available by which the “I” would be given as an object; but the concept
of a thing capable of existence only as a subject does not as yet carry any
objective reality with it. – Now if external intuition as determined in time
and space is required for objectivity, and it is this objectivity that is missed,
it is then clear that by objectivity is meant only sensuous reality. But to
have risen above such a reality is precisely the condition of thinking and of
truth. Of course, if the “I” is not grasped conceptually but is taken as a mere
representation, in the way we talk about it in everyday consciousness, then
it is an abstract self-determination, and not the self-reference that has itself
for its subject matter. Then it is only one of the extremes, a one-sided subject
without its objectivity; or else just an object without subjectivity, which it
would be were it not for the awkwardness just touched upon, namely that
the thinking subject will not be left out of the “I” as object. But as a matter
of fact this awkwardness is already found in the other determination, that of
the “I” as subject; the “I” does think something, whether itself or something
else. This inseparability of the two forms in which the “I” opposes itself to
itself belongs to the most intimate nature of its concept and of the concept
as such; it is precisely what Kant wants to keep away in order to retain
what is only a representation that does not internally differentiate itself and
consequently, of course, is void of concept. Now this kind of conceptual
void may well oppose itself to the abstract determinations of reflection or
to the categories of the previous metaphysics, for in one-sidedness it stands
at the same level with them, though these are in fact on a higher level of
thought; but it appears all the more lame and empty when compared with
the profounder ideas of ancient philosophy concerning the concept of the
soul or of thinking, as for instance the truly speculative ideas of Aristotle.22
If the Kantian philosophy subjected the categories of reflection to critical
investigation, all the more should it have investigated the abstraction of the
empty “I” that he retained, the supposed idea of the thing-in-itself. The
experience of the awkwardness complained of is itself the empirical fact in
which the untruth of that abstraction finds expression.
The Kantian critique of rational psychology only refers to Mendelssohn’s
proof of the persistence of the soul,23 and I now also cite its refutation of that
proof because of the oddness of what it adduces against it. Mendelssohn’s
proof is based on the simplicity of the soul, by virtue of which it is supposed
22
23

De anima, 402a–435b.
Cf. B413ff. Mendelssohn’s proof is in the Phädon: oder Über die Unsterblichkeit der Seele. In drei
Gesprächen (1767 and 1784). See Moses Mendelssohn, Gesammelte Werke, Jubiläumsausgabe, Schriften
zur Philosopie und Ästhetik, Vol.III.1 (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1932).

The idea of cognition

693

to be incapable of alteration in time, of transition into an other. Qualitative
simplicity is in general the form of abstraction earlier considered; as qualitative determinateness, it was investigated in the sphere of being and it was
then proved that the qualitative, which is as such abstractly self-referring
determinateness, is precisely for that reason dialectical, mere transition into
an other.24 In the case of the concept, however, it was shown that, when
considered in connection with persistence, indestructibility, imperishableness, it is that which exists for itself, which is eternal, just because it is not
abstract but concrete simplicity – because it is not a determinateness that
refers to itself abstractly but is the unity of itself and its other, and it cannot
therefore pass over into this other as if it thereby altered in it; it cannot
precisely because it is itself the other, the determinateness, and hence in this
passing over it only comes to itself.25 – Now the Kantian critique opposes
to this qualitative determination of the unity of the concept a quantitative
one. As it says, although the soul is not a manifold of reciprocally external
parts and contains no extensive magnitude, yet consciousness has a degree,
and the soul, like every concretely existing being, is an intensive magnitude;
with this magnitude, however, there is posited the possibility of a transition
into nothing through gradual vanishing.26 – Now what is this refutation
but the application to spirit of a category of being, of intensive magnitude –
a determination that has no truth in itself but on the contrary is sublated
in the concept?
Metaphysics – even one that restricted itself to the fixed concepts of the
understanding without rising to speculation, to the nature of the concept
and of the idea – did have for its aim the cognition of truth; it did probe its
subject matter to ascertain whether they were something true or not, whether
substances or phenomena. The triumph of the Kantian critique over this
metaphysics consists, on the contrary, in side-lining any investigation that
would have truth for its aim and this aim itself; it simply does not pose the
one question which is of interest, namely whether a determinate subject,
in this case the abstract “I” of representation, has truth in and for itself.
But to stay at appearances and at the mere representations of ordinary
consciousness is to give up on the concept and on philosophy. Anything
beyond that is branded by the Kantian critique as high-flown, something
to which reason has no claim. As a matter of fact, the concept does fly
high, rising above what has no concept, and the immediate justification
for going beyond it is, for one thing, the concept itself, and, for another,
24
25

Cf. GW 11, 72; above 21.111(bottom of page)–112. But this is a place where the 1832 edition varies
considerably from that of 1812.
26 B414.
Cf. above, 12.34.

12.196

694

12.197

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

on the negative side, the untruth of appearance and of representation, and
also of such abstractions as the thing-in-itself and the said “I” which is not
supposed to be an object to itself.
In the context of this logical exposition, it is from the idea of life that the
idea of spirit has emerged, or what is the same thing, that has demonstrated
itself to be the truth of the idea of life. As this result, the idea possesses
its truth in and for itself, with which one may then also compare the
empirical reality or the appearance of spirit to see how far it accords with
it. We have seen regarding life that it is the idea,27 but at the same time
it has shown itself not to be as yet the true presentation or the true mode
of its existence. For in life, the reality of the idea is singularity; universality
or the genus is the inwardness. The truth of life as absolute negative unity
consists, therefore, in this: to sublate the abstract or, what is the same, the
immediate singularity, and as identical to be self-identical, as genus, to be
self-equal. Now this idea is spirit. – In this connection, we may further
remark that spirit is here considered in the form that pertains to this idea
as logical. For the idea also has other shapes which we may now mention
in passing; in these it falls to the concrete sciences of spirit to consider it,
namely as soul, consciousness, and spirit as such.
The name “soul” was used formerly to mean singular finite spirit in
general, and rational or empirical psychology was supposed to be synonymous with doctrine of spirit. The expression, “soul,” evokes an image of it
as if it were a thing like other things. One enquires regarding its seat, the
spatial location from which its forces operate; still more, how this thing
can be imperishable, subjected to the conditions of temporality yet exempt
from alteration in it. The system of monads elevates matter by making all
of it in principle a soul;28 on this way of representing it, the soul is an
atom like the atoms of matter; the atom that rises from a cup of coffee as
vapor is capable in favorable circumstances of developing into a soul; only
the greater obscurity of its ideation distinguishes it from the kind of thing
that is manifestly soul. – The concept that is for itself is necessarily also
in immediate existence; in this substantial identity with life, immersed in
its externality, the concept is the subject matter of anthropology. But even
anthropology would find alien a metaphysics in which this form of immediacy is made into a soul-thing, into an atom like the atoms of matter. –
To anthropology must be left only that obscure region where spirit,
under influences which were once called sidereal and terrestrial, lives as a
natural spirit in sympathy with nature and has presentiments of the latter’s
27

Cf. above, 12.191.

28

zur Seelenhaftigkeit.

The idea of cognition

695

alterations in dreams and presentiments, and indwells the brain, the heart,
the liver, and so forth. To the liver, according to Plato, God gave the gift
of prophesy above which the self-conscious human is exalted, so that even
the irrational part of the soul would be provided for by his bounty and
made to share in higher things.29 To this irrational side belongs further the
behavior of figurative representation, and of higher spiritual activity in so
far as the latter is subject to the play of an entirely corporeal constitution,
of external influences and particular circumstances.
This lowest of the concrete shapes in which spirit is sunk into
materiality30 has the one immediately superior to it in consciousness. In
this form the free concept, as the “I” existing for itself, is withdrawn from
objectivity, but it refers to the latter as its other, a subject matter that confronts it. Since spirit is here no longer as soul, but, in the certainty that it
has of itself, the immediacy of being has for it the significance rather of a
negative, its identity with itself in the objectivity confronting it is at the
same time still only a reflective shining, for that objectivity still also has the
form of a being that exists in itself. This stage is the subject matter of the
phenomenology of spirit – a science that stands midway between the science
of the natural spirit and of the spirit as such. It considers spirit as it exists
for itself, but at the same time as referring to its other – an other which, as we
have just said, is thereby determined both as an object existing in itself and
as a negative. The science thus considers spirit as appearing, as exhibiting
itself in its contrary.
But the higher truth of this form is spirit for itself. For this spirit, the
subject matter31 which for consciousness exists in itself has the form of its
own determination, the form of representation in general; this spirit, which
acts on the subject matter’s determinations as on its own, on feelings, on
representations and thought, is thus infinite in itself and in its form. The
consideration of this stage belongs to the doctrine of spirit proper, which
would embrace the subject matter of ordinary empirical psychology but
which, in order to be the science of spirit, must not go about its work
empirically but must be conceived scientifically. – At this stage spirit is
finite spirit in so far as the content of its determinateness is an immediately
given content; the science of this finite spirit has to display the course along
which it liberates itself from this determinateness and goes on to grasp its
truth, the infinite spirit.
The idea of spirit which is the subject matter of logic already stands,
on the contrary, inside pure science; it has no need, therefore, to observe
29

Timaeus, 71d–e.

30

Materiatur.

31

Gegenstand.

12.198

696

12.199

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

spirit’s tracing that course, to see how it gets entangled with nature, with
immediate determinateness, with matter, or in other words with pictorial
representation; this is what the other three sciences investigate. The idea of
spirit has this course already behind it, or what is the same, it has it rather
ahead of it – behind in so far as logic is taken as the final science; ahead
in so far as it is taken as the first science from which the idea first passes
over into nature. In the logical idea of spirit, therefore, the “I” is from the
start in the way it has emerged from the concept of nature as the truth of
nature, the free concept which in its judgment is itself the subject matter
confronting it, the concept as its idea. Also in this shape, however, the idea
is still not consummated.
Although the idea is indeed the free concept that has itself as its subject
matter, it is nonetheless immediate, and just because it is immediate, it is
still the idea in its subjectivity, and hence in its finitude in general. It is
the purpose that ought to realize itself, or the absolute idea itself still in its
appearance. What the idea seeks is the truth, this identity of the concept
itself and reality; but at first it only seeks it; for it is here as it is at first, still
something subjective. Consequently, although the subject matter that is for
the concept is here also a given subject matter, it does not enter into the
subject as affecting it, or as confronting it with a constitution of its own as
subject matter, or as a pictorial representation; on the contrary, the subject
transforms it into a conceptual determination; it is the concept which is the
active principle in it – which therein refers itself to itself, and, by thus
giving itself its reality in the object, finds truth.
Initially, therefore, the idea is one extreme of a syllogism, the concept
that as purpose has itself at first for its subjective reality; the other extreme is
the restriction of the subjective, the objective world. The two extremes are
identical in that they are the idea. Their unity is, first, that of the concept,
a unity which in the one extreme is only for itself and in the other only in
itself. Second, it is reality, abstract in the one extreme and in the other in
its concrete externality. – This unity is now posited through cognition, and,
because the latter is the subjective idea which as purpose proceeds from
itself, it is at first only a middle term. – The knowing subject, through the
determinateness of its concept which is the abstract being-for-itself, refers
to an external world; nevertheless, it does this in the absolute certainty
of itself, in order to elevate its implicit reality, this formal truth, to real
truth. It has the entire essentiality of the objective world in its concept; its
process consists in positing for itself the concrete reality of that world as
identical with the concept, and conversely in positing the latter as identical
with objectivity.

The idea of cognition

697

Immediately, the idea of appearance is the theoretical idea, cognition as
such. For to the concept that exists for itself, the objective world immediately has the form of immediacy or of being, just as that concept is to itself
at first only the abstract concept of itself, is still shut up within itself. The
concept is therefore only as form, of which only its simple determinations
of universality and particularity are the reality that it possesses within, while
the singularity or the determinate determinateness, the content, is received
by it from the outside.
a. the idea of the true
At first the subjective idea is impulse. For it is the contradiction of the
concept that it has itself for the subject matter and is to itself the reality
without, however, the subject matter being an other that subsists on its
own over against it, or without the differentiation of itself from itself
having at the same time the essential determination of diversity and of
indifferent existence. The specific nature of this impulse is therefore to
sublate its own subjectivity, to make that first abstract reality a concrete
one, filling it with the content of the world presupposed by its subjectivity. –
From the other side, the impulse is determined in this way: the concept
is indeed the absolute certainty of itself; however, opposite its being-foritself there stands its presupposition of a world that exists in itself, but one
whose indifferent otherness has for the concept’s certainty of itself the status
of something merely unessential; the concept is therefore the impulse to
sublate this otherness and, in the object, to intuit its identity with itself.
This immanent reflection is the sublated opposition and the singularity
that originally makes its appearance as the presupposed being-in-itself but
is now posited and made actual for the subject; accordingly, this being-initself is the self-identity of the form as it has issued from the opposition –
an identity which is therefore determined as indifferent towards the form
in its differentiation. It is content.
Consequently this impulse is the impulse of truth in so far as the truth
is in cognition, and therefore of truth in its strict sense as theoretical idea. –
Although objective truth is the idea itself as the reality that corresponds to
the concept, and to this extent a subject matter may or may not possess
truth, nevertheless the more precise meaning of truth is that it is such for
or in the subjective concept, in knowledge.32 Truth is the relation of the
judgment of the concept, the concept that proved to be the formal judgment
32

Wissen.

12.200

698

12.201

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of truth;33 for the predicate in this judgment is not only the objectivity
of the concept, but the comparison connecting the concept of the fact with
the actuality of it. – This realization of the concept is theoretical in so far as
the concept still has, as form, the determination of subjectivity, or in so far
as it has for the subject the determination of being its own determination.
Because cognition is the idea as purpose or as subjective idea, the negation
of the world, presupposed as existing in itself, is the first negation; the
conclusion in which the objective is posited in the subjective has at first,
therefore, only the meaning that what exists in itself is posited only as
something subjective, only in conceptual determination, and consequently
does not exist as so posited in and for itself. Thus the conclusion only
attains to a neutral unity, or a synthesis, that is, to a unity of terms that
are originally separate, only externally conjoined. – Hence, since in this
cognition the concept posits the object as its own, the idea gives itself at first
only a content of which the foundation is given, in which only the form
of externality has been sublated. To this extent, this cognition still retains
its finitude in its realized purpose; in the realized purpose, it has at the
same time not attained its purpose, and in its truth it has not arrived at the
truth. For in so far as in the result the content still has the determination
of a given, the presupposed being-in-itself confronting the concept is not
sublated; the unity of concept and reality, the truth, is thereby equally not
contained in it. – Remarkable is that this side of finitude is the one that of
late has been clung to and accepted as the absolute relation of cognition –
as if the finite as such were to be the absolute! On this view, an unknown
thinghood-in-itself is attributed to the object, behind cognition, and this
thinghood, and the truth also along with it, are regarded for cognition as
an absolute beyond. Thought determinations in general, the categories, the
determinations of reflection, as well as the formal concept and its moments,
acquire on this view the status of determinations that are finite, not in and
for themselves, but in the sense of being something subjective as against
this empty thinghood-in-itself; the fallacy of taking this untrue relation of
cognition as the true relation has become the universal opinion of modern
times.
It is immediately clear from this definition of finite cognition that it is
a contradiction that sublates itself; it is the contradiction of a truth that
is supposed at the same time not to be truth, of a cognition of what is
that at the same time does not know the thing-in-itself. In the collapse of
this contradiction, its content, subjective cognition and the thing-in-itself,
33

Cf. above, 12.88.

The idea of cognition

699

collapses, that is, proves itself to be an untruth. But it is incumbent upon
cognition itself to resolve its finitude by its own forward movement and
along with it its contradiction. What we have said is a consideration which
we bring to it and remains a reflection external to it. But cognition is
itself the concept which is a purpose unto itself and, therefore, through its
realization fulfills itself, and precisely in this fulfillment sublates its subjectivity and the presupposed being-in-itself. – We must examine cognition,
therefore, in its positive activity within it. Because this idea, as we have
shown,34 is the concept’s impulse to realize itself for itself, its activity consists in determining the object, and by virtue of this determining to refer
itself to itself in it as identical. The object is simply the determinable as
such, and in the idea it has this essential side of not being in and for itself
opposed to the concept. Because this cognition is still finite, not speculative
cognition, the presupposed objectivity does not as yet have for it the shape
of something which is inherently the concept simply and solely and does
not hold anything particular for itself as against the cognition. But by thus
having the status of a beyond that exists in itself, the determination of being
determinable through the concept is essential to it; for the idea is the concept
that exists for itself, is that which is absolutely infinite in itself, in which the
object is implicitly sublated, and the aim is still to sublate it explicitly. The
object, therefore, is indeed presupposed by the idea of cognition as existing
in itself, but as so essentially related to the idea that the latter, certain of
itself and of the nothingness of this opposition, arrives in the object at the
realization of its concept.
In the syllogism whereby the subjective idea now rejoins objectivity, the
first premise is the same form of immediate seizure and connection of the
concept with respect to the object as we see in the purposive connection.35
The determining activity of the concept upon the object is an immediate
communication of itself to the object, an unresisted invasion of it. In all this
the concept remains in pure self-identity; but this immediate immanent
reflection equally has the determination of objective immediacy; that which
for the concept is its own determination, is equally a being, for it is the
first negation of the presupposition. The posited determination equally
has the status, therefore, of a presupposition which is merely found, the
apprehension of a given wherein the activity of the concept consists rather
in being negative towards itself, in holding itself back away from what is
found and passive towards it, in order that the latter be allowed to show
itself, not as determined by the subject, but as it is in itself.
34

Cf. above, 12.199.

35

Cf. above, 12.164.

12.202

700

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

In this premise, therefore, this cognition does not in any way appear as an
application of logical determinations, but as a reception and apprehension
of such determinations as already found, and its activity appears restricted
simply to the removing from the subject matter of a subjective obstacle, an
external veil. This cognition is analytic cognition.
a. Analytic cognition

12.203

The difference between analytic and synthetic cognition is sometimes said
to be that the one proceeds from the known to the unknown and the other
from the unknown to the known. On closer examination, however, it is
difficult to find any definite thought behind this difference, even less a
concept. It may be said that in general cognition begins with ignorance,
for one does not learn to know something with which one is already
acquainted. Conversely, it also begins with the known, for it is a tautological
proposition that that with which cognition begins, what it therefore actually
knows, is for that reason a known; what is as yet not known, and is expected
to be known only later, is still an unknown. In this respect it must be said
that cognition, once it has begun, always proceeds from the known to the
unknown.
The specific difference of analytic cognition is already established by the
fact that, since it is the first premise of the whole syllogism, mediation
does not as yet belong to it; analytic cognition is rather the immediate
communication of the concept, a communication that does not as yet
contain otherness and in which activity divests itself of its negativity. Yet
this immediacy of the connection is for that reason itself mediation, for it
is a negative reference of the concept to the object that annuls itself and
thereby makes itself simple and identical. This immanent reflection is only
subjective, because in its mediation the difference is present still in the
form of a presupposition existing in itself, as the object’s difference36 within
itself. The determination that results through this connection, therefore,
is the form of simple identity, of abstract universality. Accordingly, analytic
cognition has in general this identity for its principle, and the transition
into an other, the linking of different terms is excluded from it and from
its activity.
If we look now more closely at analytic cognition, we see that it starts
from a presupposition, hence from some singular, concrete subject matter,
whether for representation this subject matter is already completed or in
36

Verschiedenheit.

The idea of cognition

701

the form of a task, that is, given to it only under certain circumstances
and conditions rather than disengaged from these on its own and presented in simple independence. Now the analysis of this subject matter
cannot consist just in resolving it into the particular representations possibly
contained within it; such a resolution and the apprehension of the particular representations is an affair that would not belong to cognition, but
would rather be a matter of closer acquaintance, a determination within
the sphere of representing. Analysis, since it is based on the concept, has for
its products determinations that are essentially conceptual, though such
as are contained in the subject matter immediately. We have seen from the
nature of the idea of cognition that the activity of the subjective concept
must be regarded from one side only as the explication of what is already in
the object,37 for the object itself is nothing but the totality of the concept.
It is just as one-sided to portray analysis as though there were nothing
in the subject matter that is not imported into it, as it is to suppose that
the resulting determinations are only extracted from it. The former way
of stating the case corresponds, as is well known, to subjective idealism,
which takes the activity of cognition in analysis to be only a one-sided
positing, beyond which the thing-in-itself remains hidden. The other way
belongs to the so-called realism, for which the subjective concept is an
empty identity that imports the thought determinations from outside. –
Since analytical cognition, the transformation of the given material into
logical determinations, has shown itself to be a positing that immediately
determines itself to be equally a presupposing, to be both in one, the logical
element can appear on account of this presupposing to be in the subject
matter as something already completed, just as because of the positing it can
appear as the product of a merely subjective activity. But the two moments
are not to be separated. In the abstract form to which analysis raises it,
the logical element is of course only to be found in cognition, just as conversely it is not only something posited but something that rather exists in
itself.
Now in so far as analytical cognition is the indicated transformation, it
does not go through further middle terms; on the contrary, the determination is to that extent immediate and has precisely the meaning of being the
subject matter’s own determination, of belonging to it in itself, and therefore of being apprehended directly from it without subjective mediation.
But further, cognition is also supposed to be a progress, an explication of
differences. But because, according to the determination that it has here,
37

Cf. above, 12.199.

12.204

702

12.205

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

it is void of concept and undialectical, it only possesses a given difference,
and its progression happens solely in the determinations of the material. It
seems to have an immanent progress only in so far as the derived thought
determinations can in turn be analyzed, in so far as they are still something concrete; the highest and final term of this analyzing is the abstract
highest essence – or the abstract subjective identity and, over against it,
the difference. This progress, however, is nothing but just the repetition
of the one original activity of analysis, namely, the re-determination as a
concretion of what has already been taken up in abstract conceptual form,
and following upon that the analysis of this concretion, and then again
the renewed determination of the resulting abstraction as concrete, and so
forth. – But the thought determinations also seem to contain a transition
in themselves. If the subject matter is defined as a whole, then of course
one advances from it to the other determination of part; from cause to the
other determination of effect, and so forth. But this is no progress, for part
and whole, cause and effect, are relations – indeed, in the context of this
formal cognition they are such consummate relations that the one determination is already found essentially linked to the other. The subject matter
that has been determined whether as cause or as part is thus determined
by the whole relation, already by both sides of it. Although this relation
is in itself something synthetic, this connection is for analytical cognition
just as much of a mere given as is any other connection in its material,
and therefore outside its sphere of competence. Whether this connection
is otherwise determined as a priori or a posteriori is here indifferent, for it
is apprehended as already given, or, as it has also been called, as a fact of
consciousness – namely the fact that with the determination of whole there
is linked the determination of part, and so on. Kant made the profound
observation that there are synthetic principles a priori, and he recognized
as their root the unity of self-consciousness, hence the self-identity of the
concept.38 However, he takes the specific connection, the relational concepts, and the synthetic principles, from formal logic as given; the deduction
of these should have been the exposition of the transition of that simple unity of self-consciousness into these determinations and distinctions;
but Kant spared himself the effort of demonstrating this truly synthetic
progression, that of the self-producing concept.
It is well known that “analytical science” and “analysis” are the names
of preference of arithmetic and the sciences of discrete magnitude in general. And in fact their typical method of cognition is most immanently
38

A154–155, 158/B194, 197.

The idea of cognition

703

analytical and we must now briefly consider why this is so. – Any other
analytical cognition begins from a concrete material that has an accidental
manifoldness within; every distinction of content and every advance to
further content depend on this material. The material of arithmetic and
of algebra is, on the contrary, an already totally abstract and indeterminate
product from which every peculiarity of relation has been eliminated, and
to which, therefore, every determination and every joining is something
external. This product is the principle of discrete magnitude, the one. This
relationless atom can be increased to a plurality and externally determined
and unified into a sum; the increasing and the limiting are an empty progression and an empty determining that never gets past the same principle
of the abstract one. How the numbers are further combined and separated
depends solely on the positing activity of the knowing subject. Magnitude
is in general the category within which these determinations are conducted;
it is the determinateness that has become indifferent, so that the subject
matter has no determinateness which is immanent to it and is therefore
given to cognition. Since cognition has from the start provided itself with
an accidental assortment of numbers, these now constitute the material
for further elaboration and manifold relations. Such relations, their discovery and elaboration, do not seem, it is true, to be anything immanent
in analytical cognition, but seem rather something accidental and given;
moreover, these same relations and the operations connected with them
are also routinely conducted one after the other, as diverse, with no notice
of any internal connectedness. But it is easy to recognize the presence of a
guiding principle; it is none other than the immanent principle of analytical identity, an identity that in diversity appears as equality; progression is
the reduction of the unequal to ever greater equality. To give an example
from the first elementary operations, addition is the combining of quite
accidentally unequal numbers; multiplication, on the contrary, is the combination of equal numbers, upon which there then follows the relation of
equality of number of times and unit, and the relation of powers then comes
in.
Now because the determinateness of the subject matter and of the
relations is a posited one, any further operation with them is also wholly
analytic; accordingly, analytical science has not so much theorems as it has
problems. The analytical theorem contains the problem as already resolved
on its own terms; the wholly external distinction that attaches to the two
sides which it equates is so unessential that, as theorem, it would appear to
be a trivial identity. To be sure, Kant has declared the proposition 5 + 7 =
12 to be synthetic, because the same is exhibited on the one side in the form

12.206

704

12.207

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of a plurality, 5 + 7, and on the other in the form of a unity, 12.39 But, if the
analytic proposition is to mean more than just the totally abstract identity
and tautology of 12 = 12 and is to contain any progression within it at
all, then there must be present some sort of distinction, though not one
based on a quality, on a reflective and still less conceptual determinateness.
5 + 7 and 12 are absolutely the very same content; but the first side also
expresses the demand that 5 and 7 be combined into one expression, that
is to say, that just as 5 is the product of a process of counting that was
arbitrarily interrupted but might just as well have been carried farther, so
now the counting is to be resumed as before with the stipulation that the
ones to be added should be seven. The 12 is therefore the result of 5 and
7 and of a pre-set operation which is by nature also a completely external
and thoughtless act, one that a machine can also therefore perform. Here
there is not the slightest transition to an other; what there is, is the mere
continuation, that is, the repetition, of the same operation that produced 5
and 7.
The proof of a theorem of this kind – and it would require a proof if
it were a synthetic proposition – would consist simply in the operation of
continuing counting, starting from 5, up to 7 as the pre-determined limit,
and in the recognition of the agreement of the product of this counting
with what is otherwise called 12, a figure which is again nothing more
than that same counting up to a determined limit. For this reason we state
the proof in the form of a problem rather than a theorem as a matter of
course. We demand to perform an operation, that is to say, we state only
one side of the equation that would constitute the theorem and whose
other side is now to be found. The problem contains the content and
assigns the specific operation to be performed with it. The operation is not
constrained by any recalcitrant material endowed with specifying relations,
but is rather an external subjective act, the determinations of which are
received with indifference by the material where they are posited. The
whole difference between the conditions stipulated in the problem and the
result in the solution is only this, that the union or separation as stipulated
in the problem is actual in the solution
It is, therefore, a supremely superfluous piece of scaffolding to apply here
the form of geometrical method that goes with synthetic propositions, and
to add to the problem, over and above the solution, a proof as well. Such a
proof can express no more than the tautology that the solution is correct
because the prescribed operation has been performed. If the problem is to
39

B15ff.; A164/B205.

The idea of cognition

705

add several numbers, then the solution is to add them; the proof shows
that the solution is correct because addition was prescribed and addition
was performed. If the problem involves more complex expressions and
operations, as for instance the multiplication of decimal numbers, and the
solution only states the mechanical procedure, a proof will then indeed
be necessary; but it can consist in nothing more than the analysis of the
expressions and of the operation from which the solution proceeds of
itself. By this separation of the solution as a mechanical procedure, and of
the proof as a reminder of the nature of the subject matter to be treated
and of the operation itself, we lose precisely the advantage of the analytic
problem, namely that the construction can be derived directly from the
problem and presented, therefore, as intelligible in and for itself; in the
other way, the construction is expressly given a defect which is typical of
the synthetic method. – In higher analysis, especially in connection with
the relations of powers, where qualitative relations of discrete magnitudes
dependent on conceptual determinacies come into play, the problems and
the theorems do of course contain synthetic determinations; in these cases,
other expressions and relations than are given by the problem or theorem
must be taken as intermediary links. But here also, the determinations
enlisted as an aid must be such as to be based on recalling or developing
one side or other of the problem or theorem; the look of synthesis comes
solely from the fact that the problem or theorem has not as yet already
identified that side. – For instance, the problem of finding the sum of the
powers of the roots of an equation is solved through the examination and
then the joining of the functions that are the coefficients of the equation
of the roots. The determination of the functions of these coefficients and
their link here enlisted as an aid is not already expressed in the problem, but
for the rest the development is totally analytical. The same applies to the
solution of the equation xm – 1 = 0 with the aid of the sine, and also to its
immanent algebraic solution, famously discovered by Gauß, which takes
into consideration as an aid the residuum of xm –1 – 1 divided by 1, and the
so-called primitive roots – one of the most important extensions of analysis
in modern times.40 These solutions are synthetic, for the determinations
enlisted in their aid, the sine or the examination of the residua, are not a
determination of the problem itself.
We gave in the first part of this Logic a detailed account of the nature
of the analysis which is dedicated to the so-called infinite differentiations
40

Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855), a German mathematician and scientist who is widely regarded
as one of the greatest figures in the history of mathematics. His most important work was the
Disquisitiones arithmeticæ.

12.208

706

12.209

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

of variable magnitudes, the analysis of differential and integral calculus.41
It was shown there that underlying this analysis there is a fundamental
qualitative determination of magnitude that can be comprehended only
by the concept.42 The transition to this determination from magnitude
as such is no longer analytic; to this day, therefore, mathematics has been
incapable of justifying internally, that is, mathematically, the operations
based on it, for the transition is not of a mathematical nature. We said in
the same place that Leibniz, famed for having rendered the calculation of
infinitesimals into a calculus, executed that transition in a way which is
utterly deficient, just as totally void of concept as unmathematical.43 But
of course, once the transition is presupposed – and in the present state of
the science it is no more than a presupposition – the further course is only
a series of ordinary analytical operations.
We have said that analysis becomes synthetic when it comes to determinations that are no longer posited by the problems themselves. But the
general transition from analytic to synthetic cognition lies in the necessary
transition from the form of immediacy to mediation, from abstract identity
to difference. Analysis in general restricts its activity to determinations in
so far as these are self-referential; yet by virtue of their determinateness they
also essentially refer to an other by nature. We have already remarked that
analytic cognition remains such even when it advances to relations that
are not an externally given material but are rather thought determinations,
since for it these relations are also given. But because the abstract identity
which this cognition knows to be solely its own is essentially an identity
in difference,44 even as such it must be cognition’s own identity, and the
connection as well must become for the concept one which is posited by it
and is identical with it.
b. Synthetic cognition
Analytic cognition is the first premise of the whole syllogism – the immediate reference of the concept to the object. Identity is, therefore, the
determination which analytic cognition recognizes as its own, and analytic
cognition is the apprehension of what is. Synthetic cognition aims at the
41

42
44

Hegel is referring to Volume One of Part One, “The Doctrine of Being” in its 1812 edition, cf. GW
11, the Remark on pp. 153–178. He gave an even more extensive treatment in the 1832 edition. Cf.
above, the three Remarks in 21.236–309.
43 Cf. GW 11, 168; cf. above 21.256, 260.
GW 11, 157; cf. above 21.241.
Identität des Unterschiedenen.

The idea of cognition

707

comprehension of what is, that is, at grasping the manifoldness of determinations in their unity. It is, therefore, the second premise of the syllogism,
the one in which the diverse as such is connected. Its aim, therefore, is
necessity in general. – The diverse terms that are combined stand, on the
one hand, in a relation in which they are both connected yet mutually indifferent and self-subsistent; but, on the other hand, they are linked together
in the concept which is their simple yet determinate unity. Now inasmuch
as in a first moment synthetic cognition passes over from abstract identity
to relation, or from being to reflection, it is not the absolute reflection
of the concept that the latter recognizes in its subject matter; the reality
that the concept gives itself is the next stage,45 namely the said identity
in diversity as such, an identity that equally is, therefore, still inner, and
only necessity; it is not the subjective identity existing for itself, hence not
as yet the concept as such. Synthetic cognition, therefore, does also have
for its content the determinations of the concept, the object is posited in
them; but they stand only in relation to one another or in immediate unity,
and for that very reason not in the unity by which the concept exists as
subject.
This is what constitutes the finitude of this cognition. Because the identity which this real side of the idea has in it is still an inner one, the
determinations of that identity are still external to themselves; and because
the identity is not as subjectivity, the concept’s own specific presence in
the subject matter still lacks singularity; although what in the object corresponds to the concept is no longer the abstract but the determinate form of
the concept and hence the concept’s particularity; the singularizing element
in the object is nevertheless still a given content. Consequently, although
this cognition transforms the objective world into concepts, what it gives
to it in accordance with conceptual determinations is only the form; as for
the object in its singularity, in its determinate determinateness, this it must
find; the cognition is not yet self-determining. It likewise finds propositions
and laws, and proves their necessity; but it proves the latter not as a necessity
inherent in a fact in and for itself, that is to say, it does not demonstrate it
from the concept; it proves it rather as the necessity inherent to a cognition
that delves into given determinations, into phenomenal differences, and
cognizes for itself the proposition as a unity and relation, or cognizes the
ground of appearance from the appearance itself.
We must now examine the detailed moments of synthetic cognition.
45

die nächste Stufe.

12.210

708

12.211

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

1. Definition
To start with, the still given objectivity is transformed into simple form, as
the first form and therefore as the form of the concept; the moments of this
apprehension are none other, therefore, than the moments of the concept;
universality, particularity, and singularity. – The singular is the object itself as
an immediate representation; it is that which is to be defined. The universal
of this singular object took the form of genus in the determination of
the objective judgment, or the judgment of necessity;46 more precisely,
it took the form of the proximate genus, that is to say, of the universal
with the determinateness which is at the same time the principle for the
differentiation of the particular. This is a difference that the subject matter
receives in its specific non-indifference,47 the one that makes it a determinate
species and is the basis of its disjunction from the remaining species.
Definition, in thus reducing the subject matter to its concept, gets rid of
the externalities that are requisite for its concrete existence; it abstracts from
what is added to the concept in its realization, whereby the concept issues
first into idea and secondly into external concrete existence. Description is
for representation; it collects this extra content that belongs to reality. But
definition reduces this wealth of manifold determinations of the intuited
existence to its simplest moments; what is contained in the concepts are the
form of these simple elements and how they are determined with respect
to one another. The subject matter is thus apprehended, as we just said,
as a universal which is determined at the same time. The subject matter is
the third, the singular in which genus and particularization are posited in
one – an immediate which is posited outside the concept, for it is not yet
self-determining.
In these determinations, in the difference of form of the definition, the
concept finds itself; there it finds the reality that corresponds to it. But
since the reflection of the moments of the concept into themselves which
is singularity is not as yet contained in this reality, and since the object, in so
far as it is in cognition, is consequently not as yet determined as subjective,
it is cognition which, on the contrary, is subjective and has an external
beginning; that is to say, because of its external beginning in a singular it
is subjective. The content of the concept is therefore something given and
contingent. The concrete concept itself is thus contingent in two respects:
once because its content is contingent; and again because it is a matter
of accident which content determinations, from the many qualities which
46

Cf. above, 12.82.

47

Differenz (see the explanation of the term in the Introduction).

The idea of cognition

709

the intended object has in external existence, are chosen for the concept as
constituting its moments.
This last respect requires closer consideration. Since singularity is a
determinate way of existing in and for itself, it escapes the conceptual
determination proper of synthetic cognition. There is in fact no principle,
therefore, for determining which aspects of the subject matter are to be
regarded as belonging to its conceptual determination and which only to
its external reality. In the case of definitions, this constitutes a difficulty
which for synthetic cognition cannot be eliminated. A distinction must
nonetheless be made here. – In the first place, so far as the products of selfconscious purposiveness are concerned, it is easy enough to discover their
definition, for the purpose which they should serve is a determination that
is generated by a subjective resolution and constitutes the essential particularization, the form of the concrete existent, on which alone everything
depends here. The further nature of the material of the existent thing or
its other external properties, in so far as they correspond to the purpose,
are contained in the thing’s determination; the rest are unessential for it.
Secondly, geometrical objects are abstract determinations of space; the
underlying abstraction, the so-called absolute space, has lost all other
concrete determinations and now possesses no further shapes and configurations than are posited in it; essentially, therefore, such shapes and
configurations are only what they are intended to be; their conceptual determination in general, and more proximately their specific difference, have
unfettered reality in them; in this respect, therefore, they are the same as
the products of external purposiveness, and in this they also agree with
the objects of arithmetic in which the underlying determination is also
only one that has been posited in them. – Of course, space has yet further
determinations: its tri-dimensionality, its continuity and divisibility which
are not first posited in it by external determination. But these belong to
the material under consideration and are immediate presuppositions; synthetic relations and laws are produced only through the combination and
the interweaving of these subjective determinations with this distinctive
nature of their field into which they have been imported. – In the case of
number determinations, since they are based on the simple principle of
the one, their combination and further determination is only an entirely
posited product; on the other hand, determinations in space, which for its
part is a continuous externality,48 run a further course of their own and
48

Aussereinander.

710
12.212

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

have a reality that exceeds their concept, but it no longer belongs to the
immediate definition.
But, thirdly, in the case of the definitions of concrete objects, of nature as
well as of spirit, the situation is quite different. For representation, such subject matters are in general things of many properties. In their case all depends
on apprehending what is their proximate genus, and then what is their
specific difference. We have to determine, therefore, which of the many
properties pertains to the subject matter as genus, which as species, and
which among these properties is the essential one; this further involves recognizing how the properties hang together, whether one is already posited
with the other. For this, however, no other criterion is yet available than
existence itself. – For the definition, in which the property is to be posited
as simple undeveloped determinateness, the essentiality of the property is
its universality. But in existence this universality is empirical; it is a universality in time (whether the property persists while the rest ostensibly come
and go within the permanence of the whole), or a universality resulting
from comparison with other concrete wholes, in which case it does not get
beyond commonality. Now if comparison gives as a common foundation
the total habitus, such as is empirically given, then reflection must gather
it together into one simple thought determination and grasp the simple
character of the resulting totality. But the only possible attestation that
a thought determination, or any single one of the immediate properties,
constitutes the simple and determinate essence of the subject matter is
its derivation from the concrete constitution of the latter. But this would
require an analysis that transforms the immediate elements of this constitution into thoughts and reduces their concreteness to a simple thought
determination; and this is an analysis of a higher order than the one just
considered, for it would not be abstractive; on the contrary, in the universal
it should still retain the singular character of the concrete, should unify it
and show that it is dependent on the simple thought determination.
The connections of the manifold determinations of immediate existence to the simple concept would however require theorems, and these
need proof. But definition is the first, still undeveloped concept, and in
that it has to apprehend the simple determinateness of the subject matter,
and this apprehension is to be something simple, it can employ for the
purpose only one of the subject’s immediate so-called properties, a determination of sensuous existence or of representation; the singling out, then,
of this property through abstraction is what constitutes the simplicity, and
for universality and essentiality the concept must resort to empirical universality, to persistence under altered circumstances and to the reflection

The idea of cognition

711

that seeks the determination of the concept in external existence and in
pictorial representation – seeks it, that is, where it is not to be found. –
Defining, therefore, by its own doing also forfeits the true concept determinations that would by essence be the principles of the subject matter,
and contents itself with marks, that is, determinations in which that they
are essential to the subject matter is a matter of indifference and whose
only purpose is rather to be markers for external reflection. – Any such
single, external determinateness is too disproportionate with respect to the
concrete totality and to the nature of its concept to justify its being singled
out or to assume that a concrete whole would find in it its true expression
and determination. – For example, as Blumenbach observes, the lobe of
the ear is something lacking to all other animals and is therefore perfectly
entitled, in accordance with ordinary ways of speaking about common and
distinguishing markers, to be used as the distinctive characteristic in the
definition of the physical human being.49 But how disproportionate such a
totally external determination at once appears when measured against the
representation of the total habitus of the physical human being, and against
the demand that the concept determination shall be something essential!
It is entirely accidental whether the markers taken up into the definition
are pure makeshifts like this one or approximate the nature of a principle
instead. From their externality one can also see that the cognition based
on concepts did not begin with them; it was rather an obscure feeling,
an indeterminate but profound sense, an intimation of the essential that
preceded the discovery of genera in nature and spirit, and only afterwards
was a specific externality sought for the understanding. – Since in existence
the concept has entered into externality, it has unfolded into its differences
and cannot be absolutely attached to any single one of such properties. The
properties, as the externality of the thing, are external to themselves; for this
reason, as we demonstrated in the sphere of appearance in connection with
the thing of many properties,50 do the properties essentially become even
self-subsistent matters; spirit, regarded from the standpoint of appearance,
turns into an aggregate of many independent forces. Regarded in this way,
the single property or force, even where it is posited as indifferent to the
other properties, ceases to be a characterizing principle, with the result
that the determinateness, as the determinateness of the concept, vanishes
completely.
49

50

See J. F. Blumenbach, De Generis Humani Varietate Nativa, 3rd edn (Göttingen, 1795), §12, p. 27,
in Concepts of Race in the Eighteenth Century, ed. Robert Bernascone, Vol. 4 (Bristol: Thoemmes,
2001).
Cf. above 11.334–339.

12.213

712

12.214

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

In the concrete things, together with the diversity of the properties
among themselves, there also enters the difference between the concept and
its realization. The concept has an external presentation in nature and
spirit wherein its determinateness manifests itself as dependence on the
external, as transitoriness and inadequacy. Therefore, although an actual
thing will indeed manifest in itself what it ought to be, yet, in accordance
with the negative judgment of the concept, it may equally also show that
its actuality only imperfectly corresponds with this concept, that it is bad.
Now the definition is supposed to indicate the determinateness of the
concept in an immediate property; yet there is no property against which
an instance could not be adduced where the whole habitus indeed allows
the recognition of the concrete thing to be defined, yet the property taken
for its character shows itself to be immature and stunted. In a bad plant, a
bad animal type, a contemptible human individual, a bad state, there are
aspects of their concrete existence that are defective or entirely missing but
that might otherwise be picked out for the definition as the distinctive mark
and essential determinateness in the existence of any such concrete entity.
A bad plant, a bad animal, etc., remains a plant, an animal just the same.
If, therefore, the bad specimens are also to be covered by the definition,
then the empirical search for essential properties is ultimately frustrated,
because of the instances of malformation in which they are missing; for
instance, in the case of the physical human being, the essentiality of the
brain is missing in the instance of acephalous individuals; or, in the case
of the state, the essentiality of the protection of life and of property is
missing in the instance of despotic states and tyrannical governments. –
If the concept is maintained despite the contradicting instance and the
latter is declared, as measured by the concept, to be a bad specimen, then
the attestation of the concept is no longer based on appearance. But that
the concept stands on its own goes against the meaning of definition;
for definition is supposed to be the immediate concept, and can therefore
derive its determinations of the subject matter only from the immediacy of
existence and justify itself only in what it already finds there. – Whether its
content is in and for itself truth or contingency, this lies outside the sphere
of definition; but for this reason, because the singular subject matter under
consideration may well be a bad specimen, formal truth, or the agreement
of the concept subjectively posited in the definition and the actual subject
matter outside it, cannot be established.
The content of a definition is taken in general from immediate existence,
and because it is immediate, it has no justification; the question regarding
its necessity is precluded by its origination; by the very fact that the

The idea of cognition

713

definition voices the concept as something merely immediate, it renounces
comprehending it conceptually. What it exhibits, therefore, is nothing but
the form determination of the concept in a given content, without the
reflection of the concept within itself, that is, without its being-for-itself.
But immediacy proceeds as such only from mediation, and must therefore pass over into it. Or the determinateness of the content contained in
the definition is, for the very reason that it is determinateness, not only
immediate but something mediated by its other. Consequently definition
can apprehend its subject matter only by virtue of the opposite determination and must therefore pass over into division.
2. Division
The universal must particularize itself; to this extent, the necessity of division lies in the universal. But because definition itself already begins with
the particular, its necessity for passing over into division lies in the particular that points, as particular, to an other. Conversely, the particular separates
itself off from the universal precisely by holding on to its determinateness
for the sake of keeping it distinct from an other than it; the universal is
therefore presupposed for division. The way to proceed is therefore this: the
singular content of definition is raised through particularity to the extreme
of universality; but universality must from now on be assumed as the objective foundation and, with it as the starting point, division presents itself as
the disjunction of the universal, the latter being the first.
A transition is now introduced which, since it takes place from the
universal to the particular, is determined by the form of the concept.
Definition is as such something singular; a greater number of definitions
pertains to a greater number of subject matters. The advance from the
universal to the particular characteristic of the concept constitutes the
basis and the possibility of a synthetic science, of a system, and of systematic
cognition.
The first requirement for this is that, as indicated, the beginning be made
with the subject matter in the form of a universal. In the realm of actuality,
whether of nature or spirit, it is the concrete singularity that is given to
subjective, natural cognition as first. But in a cognition which is a conceptual comprehension, at least inasmuch as it has the form of the concept
for its basis, it is the simple, abstracted from the concrete, that on the
contrary comes first, for only in this form does the subject matter have
the form of a self-referring universality and of an immediacy that accords
with the concept. It may perhaps be objected to this way of proceeding
in matters scientific that, since intuition is easier than cognition, what can

12.215

714

12.216

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

be intuited, that is, concrete actuality, should be made the starting point
of science; that this way of proceeding would be more natural than one
that starts from an abstract subject matter and then proceeds from it to its
particularization and concrete singularization. – But inasmuch as cognition
is the issue, any comparison with intuition has already been decided and
dismissed; the only question allowed here is what should be the first inside
cognition, and how one should then go from there; what is required is not
a method appropriate to nature but one appropriate to cognition. – If the
issue is merely one of easiness, then it goes without saying that it is easier
for cognition to grasp the abstract simple thought determination than to
grasp a concrete subject matter which is a complex web of such thought
determinations and relations; and it is in this manner, no longer as it is
given in intuition, that the matter should be grasped. The universal is in
and for itself the first moment of the concept, because it is the simple,
and the particular only comes after it, because it is the mediated; and
conversely the simple is the more universal, and the concrete, since it is
internally differentiated and hence mediated, is what already presupposes
the transition from a first. – This remark applies not only to the ordering
of the whole into the specific forms of definitions, divisions, and propositions, but also to the ordering of cognition as a whole and simply with
respect to the difference of abstract and concrete in general. – Thus in
learning to read for example, the more rational way to begin is also not
with reading whole words or even syllables, but with the elements of words
and syllables and with the signs of abstract sound inflections; in alphabetic
script the analysis of concrete words into their abstract sound inflections
and their signs is already accomplished, and for this reason learning to read
is a primary occupation with abstractions. In geometry, the beginning has
to be made not with a concrete space configuration but with point and line
and then with plane figures, and among the latter not with polygons but
with the triangle, and among curves with the circle. In physics, the singular
natural properties or matters must be freed from the manifold entanglements in which they are found in concrete actuality, and presented with
their simple, necessary conditions; they too, like space configurations, are
accessible to intuition, but this intuition has to be prepared for, in such a
way that they finally appear and are held free of all the modifications due
to circumstances which are extraneous to their specific nature. Magnetism,
electricity, various kinds of gases, etc., are such subject matters as come
to be known in their specificity only by being apprehended as removed
from the concrete conditions under which they appear in actuality. Of
course, an experiment will exhibit them to intuition in some concrete case;

The idea of cognition

715

but, in order for the experiment to be scientific, it must admit only such
conditions as are necessary to it, and it must be repeated in various forms
in order to demonstrate that the concrete cluster of conditions that cannot
be separated from the matters under consideration are inessential, for these
can appear in one concrete configuration and then again in another, so that
only their abstract form is left for cognition. – To mention yet one more
example, it might appear natural and reasonable to regard colors, first, in
the concrete appearance of the animal subjective sense; next, as a spectral
phenomenon hovering outside the subject, and finally fixed in objects in
external actuality. But for cognition, the universal and consequently truly
primary form is the middle one of the three mentioned, color as it hovers
between subjectivity and objectivity in the well-known form of the spectrum, still unentangled with subjective and objective circumstances. For
the pure consideration of the nature of this object such circumstances are
at first only a source of interference, because they behave as efficient causes
and therefore make it uncertain whether specific alterations of colors, specific transitions and relations, are based on their own specific nature as color
or are rather to be attributed to the specific pathology of the circumstances
themselves, to the healthy and sick particular affections and effects of the
organs of the subject, or to the chemical, vegetable, and animal forces of the
objects. – Numerous other examples could be adduced from the cognition
of organic nature and of the world of spirit; everywhere the abstract must
constitute the starting point and the element in which and from which the
particularities and rich shapes of the concrete spread out.
Now, although with division or with the particular the distinction of
universal and particular is duly introduced, this universal is nevertheless
itself already something determinate and therefore itself only a member
of a division. Hence there is a higher universal for it, and a higher yet
for this other universal, and the same for the next all the way to infinity.
There is no immanent limit to the cognition under consideration here,
because it proceeds from a given and it is the form of abstract universality
that defines its “first.” Any object, therefore, that seems to possess an
elementary universality is made the subject matter of a specific science:
it makes an absolute beginning because ordinary acquaintance with it is
presupposed, and the assumption made is that it stands on its own with no
need of derivation. Definition takes it as an immediate.
Division is the immediately next step after this starting point. For this
advance, only an immanent principle would be required, that is, a beginning from the universal and the concept; but the cognition under consideration here lacks any such principle, for it follows only upon the form

12.217

716

12.218

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determination of the concept without that form’s immanent reflection,
and therefore takes the determinateness of the content from what is given.
There is no specific reason for the particular that enters into the division, whether with respect to what constitutes the basis of the division, or
with respect to the specific relation that the members of the disjunction
are supposed to have to one another. Consequently, in this respect the
business of cognition can only consist partly in orderly arranging the particularities found in the empirical material, and partly also in discovering
universal determinations of this material by means of comparison. Such
determinations then count as grounds of division, of which there can be
a variety, just as there can be an equal variety of divisions based on them.
The relation of the members of a division to one another, the relation
of the species, has only this one universal determination, namely that the
members, the species, are determined relative to one another in accordance
with the assumed ground of division; if their differentiation were to rest on
some other consideration, their order would be arranged along different
lines accordingly.
Because of the lack of a principle of self-determination, the only possible
laws for this business of division consist in formal, empty rules that lead
nowhere. – Thus we see laid down as a rule that division should exhaust the
concept; but in fact each single member of the division must exhaust the
concept. Actually, what is meant is that the determinateness of the concept
should be exhausted; but there is nothing in an empirical manifold of
species, internally void of determination, that contributes to this exhaustion
whether few or many of them have been discovered; it is indifferent, for
example, to the exhaustion of the concept whether in addition to the
sixty-seven species of parrots another dozen are discovered. The demand
for exhaustion can only mean this tautological proposition, that all the
species should be listed in their completeness. – Now as empirical cognition
expands, it can well happen that species are discovered that do not fit the
assumed determination of the genus, for the genus is usually adopted more
in accordance with some obscure representation of the whole habitus than
in accordance with the more or less singular mark that should expressly
serve to determine it. – In such a case, the genus would have to be altered
and a justification would have to be given for regarding another group of
species as the species of the one new genus; that is to say, the genus would
receive its determination from what we group together on the basis of
some standpoint or other that we choose to assume as a principle of unity;
this standpoint thus becomes itself the ground of division. Conversely,
should we hold on to the determinateness originally assumed to define the

The idea of cognition

717

genus, then the material that we wanted to bring as species in unity with the
earlier ones, would have to be excluded. This way of carrying on without the
concept – at one time by assuming a certain determinateness as the essential
moment of the genus, subordinating the particulars to it or excluding them
from it accordingly; at another time by starting with the particulars and
letting oneself be guided in grouping them by some other determinateness –
this way gives the appearance of a game in which it is left up to chance to
decide which part or which side of the concrete to fix on in order then to
bring order in accordance with it. – It is physical nature itself that presents
such a contingency in the principles of division; because of the external
dependency of its actuality, it stands in a manifold of connectedness which
for it is likewise given; there is, therefore, an assortment of principles to
which it has to adapt itself, following one principle in one series of its
forms but another in another series, while also producing hybrids that go
in different directions at once. Thus it happens that in one series of natural
things certain marks come to the fore as especially significant and essential
that in another series become inconspicuous and purposeless, the result
being that it is impossible to abide by any such principle of division.
The general determinateness of empirical species can only consist in this:
that they are simply diverse from one another without being opposed. The
disjunction of the concept was presented earlier in a determinate form;51
if particularity is taken without the negative unity of the concept, as a
particularity which is immediate and given, then difference stays at only
the reflective form of diversity considered earlier. The externality in which
the concept is pre-eminently to be found in nature brings with it the total
indifference of difference; for this reason it is common to take from number
the determination for division.
Such is the contingency here of the particular with respect to the universal, and therefore of division in general, that it may be attributed to
an instinct of reason when we discover in this cognition bases of division
and divisions which, to the extent that sensuous properties allow it, show
themselves to be more adequate to the concept. For example, in the case
of animals, the instruments for eating, the teeth and the claws, are used
in the systems as a far-reaching criterion of division. They may be taken
at first only as features in which it is easier, for the subjective purpose of
cognition, to detect distinguishing marks. But in fact the differentiation
embodied in those organs is not one that pertains just to external reflection;
such organs are rather the vital point of animal individuality, where the
51

Cf. above, 12.37–38.

12.219

718

12.220

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

latter posits itself as self-referring singularity by cutting itself loose from
the otherness of its external nature and from continuity with the other. –
In the case of the plant, it is the reproductive parts that constitute the
highest point of vegetable life, the point at which the plant points to the
transition into sexual difference and thereby into individual singularity. For
this reason the system has rightly turned to this point for a base of division
which, though not sufficient, is nonetheless far-reaching, and has thereby
laid down for foundation a determinateness which is such not merely for
external reflection, for the purpose of comparison, but is in and for itself
the highest of which the plant is capable.
3. The theorem
1. The third stage in this advance of cognition based on concept determinations is the transition of particularity to singularity; this stage constitutes
the content of the theorem. To be considered here, therefore, is the selfreferring determinateness, the internal differentiation of the subject matter
and the connection of the differentiated determinacies to one another. Definition contains only one determinateness, division contains determinateness
as against the other; in singularization the subject matter has parted internally. Whereas definition stops at the universal concept, in theorems the
subject matter is known in its reality, in the conditions and the forms of its
real existence. Together with the definition, therefore, the subject matter
exhibits the idea, which is the unity of the concept and reality. But the
cognition being considered here, a cognition that is still a seeking, does not
attain this presentation, for in it reality does not proceed from the concept,
and therefore the dependency of reality on the concept and consequently
the unity itself is not cognized.
Now according to the definition just given, the theorem is the properly
synthetic element of a subject matter, because the relations of its determinacies are necessary, that is, are grounded in the inner identity of the concept.
In definition and division the synthetic element is a connectedness held
together externally; what is found given is brought into the form of the
concept, but, as given, the entire content is only displayed; in the theorem,
on the contrary, it ought to be demonstratively displayed. Since this cognition does not deduce the content of its definitions and of the principles of
division, it seems that it might also spare itself the proof of the relations
expressed by the theorem and be satisfied here too just with perception. But
what distinguishes cognition from mere perception and representation is
the form of the concept in general that it imparts to the content; this is done
in definition and division; but since the content of the theorem proceeds

The idea of cognition

719

from the concept’s moment of singularity, it consists in determinations of
reality that no longer have as their relation just the simple and immediate
determinations of the concept; in singularity the concept has gone over to
otherness, to reality, thereby becoming idea. The synthesis contained in the
theorem no longer has, therefore, the form of the concept to justify it; it
is a joining together of such as are diverse; consequently, the unity not yet
thereby posited still remains to be demonstrated; here proof thus becomes
necessary to this cognition itself.
Now the first difficulty that we encounter here is of distinctly distinguishing between which of the determinations of the subject matter can be
admitted into the definitions, and which must rather be relegated to the
theorems. In this matter, there is no principle readily available. There might
seem to be one in assuming, perhaps, that what pertains to a subject matter
immediately also belongs to the definition, while for the rest, since it is
something mediated, the mediation must first be demonstrated. But the
content of the definition is as such determined and therefore itself essentially mediated; its immediacy is only a subjective one, that is to say, the
subject makes an arbitrary beginning letting a subject matter count as a
presupposition. Now since this subject matter is as such in itself concrete,
and must also be divided, the result is a number of determinations that
are mediated by nature and are taken as immediate and unproved, not on
the basis of any principle, but only subjectively. – Even in Euclid, who has
always been justly recognized to be the master of this synthetic kind of
cognition, we find under the name of axiom a presupposition about parallel
lines that some have held to be in need of proof, and various attempts have
been made to fill this lack. And there are several other theorems in which
people have thought to have discovered presuppositions that should not
have been immediately assumed but ought to have been proved. So far
as the axiom of parallel lines is concerned, it may be noted that precisely
there is where Euclid gives evidence of his good sense; he had duly appreciated the nature of his science. The proof of that axiom would have to be
derived from the concept of parallel lines; any such proof, however, has no
place in his science, no more than does the deduction of his definitions,
of his axioms and his subject matter in general, of space itself and its first
determinations, the dimensions. For any such deduction would have to be
carried out on the basis of the concept, and this lies outside the proper
domain of Euclidean science; these must remain for it, therefore, necessary
presuppositions, relative firsts.
Axioms, to take this opportunity of mentioning them, belong to the
same class. They are commonly but wrongly taken to be absolute firsts, as

12.221

720

12.222

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

if they were not in need of proof in and for themselves. If such were in
fact the case, they would then be mere tautologies, for it is only in abstract
identity that there is no diversity and that therefore also no mediation is
needed. But if the axioms are more than just tautologies, then they are
propositions drawn from another science, since within the science for which
they serve as axioms they are meant as presuppositions. Strictly speaking,
therefore, they are theorems, and are indeed mostly drawn from logic. The
axioms of geometry are lemmas of this kind, logical propositions, and they
come close, moreover, to being tautologies because they are concerned with
quantity alone and every qualitative difference has therefore been purged
from it. Of the principal axiom, the purely quantitative syllogism, we spoke
earlier.52 – Axioms, therefore, when considered in and for themselves, are
just as much in need of proof as are definitions and divisions, and they
are not made into theorems only for the reason that, since they are relative
firsts, they are assumed for a certain standpoint as presuppositions.
As regards the content of theorems, there is one further precision to be
made. Because this content consists in a connection of determinacies of
the concept’s reality, such connections may be more or less incomplete
and single relations of the subject matter, or, on the contrary, they may
be one such relation that encompasses the whole content of reality and
expresses the content’s determinate connection. But the unity of all the
content determinacies is equivalent to the concept; a proposition that contains
them is therefore itself a definition again – not one, however, that expresses
the concept only as immediately assumed, but one that expresses it rather
as developed into its determinate, real differences, or one that expresses
the concept’s complete existence. The two together, therefore, present the
idea.
If we closely compare the theorems of a synthetic science, of geometry
in particular, we find this distinction, namely that some of the science’s
theorems contain only singular relations of the subject matter, whereas
others contain relations in which its full determinateness is expressed. It
is a very superficial view that attributes equal value to all propositions, on
the ground that each generally contains a truth, and in the formal progression from step to step of a proof each is equally essential.53 The difference
with respect to the content of theorems is most intimately connected with
this progression itself, and some further remarks concerning the latter will
serve to clarify that difference further, as well as the nature of synthetic
52
53

Cf. above, 12.104–105.
For the background of Hegel’s polemical remark, see the note in the critical edition. GW 12, 353,
note to 222.33–36.

The idea of cognition

721

cognition. To start with, Euclidean geometry (which, as the representative of the synthetic method of which it delivers the most accomplished
exemplar, shall serve as an example) has from ancient times been renowned
for the order in the progression of its theorems, whereby for each theorem the propositions required for its construction and proof are always
found already proved. This circumstance concerns the formal sequence
of inference; yet, important as it is, it still has primarily to do with the
external ordering of purposiveness, and bears on its own no connection
to the essential difference of the concept and the idea in which there lies
a higher principle of the necessity of the progression. – That is to say,
the definitions with which the beginning is made apprehend the sensuous
subject matter as immediately given, and they determine it according to its
proximate genus and specific difference;54 these are equally the simple and
immediate determinacies of the concept, the universality and particularity
whose relation is developed no further. Now the initial theorems themselves
have nothing at their disposal except such immediate determinations as are
found in the definitions; similarly their reciprocal dependence can only be
a matter at first of each being in general determined through the other.
Thus Euclid’s first propositions regarding the triangle have to do only with
congruence, that is, how many parts must be determined in a triangle in order
that the remaining parts of the one and same triangle, or the whole of it, be
determined in full.55 That two triangles are compared with one another and
their congruence posited in the fact that they coincide is a detour needed
by a method that must rely on sensuous coincidence instead of the thought
of determinateness. Otherwise considered for themselves, these theorems
themselves contain two parts, one of which can be regarded as the concept,
and the other as the reality that completes the concept by realizing it. For the
understanding, whatever suffices for a full determination, that is to say, the
two sides and the enclosed angle in this case, is already the entire triangle;
nothing further is needed for its complete determinateness; the remaining
two angles and the third side are the superfluity of reality over and above
the determinateness of the concept. Thus all that those theorems in fact
do is to reduce the sensuous triangle, which of course requires three sides
and three angles, to its simplest conditions. The definition had mentioned,
quite in general, only the three lines that enclose the plane figure and
make it a triangle; it is a theorem that first expresses the determinateness of
the angles through the determinateness of the sides, just as the remaining
theorems express the dependence of three other parts on three others. –
54

Differenz.

55

See Euclid, Elements, Book 1, Props. 4, 5, 6, 8.

12.223

722

12.224

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

But the complete determinateness of the magnitude of a triangle in terms
of its sides is contained in the Pythagorean theorem; it is in this theorem
that we first have the equation of the sides of the triangle, for the preceding
sides56 bring the triangle to a reciprocal determinateness of part to part only
in general, not to an equation. This proposition is therefore the perfect,
real definition of the triangle – of the right-angled triangle in the first place,
the simplest in its differences and hence the most regular. – Euclid brings
the first book to a close with this proposition, for it does in fact attain a
perfect determinateness. And after he has reduced to a uniform type those
triangles which are not right-angles and are affected by greater inequality,
he concludes the second book with the reduction of the rectangle to the
square, with an equation between the self-equal, or the square, and the
internally unequal, or the rectangle; similarly, in the Pythagorean theorem,
the hypotenuse that corresponds to the right-angle, the self-equal, constitutes one side of the equation, while the other side is made up by the
self-unequal, the two perpendicular sides. The equation between the square
and the rectangle is at the basis of the second definition of the circle, and
this is again the Pythagorean theorem, except that the two perpendicular
sides of the right-angle are assumed to be alterable; the first equation of the
circle is in precisely the relationship of sensuous determinateness to equation
as holds between the two different definitions of conic sections in general.
This truly synthetic progression is a transition from universal to singularity, namely to that which is determined in and for itself, or to the unity of
the subject matter in itself inasmuch as this has come apart, differentiated
into its essential real determinacies. In other science, however, the common
and quite imperfect way of advancing from universality to singularity is
indeed to start from a universal, but then to singularize and concretize it
by applying it to a material brought in from elsewhere; in this way, the
singularity of the idea is strictly speaking an empirical addition.
Now whatever the content of the theorem, whether imperfect or perfect,
it must be proved. It is a relation of real determinations that do not have
the relation of concept determinations; when they do have this relation,
as it can be shown to be the case for the propositions we have called
second or real definitions, such definitions are for that very reason in one
respect definitions; but since their content consists at the same time of
relations of real determinations, not just of the relation of universal and
simple determinateness, in comparison with such a first definition they
56

All the editions, including the critical, read Seiten, i.e “sides.” I am inclined to agree with Moni and
Cesa that one should read Sätze instead, i.e. “propositions.” “Sides” does not seem to make much
sense. Hegel refers to the Pythagorean equation as “proposition” immediately after.

The idea of cognition

723

are also in need and capable of proof. As real determinacies, they have the
form of indifferent subsistence and indifferent diversity; hence they are not
immediately one and therefore their mediation is to be demonstrated. The
immediate unity in the first definition is the one in accordance with which
the particular is in the universal.
2. Now the mediation which we must now consider more closely may be
simple or may go through several mediations. The mediating members are
joined together with those to be mediated; but since it is not on the basis of
the concept, to which the transition into an opposite is altogether alien, that
the mediation and the theorem are retraced in this cognition, in the absence
of any concept of connectedness, the mediating determinations must be
imported from somewhere as a provisory material for the scaffolding of the
proof. This preparation is the construction.
Now among the connections of the content of the theorem, of which
there can be a great number, only those must be adduced and made
to work that are of service to the proof. The supply of material only
acquires meaning in this context; in itself it appears blind and meaningless.
In retrospect it will of course become apparent in the proof that there
was a purpose to drawing, for example, such or such additional lines to
a geometrical figure as the construction specifies; in the course of the
construction itself, however, this must be done blindly; by itself, therefore,
this operation is without understanding, since the purpose motivating it is
yet to be declared. – It is a matter of indifference whether the operation is
undertaken for the purpose of a theorem in the strict sense or a problem;
as it first appears before the proof, the operation is not anything derived
from the given specification of the theorem or the problem – a meaningless
act, therefore, for anyone as yet not acquainted with its purpose, and then
always only directed by an external purpose.
This hidden purpose becomes apparent in the proof. This contains, as
stated,57 the mediation of what the theorem declares as bound together, and
it is only by virtue of this mediation that this connectedness first appears
as necessary. Just as the construction lacks on its own the subjectivity of the
concept, so is the proof a subjective act lacking in objectivity. For since the
content determinations of the theorem are not posited at the same time as
determinations of the concept, but are posited instead as indifferent parts
standing in a multitude of external relations to one another, it is only in
the formal, external concept that the necessity manifests itself. The proof
is not a genesis of the relation that constitutes the content of the theorem;
57

i.e. in the preceding page.

12.225

724

12.226

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

the necessity is present only to insight, and the whole proof is only for
the subjective interest of cognition. It is for this reason a thoroughly external
reflection that proceeds from the outside to the inside, that is, arrives in
conclusion at the inner constitution of the relation on the basis of external
circumstances. These circumstances, which the construction has presented,
are a consequence of the nature of the subject matter; here they are converted
instead into the ground and the mediating relations. The middle term, the
third term in which the terms linked in the theorem present themselves
in their unity and that provides the nerve of the proof, is therefore only
something in which the connectedness appears and is external. Because the
sequence which the proof goes through is rather the reverse of the nature of
the fact, what is considered in the proof as ground is a subjective ground,
one that brings out the nature of the fact only for cognition.
The foregoing considerations make clear the necessary limit of this cognition, a limit that usually goes unrecognized. The science of geometry is the
most illustrious example of the synthetic method – but it has been inappropriately applied to other sciences as well, even to philosophy. Geometry is
a science of magnitude; hence formal inference is the one most appropriate
to it; since it treats the quantitative determination alone, abstracting from
anything qualitative, it can confine itself to formal identity, to the unity void
of concept which is equality and belongs to external, abstractive reflection.
The determinations of space that are its subject matter are already abstract
objects, suitably prepared for the purpose of obtaining a perfectly finite,
external determinateness. This science, because of its abstract subject matter, on the one hand has an aura of sublimity about it, for in these empty
silent spaces color is extinguished and the other sensuous properties have
equally vanished, and further, every other interest that would appeal to a
living individuality is silenced. On the other hand, this abstract subject
matter is still space, a non-sensuous sensuous. To be sure, intuition is raised
to a higher level in this abstraction; space is now a form of intuition,
but it is still intuition – sensuous intuition, the externality58 of the senses
themselves,59 their pure absence of concept. – Enough has been heard lately
of the pre-eminence of geometry in this respect. There are those who say
that geometry’s foremost advantage is that it is based on the intuition of
the senses, even believe that its scientific pre-eminence depends on this
circumstance and that its proofs rest on intuition. This shallow view must
be countered with the plain reminder that no science can be brought about
by intuition, but only by thought. The intuitive character that geometry
58

Aussereinander

59

A24–25/B39–40; A33/B50.

The idea of cognition

725

possesses because of its still sensuous material only gives to it that level of
evidence that the senses generally provide to thoughtless spirit. It is therefore
regrettable that the same sensuousness of material which is a sign of the
inferiority of its standpoint has been reckoned instead to its advantage. It is
solely to the abstraction of its sensuous subject matter that geometry owes
its aptitude for a higher scientific reach and the advantage that it has over
the collections of information that people are also want to call sciences but
have for content only the concrete perceptible material of the senses, and
only because of the order that they seek to bring to it do they give any sign
of a remote inkling and hint of the requirements of the concept.
It is only because the space of geometry is the abstract emptiness of
externality that it is possible for figures to be drawn in its indeterminateness
in such a way that their determinations remain perfectly at rest outside one
another with no immanent transition to the opposite. The science of these
figures is therefore plainly and simply the science of the finite which is
compared according to magnitude and has for its unity the external one of
equality. But now, since with these figures the start is made from a variety of
sides and points at once, and the various figures fall into place of themselves,
in comparing them their qualitative unlikeness and incommensurability also
come into view. Geometry is thus driven, beyond the finitude within which
it advanced step by step orderly and securely, to infinity – to the positing
as equal of such as are qualitatively diverse. Here it loses the evidence that
it derived from being otherwise based on fixed finitude without having
to deal with the concept and the transition to the opposite which is its
manifestation. As a finite science, geometry reaches its limit at this point,
for the necessity and the mediation of the synthetic realm is no longer
grounded in merely positive identity, but in negative identity.
If geometry, like algebra, quickly runs up against its limit with its abstract
subject matter, suited as this is only to the understanding, it is evident from
the start that the synthetic method is all the more insufficient for other sciences, and most insufficient of all for philosophy. Regarding definition and
division, we have already made the relevant points, and we should be left
here to speak only of theorems and proofs. But, besides the presupposition of definition and division that itself requires proof and presupposes
it, also problematic is the very position of definition and division with
respect to the theorems. This position is especially noteworthy in the
empirical sciences, as for example physics, whenever they want to give
themselves the form of synthetic sciences. This is how they go about it.
The reflective determinations of particular forces, or of otherwise inner and
essential forms, which are the results of an analysis of experience and can be

12.227

726

12.228

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

justified only as such results, must be placed at the top, in order to obtain
from them a general foundation that can then be applied to the singular
and be instantiated there. Since these general foundations have no hold of
their own, we must simply grant them in the meantime; it is only in the
derived consequences that we notice that the latter are in fact the ground
of those presuppositions. The so-called explanation, and the proof of the
concrete brought into theorems, turn out to be partly a tautology, partly
an obfuscation of the true relation, and partly also an obfuscation that
serves to hide the deception of cognition. For cognition has collected experiences tendentiously, only so that it could attain its simple definitions and
principles; and it has pre-empted the possibility of empirical refutation
by taking experiences and accepting them as valid, not in their concrete
totality but selectively, as examples that can then be used on behalf of its
hypotheses and theories. In this subordination of concrete experience to
presupposed determinations, the foundation of the theory is obscured and
is only indicated according to the side that suits the theory; and, quite in
general, the unprejudiced examination of concrete perceptions for their
own sake is thereby much impeded. Only by turning the whole procedure
upside down does the whole thing acquire the right relation in which the
link of ground and consequence can come into view. One of the principal
obstacles in the study of these sciences is thus the way we enter into them,
which we can only do by blindly taking the presuppositions for granted and,
without being able to form any further concept of them, often not even
an exact representation, at best by conjuring up in phantasy a confused
picture of them, we right there impress in our memory the determinations
of the forces and matters that we have assumed, their hypothetical shapes,
their directions and rotations. If we are asked to produce the necessity and
the concept of these assumptions in order to justify assuming their validity,
we discover that we are incapable of making a step beyond the starting
point.
We had occasion above to speak of the inappropriateness of applying the
synthetic method to strictly analytic science.60 Wolff extended this application to every kind of bits of knowledge that he dragged into philosophy and
mathematics – cognitions which were partly of a wholly analytical nature,
and partly also devoted to practical matters of an incidental kind. The
incongruity between this material, easy to grasp and by nature incapable of
rigorous and scientific treatment, and the pompous scientific roundabouts
icing it, has alone demonstrated the clumsiness of such an application,
60

Cf. above, 12.206–207.

The idea of cognition

727

finally discrediting it.s Yet, this misuse has not sufficed to shake the belief
that this method is both suited and essential to attaining scientific rigor
in philosophy. Spinoza’s example, the way he presented his philosophy, has
long served as model in this regard. But the fact is that Kant and Jacobi
did do away with this whole style of the previous metaphysics and its
method along with it. As for the content of that metaphysics, Kant has
in his own fashion shown that it leads by strict demonstration to antinomies, the same whose nature we have in other respects elucidated at the
appropriate places.63 But Kant did not reflect on the nature of the demonstration associated with them, on the fact that such a demonstration is
inextricably bound to a finite content. In his Principles of Natural Science,
he gave himself an example of how to deal with a science of reflection on
its own methodological terms, in a way that he thought would vindicate
it for philosophy.64 – While Kant attacked previous metaphysics for the
most part from the side of its content, Jacobi did it especially from the side
of its method of demonstration and, with great clarity and profundity, he
put his finger on precisely the point at issue, namely that such a method
of demonstration is strictly bound to the cycle of rigid necessity of finite
reality, and that freedom, that is, the concept and with it everything that truly
exists, lies beyond it and is unattainable by it.65 – According to Kant’s result,
s

61
62
63
64

65

For example, Wolff’s First Principles of Architecture, the Eighth Theorem, runs as follows: Theorem:
A window must be wide enough that two persons can comfortably stand at it side by side.
Proof: For it is common for one to stand at a window with somebody else to view the outside.
Now since the fabric architect should in every respect satisfy the main intentions of the owner of the
fabric (§1), he must also construct the window in such a manner that two persons can comfortably
stand at it side by side. Q.E.D.61
From the same author’s Principles of Fortification, the Second Theorem:
Theorem: If the enemy encamps in the vicinity, and the attempt at a rush to relieve the siege
is expected, a line of circumvallation must be drawn around the whole siege. Proof: Lines of
circumvallation prevent anyone from penetrating into an area from outside (§311). But those who
wish to relieve the area of siege will attempt to penetrate the area from outside. If, therefore, one
wants to keep them out, a line of circumvallation must be drawn around the area. Therefore, if the
enemy encamps in the vicinity and the attempt at a rush to relieve the siege is expected, the area
must be enclosed in lines of circumvallation. Q.E.D.62
See Christian Wolff, Anfangs-Gründe aller mathematischen Wissenschaften I, Anfangs-Gründe der
Bau-Kunst, in Gesammelte Werke, erste Abteilung, Vol. 12 (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1973), p. 440.
See Christian Wolff, Anfangs-Gründe aller mathematischen Wissenschaften II, Anfangs-Gründe der
Fortification, in Gesammelte Werke, erste Abteilung, Vol. 13 (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1973), p. 724.
GW 11, 114–120, 147; cf. above, 21.179ff., 228ff.
Kant, Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft (1786), English trans., Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Sciences, trans. Michael Friedman, in Immanuel Kant: Theoretical Philosophy
after 1781, ed. Henry Allison and Peter Heath (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
Cf. “Preface,” AK 4.467–479.
See, for instance, Supplement VII to the 1789 edition of Concerning the Doctrine of Spinoza,
Werke: Gesamtausgabe, Series 1, Vol. 1, pp. 247–265. English trans., The Main Philosophical Works,
pp. 370–373.

12.229

728

12.230

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

it is the peculiar content of metaphysics that leads it into contradictions;
the inadequacy of cognition is due to its subjectivity. Jacobi’s result is that
the inadequacy is due instead to the method and the whole nature of cognition itself that only grasps a concatenation of conditions and dependency
and therefore proves itself inadequate to what exists in and for itself, to
what is absolutely true. And in fact, since the principle of philosophy is
the infinite free concept and all its content rests on that alone, the method
suited to a finitude empty of concept is inadequate to it. The synthesis and
the mediation of this method, the process of proving, goes no further than a
necessity which is opposed to freedom, that is, an identity of the dependent
which is only implicit, whether it is apprehended as internal or as external,
and in which that which in it constitutes reality, the differentiation that
has emerged in concrete existence, remains simply self-subsistent diversity
and therefore something finite.66 In this reality, therefore, this identity does
not itself attain concrete existence but remains only internal, or again, is only
external, because its determinate content is given to it. Either way, whether
internal or external, the identity is something abstract that does not possess
within it the side of reality, is not posited as determinate identity in and for
itself; therefore the concept, which alone is the issue here and which is the
infinite in and for itself, is precluded from this cognition.
In synthetic cognition, therefore, the idea achieves its purpose only to the
extent that the concept becomes for the concept according to its moments of
identity and real determinations, or of universal and particular differences –
further also as an identity which is connectedness and dependence in diversity.
But this, its subject matter, is not adequate to the concept; for in it, in this
subject matter or in its reality, the concept does not come to be the unity
of itself with itself; in necessity its identity is for it, but in this identity the
necessity is not itself the determinateness but is on the contrary a material
external to it, that is to say, is not determined by the concept and the
concept, therefore, does not recognize itself in it. Thus in general the
concept is not for itself, is not at the same time determined in and for itself
according to its unity. For this reason the idea does not as yet attain the
truth in this cognition: it does not because of the disproportion between
subject matter and subjective concept. – But the sphere of necessity is the
highest point of being and reflection; of itself, in and for itself, it passes
over into the freedom of the concept, inner identity passes over into its
manifestation which is the concept as concept. How this transition from
the sphere of necessity to the concept occurs in itself has been shown
66

Cf. “absolute necessity,” above 11.389ff.

The idea of cognition

729

when considering necessity,67 and we saw it also at the beginning of this
Book as the genesis of the concept.68 In the present context, necessity has the
position of being the reality or the subject matter of the concept, just as the
concept into which it passes is now the concept’s subject matter. But the
transition itself is the same. Here, too, it is at first only in itself, still lying
in our reflection outside cognition, that is, itself still the inner necessity
of cognition. Only the result is for cognition. The idea, in so far as the
concept is now for itself determined in and for itself, is the practical idea,
action.
b. the idea of the good
Inasmuch as the concept, which is its own subject matter, is determined in
and for itself, the subject is determined as singular. As subjective it again has
an implicit otherness for its presupposition; it is the impulse to realize itself,
the purpose that on its own wants to give itself objectivity in the objective
world and realize itself. In the theoretical idea the subjective concept, as a
universal that in and for itself lacks determination, stands opposed to the
objective world from which it derives determinate content and filling. But
in the practical idea it is as actual that it stands over against the actual;
but the certainty of itself that the subject possesses in being determined
in and for itself is a certainty of its actuality and of the non-actuality of
the world; it is the singularity of this world, and the determinateness of its
singularity, not just its otherness as abstract universality, which is a nullity
for the subject. The subject has here vindicated objectivity for itself; its
inner determinateness is the objective, for it is the universality which is just
as much absolutely determined; the previously objective world is on the
contrary only something still posited, an immediate which is determined in
a multitude of ways but which, because it is only immediately determined,
in itself eludes the unity of the concept and is of itself a nullity.
This determinateness which is in the concept, is equal to the concept,
and entails a demand for singular external actuality, is the good. It comes
on the scene with the dignity of being absolute, because it is intrinsically
the totality of the concept, the objective which is at the same time in the
form of free unity and subjectivity. This idea is superior to the idea of
cognition just considered, for it has not only the value of the universal but
also of the absolutely actual. – It is impulse, in so far as this actual is still
subjective, self-positing, without at the same time the form of immediate
67

Cf. above, 11.408–409.

68

Cf. above, 12.11.

12.231

730

12.232

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

presupposition; its impulse to realize itself is not, strictly speaking, to give
itself objectivity, for this it possesses within itself, but to give itself only
this empty form of immediacy. – The activity of purpose, therefore, is
not directed at itself, is not a matter of letting in a given determination
and making it its own, but of positing rather its own determination and,
by means of sublating the determinations of the external world, giving
itself reality in the form of external actuality. – The idea of the will as a
self-determining explicitly possesses content within itself. Now this content
is indeed a determinate content, and to this extent finite and restricted;
self-determination is essentially particularization, since the reflection of
the will is in itself, as negative unity as such, also singularity in the sense
that it excludes an other while presupposing it. Yet the particularity of the
content is at first infinite by virtue of the form of the concept, of which
it is the proper determinateness, and which in that content possesses its
negative self-identity, and consequently not only a particularity but its
infinite singularity. The mentioned finitude of the content in the practical
idea only means, therefore, that the idea is at first not yet realized; the
concept is for the content that which exists in and for itself; it is here the
idea in the form of objectivity existing for itself; on the one hand, the
subjective is for this reason no longer just something posited, arbitrary or
accidental, but is an absolute; but, on the other hand, this form of concrete
existence, this being-for-itself, does not as yet have the form of the being-initself. Thus what from the side of the form as such appears as opposition,
appears in the form of the concept reflected into simple identity, that is,
appears in the content as its simple determinateness; the good, although
valid in and for itself, is thereby a certain particular purpose, but not one
that first receives its truth by being realized; on the contrary, it is for itself
already the true.
The syllogism of immediate realization does not itself require closer
exposition here; it is none other than the previously considered syllogism
of external purposiveness;69 only the content constitutes the difference. In
external as in formal purposiveness it was an indeterminate finite content
in general; here, though also finite, it is as such at the same time absolutely
valid. But in regard to the conclusion, the realized purpose, a further difference enters in. In being realized the finite purpose still attains only the
status of a means; since it is not a purpose determined in and for itself
already from the beginning, as realized it also remains something that does
not exist in and for itself. If the good is again also fixed as something finite,
69

Cf. above, 12.160–162.

The idea of cognition

731

and is essentially such, then, notwithstanding its inner infinity, it too cannot escape the fate of finitude – a fate that manifests itself in several forms.
The realized good is good by virtue of what it already is in the subjective
purpose, in its idea; the realization gives it an external existence, but since
this existence has only the status of an externality which is in and for itself
null, what is good in it has attained only an accidental, fragile existence,
not a realization corresponding to the idea. – Further, since this good is
restricted in content, there are several kinds of it; in concrete existence a
good is subject to destruction not only due to external contingency and
to evil, but also because of collision and conflict in the good itself. From
the side of the objective world presupposed for it (in the presupposition
of which consists the subjectivity and the finitude of the good, and which
as a distinct world runs its own course), the realization itself of the good
is exposed to obstacles, indeed, might even be made impossible. The good
thus remains an ought; it exists in and for itself, but being, as the ultimate
abstract immediacy, remains over against it also determined as a non-being.
The idea of the fulfilled good is indeed an absolute postulate, but no more
than a postulate, that is, the absolute encumbered with the determinateness of subjectivity. There still are two worlds in opposition, one a realm of
subjectivity in the pure spaces of transparent thought, the other a realm of
objectivity in the element of an externally manifold actuality, an impervious
realm of darkness. The complete development of this unresolved contradiction, between that absolute purpose and the restriction of this reality that
stands opposed to it, has been examined in detail in the Phenomenology
of Spirit (pp. 323ff.).70 – Inasmuch as the idea has within it the moment
of complete determinateness, the other concept to which the concept in
it relates possesses in its subjectivity at the same time the moment of an
object; consequently the idea enters here into the shape of self-consciousness,
and in this one respect coincides with its exposition.
But what the practical idea still lacks is the moment of real consciousness
itself, namely that the moment of actuality in the concept would have
attained for itself the determination of external being. – This lack can also
be regarded in this way, namely that the practical idea still lacks the moment
of the theoretical idea. That is to say, in the latter there stands on the side
of the subjective concept – the concept that is in process of being intuited
in itself by the concept – only the determination of universality; cognition
only knows itself as apprehension, as the identity of the concept with
itself which, for itself, is indeterminate; the filling, that is, the objectivity
70

The reference is to the 1807 edition. Cf. GW 9, 210ff.

12.233

732

12.234

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

determined in and for itself, is for this identity a given; what truly exists is for
it the actuality present there independently of any subjective positing. For
the practical idea, on the contrary, this actuality constantly confronting it
as an insuperable restriction is in and for itself a nullity that ought to receive
its true determination and intrinsic value only through the purposes of the
good. It is the will, therefore, that alone stands in the way of attaining its
goal, because it separates itself from cognition and because for it external
actuality does not receive the form of a true existence. The idea of the good
can therefore find its completion only in the idea of the true.
But it makes this transition through itself. In the syllogism of action, one
premise is the immediate reference of the good purpose to the actuality which
it appropriates and which, in the second premise, it directs as external
means against the external actuality. The good is for the subjective concept
the objective; actuality confronts it in existence as an insuperable restriction
only in so far as it still has the determination of immediate existence, not
of something objective in the sense that it is being in and for itself; it is
rather either the evil or the indifferent, the merely determinable, whose
worth does not lie within it. But this abstract being that confronts the
good in the second premise has already been sublated by the practical idea
itself; the first premise of this idea’s action is the immediate objectivity of
the concept, according to which purpose is communicated to actuality
without any resistance and is in the simple connection of identity with it.
To this extent, therefore, what remains is to bring together the thoughts of
the two premises of the practical idea. All that is added to what is already
accomplished in the first premise by the objective concept is that in the
second it is posited by way of mediation, hence for it. Just as in purposive
connection in general, where the realized purpose is again only a means
but the means is conversely also the realized purpose, so too now in the
syllogism of the good the second premise is already immediately present in
the first in itself, except that this immediacy is not sufficient and the second
premise is for the first already postulated – the realization of the good in the
face of another actuality confronting it is the mediation which is essentially
necessary for the immediate connection and consummation of the good.
For the first premise is only the first negation or the otherness of the concept,
an objectivity that would be a state of immersion of the concept into
externality; the second premise is the sublation of this otherness, whereby
the immediate realization of the purpose first becomes the actuality of
the good as concept existing for itself, for in that actuality the concept is
posited as identical with itself, not with an other, and in this way alone as
free concept. If it is now claimed that the purpose of the good is thereby

The idea of cognition

733

still not realized, what we have is a relapse of the concept to the standpoint
that it assumes prior to its activity, when the actual is determined as
worthless and yet presupposed as real. This is a relapse that gives rise to the
progression to bad infinity. Its sole ground is that in the sublating of that
abstract reality the sublating itself is just as immediately forgotten, or what
is forgotten is that this reality is rather already presupposed as an actuality
which is in and for itself worthless, nothing objective. This repetition of
the presupposition of the unrealized purpose after the actual realization of
the purpose also means that the subjective attitude of the objective concept
is reproduced and perpetuated, with the result that the finitude of the good,
with respect to both content and form, appears as the abiding truth, and
its actualization always as only a singular, never universal, act. – As a matter
of fact this state has already sublated itself in the realization of the good;
what still limits the objective concept is its own view of itself, and this view
vanishes in the reflection on what its realization is in itself. By this view the
concept only stands in its own way, and all that it has to do about it is to
turn, not against an external actuality, but against itself.
That is to say, the activity in the second premise produces only a onesided being-for-itself, and its product therefore appears as something subjective and singular, and the first presupposition is consequently repeated in it.
But this activity is in truth just as much the positing of the implicit identity
of the objective concept and the immediate actuality. This actuality is by
presupposition determined to have only the reality of an appearance, to be
in and for itself a nullity, entirely open to determination by the objective
concept. As the external actuality is altered by the activity of the objective
concept and its determination is consequently sublated, the merely apparent reality, the external determinability and worthlessness, are by that very
fact removed from it and it is thereby posited as having existence in and for
itself. In this the presupposition itself is sublated, namely the determination of the good as a merely subjective purpose restricted in content, the
necessity of first realizing it by subjective activity, and this activity itself.
In the result the mediation itself sublates itself; the result is an immediacy which is not the restoration of the presupposition, but is rather the
presupposition as sublated. The idea of the concept that is determined in
and for itself is thereby posited, no longer just in the active subject but
equally as an immediate actuality; and conversely, this actuality is posited
as it is in cognition, as an objectivity that truly exists. The singularity of
the subject with which the subject was burdened by its presupposition has
vanished together with the presupposition. Thus the subject now exists
as free, universal self-identity for which the objectivity of the concept is a

12.235

734

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

given, just as immediately present to the subject as the subject immediately
knows itself to be the concept determined in and for itself. Accordingly,
in this result cognition is restored and united with the practical idea; the
previously discovered reality is at the same time determined as the realized
absolute purpose, no longer an object of investigation, a merely objective
world without the subjectivity of the concept, but as an objective world
whose inner ground and actual subsistence is rather the concept. This is
the absolute idea.

c h a p ter 3

The absolute idea

The absolute idea has shown itself to be the identity of the theoretical and
the practical idea, each of which, of itself still one-sided, possesses the idea
only as a sought-for beyond and unattained goal; each is therefore a synthesis
of striving, each possessing as well as not possessing the idea within it, passing
over from one thought to the other without bringing the two together but
remaining fixed in the contradiction of the two. The absolute idea, as the
rational concept that in its reality only rejoins itself, is by virtue of this
immediacy of its objective identity, on the one hand, a turning back to life;
on the other hand, it has equally sublated this form of its immediacy and
harbors the most extreme opposition within. The concept is not only soul,
but free subjective concept that exists for itself and therefore has personality –
the practical objective concept that is determined in and for itself and
is as person impenetrable, atomic subjectivity – but which is not, just the
same, exclusive singularity; it is rather explicitly universality and cognition,
and in its other has its own objectivity for its subject matter. All the rest
is error, confusion, opinion, striving, arbitrariness, and transitoriness; the
absolute idea alone is being, imperishable life, self-knowing truth, and is all
truth.
It is the sole subject matter and content of philosophy. Since it contains
all determinateness within it, and its essence consists in returning through
its self-determination and particularization back to itself, it has various
shapes, and the business of philosophy is to recognize it in these. Nature
and spirit are in general different modes of exhibiting its existence, art
and religion its different modes of apprehending itself and giving itself
appropriate existence. Philosophy has the same content and the same
purpose as art and religion, but it is the highest mode of apprehending the
absolute idea, because its mode, that of the concept, is the highest. Hence
it seizes those shapes of real and ideal finitude, as well of infinity and
holiness, and comprehends them and itself. The derivation and cognition
of these particular modes are now the further business of the particular
735

12.236

736
12.237

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

philosophical sciences. Also the logicality of the absolute idea can be called
a mode of it; but mode signifies a particular kind, a determinateness of
form, whereas the logicality of the idea is the universal mode in which
all particular modes are sublated and enveloped. The logical idea is the
idea itself in its pure essence, the idea which is enclosed in simple identity
within its concept and in reflective shining has as yet to step into a formdeterminateness. The Logic thus exhibits the self-movement of the absolute
idea only as the original word, a word which is an utterance, but one that
in being externally uttered has immediately vanished again. The idea is,
therefore, only in this self-determination of apprehending itself; it is in pure
thought, where difference is not yet otherness, but is and remains perfectly
transparent to itself. – The logical idea thus has itself, as the infinite form,
for its content – form that constitutes the opposite of content inasmuch as
the latter is the form determination that has withdrawn into itself and has
been so sublated in identity that this concrete identity stands over against
the identity developed as form; the content has the shape of an other and of
something given as against the form that as such stands simply in reference,
and whose determinateness is posited at the same time as reflective shine. –
More exactly, the absolute idea itself has only this for its content, namely
that the form determination is its own completed totality, the pure content.
Now the determinateness of the idea and the entire course traversed by this
determinateness has constituted the subject matter of the science of logic,
and out of this course the absolute idea has come forth for itself; thus to
be for itself, however, has shown itself to amount to this, namely that
determinateness does not have the shape of a content, but that it is simply
as form, and that accordingly the idea is the absolutely universal idea. What
is left to be considered here, therefore, is thus not a content as such, but
the universal character of its form – that is, method.
Method may appear at first to be just the manner in which cognition
proceeds, and this is in fact its nature. But as method this manner of
proceeding is not only a modality of being determined in and for itself; it is a
modality of cognition, and as such is posited as determined by the concept
and as form, since form is the soul of all objectivity and all otherwise
determined content has its truth in form alone. If the content is again
assumed as given to the method and of a nature of its own, then method,
so understood, is just like the logical realm in general a merely external
form. But against this assumption appeal can be made, not only to the
fundamental concept of what constitutes logic, but to the entire logical
course in which all the shapes of a given content and of objects came up for
consideration. This course has shown the transitoriness and the untruth of

The absolute idea

737

all such shapes; also that no given object is capable of being the foundation
to which the absolute form would relate as only an external and accidental
determination; that, on the contrary, it is the absolute form that has proved
itself to be the absolute foundation and the ultimate truth. For this course
the method has resulted as the absolutely self-knowing concept, as the concept
that has the absolute, both as subjective and objective, as its subject matter,
and consequently as the pure correspondence of the concept and its reality,
a concrete existence that is the concept itself.
Accordingly, what is to be considered as method here is only the movement of the concept itself. We already know the nature of this movement,
but it now has, first, the added significance that the concept is all, and
that its movement is the universal absolute activity, the self-determining
and self-realizing movement. The method is therefore to be acknowledged
as the universal, internal and external mode, free of restrictions, and as
the absolutely infinite force to which no object that may present itself as
something external, removed from reason and independent of it, could
offer resistance, or be of a particular nature opposite to it, and could not be
penetrated by it. It is therefore soul and substance, and nothing is conceived
and known in its truth unless completely subjugated to the method; it is the
method proper to each and every fact because its activity is the concept.
This is also the truer meaning of its universality; according to the universality of reflection, it is taken only as the method for all things; but according
to the universality of the idea, it is both the manner of cognition, of the
concept subjectively aware of itself, and the objective manner, or rather the
substantiality of things – that is, of concepts as they first appear as others
to representation and reflection. It is therefore not only the highest force of
reason, or rather its sole and absolute force, but also reason’s highest and
sole impulse to find and recognize itself through itself in all things. – Second,
here we also have the distinction of the method from the concept as such, the
particularization of the method. As the concept was considered for itself,
it appeared in its immediacy; the reflection, or the concept considering it,
fell on the side of our knowledge. The method is this knowledge itself, for
which the concept is not only as subject matter but is as its own subjective act, the instrument and the means of cognitive activity, distinct from
this activity and yet the activity’s own essentiality. In cognition as enquiry,
the method likewise occupies the position of an instrument, as a means
that stands on the side of the subject, connecting it with the object. The
subject in this syllogism is one extreme, the object is the other, and in
conclusion the subject unites through its method with the object without
however uniting with itself there. The extremes remain diverse, because

12.238

738
12.239

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

subject, method, and object are not posited as the one identical concept; the
syllogism is therefore always the formal syllogism; the premise in which
the subject posits the form on its side as its method is an immediate determination and contains therefore the determinations of the form – as we
have seen, of definition, division, and so forth71 – as matters of fact found
ready-made in the subject. In true cognition, on the contrary, method is
not only an aggregate of certain determinations, but the determinateness
in-and-for-itself of the concept, and the concept is the middle term only
because it equally has the significance of the objective; in the conclusion,
therefore, the objective does not attain only an external determinateness by
virtue of the method, but is posited rather in its identity with the subjective
concept.
1. Accordingly, what constitutes the method are the determinations of
the concept itself and their connections, and these we must now examine
in the significance that they have as determinations of the method. – In
this, we must begin from the beginning. We spoke of this beginning at
the very beginning of the Logic,72 and also in connection with subjective
cognition,73 and we showed that, when not performed arbitrarily and in
the absence of categorial sensitivity, though it may seem to present many
difficulties, it is nevertheless of an extremely simple nature. Because it is the
beginning, its content is an immediate, but one that has the meaning and
the form of abstract universality. Or be it a content of being, or of essence or
of the concept, inasmuch as it is something immediate, it is assumed, found in
advance, assertoric. But first of all it is not an immediate of sense-intuition or
of representation, but of thought, which because of its immediacy can also be
called a supersensuous, inner intuiting. The immediate of sense-intuition
is a manifold and a singular. Cognition, on the contrary, is a thinking that
conceptualizes; its beginning, therefore, is also only in the element of thought,
a simple and a universal. – We spoke of this form earlier, in connection with
definition.74 At the beginning of finite cognition universality is likewise
recognized as an essential determination, but only as thought – and concept
determination in opposition to being. In fact this first universality is an
immediate universality, and for that reason it has equally the significance of
being, for being is precisely this abstract self-reference. Being has no need
of further derivation, as if it came to the abstract element of definition
only because taken from the intuition of the senses or elsewhere, and
in so far as it can be pointed at. This pointing and deriving involve a
71
72
73

Cf. above, 12.209.
GW 11.34ff., which is the edition to which Hegel is referring; but cf. above, 21.53ff.
74 Cf. above, 12.210.
Cf. above, 12.215.

The absolute idea

739

mediation that is more than a mere beginning, and is a mediation of a kind
that does not belong to the comprehension of thought, but is rather the
elevation of representation, of empirical and ratiocinative consciousness, to
the standpoint of thinking. According to the currently accepted opposition
of thought, or concept, and being, it passes as a very important truth that
no being belongs as yet to thought as thought, and that being has a ground
of its own independent of thought. But the simple determination of being
is in itself so poor that, if for that reason alone, not much fuss ought to be
made about it; the universal is immediately itself this immediate because,
as abstract, it is also the abstract self-reference which is being. In fact, the
demand that being should be exhibited has a further, inner meaning in
which more is at issue than just this abstract determination; implied in it
is the demand for the realization of the concept, a realization that is missing
at the beginning itself but is rather the goal and the business of the entire
subsequent development of cognition. Further, inasmuch as the content
of the beginning is to be justified and authenticated as something true or
correct by being exhibited in inner or outer perception, it is no longer
the form of universality as such that is meant, but its determinateness,
about which more in a moment. The authentication of the determinate
content with which the beginning is made seems to lie behind it, but is in
fact to be regarded as an advance, in so far as it is a matter of conceptual
cognition.
The beginning, therefore, has for the method no other determinateness
than that of being the simple and universal; this is precisely the determinateness that makes it deficient. Universality is the pure, simple concept, and
the method, as the consciousness of this concept, is aware that universality
is only a moment and that in it the concept is still not determined in and for
itself. But with this consciousness that would want to carry the beginning
further only for the sake of method, the method is only a formal procedure
posited in external reflection. Where the method, however, is the objective
and immanent form, the immediate character of the beginning must be
a lack inherent in the beginning itself, which must be endowed with the
impulse to carry itself further. But in the absolute method the universal
has the value not of a mere abstraction but of the objective universal, that
is, the universal that is in itself the concrete totality, but a totality as yet not
posited, not yet for itself. Even the abstract universal is as such, when considered conceptually, that is, in its truth, not just anything simple, but is,
as abstract, already posited afflicted by a negation. For this reason also there
is nothing so simple and so abstract, be it in actuality or in thought, as is
commonly imagined. Anything as simple as that is a mere presumption that

12.240

740

12.241

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

has its ground solely in the lack of awareness of what is actually there. – We
said earlier that the beginning is made with the immediate;75 the immediacy
of the universal is the same as what is here expressed as the in-itself that is
without being-for-itself. – One may well say, therefore, that every beginning
must be made with the absolute, just as every advance is only the exposition
of it, in so far as implicit in existence is the concept.76 But because the
absolute exists at first only implicitly, in itself, it equally is not the absolute
nor the posited concept, and also not the idea, for the in-itself is only an
abstract, one-sided moment, and this is what they are. The advance is not,
therefore, a kind of superfluity; this is what it would be if that which is
at the beginning were already the absolute; the advance consists rather in
this, that the universal determines itself and is the universal for itself, that
is, equally a singular and a subject. Only in its consummation is it the
absolute.
It may also be mentioned that a beginning which is in itself a concrete
totality may as such also be free and its immediacy have the determination
of an external existence; the germ of anything living, and subjective purpose
in general, have shown themselves to be such beginnings; hence both are
themselves impulses. The non-spiritual and inanimate, on the contrary, are
the concrete concept only as real possibility; cause is the highest stage in
which the concrete concept has, as the beginning in the sphere of necessity,
an immediate existence; but it is not yet a subject that maintains itself
as such in the course of its effective realization. The sun, for instance,
and in general all things inanimate, are determinate concrete existences
in which real possibility remains an inner totality; the moments of the
latter are not posited in them in subjective form and therefore, in so far
as they are realized, they attain concrete existence through other corporeal
individuals.
2. The concrete totality which makes the beginning possesses as such,
within it, the beginning of the advance and development. As concrete,
it is differentiated in itself, but because of its initial immediacy, this first
differentiation is to start with a diversity. However, as self-referring universality, as subject, the immediate is also the unity of this diversity. – This
reflection is the first stage of the forward movement – the emergence of
non-indifference, judgment, and determining in general. Essential is that the
method find, and recognize, the determination of the universal within it.
Whatever in this abstractive generation of the universal is left out of the
concrete is then picked up, still externally, by the finite cognition of the
75

Cf. above, 12.210.

76

das Ansichseiende ist der Begriff.

The absolute idea

741

understanding. This is how the latter operates. The absolute method, on
the contrary, does not behave in this manner of external reflection but
takes the determinate from its subject matter, for it is itself its immanent
principle and its soul. – This is what Plato demanded of cognition, that it
should consider things in and for themselves; on the one hand, that it should
consider them in their universality; on the other hand, that it should not
stray away from them while it grasps at circumstances, examples, and comparisons, but, on the contrary, should keep only them in view before it
and bring to consciousness what is immanent in them. – To this extent the
method of absolute cognition is analytic. That the method finds the further
determinations of its initial universal simply and solely in this universal,
constitutes the concept’s absolute objectivity, of which the method is the
certainty. – Equally so, however, is the method synthetic, for its subject
matter, while immediately determined as the simple universal, through the
determinateness which it has in its very immediacy and universality, proves
to be an other. Yet this connection in diversity that the subject matter is
thus in itself, is no longer a synthesis as understood in finite cognition; the
no less thoroughly analytic determination of the subject matter, the fact
that the connection is within the concept, already distinguishes it fully from
the latter synthesis.
This no less synthetic than analytic moment of the judgment through
which the initial universal determines itself from within itself as the other
of itself is to be called the dialectical moment. Dialectic is one of those
ancient sciences that have been the most misjudged in the metaphysics of
the moderns, and in general also by popular philosophy, both ancient and
recent. Diogenes Laërtius said of Plato that, just as Thales was the founder
of natural philosophy and Socrates of moral philosophy, so Plato was the
founder of the third of the sciences that belong to philosophy, of dialectic –
a contribution for which he was highly esteemed by the ancients but that
often goes quite unnoticed by those who have the most to say about him.77
Dialectic has often been regarded as an art, as if it rested on a subjective
talent and did not belong to the objectivity of the concept. What shape
it received in Kantian philosophy, and with what result, has already been
indicated in representative examples of that philosophy’s view.78 It must be
regarded as an infinitely important step that dialectic is once more being
77

78

See Diogenes Laertius, Vitae philosophorum, Vol. 1, ed. Miroslav Marcovich (Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner,
1999), Book 3, §56; Lives of Eminent Philosophers, Vol. 1, trans. R. D. Hicks (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1965).
i.e. Hegel’s discussion of Kant’s Dialectic of Pure Reason. Cf. above, 12.157–158; 21.180ff.

12.242

742

12.243

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

recognized as necessary to reason, although the result that must be drawn
from it is the opposite than Kant drew.
When dialectic is not presented, as it generally is, as something incidental, it usually assumes the following more precise form. It is shown of
a subject matter or other (for instance: world, movement, point, and so
on) that a certain determination accrues to it (for instance, in the order of
the just mentioned examples: finitude in space or time, being at this place,
absolute negation of space), also the opposite determinations can then just
as necessarily be shown to accrue to it (for example: infinity in space and
time, not-being at this place, reference to space and hence spatiality). The
older Eleatic school directed its dialectic especially against motion; Plato
commonly did it against accepted notions and concepts of his time, in particular those of the Sophists, but also against the pure categories and the
determinations of reflection; the later and more sophisticated form of skepticism extended it not only to the immediate so-called facts of consciousness
and the maxims of ordinary life, but also to all scientific concepts. Now the
conclusion drawn from this kind of dialectic is in general the contradiction
and nullity of the asserted claims. But this can happen in two ways – either
in the objective sense, that the subject matter that thus contradicts itself
internally cancels itself and is a non-thing (this was, for instance, the conclusion of the Eleatics, who denied the truth of the world, of movement,
of the point); or in the subjective sense, that cognition is deficient. Now
understood in this last subjective sense, the conclusion may be taken in
two further ways. It may mean that it is this dialectic itself that generates
the artifice of an illusion. This is the common view of the so-called healthy
common sense that takes its stand on the evidence of the senses and on customary notions and claims, at times quietly, like Diogenes the cynic did, who
demonstrated the vacuity of the dialectic of motion by silently walking up
and down; but often by getting itself all worked up, declaring that dialectic
is mere foolery or, when important ethical matters are at issue, the criminal
attempt at unsettling essentially solid norms and providing excuses for the
wicked – a view we see directed in the Socratic dialectic against that of
the Sophists, with an ire that, turned into the opposite direction, even cost
Socrates his life. As for the vulgar refutation that opposes to thinking, as
Diogenes did, sensuous consciousness and in this latter believes that it finds
the truth, this we must leave to itself; but in so far as dialectic sublates
ethical determinations, we must have confidence in reason that it will
know how to reinstate them, but reinstate them in their truth and in the
consciousness of their right, though also of their limitations. – Yet another
view is that the result of subjective nullity has nothing to do with dialectic

The absolute idea

743

itself, but that it affects the cognition against which it is directed and, in
the view of skepticism and likewise of the Kantian philosophy, cognition in
general.
The fundamental prejudice here is that dialectic has only a negative
result – a point about which more in a moment. First, regarding the said
form in which dialectic usually makes its appearance, it is to be observed
that according to that form the dialectic and its result affect a subject matter
which is previously assumed or also the subjective cognition of it, and
declare either the latter or the subject matter to be null and void, while,
on the contrary, no attention is given to the determinations which are
exhibited in the subject matter as in a third thing and presupposed as valid
for themselves. To have called attention to this uncritical procedure has
been the infinite merit of the Kantian philosophy, and in so doing to have
given the impetus to the restoration of logic and dialectic understood as the
examination of thought determinations in and for themselves. The subject
matter, as it is apart from thought and conceptualization, is a picture
representation or also a name; it is in the determinations of thought and of
the concept that it is what it is. In fact, therefore, everything rests on these
determinations; they are the true subject matter and content of reason,
and anything else that might be understood by subject matter and content
in distinction from them has meaning only through them and in them.
It must not therefore be taken as the fault of a subject matter or of the
cognition that these determinations, because of what they are and the way
they are externally joined, prove to be dialectical. On this assumption,
the subject matter and the cognition are imagined to be a subject on
which the determinations are brought to bear, in the form of predicates,
properties, or self-subsistent universals, as fixed and independently correct,
so that these determinations are brought into dialectical relations and incur
contradiction only by extraneous and contingent conjunction in and by a
third thing. But this kind of external and fixed subject of imagination and
understanding, and also these abstract determinations, cannot be regarded
as ultimates, as secure and permanent substrates. On the contrary, they are to
be regarded as themselves immediate, precisely the kind of presuppositions
and starting points which, as we have shown above,79 must succumb to
dialectic in and for themselves, because they are to be taken as in themselves
the concept. The same applies to all oppositions that are assumed as fixed,
as for example the finite and the infinite, the singular and the universal.
These are not in contradiction through some external conjoining; on the
79

Cf. above, 12.240–241.

12.244

744

12.245

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

contrary, as an examination of their nature shows, they are a transition in
and for themselves; the synthesis and the subject in which they appear is
the product of their concept’s own reflection. If a consideration that avoids
the concept stops short at their external relation, isolates them and leaves
them as fixed presuppositions, it is the concept that, on the contrary, will
fix its sight on them, move them as their soul and bring out their dialectic.
Now this is the very standpoint indicated above80 from which a universal
prius, considered in and for itself, proves to be the other of itself. Taken quite
generally, this determination can be taken to mean that what is at first
immediate is therewith posited as mediated, as referred to an other, or
that the universal is posited as a particular. The second universal that has
thereby arisen is thus the negative of that first and, in view of subsequent
developments, the first negative. From this negative side, the immediate has
perished in the other; but the other is essentially not an empty negative, the
nothing which is normally taken to be the result of dialectic, but is rather
the other of the first, the negative of the immediate; it is therefore determined
as the mediated – contains as such the determination of the first in it. The
first is thus essentially preserved and contained also in the other. – To hold
fast to the positive in its negative, to the content of the presupposition in
the result, this is the most important factor in rational cognition; what
is more, it takes only the simplest of reflections to be convinced of the
absolute truth and necessity of this requirement, and as for examples of
proofs that testify to this, the whole Logic consists of such proofs.
So what we now have, taken first or also immediately, is the mediated,
also a simple determination, for the first has perished in it, and only the
second is therefore at hand. Now since the first is contained in the second,
and this second is the truth of the first, this unity of the two can be expressed
in the form of a proposition in which the immediate is placed as the subject
but the mediated as its predicate; for example, “the finite is infinite,” “one
is many,” “the singular is the universal.” The inadequacy of the form
of such propositions and judgments is however obvious. In connection
with judgment it was shown that its form in general, and most of all the
immediate form of the positive judgment, is incapable of holding within its
grasp the speculative content and the truth.81 Its closest complement, the
negative judgment, would have to be brought in at least in equal measure.
In judgment the first, as subject, conveys the reflective semblance of an
independent subsistence, whereas it is in fact sublated in the predicate as
in its other; this negation is indeed contained in the content of the above
80

Cf. above, 12.242.

81

Cf. above, 12.64.

The absolute idea

745

propositions, but their positive form contradicts the content; consequently,
what is contained in them is not posited – whereas this was precisely the
intent behind the use of a proposition.
The second determination, the negative or mediated determination, is
moreover at the same time the one that mediates. At first it may be taken as
a simple determination, but its truth is that it is a reference or relation; for
it is the negative, but the negative of the positive, and it includes this positive
within itself. It is the other, therefore, not of a one to which it is indifferent;
in that case it would not be an other, nor a reference or relation. It is rather
the other in itself, the other of an other; hence it includes its own other within
itself and is consequently the contradiction, the posited dialectic, of itself. –
Because the first or the immediate is the concept in itself or implicitly,
and therefore is the negative also only implicitly, the dialectical moment
in it consists in the positing of the difference that is implicitly contained
in it. The second is on the contrary itself the determinate, the difference or
relation; hence the dialectical moment consists in its case in the positing
of the unity contained within it. – For this reason, if the negative, the
determinate, relation, judgment, and all the determinations falling under
this second moment, do not appear by themselves already as contradiction,
as dialectical, this is solely a defect on the part of thinking that fails to bring
its thoughts together. For the material, the opposed determinations in one
connection, are already posited, already present for thought. But formal
thinking makes identity its law, lets the contradictory content that it has
before it fall into the sphere of representation, in space and time, where
the contradictory is held in external moments, next to and following each
other, parading before consciousness without reciprocal contact. The firm
principle that formal thinking lays down for itself here is that contradiction
cannot be thought. But in fact the thought of contradiction is the essential
moment of the concept. Formal thought does in fact think it, only it at
once looks away from it and stating its principle it only passes over from it
into abstract negation.
Now the negativity just considered constitutes the turning point of the
movement of the concept. It is the simple point of the negative self-reference,
the innermost source of all activity, of living and spiritual self-movement;
it is the dialectical soul which everything true possesses and through which
alone it is true; for on this subjectivity alone rests the sublation of the
opposition between concept and reality, and the unity which is truth. –
The second negative at which we have arrived, the negative of the negative,
is this sublating of contradiction, and it too, just like contradiction, is
not an act of external reflection; for it is on the contrary the innermost,

12.246

746

12.247

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

objective moment of the life of spirit by virtue of which a subject is a person,
is free. – The self-reference of the negative is to be regarded as the second
premise of the entire syllogism. If the terms analytic and synthetic are used
as opposites, the first premise may be regarded as the analytic moment, for
in it the immediate relates to its other immediately and therefore passes
over, or rather has passed over, into it – though this connection, as already
remarked, is for this very reason also synthetic, for it is its other that it passes
over into. The second premise considered here may be defined as synthetic,
because it is the connection of the differentiated, as differentiated, to that
from which it is differentiated. – Just as the first premise is the moment of
universality and communication, so is the second determined by singularity –
a singularity which in referring to the other is at first exclusive, for itself,
and different. The negative appears as the mediating factor, because it holds
itself and the immediate of which it is the negation within itself. In so far
as these two determinations are taken as referring to each other externally
in some relation or other, the negative is only the formal mediating factor;
but, as absolute negativity, the negative moment of absolute mediation is
the unity which is subjectivity and soul.
In this turning point of the method, the course of cognition returns at the
same time back into itself. This negativity is as self-sublating contradiction
the restoration of the first immediacy, of simple universality; for the other
of the other, the negative of the negative, is immediately the positive, the
identical, the universal. In the whole course, if one at all cares to count, this
second immediate is third to the first immediate and the mediated. But it
is also third to the first or formal negative and to the absolute negativity or
second negative; now in so far as that first negative is already the second
term, the term counted as third can also be counted as fourth, and instead
of a triplicity, the abstract form may also be taken to be a quadruplicity; in
this way the negative or the difference is counted as a duality. – The third or
the fourth is in general the unity of the first and the second moment, of the
immediate and the mediated. – That it is this unity, or that the entire form
of the method is a triplicity, is indeed nothing but the merely superficial,
external side of cognition; but to have also demonstrated this superficiality,
and to have done it in the context of a specific application (for the abstract
form of number has been around for a long time, as is well known, but
without conceptual comprehension and therefore without any result) is
again to be regarded as an infinite merit of the Kantian philosophy.82 The
syllogism, or the threefold, has always been recognized to be the universal
82

B110.

The absolute idea

747

form of reason; but it has had in general the value of a wholly external form
that does not determine the nature of the content; moreover, since in its
formalism it gets caught up in the understanding’s determination of mere
identity, it lacks the essential dialectical moment of negativity; and yet this
moment enters into the triplicity of the determinations, because the third
term is the unity of the two first determinations and these, since they are
diverse, can be in unity only as sublated. – Formalism, it is true, has also
seized hold of triplicity, attending to its empty schema; the shallow nonsense
and the barrenness of the so-called construction of modern philosophy, that
consists in nothing but fastening that formal schema everywhere for the
sake of external order, with no concept or immanent determination, has
rendered that form tedious and has given it a bad name. Yet the insipidity
of this use cannot rob it of its inner worth, and the fact that the shape of
reason was discovered, albeit without conceptual comprehension at first, is
always to be highly valued.
Now, on closer examination, the third is the immediate, but the immediate through sublation of mediation, the simple through the sublating of
difference, the positive through the sublating of the negative; it is the
concept that has realized itself through its otherness, and through the sublating of this reality has rejoined itself and has restored its absolute reality,
its simple self-reference. This result is therefore the truth. It is just as much
immediacy as mediation – though these forms of judgments, that the third
is immediacy and mediation, or that it is the unity of the two, are not
capable of grasping it, for it is not a dormant third but, exactly like this
unity, self-mediating movement and activity. – Just as that with which we
began was the universal, so the result is the singular, the concrete, the subject;
what the former is in itself, the latter is now equally for itself: the universal
is posited in the subject. The two first moments of triplicity are abstract,
untrue moments that are dialectical for that very reason, and through this
their negativity make themselves into the subject. For us at first, the concept itself is both the universal that exists in itself and the negative that
exists for itself, and also the third term that exists in and for itself, the
universal that runs through all the moments of the syllogism; but this third
is the conclusion in which the concept mediates itself with itself through
its negativity and is thereby posited for itself as the universal and the identity
of its moments.
Now this result, as the whole that has withdrawn into itself and is identical with itself, has given itself again the form of immediacy. Consequently,
it is now itself all that the starting point had determined itself to be. As simple self-reference it is a universal, and in this universal the negativity that

12.248

748

12.249

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

constituted its dialectic and mediation has likewise withdrawn into simple
determinateness, which can again be a beginning. It may seem at first that
this cognition of the result is an analysis of it and would therefore have to
dissect these determinations again, and the course that it went through in
order to come to be – the course that we have examined. But if the subject
matter were in fact treated analytically in this manner, it would belong to
that stage of the idea considered above,83 a mode of cognition that searches
for its subject matter and only states of it what it is, without the necessity
of its concrete identity and of its concept. But the method of truth that
comprehends the subject matter, though analytic as we have seen, since
it remains strictly within the concept, is however equally synthetic, for
through the concept the subject matter is determined as dialectical and as
other.84 On the new foundation that the result has now constituted as the
subject matter, the method remains the same as in the preceding subject
matter. The difference concerns solely the status of the foundation as such;
although it is certainly still a foundation, its immediacy is only form, since
it was a result as well; hence its determinateness as content is no longer
something merely taken up but is deduced and proved.
It is here that the content of cognition first enters as such into the circle
of consideration, because as deduced it now belongs to the method. The
method itself expands with this moment into a system. – With respect to
content, the beginning has to be for the method at first wholly indeterminate; to this extent the method appears as the merely formal soul, for
which and by which the beginning was determined simply and solely only
according to form, that is to say, as the immediate and universal. In the
course of the movement we have indicated, the subject matter has received
a determinateness for itself – and this determinateness is a content, for the
negativity that has withdrawn into simplicity is the sublated form, and
stands as simple determinateness over against its development, and in the
first instance against its very opposition to universality.
Now since this determinateness is the proximate truth of the indeterminate beginning, it denounces the incompleteness of the latter, and it also
denounces the method itself which, starting from that beginning, was only
formal. This can now be expressed as the henceforth determinate demand
that the beginning, since as against the determinateness of the result it
is itself something determinate, ought to be taken not as immediate, but
as mediated and deduced. This may appear as the demand for an infinite retrogression in proof and deduction; just as from the newly obtained
83

Cf. above, 12.209.

84

Cf. above, 12.242.

The absolute idea

749

beginning a result likewise emerges as the method runs its course, so that
the movement would roll on forwards to infinity as well.
It has been repeatedly shown that the infinite progression as such belongs
to a reflection void of concept; the absolute method, which has the concept for its soul and content, cannot lead into it. Even such beginnings as
being, essence, universality, may seem at first to be of the kind that possess
the full universality and complete absence of content that is required for
an entirely formal beginning, such as the beginning is supposed to be,
and therefore not to require or allow, as absolutely first beginnings, further regress. Since they refer purely to themselves, they are immediate and
indeterminate, and so they do not of course have in them the difference
which is straightaway posited in some other beginning between the universality of its form and its content. But the very indeterminacy which
these logical beginnings have as their sole content is what constitutes their
determinateness; this determinateness consists in their negativity, as sublated mediation; the particularity of this negativity gives a particularity
also to their indeterminacy, and it is by virtue of it that being, essence, and
universality, are differentiated. Now the determinateness that accrues to
them when taken for themselves is their immediate determinateness, and
this is just as immediate as that of any content and in need, therefore,
of derivation; for the method it is a matter of indifference whether the
determinateness is taken as determinateness of form or of content. That it
gives itself a determination by the first of its results does not mean that,
in fact, it is thereby set on a new footing; it remains neither more nor less
formal than before. For since the method is the absolute form, the concept that knows itself and everything as concept, there is no content that
would stand out over against it and determine it as a one-sided external
form. Hence, just as the lack of content of the said beginnings does not
make them absolute beginnings, so too it is not the content that would
as such lead the method into the infinite progress forwards or backwards.
In one respect, the determinateness that the method generates for itself in
its result is the moment through which it is self-mediation and converts
the immediate into a mediated beginning. But conversely, it is through that
determinateness that this mediation of the method runs its course; it goes
through a content, as through a seeming other of itself, back to its beginning, in such a way that it does not merely restore that beginning, albeit as
determinate, but that the result is equally the sublated determinateness, and
hence also the restoration of the first immediacy in which it began. This
it accomplishes as a system of totality. We now have to consider it in this
determination.

12.250

750

12.251

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

The determinateness which was the result is, as we have shown,85 itself
a new beginning because of the form of simplicity into which it has
withdrawn; since this beginning is distinguished from the one preceding
it by this very determinateness, cognition rolls onwards from content to
content. First of all, this forward movement determines itself in that it
begins from simple determinacies, and the following become ever richer
and more concrete. For the result contains its beginning and its course
has enriched it with a new determinateness. The universal constitutes the
foundation; the advance is not to be taken, therefore, as a flowing from
other to other. In the absolute method, the concept maintains itself in its
otherness, the universal in its particularization, in judgment and reality; at
each stage of further determination, the universal elevates the whole mass of
its preceding content, not only not losing anything through its dialectical
advance, or leaving it behind, but, on the contrary, carrying with itself all
that it has gained, inwardly enriched and compressed.
This expansion may be regarded as the moment of content, and in the
whole as the first premise; the universal is communicated to the wealth of
content, is immediately received in it. But the relation has also a second,
negative or dialectical side. The enrichment proceeds in the necessity of the
concept, it is contained by it, and every determination is a reflection into
itself. Each new stage of exteriorization, that is, of further determination, is
also a withdrawing into itself, and the greater the extension, just as dense
is the intensity. The richest is therefore the most concrete and the most
subjective, and that which retreats to the simplest depth is the mightiest
and the most all-encompassing. The highest and most intense point is the
pure personality that, solely by virtue of the absolute dialectic which is its
nature, equally embraces and holds everything within itself, for it makes
itself into the supremely free – the simplicity which is the first immediacy
and universality.
It is in this manner that each step of the advance in the process of further
determination, while getting away from the indeterminate beginning, is
also a getting back closer to it; consequently, that what may at first appear
to be different, the retrogressive grounding of the beginning and the progressive further determination of it, run into one another and are the same.
The method, which thus coils in a circle, cannot however anticipate in
a temporal development that the beginning is as such already something
derived; sufficient for an immediate beginning is that it be simple universality. Inasmuch as this is what it is, it has its complete condition; and
85

Cf. above, 12.248, 249.

The absolute idea

751

there is no need to deprecate the fact that it may be accepted only provisionally and hypothetically. Whatever might be adduced against it – about
the limitations of human cognition; about the need to reflect critically
on the instrument of cognition before getting to the fact itself – all these
are themselves presuppositions, concrete determinations that as such carry
with them the demand for mediation and grounding. Therefore, since
they formally have no advantage over beginning with the fact itself as they
protest against, and, because of their more concrete content, are on the
contrary all the more in need of derivation, singling them out for special
attention is to be considered as empty presumption. They have an untrue
content, for they make into something incontestable and absolute what is
known to be finite and untrue, namely a restricted cognition determined as
form and instrument in opposition to its content; this untrue cognition is itself
also the form, the retroactive search for grounds. – The method of truth also
knows that the beginning is incomplete, because it is a beginning; but at
the same time it knows that this incompleteness is necessary, because truth
is but the coming-to-oneself through the negativity of immediacy. The
impatience that would merely transcend the determinate – be it called beginning, object, the finite, or in whatever other form it is otherwise taken –
in order that one would find oneself immediately in the absolute, has
nothing before it as cognition but the empty negative, the abstract infinite.
Or what it has before it is a presumed absolute, presumed because not
posited, not comprehended; comprehended it will be only through the mediation of cognition, of which the universal and immediate are a moment,
and as for the truth itself, it resides only in the extended course of mediation and at the end. – To meet the subjective need and the impatience that
come with not knowing, one may well provide an overview of the whole in
advance – by means of a division for reflection that, in the manner of finite
cognition, gives the particular of the universal as already there, to be waited
for as the science progresses. Yet this affords nothing more than a picture
for representation; for the true transition from the universal to the particular
and to the whole which is determined in and for itself and in which that
first universal is in truth itself again a moment – this transition is alien to
the division of reflection and is the exclusive mediation of science itself.
By virtue of the nature of the method just indicated, the science presents
itself as a circle that winds around itself, where the mediation winds the
end back to the beginning which is the simple ground; the circle is thus a
circle of circles, for each single member ensouled by the method is reflected
into itself so that, in returning to the beginning it is at the same time the
beginning of a new member. Fragments of this chain are the single sciences,

12.252

752

12.253

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

each of which has a before and an after – or, more accurately said, has in
possession only the before and in its conclusion points to its after.
So the logic also has returned in the absolute idea to this simple unity
which is its beginning; the pure immediacy of being, in which all determination appears at first as extinguished or removed by abstraction, is the
idea that through mediation, that is, the sublation of mediation, has come
to the likeness corresponding to it. The method is the pure concept that
only relates to itself; it is, therefore, the simple self-reference which is being.
But it now is also the fulfilled concept, the concept that comprehends itself
conceptually, being as the concrete and just as absolutely intensive totality. –
In conclusion, there remains only this to be said of this idea, that in it, in
the first place, the science of logic has apprehended its own concept. In the
sphere of being, at the beginning of its content, its concept appears as a
knowledge external to that content in subjective reflection. But in the idea
of absolute cognition, the concept has become the idea’s own content. The
idea is itself the pure concept that has itself as its subject matter and which,
as it runs itself as subject matter through the totality of its determinations,
builds itself up to the entirety of its reality, to the system of science, and
concludes by apprehending this conceptual comprehension of itself, hence
by sublating its position as content and subject matter and cognizing the
concept of science. – In second place, this idea is still logical; it is shut
up in pure thought, the science only of the divine concept. Its systematic
exposition is of course itself a realization, but one confined within the same
sphere. Because the pure idea of cognition is to this extent shut up within
subjectivity, it is the impulse to sublate it, and pure truth becomes as final
result also the beginning of another sphere and science. It only remains here
to indicate this transition.
The idea, namely, in positing itself as the absolute unity of the pure
concept and its reality and thus collecting itself in the immediacy of being,
is in this form as totality – nature. – This determination, however, is
nothing that has become, is not a transition, as was the case above when the
subjective concept in its totality becomes objectivity, or the subjective purpose
becomes life.86 The pure idea into which the determinateness or reality of the
concept is itself raised into concept is rather an absolute liberation for which
there is no longer an immediate determination which is not equally posited
and is not concept; in this freedom, therefore, there is no transition that
takes place; the simple being to which the idea determines itself remains
perfectly transparent to it: it is the idea that in its determination remains
86

Cf. above, 12.125–126; 160–181.

The absolute idea

753

with itself. The transition is to be grasped, therefore, in the sense that the
idea freely discharges87 itself, absolutely certain of itself and internally at
rest. On account of this freedom, the form of its determinateness is just as
absolutely free: the externality of space and time absolutely existing for itself
without subjectivity. – Inasmuch as this externality is only in the abstract
determinateness of being and is apprehended by consciousness, it is as mere
objectivity and external life; within the idea, however, it remains in and
for itself the totality of the concept, and science in the relation of divine
cognition to nature. But what is posited by this first resolve of the pure idea
to determine itself as external idea is only the mediation out of which the
concept, as free concrete existence that from externality has come to itself,
raises itself up, completes this self-liberation in the science of spirit, and in
the science of logic finds the highest concept of itself, the pure concept
conceptually comprehending itself.
87

entläßt.

a p p en d ix

Hegel’s Logic in its revised and unrevised parts

It is a matter of speculation how Hegel would have revised Part Two of
Volume One (Book Two in the Lasson edition) and Volume Two (Book
Three in the Lasson edition) of the Logic if he had lived to complete the
planned work of revision. Some clues may, however, be derived from the
changes that Hegel brought to the 1817 Encyclopedia Logic in its new
edition of 1830. In this last edition, Hegel rearranged the ordering of the
categories of “essence.” He replaced the title of the first grouping, which
in 1817 was “The Pure Determinacies of Reflection,” with “Essence as
the Ground of Existenz”; moved the category of “Existenz,” which in 1817
was in the second grouping under the general heading of “Appearance,”
to the first grouping, and replaced it in the second grouping of 1830,
still entitled “Appearance,” with “The World of Appearances.” As used by
Hegel in all the texts of the Logic that we have, “Existenz” is an ontological
term. Like the Scholastic existentia which is the counterpart of essentia, it
signifies the being of a thing inasmuch as it is internally grounded by the
thing’s essence. Within the Logic, Existenz stands reflectively to “essence” as
“Dasein” stands immediately to “being.” On the face of it, the 1830 grouping
of the categories of essence thus seems to be the more natural one, for it
more clearly brings out the close conceptual connection between “essence”
and “Existenz.” This connection eventually develops into the idea of an
internally cohesive world of variegated appearances, that is, “The World of
Appearances” of the 1830 Encyclopedia Logic. One should think, therefore,
that a new edition of the “Doctrine of Essence” of the Greater Logic would
have followed more closely the headings and groupings of categories of the
1830 Encyclopedia. However, whether these changes would have amounted
to a truly substantial conceptual reorientation of the Logic is of course open
to question.
Also to be kept in mind is that the Encyclopedia Logic differs from
the Greater Logic in sheer size: according to the pagination of the critical
edition, there are 168 pages in the 1813 “Doctrine of Essence” as opposed
754

Hegel’s Logic in its revised and unrevised parts

755

to 30 pages in the equivalent section of the 1830 Encyclopedia. And it
also differs in scope. The one was intended as a textbook for university
instruction; the other, as a theoretical treatise. Any contrast between the
two can only be of limited value. Perhaps a more reliable indicator of any
conceptual progression from the Nürnberg to the Berlin period might be
the one part of the earlier Greater Logic which Hegel did in fact revise
in Berlin, namely the “Doctrine of Being.”1 Here are the most significant
changes:
(1) In 1832, Hegel added, in connection with “measure,” some comments
regarding the modal categories and critical of Spinoza’s and Kant’s
treatment of these categories.2 We have already commented on them
in the main body of the Introduction, bringing out the conceptual
importance of these comments.
(2) The 1832 text is considerably enlarged in comparison with that of 1812,
by about one third, the extra material the result of a more detailed treatment of some of the categories and the addition of more “Remarks.”
These are notes that expand on historical and conceptual points connected with the subjects under consideration. Notable among them are
the two extra Remarks on the nature and the foundations of calculus
that Hegel added in 1832 to the one Remark (GW 11, 153ff.) of the 1812
edition.3 The conceptual importance of these three additions has also
been discussed in the main body of the Introduction.
(3) The 1832 edition has a more streamlined version of the conceptually
awkward 1812 ordering of the categories of “Dasein” (or “immediate existence”) in Chapter 2, and of “being-for-itself” in Chapter 3.
“Reality” and “negation,” which in 1812 are treated as independent
headings, are not so treated in 1832 but reappear under “quality” as the
two shifting moments that define the peculiarly immediate determinacy
of Dasein.4 It is possible that in a revised edition of the “Doctrine of
Essence,” “Schein” (“reflective shine”), which is the reflective counterpart of “reality,” would have been dropped as an independent category
(as it also is in the 1827/30 Encyclopedia)5 but would be reintroduced
instead as a moment of the first reflective determinacies of “essence,”
namely “identity,” “difference,” “diversity,” and “contradiction.” Each
1
2
5

The changes are documented in the critical apparatus of GW 21.
3 See above, Introduction, note 82.
4 Cf. GW 21.98–99.
See above, Introduction, note 86.
So it was also in the lecture course on Logic of the 1831 summer term. Determinacies such as
“identity” and “difference” are the by-products of the internal reflection of “essence” which acquire
the “reflective shine” of having independent being. It’s as if they were an external “shine” of essence.
Cf. G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Logik, Vol. 10 (Hamburg: Meiner, 2001), pp. 137–138.

756

Appendix

of these re-enacts in “essence” – but reflectively, and each in its own
way – the shifting relation which “reality” and “negation” play out in
“Dasein.” “Schein” would appear in them as the lingering immediacy
(“all that remains of the sphere of being,”6 as Hegel puts it) that still
affects them and makes them seem to have a reality independent of
“essence.” But it is also possible (and perhaps even more likely) that
Hegel would have wanted to treat this lingering immediacy on its own,
directly in connection with “essence,” exactly as he did in 1812.
(4) In 1832, in connection with the transitions from one category of “being”
to another, Hegel is more precise in his use of language. He avoids the
language of reflectivity, which is more appropriate to the transitions of
“essence,” apparently in order to stress precisely the immediacy of such
transitions.7
These are the main changes. To what extent, if any, they make for a
substantial change in the orientation of Hegel’s thought is of course a
matter of interpretation.
6
7

GW 11.241.
Cf. John Burbidge’s review of GW 11, The Owl of Minerva, 10.4 (1979), 5–7, where this difference in
language is documented.

Bibliography

SOURCES CITED BY HEGEL
Aristotle. Analytica priora. In Aristotelis opera. Vol. 1. Edited by Immanuel Bekker.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1960. Translated by A. J. Jenkinson as Prior Analytics. In The Complete Works of Aristotle. Vol. 1. Edited by Jonathan Barnes.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.
De Anima. In Aristotelis opera. Vol. 1. Edited by Immanuel Bekker. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter, 1960. Translated by J. A. Smith as On the Soul. In The
Complete Works of Aristotle. Vol. 1. Edited by Jonathan Barnes. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1984.
Metaphysica. In Aristotelis opera. Vol. 2. Edited by Immanuel Bekker. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter, 1960. Translated by W. D. Ross as Metaphysics. In The
Complete Works of Aristotle. Vol. 2. Edited by Jonathan Barnes. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1984.
Physica. In Aristotelis opera. Vol. 1. Edited by Immanuel Bekker. Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter, 1960. Translated by R. P. Hardie and R. K. Gaye as Physics. In
The Complete Works of Aristotle. Vol. 1. Edited by Jonathan Barnes. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1984.
In sophisticos elenchos. In Aristotelis opera. Vol. 1. Edited by Immanuel Bekker.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1960. Translated by W. A. Pickard as Sophistical
Refutations. In The Complete Works of Aristotle. Vol. 1. Edited by Jonathan
Barnes. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Barrow, Isaac. Lectiones geometricae: In quibus (praesertim) generalia curvarum
symptomata declarantur. London, 1672.
Bayle, Pierre. Dictionnaire historique et critique, 11th edn. Paris, 1820. Reprinted,
Geneva: Slatkine Reprints, 1969.
Berzelius, Jöns Jakob. Lehrbuch der Chemie. Vol. 3. Translated by F. Wöhler.
Dresden, 1827.
Blumenbach, J. F. De generis humani varietate nativa. 3rd edn. Göttingen, 1795.
In Concepts of Race in the Eighteenth Century. Vol. 4. Edited by Robert
Bernasconi. Bristol: Thoemmes, 2001.
Böhme, Jakob. Sämtliche Schriften. Vol. 1, Aurora, oder Morgenröthe im Aufgang
(1612). Edited by August Faust and Will-Erich Peuckert. Stuttgart: Fr. Frommanns, 1955.
757

758

Bibliography

Brutus, Decimus. Letter 401, to Cicero. In Cicero’s Letters to His Friends. Vol. 3. The
Loeb Classical Library, No. 230. Edited and translated by D. R. Shackleton
Bailey. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001.
Carnot, Lazare. Réflexions sur la métaphysique du calcul infinitésimal. Paris, 1797.
Cavalieri, Francesco Bonaventura. Exercitationes geometricae sex. Bologna, 1647.
Geometria indivisibilibus continuorum nova quadam ratione promota. Bologna,
1653.
Descartes, René. The Geometry of René Descartes (1637). Translated by David
Eugene Smith and Marcia L. Latham. La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1952. Includes
a facsimile of the original French text.
Meditationes de prima philosophia (1641). In Oeuvres de Descartes. Vol. 7. Edited
by Charles Adam and Paul Tannery. Paris: J. Vrin, 1964. Translated by John
Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch as Meditations on First
Philosophy. In The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. Vol. 2. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Oeuvres complètes. Vol. 5. Edited by Victor Cousin. Paris: F. G. Levrault, 1824.
Diels, Hermann and Walter Kranz, eds. Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. 3 vols.
Berlin: Weidmann, 1956.
Euclid. Euclid’s Elements. Edited by Dana Densmore. Translated by Thomas L.
Heath. Santa Fe, NM: Green Lion Press, 2002.
Euler, Leonhard. Lettres à une princesse allemande sur divers sujets de physique et de
philosophie. Leipzig: Dyck, 1792–4.
Fichte, J. G. Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre (1794/95). In Gesamtausgabe der bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Series 1, Vol. 2, Werke
1793–95. Edited by Reinhard Lauth and Hans Jacob. Stuttgart and BadCanstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1965. Translated and edited by Peter Heath
and John Lachs in Foundation for the Entire Science of Knowledge. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Das System der Sittenlehre nach den Prinzipien der Wissenschaftslehre (1798).
Translated and edited by Daniel Breazeale and Günter Zöller in The System of Ethics According to the Principles of the Wissenschaftslehre. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
“Versuch einer neuen Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre: Einleitung.” In
Gesamtausgabe der bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Series 1, Vol. 4,
Werke 1797–98. Edited by Reinhard Lauth and Hans Gliwitzky. Werke:
Gesamtausgabe, Series 1, Vol. 1, pp. 247–265. Translated and edited by
Daniel Breazeale in An Attempt at a New Presentation of the Wissenschaftslehre (1797/98): “[First] Introduction to the Wissenschaftslehre.” In Introductions to the Wissenschaftslehre and Other Writings. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett,
1994.
“Versuch einer neuen Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre: Zweite Einleitung
in die Wissenschaftslehre.” In Gesamtausgabe der bayerischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften. Series 1, Vol. 4, Werke 1797–98. Edited by Reinhard Lauth
and Hans Gliwitzky. Stuttgart and Bad-Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog,

Bibliography

759

1970. Translated and edited by Daniel Breazeale in An Attempt at a New
Presentation of the Wissenschaftslehre (1797/98): “Second Introduction to the
Wissenschaftslehre.” In Introductions to the Wissenschaftslehre and Other Writings. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1994.
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von. Zur Farbenlehre: Didaktischer Teil (1808). In
Goethes Werke. Vol. 13. Hamburg: Christian Wegner, 1966.
Haller, Albrecht, Baron von. Hallers Gedichte. Edited by Ludwig Hirzel. 3 vols.
Bibliothek alterer Schriftwerke der deutschen Schweiz, 1882.
Horace. Odes and Epodes. The Loeb Classical Library, No. 33. Edited and translated
by Niall Rudd. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich. David Hume über den Glauben, oder Idealismus und
Realismus, Ein Gespräch. Breslau, 1787. Translated and edited by George di
Giovanni in Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi: The Main Philosophical Writings and
the Novel Allwill. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press,
1994.
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Werke. Edited by J. F. Köppen and C. J. F. Roth,
6 vols. Leipzig: Gerhard Fleischer, 1812–1825. Reprinted, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1968.
Jacobi an Fichte. Hamburg, 1799. Translated and edited by George di Giovanni
in Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi: The Main Philosophical Writings and the
Novel Allwill. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press,
1994.
Über die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn. 2nd edn.
Breslau, 1789. Translated in part by George di Giovanni in Friedrich Heinrich
Jacobi: The Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel Allwill. Montreal and
Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1994.
Werke: Gesamtausgabe. Edited by Klaus Hammacher and Walter Jaeschke.
Stuttgart and Bad-Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1988–.
Kant, Immanuel. Kritik der praktischen Vernunft (1788). In Kant’s Gesammelte
Schriften. Vol. 5. Edited by the Royal Prussian Academy of the Sciences.
Berlin: Reimer, 1913. Translated and edited by Mary Gregor as Critique of
Practical Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Kritik der reinen Vernunft. 2nd edn (1787). In Kant’s Gesammelte Schriften.
Vol. 3. Edited by the Royal Prussian Academy of the Sciences. Berlin: Reimer,
1911. Translated and edited by Paul Guyer and Allen Wood as Critique of Pure
Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Kritik der Urtheilskraft (1790). In Kant’s Gesammelte Schriften. Vol. 5. Edited by
the Royal Prussian Academy of the Sciences. Berlin: Reimer, 1913. Translated
and edited by Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews as Critique of the Power of
Judgment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft (1786). In Kant’s Gesammelte
Schriften. Vol. 4. Edited by the Royal Prussian Academy of the Sciences.
Berlin: Reimer, 1911. Translated by Michael Friedman as Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Sciences. In Immanuel Kant: Theoretical Philosophy after

760

Bibliography

1781. Edited by Henry Allison and Peter Heath. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002.
Kepler, Johannes. Nova stereometria doliorum vinariorum (1615). In Gesammelte
Werke. Vol. 9, Mathematische Schriften. Edited by F. Hammer. Munich:
Beck, 1960.
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb. Der Messias. Leipzig, 1844.
Laertius, Diogenes. Vitae philosophorum. Edited by Miroslav Marcovich. 2 vols.
Stuttgart: B. G. Teubner, 1999. Translated by R. D. Hicks in Lives of
Eminent Philosophers. 2 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1965.
Lagrange, Joseph Louis. Théorie des fonctions analytiques, contenant les principes
du calcul différentiel, dégagés de toute considération d’infiniment petits,
d’évanouissans, de limites et de fluxions, et réduits à l’analyse algébrique des
quantités finies. 3rd edn. Paris, 1847.
Traité de la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés, avec des notes
sur plusieurs points de la théorie des équations algébriques. 3rd edn. Paris, 1826.
Lambert, Johann Heinrich. Neues Organon oder Gedanken über die Erforschung und
Bezeichnung des Wahren und dessen Unterscheidung vom Irrtum und Schein
(1764). Vol. 1. Edited by Günter Schenk. Berlin: Akademie, 1990.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Disputatio metaphysica de principio individui (1663).
In Die philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Series 2,
Vol. 4. Edited by C. J. Gerhardt. Berlin, 1880.
Dissertatio de arte combinatoria (1666). In Opera omnia. Vol. 2: 1. Edited by
Ludovici Dutens. Geneva, 1768.
Essais de Théodicée (1710). In Die philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz. Vol. 6. Edited by C. J. Gerhardt. Berlin, 1885. Translated by E. M.
Huggard in Theodicy: Essays on the Goodness of God, the Freedom of Man and
the Origin of Evil. La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1985.
Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement par l’auteur du système de l’harmonie préestablie
(1704). In Die philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Vol. 5.
Edited by C. J. Gerhardt. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1960. Translated and
edited by Peter Remnant and Jonathan Bennett in New Essays on Human
Understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
“Ohne Überschrift, enthaltend die sogenannte Monadologie.” In Die
philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Vol. 6. Edited by
C. J. Gerhardt. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1961. Translated by Daniel Garber
and Roger Ariew as The Principles of Philosophy, or, the Monadology (1714). In
Philosophical Essays. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1989.
Opera omnia, nunc primum collecta. Edited by Ludovici Dutens. 6 vols. Geneva,
1768.
Principes de la nature et de la grace, fondés en raison (1714). In Die philosophischen
Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Vol. 6. Edited by C. J. Gerhardt.
Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1961. Translated by Daniel Garber and Roger
Ariew as The Principles of Nature and Grace, Based on Reason. In Philosophical
Essays. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1989.

Bibliography

761

Malebranche, Nicolas. Recherche de la vérité: Eclaircissements (1674–5). In Oeuvres
de Malebranche. Vol. 3. Edited by Geneviève Rodis-Lewis. Paris: Vrin, 1964.
Translated and edited by Thomas M. Lennon in The Search after Truth:
Elucidations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Mendelssohn, Moses. Phädon: oder Über die Unsterblichkeit der Seele: In drei
Gesprächen (1767 and 1784). In Gesammelte Werke, Jubiläumsausgabe:
Schriften zur Philosophie und Ästhetik. Vol. 3: 1. Berlin: Akademie, 1932.
Newton, Isaac. Philosophiæ naturalis principia mathematica. Amsterdam, 1714.
Translated by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman in The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1999.
Plato. Sophista. In Platonis et quae vel Platonis esse feruntur vel Platonica solent
comitari . . . Vol. 4. Edited by Immanuel Bekker. London, 1827. Translated
by Nicholas P. White as Sophist. In Complete Works. Edited by John M.
Cooper. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1997.
Timaeus. In Platonis et quae vel Platonis esse feruntur vel Platonica solent
comitari . . . Vol. 7. Edited by Immanuel Bekker. London, 1827. Translated by
Donald J. Zeyl as Timaeus. In Complete Works. Edited by John M. Cooper.
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1997.
Plouquet, Gottfried. Expositiones Philosophiæ Theoreticæ Logik (1782). Edited and
translated into German by Michael Franz. Studien und Materialen zur
Geschichte der Philosophie. Hildesheim: Olms, 2006. Original Latin text
included.
Reinhold, K. L. “Was ist das Denken, als Denken?” In Beyträge zur leichtern
Übersicht der Philosophie beym Anfange des 19. Jahrhunderts, I. Hamburg:
Perthes, 1801.
Ritter, Johann Wilhelm. Das elektrische System der Körper: Ein Versuch. Leipzig,
1805.
Schelling, F. W. J. Darstellung meines Systems der Philosophie (1801). In Schellings
Werke. Vol. 3. Edited by Manfred Schröter. Munich: C. H. Beck, 1927.
Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur (1797). Reprinted in Schellings Werke.
Ergänzungsband 1. Munich: Beck, 1956. Translated by E. H. Harris and Peter
Heath as Ideas for a Philosophy of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1988.
Schubert, Friedrich Theodor. Theoretische Astronomie. Vol. 3, Physische Astronomie.
St. Petersburg, 1798.
Spehr, Friedrich Wilhelm. Vollständiger Lehrbegriff der reinen Kombinationslehre.
Braunschweig, 1824.
Spinoza, Benedictus. The Chief Works of Benedict of Spinoza. Translated by
R. H. M. Elwes. 2 vols. New York: Dover, 1951.
The Correspondence of Spinoza. Translated and edited by A. Wolf. New York:
Russell & Russell, 1966.
Ethica. In Opera. Vol. 2. Edited by Carl Gebhardt. Heidelberg: Winter, 1925.
Translated by Edwin Curley as Ethics. In The Collected Writings of Spinoza.
Vol. 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985.

762

Bibliography

Opera. Edited by Carl Gebhardt. 4 vols. Heidelberg: Winter, 1925.
Wolff, Christian. Anfangs-Gründe aller mathematischen Wissenschaften I.
Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1750. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. 1st series,
Vol. 12. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1973.
Anfangs-Gründe aller mathematischen Wissenschaften II. Halle, 1757. Reprinted
in Gesammelte Werke. 1st series, Vol. 13. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1973.
Elementa matheseos universæ. Halle and Magdeburg, 1742. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. 2nd series, vol. 29. Edited by J. E. Hofmann. Hildesheim: Georg
Olms, 1968. Translated by John Hanna in A Treatise of Algebra, with an Application of it to a Variety of Problems in Arithmetic, to Trigonometry, and Conic
Sections. Three Preliminary Treatises. London, 1739.
Philosophia prima, sive ontologia, methodo scientifica pertractata. 2nd edn.
Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1736. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. 2nd series,
Vol. 3. Edited by Jean Ecole. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1962.
Philosophia rationalis sive logica, methodo scientifica pertractata et ad usum scientiarum atque vitae aptata. Praemittitur discursus praeliminaris de philosophia
in genere. Frankfurt, 1740. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. 2nd series,
Vol. 1: 2. Edited by Jean Ecole. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1983.
Theologia naturalis methodo scientifica pertracta: pars posterior. Frankfurt and
Leipzig, 1741. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. 2nd series, Vol. 8. Edited by
Jean Ecole. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1981.
WORKS OF HEGEL CITED
Hegel, G. W. F. Differenz des Fichte’schen und Schelling’schen System der Philosophie.
Kritisches Journal der Philosophie (1801). Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke.
Vol. 4, Jenaer Kritische Schriften. Edited by Hartmut Buchner and Otto
Pöggeler. Hamburg: Meiner, 1968. Translated by H. S. Harris and W. Cerf as
The Difference Between Fichte’s and Schelling’s System of Philosophy. Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1977.
“Verhältniß des Skepticismus zur Philosophie, Darstellung seiner verschiedenen Modificationen, und Vergleichung des neuesten mit dem alten.” Kritisches Journal der Philosophie (1802). Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 4,
Jenaer Kritische Schriften. Edited by Hartmut Buchner and Otto Pöggeler.
Hamburg: Meiner, 1968. Translated with introductory studies by George di
Giovanni and H. S. Harris as “On the Relationship of Skepticism to Philosophy, Exposition of its Different Modifications and Comparison of the Latest
Form with the Ancient One.” In Between Kant and Hegel: Texts in the Development of Post-Kantian Idealism. Revised edn. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett,
2000.
“Wie der gemeine Menschenverstand die Philosophie nehme – dargestellet
an den Werken des Herrn Krug.” Kritisches Journal der Philosophie (1802).
Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 4, Jenaer Kritische Schriften. Edited by
Hartmut Buchner and Otto Pöggeler. Hamburg: Meiner, 1968. Translated
and edited by George di Giovanni and H. S. Harris as “How the Ordinary

Bibliography

763

Human Understanding Takes Philosophy (as displayed in the works of Mr.
Krug).” In Between Kant and Hegel: Texts in the Development of Post-Kantian
Idealism. Revised edn. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 2000.
G. W. F. Hegel: “System of Ethical Life” (1802/3) and “First Philosophy of Spirit”
(1803/4): Part III of the System of Speculative Philosophy 1803/4. Edited and
translated by H. S. Harris and T. M. Knox. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1979. Critical German Text: Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 5, Schriften
und Entwürfe (1799–1808). Edited by T. Ebert, M. Baum, and K. R. Meist.
Hamburg: Meiner, 1998.
Phänomenologie des Geistes. Bamberg and Würzburg, 1807. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 9. Edited by Wolfgang Bonsiepen and Reinhard Heede.
Hamburg: Meiner, 1980. Translated by A. V. Miller as Hegel’s Phenomenology
of Spirit. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977.
Wissenschaft der Logik. Vol. 1, Die objektive Logik. Nürnberg, 1812. Reprinted
in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 11, Wissenschaft der Logik, Erster Band: Die objektive Logik (1812/1813). Edited by Friedrich Hogemann and Walter Jaeschke.
Hamburg: Meiner, 1978.
Wissenschaft der Logik. Vol. 1, Die objektive Logik. Book 2, “Die Lehre vom
Wesen.” Nürnberg, 1813. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 11, Wissenschaft
der Logik, Erster Band: Die objektive Logik (1812/1813). Edited by Friedrich
Hogemann and Walter Jaeschke. Hamburg: Meiner, 1978.
Wissenschaft der Logik oder die Lehre vom Begriff. Nürnberg, 1816. Reprinted
in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 12, Wissenschaft der Logik, Zweiter Band: Die
subjektive Logik (1816). Edited by Friedrich Hogemann and Walter Jaeschke.
Hamburg: Meiner, 1981.
Wissenschaft der Logik. 2nd edn. Edited by Leopold von Henning. 2 vols. Berlin:
Duncker and Humblot, 1841.
Encyclopedia Logic, as Hegel’s Logic or The Logic of Hegel. Translated by
W. Wallace. London: Oxford University Press, 1873. Reprint, 1963.
Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse: Zum Gebrauch
seiner Vorlesungen. 1st edn. Heidelberg, 1817. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke.
Vol. 13. Edited by Wolfgang Bonsiepen and Klaus Grotsch. Hamburg:
Meiner, 2000.
Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse: Zum Gebrauch
seiner Vorlesungen. 3rd edn. Heidelberg, 1830. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke.
Vol. 20. Edited by Wolfgang Bonsiepen and Hans-Christian Lucas. Hamburg: Meiner, 1992.
Wissenschaft der Logik, erster Teil, Die objektive Logik. Vol. 1, Die Lehre vom
Sein. Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1832. Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 21,
Wissenschaft der Logik, Teil I: Die objective Logik; Band I: Die Lehre vom
Sein (1832). Edited by Friedrich Hogemann and Walter Jaeschke. Hamburg:
Meiner, 1985.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel’s Werke: Vollständige Ausgabe durch einen Verein
von Freunden des Verewigten. Vols. 3–5, Wissenschaft der Logic. Edited by
Leopold von Henning. Berlin: Duncker und Humblot, 1833.

764

Bibliography

“Hegels ursprüngliches System 1798–1806: Aus Hegels Nachlass.” Literarhistorisches Taschenbuch. Edited by Robert Prutz. Leipzig, ii (1844).
The Logic of Hegel, Translated from the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences.
Translated by William Wallace. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1873. 2nd
edn, 1892.
Hegel’s Logic, Being Part One of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences
(1830). Translated by William Wallace, with a Foreword by J. N. Findlay.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975.
Theologische Jugendschriften. Edited by Hermann Nohl. Tübingen: Mohr, 1907.
Reprint, Frankfurt am Main: Minerva, 1966.
Hegel’s Doctrine of Formal Logic, Being a Translation of the First Section
of the Subjective Logic. Translated by H. S. Macran. Oxford: Clarendon,
1912.
G. W. F. Hegel: Hegels erstes System. Edited by H. Eherenberg and H. Link.
Heidelberg, 1915.
Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie. Edited by Georg Lasson.
Leipzig: Meiner, 1923.
Hegel’s Logic of World and Idea, Being a Translation of the Second and Third
Parts of the Subjective Logic. Translated by H. S. Macran. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1929.
Hegel’s Science of Logic. Translated by W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers.
2 vols. London: Allen & Unwin; New York: Macmillan, 1929.
Jenenser Realphilosophie I. Edited by Johannes Hoffmeister. Leipzig: Meiner,
1932.
Wissenschaft der Logik. 2nd edn. Edited by Georg Lasson. Leipzig: Meiner,
1932–1934.
Hegel’s Science of Logic. Translated by A. V. Miller. London: Allen & Unwin;
New York: Humanities Press, 1969.
Science de la logique. Translated by S. Jankélévich after the Lasson edition. Paris:
Aubier, 1969.
Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 7, Jenaer Systementwürfe II, Logik, Metaphysik, Naturphilosophie (1804/05). Edited by Rolf-Peter Horstmann and Johann Heinrich
Trede. Hamburg: Meiner, 1982. Translation of the Logic and Metaphysics
edited by John Burbidge and George di Giovanni as The Jena System 1804–5:
Logic and Metaphysics. Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 1986.
Encyclopedia Logic: Part 1 of the “Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences” with
the Zusätze. Translated by T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting, and H. S. Harris.
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1991.
Vorlesungen, Ausgewählte Nachschriften und Manuskripten. Vol. 11, Vorlesungen über Logik und Metaphysik. Edited by Karen Gloy. Hamburg: Meiner,
1992.
G. W. F. Hegel: Scienza della logica, Vols. 1 and 2. Translated by Arturo Moni.
1924–25. Revised by Claudio Cesa. Roma-Bari: Laterza, 2001.

Bibliography

765

Vorlesungen, Ausgewählte Nachschriften und Manuskripten. Vol. 10, Vorlesungen
über die Logik. Edited by Udo Rameil and H.-Christian Lucas. Hamburg:
Meiner, 2001.
Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 8, Jenaer Systementwürfe III. Edited by Rolf-Peter
Horstmann. Hamburg: Meiner, 1976. Translated in part by Leo Rauch as
Hegel and the Human Spirit: A Translation of the Jena Lectures on the Philosophy of Spirit (1805–6) with Commentary. Detroit: Wayne State University
Press, 1983.
WORKS CITED BY THE EDITOR AND SELECTED READINGS
Baillie, James Black. The Origin and Significance of Hegel’s Logic. London: Macmillan, 1901. Reprint, New York: Garland, 1984.
Balaban, Oded. “Circularity of Thought in Hegel’s Logic.” Review of Metaphysics,
44.1 (September 1990): 95–109.
Baptist, Gabriella. Il problema della modalità nelle logiche di Hegel. Genoa: Pantograf, 1993.
Beiser, Frederick. Hegel. New York: Routledge, 2005.
Bencivenga, Ermanno. Hegel’s Dialectical Logic. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2000.
Berto, Francesco. “Modus tollens: Kant, Hegel e la critica della nozione logica di
sostanza.” Giornale di metafisica, 25.2 (May–August 2003): 287–304.
Biard, J., D. Buvet, J. F. Kervegan, J. F. Kling, A. Lacmix, A. Lecrivain, and
M. Slubicki. Introduction à la lecture de la Science de la Logique de Hegel. 3
vols. Paris: Aubier-Montaigne, 1981–1987.
Bole, T. “Contradiction in Hegel’s Science of Logic.” Review of Metaphysics, 40
(March 1987): 515–534.
“The Dialectic of Hegel’s Logic as the Logic of Ontology.” Hegel-Jahrbuch, 19.4
(1975): 152–159.
“The Success of the Project of Hegel’s Science of Logic.” Southwest Philosophy
Review: The Journal of The Southwestern Philosophical Society, 18.1 (January
2002): 155–163.
“Taking Hegel’s Logic Seriously.” Southwest Philosophy Review: The Journal of
The Southwestern Philosophical Society, 9.1 (January 1993): 51–61.
Bormann, Marco. “On the Deconstruction of Hegel’s Logic.” Prima Philosophia,
13.4 (October–December 2000): 333–340.
Brandom, Robert. “The Structure of Desire and Recognition: Self-Consciousness
and Self-Constitution.” In Von der Logik zur Sprache. Stuttgarter HegelKongress 2005. Edited by R. Bubner and G. Hindrichs. Stuttgart: KlettCotta, 2007.
Tales of the Mighty Dead. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
Bubner, Rüdiger. “Zur Struktur dialektischer Logik.” In Hegel-Jahrbuch 1974.
Edited by Wilhelm R. Beyer. Cologne: Pahl-Rugenstein, 1974.
Burbidge, John W. “The First Chapter of Hegel’s Larger Logic.” The Owl of
Minerva, 21.2 (Spring 1990): 177–183.

766

Bibliography

Hegel on Logic and Religion: The Reasonableness of Christianity. Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1992.
“Hegel’s Conception of Logic.” In The Cambridge Companion to Hegel. Edited
by Frederick C. Beiser. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
“Hegel’s Logic.” In Handbook of the History of Logic. Vol. 3, The Rise of Modern
Logic: From Leibniz to Frege. Edited by Dov. M. Gabbay and John Woods.
Amsterdam: Elsevier/North Holland, 2004.
On Hegel’s Logic: Fragments of a Commentary. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities, 1981.
The Logic of Hegel’s “Logic”: An Introduction. Peterborough: Broadview, 2006.
Review of Gesammelte Werke. Vol. 11, Wissenschaft der Logik, Erster Band: Die
objektive Logik (1812/13), by G. W. F. Hegel. The Owl of Minerva, 10.4 (1979):
5–7.
Burkhardt, Bernd. Hegels “Wissenschaft der Logik” im Spannungsfeld der Kritik.
New York: Olms, 1993.
Butler, Clark. Hegel’s Logic: Between Dialectic and History. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1996.
Carlson, David Gray. A Commentary to Hegel’s “Science of Logic.” Basingstoke and
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
“Hegel’s Theory of Measure.” Cardozo Law Review, 25.1 (2003): 129–213.
“Hegel’s Theory of Quantity.” Cardozo Law Review, 23.6 (2002): 2027–2155.
ed. Hegel’s Theory of the Subject. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2005.
Cave, George P. “The Dialectic of Becoming in Hegel’s Logic.” The Owl of Minerva,
16.2 (Spring 1985): 147–160.
Centrone, Stefania. “Infinito matematico e soggettività: Notazioni sulla sezione
quantità della Scienza della Logica di Hegel.” Giornale Critico della Filosofia
Italiana, 22.3 (September–December 2002): 430–448.
Cirulli, F. Hegel’s Critique of Essence: A Reading of the Wesenslogik. New York:
Routledge, 2006.
Cutrofello, Andrew. “Hegel’s Science of Logic and Idea of Truth.” Idealistic Studies:
An International Philosophical Journal, 13.1 (1983): 33–49.
Damerow, P. and W. Lefèvre. “Die wissenschaftliche Problemlage für Hegels
‘Logik.’” In Hegel-Jahrbuch 1979. Edited by W. R. Beyer. Cologne: PahlRugenstein, 1980.
De Boer, Karin. “The Dissolving Force of the Concept: Hegel’s Ontological
Logic.” Review of Metaphysics, 57.4 (June 2004): 787–822.
Deligiorgi, Katerina. “Kant, Hegel, and the Bounds of Thought.” Bulletin of the
Hegel Society of Great Britain, 45–46 (2002): 56–71.
De Vos, Ludovicus. Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik: Die absolute Idee. Einleitung und
Kommentar. Bonn: Bouvier, 1983.
De Vries, W. A. “Hegel’s Logic and Philosophy of Mind.” In Routledge History of
Philosophy. Vol. 6, The Age of German Idealism. Edited by R. C. Solomon
and K. M. Higgins. London: Routledge, 1993.

Bibliography

767

Di Carlo, Leonardo. “Dal concetto alla natura nella Scienza della logica di Hegel.”
Teoria: Rivista di Filosofia, 24.2 (2004): 79–91.
Di Giovanni, George. “The Category of Contingency in the Hegelian Logic”
(1980). Reprinted in Selected Essays on G. W. F. Hegel. Edited by L. Stepelevich.
New York: Humanities Press, 1992.
ed. Essays on Hegel’s Logic. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1990.
Freedom and Religion in Kant and His Immediate Successors: The Vocation of
Humankind, 1774–1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
“Hegel’s Anti-Spinozism: The Transition to Subjective Logic and the End of
Classical Metaphysics.” The Cardozo Public Law, Policy, and Ethics Journal,
3 (2005): 45–60.
“Reflection and Contradiction: A Commentary on Some Passages of Hegel’s
Science of Logic” (1973). Reprinted in G. W. F. Hegel: Critical Assessments.
Vol. 3. Edited by Robert Stern. London: Routledge, 1993.
“Sacramentalizing the World: On Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre of 1810.” In
Grund- und Methodenfragen in Fichtes Spätwerk. Fichte-Studien 31. Edited
by Günter Zöller and Hans Georg von Mainz. Amsterdam and New York:
Rodopi, 2007.
Doz, André. La logique de Hegel et les problèmes traditionnels de l’ontologie. Paris:
Vrin, 1987.
“L’entrée dans la Logique de Hegel.” Bulletin de la societé française de philosophie,
89.1 (January–March 1995): 1–27.
Dubarle, Dominique and André Doz. Logique et dialectique. Paris: Larousse, 1972.
Düsing, Klaus. Das Problem der Subjektivität in Hegels Logik. Bonn: Bouvier, 1976.
Eley, Lothar. Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik. Leitfaden und Kommentar. Munich:
Wilhelm Fink, 1976.
Erdmann, J. E. Grundriß der Logik und der Metaphysik. 4th edn. Halle: Schmid,
1864. Translated by B. C. Burt, as Outlines of Logic and Metaphysics. London:
Swan Sonnenschein, 1896.
Falk, Hans-Peter. Das Wissen in Hegels “Wissenschaft der Logik.” Symposium
no. 83. Freiburg: Alber, 1983.
Falkenburg, Brigitte. “How to Save the Phenomena.” In Hegel and the Philosophy
of Nature. Edited by Stephen Houlgate. Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press, 1998.
Ferrara, Vincent J. “Hegel’s Logic: A Dialectical Substantiation of Anselm’s Ontological Argument.” Analecta Anselmiana, 4.1 (1975): 261–274.
Ferrer, Diogo Falcão. “La function systématique de l’idée de la vie dans la ‘Science
de la logique’ de Hegel.” In Das Leben Denken, Erster Teil (Hegel-Jahrbuch
2006). Edited by Andreas Arndt. Berlin: Akademie, 2006.
Ferrini, Cinzia. Dai primi hegeliani a Hegel. Naples: Città del Sole, 2003.
“Logica e filosofia della natura nella dottrina dell’essere hegeliana I.” Rivista di
storia della filosofia, 4 (1991): 701–735.
“Logica e filosofia della natura nella dottrina dell’essere hegeliana II.” Rivista di
storia della filosofia, 1 (1992): 104–124.

768

Bibliography

“On the Relation between ‘Mode’ and ‘Measure’ in Hegel’s Science of Logic:
Some Introductory Remarks.” The Owl of Minerva, 20.1 (Fall 1988): 21–49.
Fichera, Giuseppe. Il problema del cominciamento logico e la categoria del divenire
in Hegel e nei suoi critici. Catania: Istituto universitario di magistero, 1956.
Fichte, J. G. Die Bestimmung des Menschen, dargestellt von Johann Gottlieb Fichte.
Berlin: Voss, 1800. Translated by Roderick M. Chisholm as The Vocation of
Man. New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1956.
“Versuch einer neuen Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre: Einleitung.” In
Gesamtausgabe der bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Series 1, Vol. 4,
Werke 1797–98. Edited by Reinhard Lauth and Hans Gliwitzky. Stuttgart
and Bad-Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1970. Translated and edited by
Daniel Breazeale in An Attempt at a New Presentation of the Wissenschaftslehre
(1797/98): “[First] Introduction to the Wissenschaftslehre.” In Introductions to
the Wissenschaftslehre and Other Writings. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1994.
“Versuch einer neuen Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre: Zweite Einleitung in
die Wissenschaftslehre.” In Gesamtausgabe der bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Series 1, Vol. 4, Werke 1797–98. Edited by Reinhard Lauth and
Hans Gliwitzky. Stuttgart and Bad-Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1970.
Translated and edited by Daniel Breazeale in An Attempt at a New Presentation of the Wissenschaftslehre (1797/98): “Second Introduction to the Wissenschaftslehre.” In Introductions to the Wissenschaftslehre and Other Writings.
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1994.
Findlay, J. N. Hegel: A Re-Examination. New York: MacMillan, 1958; New York:
Humanities Press, 1964.
Fink-Eitel, H. “Hegels phänomenologische Erkenntnistheorie als Begründung
dialektischer Logik.” Philosophisches Jahrbuch, 85.2 (1978): 242–258.
Flach, Werner. “Zum ‘Vorbegriff ’ der kleinen Logik Hegels.” In Der Idealismus
und seine Gegenwart. Festschrift für Werner Marx zum 65. Geburtstag. Edited
by Ute Guzzoni, Bernhard Rang, and Ludwig Siep. Hamburg: Meiner, 1976.
Fleischhacker, L. “Hegel on Mathematics and Experimental Science.” In Hegel
and Newtonianism. Edited by Michael John Petry. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993.
Fleischmann, Eugène. La science universelle ou la logique de Hegel. Paris: Plon, 1968.
Forster, Michael. “Hegel’s Dialectical Method.” In The Cambridge Companion to
Hegel. Edited by Frederick C. Beiser. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1993.
Friedrich, Horst. Hegel’s “Wissenschaft der Logik”: Ein Marxistischer Kommentar. 2
vols. Berlin: Karl Dietz, 2000, 2006.
Fulda, Hans Friedrich. Das Problem einer Einleitung in Hegels Wissenschaft der
Logik. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann, 1965.
“Unzulängliche Bemerkungen zur Dialektik.” In Seminar: Dialektik in der
Philosophie Hegels. Edited by Rolf-Peter Horstmann. Frankfurt am Main:
Suhrkamp, 1978.
Fulda, Hans Friedrich, Rolf-Peter Horstmann, and Michael Theunissen. Kritische
Darstellung der Metaphysik: Eine Diskussion über Hegels Logik. Frankfurt:
Suhrkamp, 1980.

Bibliography

769

Gadamer, Hans Georg. “The Idea of Hegel’s Logic.” In Hegel’s Dialectic: Five
Hermeneutical Studies. Translated by P. Christopher Smith. New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 1976.
Gaskins, Richard H. “The Structure of Self-Commentary in Hegel’s Dialectical
Logic.” International Philosophical Quarterly, 30 (December 1990): 403–417.
Gauthier, Yvon.“Logique hegelienne et formalisation.” Canadian Philosophical
Review, 6 (September 1967): 151–165.
Genovesi, Antonio. Elementa artis logico-criticæ, Liber V. Venice, 1749.
Gli elementi dell’arte logico-critica, 2nd edn. Venice, 1783.
Geraets, Théodore F. La logica di Hegel tra religione e storia. Milan: Guerini e
associati, 1996.
Graeser, Andreas. “Bemerkungen zur Beschreibung des Anfangenden in Hegels
Logik.” Freiburger Zeitschrift für Philosophie und Theologie, 32 (1985): 439–454.
Gray, J. G. “Hegel’s Logic: The Philosophy of the Concrete.” Virginia Quarterly,
47.2 (1971): 175–189.
Günther, Gotthard. Grundzüge einer neuen Theorie des Denkens in Hegels Logik.
2nd edn. Hamburg: Meiner, 1978.
Gupta, Jay A. “Hegel on Logic, Determinacy, and Cognition.” Philosophical Forum,
35.1 (Spring 2004): 81–96.
Guzzoni, Ute. Werden zu sich: Eine Untersuchung zu Hegels “Wissenschaft der Logik.”
Freiburg i. Br: Alber, 1978.
Haag, Karl Heinz. Philosophischer Idealismus: Untersuchungen zur Hegelschen
Dialektik mit Beispielen aus der “Wissenschaft der Logik.” Frankfurt: Europaische Verlagsanstalt, 1967.
Haas, Andrew. Hegel and the Problem of Multiplicity. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press, 2000.
Hackenesch, Christa. Die Logik der Andersheit: Eine Untersuchung zu Hegels Begriff
der Reflexion. Frankfurt: Athenäum, 1987.
Hahn, S. S. Contradiction in Motion: Hegel’s Organic Concept of Life and Value.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2007.
Halper, Edward. “Self-Relation in Hegel’s Science of Logic.” Philosophy Research
Archives, 7 (1981): 89–133.
Hanna, Robert. “From an Ontological Point of View: Hegel’s Critique of the
Common Logic.” Review of Metaphysics, 40 (December 1986): 305–338.
Harris, Errol E. An Interpretation of the Logic of Hegel. New York: University Press
of America, 1983.
Harris, H. S. “Hail and Farewell to Hegel: The Phenomenology and the Logic.”
The Owl of Minerva, 25.2 (Spring 1994): 163–171.
Hegel’s Development. Vol. 2, Night Thoughts: Jena 1801–1806. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1983.
“Hegel’s Jena Logic and Metaphysics.” The Owl of Minerva, 18.2 (Spring 1987):
209–218.
Harris, W. T. Hegel’s Doctrine of Reflection: Being a Paraphrase and a Commentary
Interpolated into the Text of the Second Volume of Hegel’s Larger Logic, Treating
of “Essence.” New York: D. Appleton, 1881.

770

Bibliography

Hegel’s Logic: A Book on the Genesis of the Categories of the Mind. Chicago,
1890. Reprinted as Hegel’s Logic: The Philosophy of Hegel. New York: Garland,
1984.
Hartnack, Justus. An Introduction to Hegel’s Logic. Translated by Kenneth R.
Westphal and Lars Aagaard-Mogensen. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1998.
Hasselberg, Erwin and Frank Radtke, eds. Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik: Eine internationale Bibliographie ihrer Rezeption im XX Jahrhundert. Vienna: Passagen,
1993.
Henrich, Dieter. “Anfang und Methode der Logik.” Hegelstudien, 1 (1964): 19–35.
Hegel im Kontext. Frankfurt am Main: Surhkamp, 1971.
Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik: Formation und Rekonstruktion. Stuttgart: KlettCotta, 1986.
ed. Die Wissenschaft der Logik und die Logik der Reflexion. Hegel-Tage Chantilly
1971. Bonn: Bouvier, 1978.
Hibben, John G. Hegel’s Logic: An Essay in Interpretation. New York: Scribner and Sons, 1902. Reprint, New York: Garland, 1984; Hibben Press,
2007.
Hoffmeyer, John. The Advent of Freedom: The Presence of the Future in Hegel’s
“Logic.” London: Associated University Press, 1994.
Hogemann, F. “L’idée absolue dans la science de la logique de Hegel.” In Hegel:
The Absolute Spirit. Edited by Theodore F. Geraets. Ottawa: University of
Ottawa Press, 1984.
“Die Idee des Guten in Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik.” Hegel-Studien, 29
(1994): 79–102.
Holz, Harald. “Anfang, Identität und Widerspruch: Strukturen von Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik, gezeigt an dem Abschnitt: ‘Womit der Anfang der Wissenschaft gemacht werden muss’ sowie der ‘Logik des Seins.’” Tijdschrift voor
Filosofie, 36 (1974): 707–761.
Horstmann, Rolf-Peter. “Hegel über Unendlichkeit, Substanz, Subjekt: Eine Fallstudie zur Rolle der Logik in Hegels System.” In Internationales Jahrbuch
des Deutschen Idealismus/International Yearbook of German Idealism. Vol. 1,
Konzepte der Rationalität/Concepts of Rationality. Edited by Karl Ameriks.
Berlin: De Gruyter, 2003.
Hösle, V. Hegels System: Der Idealismus der Subjektivität und des Problems der
Intersubjektivität. Vol. 1, Systementwicklung und Logik. Hamburg: Meiner,
1987.
Houlgate, Stephen. An Introduction to Hegel: Freedom, Truth, and History. 2nd
edn. London: Routledge, 2005.
“Hegel’s Critique of Foundationalism in the ‘Doctrine of Essence.’” In German
Philosophy Since Kant. Edited by Anthony O’Hear. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999.
“Logic and Nature in Hegel’s Philosophy: A Response to John Burbidge.” The
Owl of Minerva, 34.1 (2002–2003): 107–125.
“Necessity and Contingency in Hegel’s Science of Logic.” The Owl of Minerva,
27 (1995): 37–49.

Bibliography

771

The Opening of Hegel’s Logic: From Being to Infinity. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue,
2006.
“Substance, Causality, and the Question of Method in Hegel’s Science of
Logic.” In The Reception of Kant’s Critical Philosophy: Fichte, Schelling, and
Hegel. Edited by Sally Sedgwick. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2000.
Hyppolite, Jean. “Essai sur la logique de Hegel.” Revue internationale de philosophie,
6.19 (1962): 35–49. Reprinted in Figures de la pensée philosophique: Ecrits (1931–
1968). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1971.
Logique et existence: essai sur la logique de Hegel. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1961.
Iber, Christian. Metaphysik absoluter Relationalität: Eine Studie zu den beiden ersten
Kapiteln von Hegels Wesenslogik. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1990.
Inwood, M. J. Hegel. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983.
Insole, Christopher J. “Informed Tolerance.” Review of A Secular Age, by Charles
Taylor. The Times Literary Supplement, February 1, 2008, 5470: 5.
Jarczyk, Gwendoline. “Une approche de la vérité logique chez Hegel.” Archives de
philosophie, 44 (April–June 1981): 239–247.
“Subjet/objet dans la logique de l’essence de Hegel.” Aquinas: Rivista internazionale di filosofia, 24 (May–December 1981): 337–352.
Système et liberté dans la logique de Hegel. Paris: Editions Aubier-Montague,
1980.
Johannes a sancto Thoma. Cursus Philosophicus. Edited by B. Reiser. Turin: Marietti, 1930.
The Material Logic of John of St. Thomas. Translated by Y. Simon, J. J. Glanville,
and G. D. Hollenhorst. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1955.
Johnson, Paul Owen. The Critique of Thought: A Re-examination of Hegel’s Science
of Logic. Brookfield: Gower, 1988.
Kemper, Peter. Dialektik und Darstellung: Eine Untersuchung zur spekulativen
Methode in Hegels “Wissenschaft der Logik.” Frankfurt: Fischer, 1980.
Kierkegaard, Søren. Concluding Unscientific Postscript. Vol. 1. Edited and translated
by H. V. Hong and E. H. Hong. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1992.
Kimmerle, Heinz. “Die allgemeine Struktur der dialektischen Methode.”
Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung, 33 (April–June 1979): 184–209.
Das Problem der Abgeschlossenheit des Denkens. Hegel-Studien, Beiheft 8. Bonn:
Bouvier, 1970.
Kirkland, Frank M. “Hegel’s Critique of Psychologism.” In Phenomenology: East
and West: Essays in Honor of J. N. Mohanty. Edited by Frank M. Kirkland.
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993.
Koch, Anton Friedrich. “Die Selbstbeziehung der Negation in Hegels Logik.”
Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung, 53.1 (January–March 1999): 1–29.
Kreines, James. “Hegel’s Critique of Pure Mechanism and the Philosophical Appeal
of the Logic Project.” European Journal of Philosophy, 12.1 (April 2004): 38–
74.

772

Bibliography

Lakebrink, Bernhard. “Aus Hegels Logik: Sein und Existenz.” In Der Idealismus
und seine Gegenwart. Festschrift für Werner Marx zum 65. Geburtstag. Edited
by Ute Guzzoni, Bernhard Rang and Ludwig Siep. Hamburg: Meiner, 1976.
Kommentar zur Hegels “Logik” in seiner “Encyclopädie” von 1830. 2 vols. Freiburg:
Karl Alber, 1979, 1985.
Lamb, David. “Teleology: Kant and Hegel.” In Hegel’s Critique of Kant. Edited by
Stephen Priest. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Lau, Chong-Fuk. “Voraussetzungs- und Bestimmungslosigkeit: Bemerkungen
zum Problem des Anfangs in Hegels ‘Wissenschaft der Logik.’” Perspektiven
der Philosophie: Neues Jahrbuch, 26 (2000): 287–323.
Léonard, André. Commentaire littéral de la logique de Hegel. Paris: J. Vrin, 1974.
Longuenesse, Béatrice. “Actuality in Hegel’s Logic.” Graduate Faculty Philosophy
Journal, 13.1 (1988): 115–124.
Hegel’s Critique of Metaphysics. Translated by Nicole J. Simek. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Lukács, George. “Die Frage der Besonderheit in der klassischen deutschen Philosophie: Das Problem von Allgemeinheit, Besonderheit und Einzelheit in
der Logik und Kategorienlehre bei Kant, Schelling und Hegel.” Deutsche
Zeitschrift für Philosophie, 2.4 (1954): 764–807.
Macran, H. S. Hegel’s Logic of World and Idea. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1929.
Marcuse, Herbert. Hegel’s Ontology and the Theory of Historicity. Translated by
Seyla Benhabib. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987.
Marx, Wolfgang. Hegels Theorie logischer Vermittlung: Kritik der dialektischen
Begriffskonstruktion in der “Wissenschaft der Logik.” Stuttgart: Fromann Holzboog, 1972.
Massolo, Arturo. Logica hegeliana e filosofia contemporanea. Florence: Giunti, 1967.
Ricerche sulla logice hegeliana ed altri saggi. Florence: Marzocco, 1950.
McTaggart, John McTaggart Ellis. A Commentary on Hegel’s Logic. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1910.
Studies in Hegelian Cosmology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1918.
Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic. 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1922.
Meist, Kurt Reiner. “‘Sich vollbringende Skeptizismus’: G. E. Schulzes Replik
auf Hegel und Schelling.” In Transzendentalphilosophie und Spekulation: Der
Streit um die Gestalt einer ersten Philosophie (1799–1807). Edited by Walter
Jaeschke. Hamburg: Meiner, 1993.
Merker, Nicolao. Le origini della logica hegeliana: Hegel a Jena. Milan: Feltrinelli,
1961.
Michelet, C. L. “The Dialectic and the Principle of Contradiction (1871).” In
G. W. F. Hegel: Critical Assessments. Vol. 1, Nineteenth Century Readings.
Translated by Louis Soldan. Edited by Robert Stern. London: Routledge,
1993.
Moretto, Antonio. Filosofia della matematica e della meccanica nel sistema hegeliano.
Padua: Il Poligrafo, 2004.
Hegel e la “Matematica dell’infinito.” Trento: Verifiche, 1984.

Bibliography

773

Questioni di filosofia della matematica nella “Scienza della Logica” di Hegel.
Trento: Verifiche, 1988.
“Sul problema della considerazione matematica dell’infinito e del continuo in
Aristotele e Hegel.” In Hegel e Aristotele. Edited by A. Ferrarin. Cagliari:
Edizioni AV, 1997.
Müller, Olaf and Klaus Hartmann. Hegels Logik. Hawthorne: de Gruyter, 1999.
Mure, G. R. G. An Introduction to Hegel. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940.
A Study of Hegel’s Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1950.
Noël, G. La logique de Hegel. Paris: Vrin, 1933.
Nuzzo, Angelica. “The Idea of ‘Method’ in Hegel’s Science of Logic – A Method for
Finite Thinking and Absolute Reason.” Bulletin of the Hegel Society of Great
Britain, 39–40 (1999): 1–17.
Logica e sistema: Sull’ idea hegeliana di filosofia. Genoa: Pantograf, 1992.
Paimann, Rebecca. “Anmerkungen zum Verhältnis von Glauben und Wissen in
Bezug auf den Anfang der Hegelschen ‘Wissenschaft der Logik.’” In Glauben
und Wissen, Zweiter Teil (Hegel-Jahrbuch 2004). Edited by Andreas Arndt
et al. Berlin: Akademie, 2004.
Papi, Fulvio. “Sull’inizio nella Scienza della logica di Hegel: Filosofia come inizio
e come progetto.” Paradigmi, 19 (2001): 23–34.
Paterson, A. L. T. “Self-reference and the Natural Numbers as the Logic of Dasein.”
Hegel-Studien, 32 (1997): 93–121.
Pinkard, Terry. Hegel’s Dialectic: The Explanation of Possibility. Philadelphia: Temple, 1988.
“Hegel’s Idealism and Hegel’s Logic.” Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung, 33
(April–June 1979): 210–226.
“The Logic of Hegel’s Logic.” Journal of the History of Philosophy, 17 (October
1979): 417–435.
“The Successor to Metaphysics: Absolute Idea and Absolute Spirit.” Monist,
74.3 (July 1991) 295–328.
Pippin, Robert B. “Hegel and Category Theory.” Review of Metaphysics, 43.4 (June
1990): 839–848.
Hegel’s Idealism: The Satisfaction of Self-Consciousness. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1989.
“Hegel’s Metaphysics and the Problem of Contradiction.” Journal of the History
of Philosophy, 16.3 (1978): 301–312.
Pöggeler, Otto. “Fragmente aus einer Hegelschen Logik mit einem Nachwort
zur Entwicklungsgeschichte von Hegels Logik.” Hegel-Studien, 2 (1963):
19–70.
Rinaldi, Giacomo. “Die Aktualität von Hegels Logik.” Jahrbuch für Hegelforschung,
2 (1996): 27–54.
A History and Interpretation of Hegel’s Logic. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press,
1992.
“Le prime categorie della logica hegeliana e il problema dell’origine della dialettica.” Annali della Facoltà di lettere e filosofia, Università di Napoli, 20 (1977–
1978): 305–306.

774

Bibliography

Rosen, Stanley. G. W. F. Hegel: An Introduction to the Science of Wisdom. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1974.
Rosenkranz, Karl. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel’s Leben: Supplement zu Hegel’s
Werke. Berlin, 1844. Reprint, Darmstadt, 1967.
“The Science of Logic (1870).” In G. W. F. Hegel: Critical Assessments. Vol. 1,
Nineteenth Century Readings. Translated by G. S. Hall. Edited by Robert
Stern. London: Routledge, 1993.
Rowe, William V. “Essence, Ground, and First Philosophy in Hegel’s Science of
Logic.” The Owl of Minerva, 18.1 (Fall 1986): 47–56.
Ruschig, Ulrich, “Logic and Chemistry in Hegel’s Philosophy.” Hyle: An International Journal for the Philosophy of Chemistry, 7.1–2 (2001): 5–22.
Sandkaulen, Birgit. “Das ‘leidige Ding an sich’: Kant – Jacobi – Fichte.” In Kant
und der Frühidealismus. Edited by Jürgen Stolzenberg. Hamburg: Meiner,
2007.
Sans, Georg. “Hegels Idee des individuellen Lebens.” Theologie und Philosophie:
Vierteljahresschrift, 77.1 (2002): 54–72.
Die Realisierung des Begriffs: Eine Untersuchung zu Hegels Schlusslehre. Berlin:
Akademie, 2004.
Schäfer, Alfred. Der Nihilismus in Hegels Logik: Kommentar und Kritik zu Hegels
“Wissenschaft der Logik.” Berlin: Arno Spitz, 1992.
Schäfer, Rainer. Die Dialektik und ihre besonderen Formen in Hegel’s Logik. Hamburg: Meiner, 2001.
Schick, Friedrike. Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik – metaphysische Letztbegrundung
oder Theorie logischer Formen? Freiburg: Alber, 1994.
Schmid, Aloys. Entwicklungsgeschichte der Hegel’schen Logik. Regensberg: Joseph
Mai, 1858. Reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1976.
Schmidt, Josef. Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik und ihre Kritik durch Adolf Trendelenburg. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1977.
Schubert, Alexander. Der Strukturgedanke in Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik.
Königsstein: Anton Hain, 1985.
Schulze, G. E. [anonymous], Ænesidemus, oder über der vom Herrn Prof. Reinhold in Jena gelieferten Elementarphilosophie, nebst einer Verteidigung gegen
die Anmassungen der Venunftkritik (1792). Translated in part by George di
Giovanni and H. S. Harris as Ænesidemus (excerpt).” In Between Kant and
Hegel: Texts in the Development of Post-Kantian Idealism. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett, 2000.
“Aphorismen über das Absolute, als das alleinige Prinzip der wahren Philosophie, über die einzige mögliche Art es zu erkennen, wie auch über das
Verhältnis aller Dinge in der Welt zu demselben.” In Neues Museum der
Philosophie und Litteratur. Edited by Friedrich Bouterwek, 1.2 (1803): 110–
148. Reprinted in Transzendentalphilosophie und Spekulation: Der Streit um
die Gestalt einer Ersten Philosophie (1799–1807), Quellenband. Edited by Walter
Jaeschke. Hamburg: Meiner, 1993.
Kritik der theoretischen Philosophie. 2 vols. Hamburg, 1801.
Seidel, George J. “Hegel on Ground.” Idealistic Studies: An Interdisciplinary Journal
of Philosophy, 1 (September 1971): 219–226.

Bibliography

775

Sellars, Wilfrid. “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind.” In Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy of Science. Edited by Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1956.
Spaventa, B. “La prime categorie della logica di Hegel.” In Scritti filosofici. Edited
by G. Gentile. Naples: Morano, 1900.
Staats, Reinhart. “Der theologischgeschichtliche Hintergrund des Begriffs ‘Tatsache.’” Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche, 70 (1973): 316–345.
Stace, W. T. The Philosophy of Hegel: A Systematic Exposition. London: Macmillan,
1924. Reprint, New York: Dover Publications, 1955.
Stekeler-Weithofer, Pirmin. “Hegel’s Logic as a Theory of Meaning.” Philosophical
Investigations, 19.4 (1996): 287–307.
“Mathematical Thinking in Hegel’s Science of Logic.” In Internationales
Jahrbuch des deutschen Idealismus/International Yearbook of German Idealism.
Vol. 3, Deutscher Idealismus und die analytische Philosophie der Gegenwart/
German Idealism and Contemporary Analytic Philosophy. Edited by Karl
Ameriks. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2005.
Stern, Robert, ed. G. W. F. Hegel: Critical Assessments. Vol. 3. Phenomenology of
Spirit and Logic. London: Routledge, 1993.
Stirling, J. Hutchison. The Secret of Hegel. Edinburgh and New York, 1865; 2nd
edn, 1898.
Taylor, Charles. Hegel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.
A Secular Age. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007.
Theunissen, Michael. Sein und Schein: Der kritische Funktion der Hegelschen Logik.
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1978.
Trendelenburg, F. A. Logische Untersuchungen. 2 vols. Leipzig: Hirzel, 1862.
Verene, Donald Phillip. “The True and the Bad Infinity.” In Logos and Eros: Essays
Honoring Stanley Rosen. Edited by Nalin Ranasinghe. South Bend, IN: St.
Augustine’s Press, 2006.
Vetö, Miklos. “Les métamorphoses de la causalité dans la logique de Hegel.” Revue
philosophique de Louvain, 98.3 (August 2000): 519–548.
Von Sivers, Kathrin. “Being: An Approach to the Beginning of Hegel’s Wissenschaft der Logik.” Prima Philosophia, 10.3 (1997): 335–340.
Wallace, Robert M. Hegel’s Philosophy of Reality, Freedom, and God. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Wallace, William. Prolegomena to the Study of Hegel’s Philosophy and Especially of
his Logic. 2nd edn. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1931.
Wandschneider, Dieter. “Absolutes Wissen? Zu Hegels Projekt der Selbstbegründung einer absoluten Logik.” In Glauben und Wissen, Zweiter Teil
(Hegel-Jahrbuch 2004). Edited by Andreas Arndt et al. Berlin: Akademie,
2004.
Weisshaupt, Kurt. “Zur Dialektik des Sollens in Hegels ‘Wissenschaft der Logik.’”
In Hegel-Jahrbuch 1975. Edited by Wilhelm R. Beyer. Cologne: PahlRugenstein, 1976.
Wetzel, M. Reflexion und Bestimmtheit in Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik. Hamburg:
Fundament, 1971.

776

Bibliography

White, Alan. Absolute Knowledge: Hegel and the Problem of Metaphysics. Athens,
OH: Ohio University Press, 1983.
Winfield, Richard Dien. From Concept to Objectivity: Thinking Through Hegel’s
Subjective Logic. London: Ashgate, 2006.
Wohlfahrt, Günther. “Das unendliche Urteil. Zur Interpretation eines Kapitels
aus Hegels ‘Wissenschaft der Logik.’” Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung,
39.1 (January–March 1985): 85–100.
Wölfle, Gerhard Martin. Die Wesenslogik in Hegels “Wissenschaft der Logik”: Versuch einer Rekonstruktion und Kritik unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der
philosophischen Tradition. Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1994.
Yamane, Tomoyaki. Wirklichkeit: Interpretation eines Kapitels aus Hegels “Wissenschaft der Logik.” Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1983.
Zimmerli, Walter. “Die Wahrheit des ‘impliziten Denkers’: Zur Logikbegründungsproblematik in Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik.” Studia Philosophica:
Jahrbuch der Schweizerischen Philosophischen Gesellschaft, 41 (1982): 139–160.
“Is Hegel’s Logic a Logic?: Analytical Criticism of Hegel’s Logic in Recent
German Philosophy.” In Hegel and His Critics: Philosophy in the Aftermath of
Hegel. Edited by William Desmond. Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press, 1989.

Index

abscissa and ordinate, 223, 231
absolute, the: and absolute necessity, 487; and
beginning, 740; as the concept, 339, 521;
determinate, 471; as emanation, 474; as
essence, 337; exposition of, 466–468, 471,
477; and the finite, 385; as ground, 467, 468;
as indifference, 328; life of, xvi; mode of,
470–471, 477; nature of, 466, 477; presumed
751; as totality, 469
abstraction, 69–70, 537–538, 546, 548, 549
accidentality, 490–492
acids and bases, 310–311
action, 17, 407, 637, 729, 732–733, 734
activity, 362, 661, 664
actuality, 339, 419, 450, 465; absolute, 465, 485,
486, 489; the absolute as, 471, 477–478; and
the concept, 30, 548; essential relation as,
464; as a fact, 586; formal, 478; as
immediacy, 628; as manifestation, 478;
moments of, 465, 478; necessary, 490; real,
478, 482; reflected, 480; as singularity, 713
addition, 172–173, 703
Aenesidemus, see Schulze, G. E.
affinity, 646; chemical, 308, 310–317, 318;
elective, 303, 308–310, 311–312, 314
allness, 572–573
alteration, 90, 290
amount, 169, 170, 171, 182, 183, 272, 278
an ihm (ihr), lxv–lxvii
an ihm (ihr) selbst, lxv–lxvii
an sich (selbst), lxv–lxvii
analysis, 746, 748
Anaxagoras, 29
animal, 717
Ansichsein, lxvii
anthropology, 676, 694
appearance, 339, 418, 437–438, 521; concrete
existence as, 434, 437–438, 441; moments of,
418, 438; the thing as 436; untruth of, 671
Archimedes: on the circle, 261, 269; on the cone,
269; on curves, 257, 258; on the line, 174

argumentation, 407
Aristotle: on the categories, 355; and elenchi,
290–291; and logic, 30, 525; on number, 178;
and the potentia, 280; and pure thought, 14;
on the soul, 692; on space and time,
164–165; and the syllogism, 591, 601; and the
understanding, 165
arithmetic: and analysis, 702–705; analytic
character, 173, 178, 373, 704; calculation in,
171–173, 175–177, 236, 607; and the concept,
178; and intuition, 539; and machines,
181–182, 607, 704; and number, 170, 171–173;
and the positive and negative, 371–374; see
also addition, division, multiplication, powers
and roots, and subtraction
art, xxi, 735
astronomy, 194, 333
atom, 313, 632
atomism, 134–135, 137, 155
attraction, 154, 643
attribute, 469–470, 489
aufheben, Aufhebung, lxvii
axiom, 602, 719–720
Bacon, Francis, 297
bad, the, 712
Bardili, C. G., 32
Barrow, Isaac, 223, 244–245, 268, 269
Bayle, Pierre, 165
becoming, 80–81; dialectic against, 79; in
essence, 346; and the fact, 416; meaning of,
509; privileging of, xxxviii; as synthesis of
being and nothing, 72, 80; as the truth of
being and nothing, 60, 67, 68, 69, 216
beginning of philosophy, 45–48, 51–52; the
absolute as, 55; a definition as, 29; God as,
55; grounding of, 750; the “I” as, 53; as
immanent in philosophical development, 49;
as immediate, 48; intellectual intuition as,
54–55; as mediated, 46–47; and method,
738–740, 748–750; nothing as, 75–76;

777

778

Index

beginning of philosophy (cont.)
as provisional, 751; and subjective cognition,
713–715
beginning of the world, 78–79
being: as abstraction, 73, 74; and actuality, 477;
and becoming, 69, 80, 81; as beginning, 47,
48, 50, 52–55, 749; and the concept, 508, 519,
522, 526, 626, 739, 752; difference in, 535; and
essence, 334–335, 337–338, 413, 418, 420; and
the fact, 415; as immediacy, 47, 50, 58, 59,
462, 530, 628; as indeterminate,
xxxvii–xxxviii, 84; as indifference, 326, 328,
334; logic of, 39; as a logical determination,
355; and measure, 328; as mediated, 50; as a
moment, 82, 145; and movement, 337; and
necessity, 487, 490, 504; and nothing, 59,
61–69, 70, 74, 78, 80, 82, 216; and objectivity,
628; self-equality of, 356; and sense
perception, 627; as shine, 342–344; as such,
282; and thought, 739; as totality, 466; and
truth, 672; and the universal, 530, 531, 558
being-for-itself: completion of, 144, 145; as
existence, 55; the infinite as, 120; in measure,
300, 301; as a moment of quality, 145; as such,
126–132
being-for-one, 128
being-for-other, 98
being-in-itself, 92–93, 94; see also Ansichsein
Berthollet, Claude, 311–312, 313, 314
Berzelius, Jöns Jakob, 312–314, 315–317
Bestimmung, xxxviii, 95, 663, 666
Beziehung, sich beziehen, lxviii
birth, 321
blessedness, 532
Blumenbach, J. F., 711
body, 641–642
Boehme, Jacob, 88
Brandom, Robert, lv
Brahma, 73, 283, 284
Brockmeyer, Henry C., xvi, lxiii
Buddhism, 60, 75, 284
Burt, B. C., lxvii
Butler, Joseph, lxxii
Cajetanus, Thomas, xxxvi
calculus: and analysis, 706; application of, 235,
242–243; approximation in, 230, 231; attack
on, 215; and the concept, 544, 546; and
concrete existence, 233; differential, 251, 253,
254, 259; equations of, 237–238, 239; and the
infinitely small, 232–234, 261–262; integral,
251, 253, 259; and mathematical procedure,
205; and mechanics, 225, 251–252; method of,
235–236; omission of terms, 235; and powers,
236; principles of, 237; Remarks on, xli–xlv;

semblance of arbitrariness, 243; semblance of
inexactitude, 220; subject matter of, 244;
and the syllogism, 607, 608; see also abscissa
and ordinate, coefficient, differential,
function, increment, infinitesimal, series
capital, 372
Carnot, Lazare, 218, 227
categories: of being, xlvi, 354; of the concept,
xlix–liii; of essence, xlv–xlviii; as knots, 17;
in language, 12; modal, xliii–xlv; true
critique of, 66
causality, relation of: 489, 510–511; action and
reaction in, 500–503; and the concept, 504,
635; conditioned, 502; determinate,
494–500, 502; formal, 492–494, 499, 500;
and the hypothetical judgment, 577; and the
hypothetical syllogism, 621; and the infinite,
121, 498–499, 502; as reciprocity of action,
504; and spirit, 281, 496–497; and teleology,
664; and the thing, 427
cause: and the concept, 740; efficient and final,
651; etymology, 513; and freedom, 657;
proximate and remote, 496
Cavalieri, Francesco Bonaventura, 217, 258, 265,
266–267, 268
center, the, 640
Cesa, Claudio, lxiv, lxxiv
chemism: as the concept, 657; as an immanent
principle, 652; and the judgment, 645; and
life, 686; meaning of, 645; and necessity,
652; and neutrality, 647; objectivity as, 630,
640–644; and process, 646; and purpose,
656, 662
chemistry, 321, 430, 649
China, 75
circle, 261, 264, 750, 751
coefficient, 242
cognition: absolute, 752; analytic, 700–706,
710; content of, 748; as contrasted with
perception, 718; as enquiry, 737; finite,
698–699, 738, 740; the idea as, 675, 679, 688,
689, 697, 698; and intuition, 738; and logic,
13, 46, 676; and method, 737–738; rational,
744; synthetic, 700, 706; systematic, 713; see
also erkennen, Erkenntnis
cold, 77–78
color, 188, 252, 430, 581, 715
coming-to-be and passing-away, 322
common sense, 61; on being and nothing, 62;
and the categories, 18; confusions of,
62–63; on dialectic, 742; and the
understanding, 25; see also ordinary
thinking, thinking of external reflection,
thinking of the understanding, uneducated
thought

Index
communication: and chemism, 647; and
cognition, 699; material, 636; and real
mechanical process, 638; spiritual, 635–636;
and universality, 641
concept(s): classification of, 541–544; clear and
obscure, 541; contrary and contradictory,
543, 579; distinct and indistinct, 541–542; and
ordinary life, 628; subordinate and
coordinate, 543–544
concept, the: 206, 505, 508, 512; absolute, 339,
533; as absolute ground, 545; as the absolute
judgment, 673; and the absolute relation,
490; adequate, 542; and algebra, 544–545; as
being, 752; categories of, xlix–liii; and
causality, 504; and chemism, 649, 650; the
concept of, li, 514, 526; and concepts, 19; as
concrete, 654; contempt for, 514; and
contradiction, 745; creativity of, 534;
cunning of, 291; and definition, 708–709;
determinate, 526, 537–538, 540; the difference
of, 580; division of, 526–527, 554; and
essence, 462; exhaustion of, 716; and
existence, 626; as the fact, 19; faculty of,
529; as for-itself, 693; formal, 527, 528; free,
325; fulfilled, 752; genesis of, 509, 517, 530; as
genus, 689; and God, 627; and ground, 389,
408; and identity, 577; as impulse, 673; and
intuition, xviii–xix, xxiii; and life, 689; logic
of, 39, 42; in logic, 39–40; as the logos, 19;
and method, 737–738, 752; moments of,
529–530; movement of, 10, 737, 745; and
nature, 536, 717; and objectivity, 668–669;
omnipotence of, 586; particular, 534–540;
and personality, 735; and pictorial
representation, 536; and the predicate, 551;
pure, 529–530, 547, 627; as purpose, 673; and
quantity, 545–546, 548; real, 527; and reality,
518, 522, 673; realization of, 550, 624; and
reason, 19, 540; as soul, 735; as spirit, 436;
subjectivity of, 673; and substance, 16, 509,
511; and synthetic cognition, 728; and
teleology, 664; as the thing-in-itself, 564; and
unity, 158, 588; universal, 530–534
concrete existence, 69; and actuality, 477–478;
as appearance, 465; as being, 418; as essence,
422, 437; and essential relation, 449; and the
fact, 417, 418; as immediacy, 628; and
mediation, 420–422; true, 445; truth of,
434; see also Existenz
condition, 411–418, 577, 620–621
congruence of figures, 265, 267
connection, 556, 563–564; see also Beziehung
consciousness, 41; as being-for-itself, 127; as
contrasted with thought, 41; as determinate,
74; in Hegel’s early lectures, xix, xx;

779

immediate, 47; modern, 20; opposition of,
39; pure, 74; spirit as, 10, 694, 695; and
transcendental idealism, 428
constants, 238, 250–251
constitution, 426
constitution, political, 287, 323
construction, 146, 723
content: absolute, 467, 471; and the absolute,
471; and causality, 494–495, 497; and
condition, 414; and form, 397–398; logical,
562; and the subject, 697
contingency, 480–481; and absolute necessity,
487–488; actuality as, 478, 486; and the
judgment, 584; and real necessity, 485, 486
continuity, 154, 155, 164, 165–166
contradiction: absolute, 684; and the categories
of essence, xlvi; and the concept, 745;
essence as, 354, 374–378; and formal
thinking, 745; objective and subjective senses
of, 742–743; as pain, 684; principle of,
360–361, 381, 384–385; and reason, 26; and
the syllogism, 594–595
copula: as ground, 586; in the judgment, 555,
556, 568, 574; repletion of, 587
corpuscular theory, 313, 316
creation, xlix, 9, 29, 533
crime, 567
critical philosophy, 16, 27, 30
Croce, Benedetto, lv
crystallization, 400
Dasein, lxviii–lxix, 69
death, 321
deed, 640
definition: of a concept, 542; preliminary, 34;
second, 722; as singular, 713; synthetic
cognition as, 708–713; and the theorem, 718,
725
degree, 183–185, 187–188, 202, 307
demonstration, 366
density, 332
Descartes, René, li; on God, 625; his tangential
method, 223, 248–249, 250
determinateness: absolute, 532; and being, 85,
352, 355; and form, 391, 461; in general, 85,
580; as negation, 78; as particularity, 534,
536–537; as quality, 391; as such, 84, 96; and
the universal, 532–533
determination, 95–96; of being, 351; of the
concept, 538, 545, 548; conflict of, 26; as
contrasted with constitution, 96–97; as
contrasted with determinateness, 95–96;
form-, 460–461; of the judgment, 563–564;
and otherness, 103; of reflection, 351, 352–353,
354–356, 374, 380; thought, 15–18, 35

780

Index

determinism, 633, 651
development, 556
dialectic, 80; and discourse, xxxix; in the early
lectures, xx; and the ethical, 742; in logic,
34–35; science of, 741–744
dialogue, xxxix
difference, 374; absolute, 357, 361–362; and the
concept, 540; as contradiction, 374;
determinate, 364, 366; essence as, 354,
361–374; and form, 391; moments of, 362,
367; and particularity, 543; in its truth, 535;
see also Unterschied
differential, 224–227
Diogenes the Cynic, 742
Diogenes Laërtius, 164, 525
Dirksen, Enno Heeren, 230
discourse: and dialectic, xxxix; and dialogue,
xxxix; in the Logic, xxxiv, xxxvii; as
meaning-generating performances, xxxiv;
progression of, l–li; and the transition to
subjectivity, xlix
discreteness, 154, 165–166
diversity, 374; essence as, 362–365; and form,
391; law of, 365–367; and method, 740; and
self-subsisting matter, 430; see also
Verschiedenheit
division(s), 713–718, 725
division (arithmetical), 175, 373
division, preliminary, 34, 38
drive, 382
duplicity, 746
duty, 107
dynamism, 186
Einzeln, lxx
Eleatics, the: and dialectic, 742; and idealism,
129; and pantheism, 61; on pure being, 60;
and pure thought, 65; and quantity, 164
electricity, 310, 315–317, 430, 636
ellipse, 264
empiricism, 581
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in
Outline, xiii, lxiv, 11, 754–755
ens, 42
Erdmann, Johann Eduard, li, lv, lxvii
erkennen, Erkenntnis, lxx
error, 380
essence, 390; and absolute necessity, 487; as a
beginning, 749; and being, 337–339, 340,
341, 342, 418; between being and concept,
339; as being-in-and-for-itself, 338, 339;
categories of, xlv–xlviii; and the concept,
462, 508, 522, 526; doctrine of, 40; as
essentiality, 354; etymology of, 337, 462; as
an existent, 387; and form, 391, 392–393; as

immediate, 345; and the inner, 461, 462; as
matter, 393; and measure, 285; moments of,
339; and movement, 391; simple, 382; as the
totality, 338, 466; ubiquity of, 382
essential and unessential, the, xlv, 341–342
ether, 402
ethical, the, 742
Euclid: his geometry, 721–722; and the line,
174, 719; and the parallelogram, 266; on the
triangle, 721–722
Euler, Leonhard, 220–222, 223, 241, 544
evil, 140, 379, 567, 732
Ex nihilo, nihil fit, 61
existence, 83–84, 90; and becoming, 81; and the
concept, 626; as determinate being, 84; and
essence, 341, 351; and finitude, 126; and
ground, 413–414; as indifference, 328; as a
logical determination, 355; as poor, 626; and
possibility, 69; and quality, 145; truth of,
416; see also Dasein
Existenz, lxviii–lxix, 69, 754
experience, 358–359
fact, the: 324; absolute, 460; dual nature of,
585; essence as, 414–418; and logic, 19;
originary, 513; and the relation of inner and
outer, 460, 462; universality of, 617; see also
Sache
facticity, xxxii, xxxiii–xxxiv, xxxv, xlv
faith, 422
falling bodies, 286, 297, 299–300, 301, 442
fatalism, 651
fate, 284, 639, 640
feeling: as independent, 15; of the living being,
683, 685; philosophy on, 519; of self, 686
Fermat, Pierre de, 223, 245
Fichte, J. G.: his account of experience,
xxix–xxxi; and conceptualization, xxxii; and
facticity, xxxii, lii; on freedom, xxv, xxxi,
xxxiii; Hegel’s debt to, xxiii–xxiv, lviii; and
the “I”, xxxiii, 132; and idealism, 131–132,
343; on the infinite, 196–197; and Kant,
xxix–xxxii; and nature, xxxii, xlvii, lvii, lix; on
the object (Gegenstand), xxxiv; and the
ought, 107; and philosophical advance, 71; as
a post-modernist, xxxiii; and pragmatic
history, xxxiii; and reason, xxv, xxxii; and
Schelling, xxv; on the subject, xxiv–xxv; on
the subjective and objective, li; on substance,
xlix; and truth, xxvi, lii; on the
understanding, xxxii; Wissenschaftslehre,
xxxii–xxxiii
Findlay, J. N., lxiv
finitude (the finite): and the absolute, 468;
etymology, 101; existence as, 101–105; and the

Index
infinite, lxxi, 108, 109–110, 115; and perishing,
101; and perishing of the perishing, 102, 103;
and things, 66, 385, 672; and universality,
534, 540
first practical demand, 65
Fischer, Ernst Gottfried, 311, 314
force(s): of attraction and repulsion, 145–150,
332, 400; centripetal and centrifugal, 150–151,
330–332, 402; the conditionedness of,
456–457; and contradiction, 382; expression
of, 458, 459, 460, 461; and the infinite, 459,
737; and intensive magnitude, 186–187; in
physics, 13; of reason, 737; the solicitation of,
457–459; and the spiritual, 281, 436; of the
understanding, 538; see also relation,
essential
form: absolute, 460, 461, 467, 471, 477; and the
absolute, 471; and the absolute idea,
736–737; as absolute necessity, 486; activity
of, 395, 396; and causality, 497, 498; and
condition, 414; and content, 397–398; and
essence, 391–393; and ground, 398–400; the
infinite, 42; and matter, 393–397; and
objectivity, 736; and reflection, 392; of the
syllogism, 614–615
fraction, 208–210
freedom: abstract, 140; and beginning, 740;
categories of, lii; and the concept, 505, 509,
512–513, 526, 527, 651, 654; consciousness of,
428; and contingency, 504; and fatalism, 651;
of the “I”, 514; of the idea, 752–753; and the
infinite, 589; and necessity, 488, 504, 509,
511; and the negative, 746; in thought, 16
friction, 641
friendship, 646
Fries, Jakob Friedrich, 31
function, 215
für ihm (ihr) selbst, lxv–lxvii
für sich (selbst), lxv–lxvii
Galilei, Galileo, 297
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 705
Gegenstand, gegenständlich, Gegenständlichkeit,
xxxiv, xxxvi, lxx–lxxi
Gentile, Giovanni, lv
genus: and division, 716, 717; and fate, 639; and
the judgment, 708; process, 679, 686–688;
proximate, 579–580; real, 646; and species,
578–580; and universality, 533, 574, 617
geometry: analytic character of, 173–174; axioms
of, 720; beginning in, 714; the fundamental
proposition of, 247; and intuition, 539, 724;
and number, 170–171; preeminence of,
724–725; as a science of the finite, 725; and
spatial objects, 260, 709; theorems of,

781

720–722; see also circle, ellipse, parallel lines,
parallelogram, trapezium, and triangle
Geraets, T. F., lxiv, lxv, lxvii, lxxi
German Empire, 594
Gesammelte Werke, xiv, xv, lxxiv
God: abstract definition of, 66; and abstraction,
547; as being, 285; and creation, xlix; as the
ground of nature, 406; as an idealization,
128, 129; as immediate, 463; and the infinite,
547; and logic, 29; as measure, 285; as nature,
463; and the negative, 62; properties of, 626;
and reason, 422; as spirit, 463, 626; as
thought, 463; see also proof of God’s
existence
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, xxvi, 303
good, the, 684, 729, 731
Good, F. A., xiii
government, 642
gradualness, 290, 320, 322
grammar, 36
gravity, 300, 314, 318, 405–406
Greeks, the, 284
ground: as abyss, 422; and appearance, 446;
complete, 408–410; as condition, 411–415;
-connection, 408–410; and content,
397–400; determinate, 398–410; essence as,
377–378, 386–388, 390; etymology, 422;
formal, 400, 405, 406; and the hypothetical
judgment, 577; and the hypothetical
syllogism, 621; moments of, 387–388;
principle of, 388;
real, 403–408; retreat to, 49; sufficient, 408;
and teleology, 388, 664; see also zu Grunde
gehen
habit, 15
Haller, Albrecht, Baron von, 194
Harris, H. S., lxiv, lxv, lxvii, lxxi
Harris, William T., lxiii
heat, 636
Hegel, Karl, xiii
Henning, Leopold von, xiv
Heraclitus, 60, 164–165
history, xxvi–xxvii, xxxiii, lx–lxi, 496–497
Houlgate, Stephen, lxiv
human being, 12, 15, 96, 463
Hume, David, 691
“I”, the: 53; and composition, 543; the
concept as, 514–516; as an idealization, 128;
as infinite, 195; and the object, 629; and
pure quantity, 156; as singularity, 514; as
subject and object, 691–692; and
transcendental idealism, 428; as universality,
514, 533

782

Index

idea, the: absolute, 732–733, 734, 735, 736, 752;
actuality of, 671–672; and the concept, 518,
527, 542, 669, 670–675, 696, 699, 720, 752; as
contrasted with representation, 670; and
God, 627; of the good, 732; immediate,
676, 686; as logical, 736, 752; moments of,
675; practical, 729–734, 735; and purpose,
630, 654; as rational, 671; repose of, 674; the
rise of, 523; as subject-object, 673; as
subjective, 696, 697; summary of, lii; and
the syllogism, 696, 699; theoretical, 697,
729, 731, 735; of the true, 732
ideal, the, 119
idealism, 124; and appearance, 342–343; and
scepticism, 343; subjective, 125, 157, 428, 629,
701; transcendental, 27, 30, 282, 428; versions
of, 129–132
idealized, the, 119, 124, 128, 129; see also Ideelle,
das
Ideelle, das, lxxi
identity: absolute, 467, 469, 471; abstract, 356;
and difference, 361–362, 367; essence as, 354,
356–361; and external reflection, 67; and
form, 391; in the judgment, 555–556; law of,
18; and separation, 358; and universality, 543
ignorance, 380
immediacy: abstract, 508; and the concept, xlix,
536; and facticity, xxxiv, xxxv; and mediation,
46, 61, 744; reflection as, 347–348; of the
universal, 558
impact, 643
impulse, 15, 656, 657, 697, 737, 740
in ihm (ihr), lxv–lxvii
in ihm (ihr) selbst, lxv–lxvii
in sich (selbst), lxv–lxvii
increment, 235, 241–242
indeterminateness, 74, 749
indifference: absolute, 326, 333–334; duty of, 65;
and essence, 333–334; inverse ratio of, 327;
and measure, 333; moment of, 383; positing
of, 327–330; and Spinoza, 333
individual, 87, 687; see also Individuum
individuality, 547, 594, 643
Individuum, lxx
India, 73, 283
induction, see syllogism, the
infinite, the: as the absolute, 108–109; bad, 111,
113, 119, 120–121, 192, 211–213, 572, 596; as
becoming, 118; as being, 118; as
being-for-itself, xxxix; as a circle, 119; and
contradiction, 382; as existence, 118; and
external reflection, 349; and the finite, 27,
109, 110–111, 112, 113, 114, 115–116, 118, 123–124,
743; finitized, 115; and force, 459; in general,

109; in Hegel’s early lectures, xxi; of measure,
323–324; metaphysical, 204; and negation,
112; and the one, 137; progression, 113,
116–118, 120–121, 749; true, xli, xlii, 86, 109,
118–119, 123, 204
infinite, the quantitative (mathematical):
190–191, 204, 206, 207; approximation to,
192; bad, 192–194, 210, 276; definitions of,
217–222; incorrect representations of, 215;
process, 191–192, 202–203; and quality,
190–191, 280, 323; relative and absolute, 212;
and the true infinite, 207, 213–216, 218–219,
222; two kinds of, 210, 211
infinitesimal, 215, 216, 219–221, 222, 223–224,
236, 259, 260, 269
inherence, 591
innocence, 379–380
intention, 68
“Introduction to Philosophy”, xvi
intuition, 162; and cognition, 714, 738; and the
concept, xviii–xix, xxiii, 519; intellectual, 55,
539; material of, 518; philosophy on, 519; and
the universal, 539
irritability, 682, 683
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich: on abstraction, 72;
his critique of Kant, xxx–xxxi, 71–73; and
metaphysics, 727–728; and philosophical
advance, 71–74; on space, 72, 73; on
Spinoza, xlviii
John of St. Thomas, xxxvi
Johnston, W. H., lxiv
judgment, the: 544, 549, 552, 558; absolute, 586;
apodictic, 582, 629; assertoric, 582, 583–584,
585; categorical 575–576, 578, 584; the concept
as, 528, 530, 550, 553–554; of the concept, 557;
as contrasted with conceiving, 550; as
contrasted with the proposition, 355, 553;
disjunctive, 578–581, 582; and the division of
the logic, 38, 39; etymology, 552; of existence,
556, 557–568, 569, 581, 593, 658; faculty of,
529; hypothetical, 576–578, 584, 620; infinite,
567–568; of inherence, 557; of life, 678; and
method, 740, 741; of modality, 582;
moments of, 556; movement of, 556; of
necessity, 557, 575–581, 582, 708; negative,
562–567, 576, 601, 604, 744; as objective, 554,
585; and objectivity, 631; particular, 570–572,
584; positive, 525, 557, 562–563, 576, 604,
744; problematic, 582, 584–585; qualitative,
557; and quantity, 569; of reflection, 556,
568–575, 581, 609; of the singular, 570, 584;
and subjectivity, 582; subsumption, 570, 574;
and truth, 67, 525, 697, 744; the truth of,

Index
585; and unity, 588; universal, 572–575; usual
definition of, 553
Kant, Immanuel: on the antinomies, 157–164,
165, 198, 454, 595, 654, 727; on appearance,
343; on arithmetic, 172–173, 703; on bodies,
163; on the categories, xxviii, 40, 41, 56, 525,
541; on composition, 159–163; on the
concept, 63, 64–65, 421, 516, 520; on the
concepts of reason, 670–671; on concrete
existence, 420; on contradiction, 35; his
critical project, xxvii–xxix; Critique of Reason,
654; and dialectic, xx, 35, 741, 743; on
freedom and necessity, 654–655; on geometry,
173–174; and the “I”, xxxiii, 132, 515–516, 690,
691, 692, 693; on the idea, 670, 671; and
idealism, 131–132, 343, 523; on the infinite,
193–195, 206–207; on judgment, 350; on
logic, 30, 40, 520, 525; on matter, 146–150;
his merit, 40; and metaphysics, 693, 727;
and method, liii, 727; on modality, xliii–xlv,
57, 282–283; on the moral law, xxxiii; on the
object (Gegenstand), xxxiv; on the object
(Objekt), 515; and the ought, 107; and the
proofs of God’s existence, 63–65, 66, 420,
628; on purposiveness, 654–656; on rational
psychology, 690–691, 692–694; and reality,
517, 522, 523; on reason, 520–521, 693; and
reflection, 350; on relation, 57; on repulsion
and attraction, 146–150; on the soul,
188–189; on space, 149–150, 161–163, 198,
200–201; on the subjective and objective, li;
and subjectivism, xxx; on the sublime, 193,
195; and the synthetic a priori, 173–175, 519,
520, 524, 702; on the thing-in-itself, xxix, xxx,
xlix, 41, 564, 692; on thought, 522; on time,
198–200; and the transcendental deduction,
515; and the transcendental ideality of
perception, 158; and Transcendental Logic,
xxxiv, 40–41; and triplicity, 746; on truth,
521, 523–524, 525; on the understanding, 7;
and the unity of apperception, xxiii, 515, 520
Kepler, Johannes: and measure, 297; and
motion, 252, 263; and Newton, 234, 298; and
spatial objects, 261; and stereometric objects,
257
Kierkegaard, Søren, liv
knowledge, absolute, 29, 675
Krishna, 283
Krug, Wilhelm Traugott, lvii
Lagrange, Joseph-Louis, 222, 225; and calculus,
227–229, 239; on final ratios, 221; on
increments, 241; and the infinite, 223; and

783

mechanics, 223, 252; and Newton, 227;
and the rectification of curves, 256–257, 258;
and series, 259, 260; and tangents, 246–248
Lambert, Johann Heinrich, 544
Landen, John, 223
language: and chemism, 647; Chinese, 12;
German, 12; and grammar, 36; in Hegel’s
early lectures, xix; Latin, 82; and logic, 12,
19; in the Logic, xxxiv–xxxv; and spirit, 36;
and thought, 12; and the universal, 91
Lasson, Georg, xiv, lxxiv
law(s): of appearance, 438, 440–444, 448; and
change, 323; and communication, 636; of
continuity, 218; etymology, 440; kingdom of,
441, 442, 444, 445–446; mechanism as, 640,
643–644
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm: on concepts, 608;
on consciousness, 107, 131; and difference,
366; on God, 475; and idealism, 130–131, 137,
343; on infinitesimals, 220, 223; on
magnitude, 706; his method, 245; on the
monad, 130–131, 137, 343, 474–476, 632; and
Newton, 401; and plurality, 137; and the
principle of sufficient reason, 388; on
quantity, 156; on the syllogism, 607;
terminology of, xliii; on triangles, 268
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, lxxii
lever, 82
life: and abstraction, 547; and causality, 496;
and the concept, 517; and contradiction, 382,
384; and genus, 687; the idea as, 675, 689,
694; the logical as contrasted with the
scientific view of, 677–678; moments of,
678–679; natural, 677; process, 679,
684–686; and purposiveness, 654; as
universality, 533, 678; see also living
individual
light: and absolute necessity, 488; and calculus,
252; and color, 581; and darkness, 69, 379; of
nature, 489; and perception 402; and
polarity, 13; and quantity, 156
likeness and unlikeness, 363–365, 367
limit, 98–101, 169; and determination, 103; of
discrete magnitude, 167; and essence, 338; of
number, 169–170; qualitative as contrasted
with quantitative, 153; of the ratio, 228–229;
and the something, 565; and spatial objects,
99, 100
living individual, 678, 680, 683
logic: and the absolute idea, 736; analogy in,
614; the beginning of, 23; of the concept,
507; and content 18–19, 23, 24, 27, 29;
current state of, 31–32; definition of, 28, 38;
development of 19–20; disfigurations of, 31;

784

Index

logic: and the absolute idea (cont.)
division of, 38–43; and education, 36–38;
empirical, 541; the fate of, 8; as formal, 24,
27, 522, 523, 524; formalism in, 524, 628; and
God, 29; and grammar, 36; and human
nature, 12; importance of, 605; and the
in-itself, 94; and the judgment, 563, 564,
567; and mathematics, 19; as means, 14; and
metaphysics, xiv, xvii, 313; and method, 32,
33; natural, 15, 16, 37; and notation, 544;
objective, 39, 40, 42, 509; parts of, 43; and
phenomenology, xxii–xxiv; previous
treatment of, 11–12; pure and applied, 676;
pure essentialities of, 10; as pure knowledge,
47; and reality, 522–523; as the realm of
shadows, 37; and reason, 29; and reckoning,
32; reformation of, 31; and science, 23;
science of, 9, 752, 753; subject matter of, 14,
676; subjective, 39, 42; as supernatural, 12;
task of, 17, 19; transcendental, 40; and truth,
24, 523–525, 676; and youth, 14
Logic, the: beginning of, xxxiv, xxxvii–xxxix;
end of, lii; first adumbration of, xxi; as a
form of life, liii; genesis of, xxvii;
hermeneutic reading of, lix–lx; influence of,
liv; and Kant, xxvii; and metaphysics, xxvii,
liii–liv; and nature, xliv–xlv; ontological
reading of, lv–lix; the parts of, xxxvii;
progression in, xxxv; publication of, xii–xiv;
and pure reason, lxi–lxii; readings of, xii;
revisions to, 754–756; and the system, xiv;
textual exegesis of, lv; and Transcendental
Logic, xi, xxii; translations of, lxiii–lxiv
“Logic and Metaphysics”, xii, xv–xvi, xvii, xxii
love, 532, 646
Lully, Raymond, 607
Macran, H. S., lxiii
magnetism, 310, 430, 636
magnitude, 56, 153, 190, 196, 206; alterability of,
214; continuous, 166–167, 182, 230, 266, 269;
discrete, 166, 167, 182, 269, 703; extensive,
182; final, 218; generated, 219; indivisible,
266; intensive, 182, 183–189, 693; opposite,
371–373; and powers, 236; as proportion,
264–265; sciences of, 702; spatial, 170;
vanishing, 218, 298; variable, 295
Malebranche, Nicolas, 129–130
mark, 541–542, 711
Marx, Karl, lv
mass, 187
materialism, 542
mathematics: and composition, 155; and the
empirical, 220; formalism in, 179, 215, 230;
and the infinite, 204, 216, 545; and logic, 19,

32; and metaphysics, 204–205, 215–216; and
method, 32; and physics, 234; and
presupposition, 473; and proof, 206; and
self-justification, 706; and syllogism,
602–603; and the understanding, 80;
universality in, 240, 572; see also arithmetic,
calculus, constants, geometry, polynomials,
variables
matter: continuity of, 166; electrical, 402;
eternity of, 79; and force(s), 146–150, 456;
and form, 393–397; infinite divisibility of,
157, 159–164, 454–455; and logic, 28;
magnetic, 402; and movement, 395–396;
penetration of, 147, 149; and property,
430–432; and pure quantity, 156;
self-subsisting, 430; the veritable, 29
McTaggart, John M. E., xii, lvi–lvii, lviii
means, 659–662, 666, 669
measure, 57, 282, 288, 292; difficulty of,
286–287; and essence, 285; exclusive,
318–319, 323; immediate, 289, 295, 318; and
modality, xliv, 284; moments of, 285–286; as
necessity, 284–285; nodal lines of 319–320,
323; and quality, xl–xli, xlii; real, 302;
realized, 295; self-reference of, 319; and the
something, 288; specifying, 291–293, 298; as
a standard, 289; summary of, 325
mechanical process, 634–640
mechanics, 225, 232–233, 251–252
mechanism, 503, 631, 652; absolute, 640–644;
and causality, 635; free, 643, 644; and life,
686; and matter, 148; and measure 286; and
necessity, 653; and the object, 669;
objectivity as, 630, 631; and purpose, 656,
662, 663; spiritual, 631; and teleology,
651–654, 655
mediation, 89, 421; and essential relation, 453;
of ground, 390–391; pure, 387; self-referring,
603
Mendelssohn, Moses, lxxii, 608, 692–693
mental space, xxviii–xxix
metaphysics: on being and becoming, xxxviii;
Christian, 61; as contrasted with speculative
philosophy, 95; disappearance of, 7–8;
earlier, 651; and essence, xlv–xlvi; and logic,
xiv, xvii, 42; and the Logic, xxvii, liii–liv;
spurious, xvi; on thought, 25; and truth, 693
meteorology, 645
method: the absolute, 10, 739, 741; and the
absolute idea, 736; as a circle, 750; as the end
of the Logic, liii; foundation of, 748
middle term, 589
Miller, Arthur V., lxiv
mixture, 643
modality, xliii–xlv, lviii, 282–284

Index
Moderatus of Gades, 179
molecule, 402
moment, 82; evanescent, xliii
monad, 137, 382, 634, 694
Moni, Arturo, lxiv, lxxiv
morality, 195–196, 322–323, 407, 636
motion: in calculus, 243, 251–252; and
communication, 636; and contradiction,
382; free, 263; infinite, 641; and matter, 148;
and measure, 287, 296–297; of the point,
262
movement: and content, 33; and contradiction,
382; as progression and regression, xxxvii; in
science, 9; self-, 362, 382, 384, 643; of
speculative thinking, 67; and thought, xx
multiplication, 175, 262–264, 373, 703
music, 308–309, 321
name, 271, 551
nature: and God, 406; as ground, 406; and the
idea, 735, 752–753; impotence of, xlix, lvii,
536; investigation of, 652; and life, 677; and
the Logic, xliv–xlv, lix–lx; and the modal
categories, xlvii; objects of, 710–713; and
spirit, xxi–xxii, xxvi, 91–92
necessity: absolute, 478, 486–489, 490; as blind,
488; as cause, 493–494; of the concept, 578,
750; and essence, 554; formal, 481–482; and
freedom, 644, 728; in philosophy, 12; as
power, 492; real, 484–486, 504; and synthetic
cognition, 707; and synthetic unity, 52
need, 684
negation, 33, 34, 89, 119; see also reality
negativity, 426, 470, 745–746
Newton, Isaac: and bad categories, 317; cited,
233; criticism of, 234; and differentials,
224–226; and the force of attraction, 401; on
generative magnitudes, 219; and indivisibles,
217, 218; on the infinite, 217–218, 219; and
measure, 297; his method, 245; and optics,
234; his terminology, xliii; on triangles, 268;
his true merit, 298
Nohl, Hermann, xv
non-being, 60
nosology, 332
nothing: as an absence of being, 77; and
becoming, 69, 80, 81; as being, 59, 61–69; as
determinate, 60; as existing, 76–77; as
indeterminate, xxxvii–xxxviii, 60; as a
moment, 82; self-equality of, 356
null, the, 376
number(s), 32, 169, 170, 171, 175, 607; and
calculation, 171–173; and the concept, 540;
and definition, 709; equality of, 175; and
extensive quantum, 182, 187; externality of,

785
171, 178; indifference of, 170; as intensive
magnitude, 187; and nodal line, 320–321;
and pedagogy, 181–182; and rational relations,
177–181; system, 172; and thoughts, 179–180;
and the understanding, 177; and the
universal, 280–281

object: the chemical, 645–646, 672; and
cognition, 699; the mechanical, 631–634,
637, 645, 660, 672; see also Objekt,
Objektivität
objectivity: the concept as, 624, 625–630, 673;
of the concept, 527; as immediacy, 628;
meaning of, 629; moments of, 630; sublating
of, 667–668; as such, 636; summary of,
li–lii; and the syllogism, 619; transition to,
l–li; see also Objekt, Objektivität
Objekt, Objektivität, lxx–lxxi
one(s), the: attraction of, 139, 141–144;
being-for-itself as, 132; connection of, 142,
144–145; and continuity, 155; and discrete
magnitude, 703; exclusion of, 138–139; as
limit, 167; and the many, 132–137, 140; and
quantum, 168; repulsion of, 136–137, 138,
141–144; the singular as, 548; as unalterable,
133; and the void, 133–136
ontology, 42
opposition, 365, 367, 374; and determinateness,
378; essence as, 367–370; fixed, 743; and
form, 391; objectified, 644; quantitative,
197; and singularity, 543
order, 643
ordinary thinking: on the concept, 514, 518, 537;
on contradiction, 381–384; on diversity, 366,
367; on the “I”, 516, 692; on the idea, 670;
and the infinite, 206; on judgment, 562; on
logic, 24–25, 27, 524, 562; on opposites, 383;
on reason, 588; on subjectivity, 585; on the
syllogism, 604–607, 621; on the thing,
434–435; on thought, 24–25; on truth, 24,
521; see also common sense, representation,
thinking of external reflection, thinking of the
understanding, uneducated thought
organic, the, 286
organism, 681
ought, the, 104–108, 190, 586
pain, 106–107, 684
pantheism, 61, 283–284, 285
parallel lines, 719
parallelogram, 265, 267–268
Parmenides, on being, xxxviii, 60, 70–71; his
dialectic, 164; and the finite, 71; and
measure, 284; and pure thought, 65; and
semblance, 74

786

Index

particularity: of the concept, 505, 530; and
determinateness, 532; as principle, 534;
and singularity, 546, 547; the universal as,
532
passion, 15
passivity, 500
pedagogy, 8
Peirce, Charles S., lv
people, xviii, xix
person, 646
personality, 514, 547, 636, 735, 750
phenomenology of spirit, xxii–xxiv, xxv, 517,
695
Phenomenology of Spirit: consciousness in, 10,
28; and the good, 731; and history,
xxvi–xxvii; as an introduction to philosophy,
xvi, xxvi–xxvii; and language, xxxiv; legacy
of, lx; and the Logic, xxii, 11, 46–47; and
mathematics, 32; and method, 33; and
Schelling, xxiv; and the Wissenschaftslehre,
xxiii
philosophemata, 177, 178
philosophy: and the absolute idea, 735; as a
circle, 49; and the concept, 177; dynamic,
314; and geometry, 724; as hypothetically
true, 48–50; as idealism, 124; introduction
to, xvi; and leisure, 14; and logic, 181, 508;
and mathematics, 9, 32, 181; and method, 9,
33; natural, 298; nature of, 519; and
preliminary reflection, 34, 38, 84; progression
in, 48, 49; purpose of, xxii; the quantitative
in, 280–281; on reality, 518; as the refutation
of errors, 25; requirement of, 380, 518; as
science, 9, 10; and the senses, 627; and
symbols, 281; and the synthetic method, 725,
726; and terminology, 12, 628–629; see also
beginning of philosophy, science
Photius, 179
physics: and atomism, 135; beginning in,
714–715; foundation of, 146; and gases, 436;
and mathematics, 234; nature of, 689; and
polarity, 13; and the synthetic method,
725–726; see also mechanics
physiology, 332
Pilate, Pontius, 507
planets, the: 286, 287; gravitation of, 594; and
measure, 297, 318; movement of, 330–332,
400
plant, 106, 463, 718
Plato: and cognition, 741; and dialectic, 34,
741, 742; on number, 178; on the One, 76,
140; on the other, 91; and pure thought, 14;
and sophistry, 408; on the soul, 695; on
truth, 30
Ploucquet, Gottfried, 608

plurality, 136, 137, 154, 183, 573
polarity, 13, 317
polynomials, 572
popular philosophy, 741
porosity, 433, 434–435
positedness, 526; appearance as, 439; and the
concept, 526; and determination, 352; and
existence, 351–352; and likeness and
unlikeness, 365; as negation, 352, 353; and
opposition, 368; as reflection, 363
positing, 94
positive and negative, 61, 368–374, 375–380, 565
possibility: absolute, 486; formal, 478–480,
482, 484; and impossibility, 479; real,
482–485, 740
power: absolute, 491; creative and destructive,
491; substance as, 492, 493; the universal as,
532, 533; as violence, 501–502, 639
powers and roots, 176–177, 214, 215, 236–237,
239, 240–241, 260–269, 705
predetermined harmony, 634
pre-Romantics, xlix
pressure, 643
principle(s), 645; of analytical identity, 703; of
concrete existence, 420; of contradiction, 18,
479; ethical, 629; of the excluded middle,
380–381; of immanent reflection, 475; of
self-movement, 643; of sufficient reason, 388,
420
product, 637
progress, 701–702
proof, 420, 514, 704–705, 722, 723
proof of God’s existence, 7, 420–421;
cosmological, 75, 385; ontological, liv, 86–87,
384, 420–421, 625–628
propagation of the species, 688
property: of concrete objects, 710; immediate,
710; and matter, 430–432, 711–712; and the
thing, 426–427, 429–430
proposition, 355, 360
psychology: empirical, 695; laws of, 287; and
logic, 676; rational, 188, 690; and reality,
517; stages of, 517
puncticity, 433, 434
punishment, 406–407
purpose: as activity, 661, 662; the concept as,
650, 652, 656, 658; finitude of, 660; and the
judgment, 656; the movement of, 658, 669;
and objectivity, 630, 656–657; as rational,
657, 663; realized, 662–669, 730; the
subjective, 657–659; and syllogism, 656, 657,
660–661, 665, 669
purposiveness: external, 653, 730; and
intelligence, 651, 653, 657; of the living being,
680; products of, 709

Index
Pythagoras, 177, 179, 280
Pythagorean theorem, 176, 722
quadruplicity, 746
quality, 152, 216; as contrasted with the
determination of reflection, 353; development
of, 145; as dialectical, 693; existence as,
84–85, 88; extensive and intensive, 296; in
measure, xl–xli; occult, 401; primacy of,
56–57; and property, 88, 426; truth of, 278;
and universality, 557; see also quantity
quantity, 56, 152, 154, 282, 454; categories of,
xxxix–xl; and indifference, 326; and limit,
339; and the modal categories, xliv; pure, 152,
153, 154–157; and quality, xli, 288, 290,
319–320, 322–323; and the relation of whole
and parts, 454; transition to, 145
quantum, 152, 191, 216, 278; alteration in, 153,
154–157; and the concept, 280; extensive, 182,
184, 185–188, 189; finite, 190; immediate,
299; infinite, 189–190, 201–204, 207–208;
and infinitesimal differences, 215; moments
of, 168; qualitative determination of, 203,
206, 215, 230, 260, 262, 263–264, 269,
279–280, 288; and quantity, 168; and ratio,
271, 275–276, 278–279; restoration of, 203,
205; specific, 288–291
ratio, 152, 204; as calculation, 177; and calculus,
244; and chemistry, 311; determinations of,
209; direct, 272–273, 274, 279, 300; the
exponent of, 272–274, 276, 277, 278,
292–293, 307; final, 230; and indifference,
327; and the infinite, 209–210, 211, 276;
inverse, 274–277, 279, 286, 332; and measure,
xl, 292–294, 304; moments of, 271–272; of
powers, xl, 278–279, 280–281; and quality,
236, 271, 551; see also Verhältnis
reaction, 636–637
reading, 714
realism, 701
reality, 550; and actuality, 85; affirmative,
86–87; and ideality, 462; idealized as
contrasted with external, 643; and identity,
462; as the infinite, 119; meaning of, 673; and
negation, 85, 88, 89; as reelle and reale, 119
Realphilosophie, xxi–xxii
reason: as connective activity, 26; and
contradiction, 26; cunning of, 663; defense
against, 638; and dialectic, 10, 158, 742; force
of, 737; formal, 529; and the idea, 527;
impotence of, xlix, 539; impulse of, 737;
instinct of, 717; and logic, 28, 29; and
objectivity, 629; and the ought, 107;
sharpening function, 384; as spirit, 10; and

787

the syllogism, 588–589, 592, 604–606, 747;
and thought, 520; true content of, 743
reciprocity of action, 489, 503–504, 511
reconciliation, 140
reference, l, 450, 745
reflection, 285, 339, 340, 362, 441; absolute, 346,
348, 350, 370; determining, 350, 351, 387;
difference in, 535; in diversity, 363; essence
as, 345–353, 418, 554; external, 348–351, 363;
and ground, 386; immanent, 363, 370, 661;
as immediacy, 347–348, 349; infinite, 511; as
judgment, 350; as mediation, 387; moments
of, 346; movement of, 346–348; as positing,
347, 348; as presupposing, 347, 348; real, 477;
self-excluding, 376–377; self-repelling, 429;
and shine, 345; of the understanding, 25–26;
and universality, 531; see also thinking of
external reflection
Reinhold, K. L., 32, 48
relation, absolute, 465, 489–490
relation, essential: 419; and the absolute, 467;
and actuality, 465; essence as, 449–450; of
force, 450, 454, 455–459; and identity, 462,
463; law as, 448; moments of, 450; of outer
and inner, 450, 460–463, 466, 467; of whole
and parts, 450–455, 460
relation of series, 306–307
religion, xxi, 124, 508, 518, 735
representation, 63, 124; see also Vorstellung
reproduction, 683
repulsion, 154
resistance, 639
rest, 637, 638, 640, 641
restriction, 103, 104–105, 108, 131–132
Richter, Jeremiah Benjamin, 311, 314, 316
right, 567, 589
Ritter, Johann Wilhelm, 316
Roberval, Gilles Personne de, 245
Rosenkranz, Karl, xiv–xv, xviii, xxii, xxiv, xxvii
rule, 288, 291–292, 644
Sache, lxxi–lxxii
Sartre, Jean-Paul, xxv
saturation, 312, 313, 317
Schein, lxxii–lxxiii
Schelling, F. W. J., and the Absolute, xvi; and
experience, xviii; and facticity, xxxiv; and
Fichte, xxv; Hegel’s distancing from, xviii,
xxiii, lviii; and nature, xxvi, lix; and Schulze,
xxiv
Schubert, Friedrich Theodor, 233
Schulze, G. E. (Aenesidemus), xxiii–xxiv, xxx
science: as a circle, 49, 751; concept of 23, 28;
the concern of, 54; content of, 29; definition
of, 28–29; double transition in, 279;

788

Index

science: as a circle (cont.)
first demand of, 68; and intuition, 724;
method of, 32; of nature, 522–523;
philosophy as, 9, 10; pure, 29; of spirit,
522–523; starting point of, 713–715; synthetic,
713
Science of Logic, xiii–xiv
sciences, the, 9, 36, 52, 400–403, 473
selbstständig, lxxiii
self-consciousness: awkwardness of, 691; as
being-for-itself, 127; as the concept, 691; and
fate, 639–640; and the idea, 689, 731; as an
idealization, 129; as infinity, 127
self-presupposing, 144
self-subsistence, 140, 377, 439
Sellars, Wilfrid, lv
sense consciousness, 47, 519
sensibility, 332, 682
sentience, 106
series, 209–213, 240, 259–260, 269
sex relation, 646
shine: and the absolute, 468; and appearance,
418; being as, 342–344; and determining
reflection, 352; and essence, 340, 344–345,
346; and the fact, 415; the moments of, 344;
real, 438; reflective, 35, 438, 439, 549;
substance as, 490–491; see also Schein
Shiva, 283, 284
sign, 647
singularity: of the concept, 505, 513, 530, 540,
546–549; and judgment, 553–554, 574;
natural, 604; as totality, 513; see also Einzeln
skepticism, 158, 342–343, 742
space: absolute, 709; in calculus, 243;
conceptualized, 162; in geometry, 724;
ideality of, 305; and matter, 149–150; of
reason, xxviii; and time, 73, 156, 157, 166,
201, 302, 442
Spalding, Johann Joachim, lxxii
species, 534, 717
speculative, the: 35, 122; and contradiction, 383;
misunderstanding of, 67; and negation, 87;
and the non-identity of subject and predicate,
67
Spehr, Friedrich Wilhelm, 260
Spinoza, Benedictus: on the absolute, xlviii,
472–474; on attribute, 87, 473; on being,
xxxviii; and causa sui, xlvi, l; on cognition,
472; and the finite, 71, 74; Hegel’s relation to,
xlvi–xlix, lviii–lix; and idealism, 129; on
infinity, xli–xlii, 87, 129, 212–213; and
method, 32, 727; and the mode, xliv, 283,
284, 474; his monistic ontology, xlvii; on
negation, 472; “omnis determinatio est
negatio”, 87, 472; on pantheism, 61; and

pure quantity, 155; refutation of, 512; on
substance, 87, 129, 212, 283, 284, 333, 472,
474; his system, 511–512; and Transcendental
Idealism, 282
spirit: absolute, 49; and abstraction, 547; and
causality, 496–497; and the concept, 545;
concrete, 523; and contradiction, 201, 436;
doctrine of, 695; emergence from life, 694;
for-itself, 695; in Hegel’s early lectures, xx;
and the idea, 672, 689, 735; the idea of,
695–696; as an idealist, 125; as an
idealization, 128, 129; infinite, 533, 695; and
intensive quantum, 189; and life, 677–678;
and measure, 287; and mechanism, 631;
metaphysics of, 689; and nature, xxi–xxii,
xxvi, 690; objects of, 710–713; philosophy of,
lx, 11; science of, 753; and self-knowledge, 17;
as a thing, 436; as universality, 533
Socrates, 408, 741, 742
something, 60, 88–90; as becoming, 90; as
finite, 103–105; and limit, 98–100, 565; and
measure, 301, 303–304, 305; and other,
90–95; and quantum, 185–186; and
something, 97–98
sophistry, 80, 408
soul, the: and the concept, 17, 674, 678, 735;
of the fact, 586; faculties of, 436; the
individual as, 680; irrational part of, 695;
and life, 678, 679; metaphysics of, 689–690,
691; method as 737; spirit as, 694–695; as a
thing, 694
sound, 302
St. Louis Hegelians, lv
state, 325, 326
state, political, 323, 594, 672–673
Stirling, J. Hutchison, lv, lxiii, lxvii, lxviii
Struthers, L. G., lxiv
subject, 42; and the concept, 40; as historical,
xxv; and predicate, 550–553, 554–556, 557–558,
626; self-differentiating, 333; and substance,
511; and world, 684–686, 696
subjectivity: of the concept, 505, 527; as
contrasted with objectivity, li; and external
reflection, 582; logic of, xlviii; meaning of,
xlix, 42, 585, 626, 629; moments of, 528;
summary of, l–li; and the syllogism, 619;
transition to, xlix
sublation, 81–82; see also aufheben, Aufhebung
subsistence, 438, 440
substance(s), 450, 465, 490, 509; absolute, 537;
and accidents, 489, 490–492; as cause, 493;
and the concept, 509, 532; consummation of,
511; and freedom, 657; interaction of, 634;
method as, 737; and necessity, 488, 512; the
universal as, 532, 534

Index
substantiality, relation of: 489, 490–492; and
the concept, 526; as immediacy, 628;
movement of, 509–510, 511; and objective
universality, 575; and the spiritual,
281
substrate, 327, 334, 404, 441
subsumption, 555
subtraction, 175, 373
Suchting, W. A., lxiv, lxv, lxvii, lxix, lxxi,
lxxiii
suprasensible, the, 589
syllogism, the: of allness, 610–612, 615; of
analogy, 614–616; and arithmetic, 607; the
categorical, 618–620, 621, 622; and chemism,
647, 649–650; the concept as, 528, 588–589;
conclusion of, 556; as dialectical, 606; the
disjunctive, 622–623, 648; of existence, 589,
590, 603–604, 610, 611, 618; of experience,
612; external reflection as, 349; first figure of,
590–597, 598, 600; formal, 547, 605–607,
615, 624, 665; and formalism, 590, 592, 601,
623; fourth figure of, 601–603; hypothetical,
620–622, 623; of induction, 612–614, 615;
and infinite progression, 596; and the
judgment, 593; mathematical, 602–603; the
meaning of, 592; and mechanism, 642;
moments of, 589; of necessity, 590, 617–618,
624; and the ontological proof, 420; as
qualitative, 593; and the quaternio
terminorum, 615, 616; and reason, 588, 746;
of reflection, 589, 604, 609, 611–612,
616–617, 619, 624; relationless, 602; second
figure of, 597–600; and things-in-themselves,
425; third figure of, 600–602; and the trinity,
284; of the understanding, 589, 610
symbol, 180–181, 281, 546
synthesis, 72, 74, 741, 746, 748
system: basis of, 713; Hegel’s first outline of,
xvi, xxi; the method as, 748; refutation of,
511; of totality, 749; truth or falsity of,
511–512
Taquet, Andrew, 268–269
Tatsache, lxxi
tautology, 633
Taylor, Charles, lix
teleology: and the concept, 654; and
extra-mundane intelligence, 652; in history,
lxi; objectivity as, 630, 651–657; process of,
664
temperature, 293–294
Thales, 124, 741
theology, 8
theorem, 703, 718–728
thesis and antithesis, 71

789

thing, the: as “also”, 432–433, 434; concrete
existence as, 423–426, 445; as contradiction,
436; as dissoluble, 433; essence as, 418; and
matter, 431–435; as “this”, 432–433, 434
thing-in-itself, the: 41, 93–94; abstract, 426;
and concrete existence, 423–426; and
consciousness, 427–428; and critical
philosophy, 30; and properties, 427,
429–430; as the rational, 42; and shine, 343;
taken as the absolute, 698; and
transcendental idealism, 30, 428; true, 564;
and the understanding, 26
thinking of external reflection: on causality,
499; as contrasted with subjectivity, 582; on
essence, 338, 356, 392; on identity, 356–357;
on the positive and negative, 378–379; on
reason, 357; and the thing-in-itself, 424,
425–426; see also common sense, ordinary
thinking, thinking of the understanding,
uneducated thought
thinking of the understanding, 472; on being
and nothing, 69–70, 76–78; on continuity,
155, 165; on the finite and infinite, 102,
115–116, 117–118, 211; and the how, 72; on life,
678; on the one and the many, 140; and
planetary motion, 330; on the Trinity, 180;
see also common sense, ordinary thinking,
thinking of external reflection, uneducated
thought
“this”, the, 91, 432–433, 434, 436, 549
thought: and abstraction, 35–36, 519; as
contrasted with consciousness, 41; formal,
745; free, 17; and the idea, 689; laws of, 354,
355, 356, 358; and logic, 29; objectivity of, 30;
pure, 13–14, 29; as such, 41; and things, 16;
as transcendence of restriction, 105–107
time, 199; see also space
tone, 188
tool, 663
totality, 279
transition, 69, 74, 279, 554
trapezium, 263–264
Trendelenburg, F. A., liv
triangle, 267
Trinity, the, 180, 283–284
triplicity, 283, 746, 747
truth, 380, 523, 525, 751; absolute, 675; the
absolute idea as, 735, 747; and the concept,
19, 521; condition of, 692; as correspondence,
562; formal, 358; and the idea, 670, 671;
and the judgment, 557, 562, 697; knowledge
of, 46; and logic, 18, 29; objective, 697;
reason as, 527; as science, 29; sublimity of,
507; as tangible, 29; unattainableness of,
508

790

Index

unconditional, the, 589
understanding, the: 10; and the concept, 526,
588; forms of, 26–27; meaning of, 670;
and reason, 25, 529, 538–540; reflection of,
25–26; and the thing-in-itself, 26; see also
thinking of the understanding
uneducated thought, 119, 122, 543
unit, 169, 171, 272, 278
unity, 67–68
universal, the: 530, 543; abstract, 536, 537, 538,
739; as beginning, 749; and the concept, 505,
513, 529–530, 569, 573, 714; and the concrete,
531, 585; empirical, 573; the greater, 578;
immediacy of, 740; the infinite, 533; and the
judgment, 553–554; objective, 574, 575, 617,
641; as particular, 535; of reflection, 572–573,
616; and singularity, 546–547, 549; as totality,
513
universe, 633
Unterschied, lxxiii
Valerius, Lucas, 258
variables, 209, 214–215, 238–239
Verhältnis, sich verhalten, l, lxviii
Verschiedenheit, lxxiii
violence, 501, 532, 639, 646, 663, 685

virtue, 379
Vishnu, 283
visibility, 77–78
vocation, 666
void, the, see the one(s)
Vorstellung, lxxiii
Wallace, William, lxiv
was für ein Ding, 128–129
water, 647
will, 675, 730
wissen, Wissen, lxx
Wolff, Christian, xliii, 32, 220,
726–727
wonder, 536
world, (the): the absolute attribute as, 469;
absolute essence of, 651; of appearances, 444,
445–448, 469; and contradiction, 201; as
creation, 577; ground of 406; in and for
itself, 444–448, 469; indifference of, 685;
meaning of, 448; objective, 659;
suprasensible, 444; as universe, 633; as a
universe of meaning, xlix
zoology, 332
zu Grunde gehen, lxxiii–lxxiv

