Edmund Husserl

Translated, with an Introduction, by

The Crisis
of European Sciences
and Transcendental
Phenomenology
An Introduction
to Phenomenological Philosophy
David Carr

NORTHWESTERN
EVANSTON

UNIVERSITY

PRESS
1970

Copyright © 1970 by Northwestern University Press
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 77-82511
Manufactured in the United States of America
All rights reserved
First printing, 1970
Second printing, 1975
Third printing, 1977
Fourth printing, 1978
CLOTH EDITION, ISBN 0-8101-0255-2
PAPER EDITION, ISBN 0-8101-0458-X
Originally published in German under the title
Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die
transzendentale Phänomenologie: Eine Einleitung
in die phänomenologische
Philosophie,
edited by Walter Biemel,
copyright © 1954 by Martinus Nijhoff,
The Hague; 2nd printing, 1962.

David C a n is assistant professor of philosophy
at Yale University.

Contents

Translator's Introduction

/

xv

PART I THE CRISIS OF THE SCIENCES AS EXPRESSION
OF THE RADICAL LIFE-CRISIS OF EUROPEAN HUMANITY

§ I. Is there, in view of their constant successes, really a crisis of
the sciences? / 3
§ 2. The positivistic reduction of the idea of science to mere factual
science. The "crisis" of science as the loss of its meaning for
life. / 5
§ 3. The founding of the autonomy of European humanity through
the new formulation of the idea of philosophy in the Renaissance. / 7
§ 4. The failure of the new science after its initial success; the unclarified motive for this failure. / 10
§ 5. The ideal of universal philosophy and the process of its inner
dissolution. / 11
§ 6. The history of modern philosophy as a struggle for the meaning
of man. / 14
§ 7. The project of the investigations of this work. / 16
PART II

CLARIFICATION OF THE ORIGIN OF THE MODERN OPPOSITION
BETWEEN PHYSICALISTIC OBJECTIVISM
AND TRANSCENDENTAL SUBJECTIVISM

§ 8. The origin of the new idea of the universality of science in the
reshaping of mathematics.
/ 21
§ g. Galileo's mathematization of nature. / 23
a. "Pure geometry." / 24
b. The basic notion of Galilean physics: nature as a mathematical universe. / 28
c. The problem of the mathematizability of the "plena." / 34
d. The motivation of Galileo's conception of nature. / 37

[ix]

X

§ 10.
§11.
§ 12.
§ 13.
§ 14.
§ 15.
§16.
§ 17.
§18.
§ 19.
§ 20.
§ 21.
t
§ 22.
§ 23.
§ 24.
§ 25.

/

CONTENTS

e. The verificational character of natural science's fundamental hypothesis. / 41
f. The problem of the sense of natural-scientific "formulae," / 43
g. The emptying of the meaning of mathematical natural
science through "technization." / 46
h. The life-world as the forgotten meaning-fundament of
natural science. / 48
i. Portentous misunderstandings resulting from lack of clarity
about the meaning of mathematization. / 53
k. Fundamental significance of the problem of the origin of
mathematical natural science. / 56
1. Characterization of the method of our exposition. / 57
The origin of dualism in the prevailing exemplary role of
natural science. The rationality of the world more geometrico. / 60
Dualism as the reason for the incomprehensibility of the problems of reason; as presupposition for the specialization of the
sciences; as the foundation of naturalistic psychology. / 61
Over-all characterization of modern physicalistic rationalism.
/ 65
The first difficulties of physicalistic naturalism in psychology:
the incomprehensibility of functioning subjectivity.
/ 67
Precursory characterization of objectivism and transcendentalism. The struggle between these two ideas as the sense of
modern spiritual history. / 68
Reflection on the method of our historical manner of investigation. / 70
Descartes as the primal founder not only of the modern idea of
objectivistic rationalism but also of the transcendental motif
which explodes it. / 73
Descartes's return to the ego cogito. Exposition of the sense of
the Cartesian epoche. / 75
Descartes's misinterpretation of himself. The psychologistic
falsification of the pure ego attained through the epoche. / 78
Descartes's obtrusive interest in objectivism as the reason for
his self-misinterpretation.
/ 81
"Intentionality" in Descartes. / 82
Descartes as the starting point of two lines of development,
rationalism and empiricism.
/ 83
Locke's naturalistic-epistemological psychology. / 84
Berkeley. David Hume's psychology as fictionalistic theory of
knowledge: the "bankruptcy" of philosophy and science. / 86
The genuine philosophical motif hidden in the absurdity of
Hume's skepticism: the shaking of objectivism.
/ 88
The "transcendental" motif in rationalism: Kant's conception
of a transcendental philosophy. / 91

Contents /

xi

§ 26. Preliminary discussion of the concept of the "transcendental"
which guides us here. / 97
§ 27. The philosophy of Kant and his followers seen from the
perspective of our guiding concept of the "transcendental"
The task of taking a critical position. / 98
PART III

THE CLARIFICATION OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL PROBLEM
AND THE RELATED FUNCTION OF PSYCHOLOGY

A. The Way into Phenomenological Transcendental Philosophy by Inquiring back from the Pregiven LifeWorld
§ 28. Kant's unexpressed "presupposition": the surrounding world of
life, taken for granted as valid. / 103
§ 29. The life-world can be disclosed as a realm of subjective phenomena which have remained "anonymous." / 111
§ 30. The lack of an intuitive exhibiting method as the reason for
Kant's mythical constructions.
/ 114
§31» Kant and the inadequacy of the psychology of his day. The
opaqueness of the distinction between transcendental subjectivity and soul. / 116
§ 32. The possibility of a hidden truth in Kant's transcendental philosophy: the problem of a "new dimension" The antagonism between the "life of the plane" and the "life of depth" / 118
§ 33- The problem of the "life-world" as a partial problem within the
general problem of objective science. / 121
§34. Exposition of the problem of a science of the life-world. / 123
a. The difference between objective science and science in
general. / 123
b. The use of subjective-relative experiences for the objective
sciences, and the science of them. / 125
c. Is the subjective-relative an object for psychology? / 126
d. The life-world as universe of what is intuit able in principle;
the "objective-true" world as in principle nonintuitable
"logical" substruction. / 127
e. The objective sciences as subjective constructs—those of a
particular praxis, namely, the theoretical-logical, which itself belongs to the full concreteness of the life-world.
/

129

f. The problem of the life-world not as a partial problem but
rather as a universal problem for philosophy. / 132
§ 35. Analysis of the transcendental epoche. First step: The epoche
of objective science. / 135
§ 36. How can the life-world, after the epoche of the objective sciences, become the subject matter of a science? The distinction
in principle between the objective-logical a priori and the a
priori of the life-world. / 137
§ 37. The formal and most general structures of the life-world: thing

XÜ

/

CONTENTS

and world on the one side, thing-consciousness on the other.
/ 142
§ 38. The two possible fundamental ways of making the life-world
thematic: the naive and natural straightforward attitude and
the idea of a consistently reflective attitude toward the "houf9
of the subjective manner of givenness of life-world and lifeworld objects. / 143
§ 39» The peculiar character of the transcendental epoche as a total
change of the natural attitude of life. / 148
§ 40. The difficulties surrounding the genuine sense of performing
the total epoche. The temptation to misconstrue it as a withholding of all individual validities, carried out step by step.
/ 148
§ 41. The genuine transcendental epoche makes possible the "transcendental reduction"—the discovery and investigation of the
transcendental correlation between world and world-consciousness. / 151
§ 42. The task of concretely plotting ways in which the transcendental reduction can actually be carried out. / 152
§ 43. Characterization of a new way to the reduction, as contrasted
with the "Cartesian way." / 154
§ 44. The life-world as subject matter for a theoretical interest determined by a universal epoche in respect to the actuality of
the things of the life-world. / 155
§45. Beginnings of a concrete exposition of what is given in senseintuition purely as such. / 157
§ 46. The universal a priori of correlation. / 159
§ 47. Indication of further directions of inquiry: the basic subjective phenomena of kinesthesis, alteration of validity,
horizon-consciousness, and the communalization of experience. / 161
5 48. Anything that is—whatever its meaning and to whatever
region it belongs—is an index of a subjective system of correlations. / 165
§ 49. Preliminary concept of transcendental constitution as "original
formation of meaning." The restricted character of the exemplary analyses carried out so far; an indication of further
horizons of exposition. / 167
§ 50. First ordering of all working problems under the headings
ego-cogito-cogitatum. / 170
§ Si. The task of an "ontology of the life-world" / 173
5 52. The emergence of paradoxical enigmas. The necessity of new
radical reflections. / 174
§ 53. The paradox of human subjectivity: being a subject for the
world and at the same time being an object in the world.
/ 178

Contents /

xiii

§ 54. The resolution of the paradox: / 182
a. We as human beings, and we as ultimately functioningaccomplishing subjects. / 182
b. As primal ego, I constitute my horizon of transcendental
others as cosubjects within the transcendental intersubjectivity which constitutes the world. / 184
S 55* The correction in principle of our first application of the
epoche by reducing it to the absolutely unique, ultimately functioning ego. / 186
PART III

B. The Way into Phenomenological Transcendental Philosophy from Psychology

§ 56. Characterization of the philosophical development after Kant
from the perspective of the struggle between physicalistic objectivism and the constantly reemerging "transcendental motif." / 191
5 57. The fateful separation of transcendental philosophy and psychology. / 198
§58. The alliance and the difference between psychology and
transcendental philosophy. Psychology as the decisive field.
/ 203
S 59. Analysis of the reorientation from the psychological attitude
into the transcendental attitude. Psychology "before" and
"after" the phenomenological reduction. (The problem of
"flowing in.") / 208
§ 60. The reason for the failure of psychology: dualistic and physicalistic presuppositixms. / 211
§ 61. Psychology in the tension between the (objectivistic-philosophical) idea of science and empirical procedure: the incompatibility of the two directions of psychological inquiry (the
psychophysical and that of "psychology based on inner experience"). / 213
§ 62. Preliminary discussion of the absurdity of giving equal status
in principle to souls and bodies as realities; indication of the
difference in principle between the temporality, the causality,
and the individuation of natural things and those of souls.
/ 215
§ 63. The questionable character of the concepts of "outer" and
"innef* experience. Why has the experience of the bodily thing
in the life-world, as the experience of something "merely subjective" not previously been included in the subject matter of
psychology? / 219
§ 64. Cartesian dualism as the reason for the parallelization. Only
the formal and most general features of the schema "descriptive
vs. explanatory science" are justified. / 221
§ 65. Testing the legitimacy of an empirically grounded dualism by
familiarizing oneself with the factual procedure of the psychologist and the physiologist. / 224
§ 66. The world of common experience: its set of regional types and

Xiv

§ 67.
§ 68.
§ 69.

5 70.
§ 71.
§ 72.

/

CONTENTS

the possible universal abstractions mithin it: "nature" as correlate of a universal abstraction; the problem of "complementary abstractions'9
/ 226
The dualism of the abstractions grounded in experience. The
continuing historical influence of the empiricist approach
(from Hobbes to Wundt). Critique of data-empiricism.
/ 230
The task of a pure explication of consciousness as such: the
universal problem of intentionality. (Brentano's attempt at a
reform of psychology.)
/ 233
The basic psychological method of "phenomenological-psychological reduction" (first characterization: [1] intentional relatedness and the epoche; [2] levels of descriptive psychology;
[3] establishing the "disinterested spectator"). / 235
The difficulties of psychological "abstraction." (The paradox
of the "intentional object9; the intentional primal phenomenon
of "sense" / 241
The danger of misunderstanding the "universality" of the
phenomenological-psychological epoche. The decisive significance of the correct understanding.
/ 244
The relation of transcendental psychology to transcendental
phenomenology as the proper access to pure self-knowledge.
Definitive removal of the objectivistic ideal from the science of
the soul / 257
APPENDIXES

I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.

A. The Vienna Lecture
Philosophy and the Crisis of European Humanity / 269
B. Supplementary Texts
Idealization and the Science of Reality—The Mathematization
of Nature / 301
The Attitude of Natural Science and the Attitude of Humanistic Science. Naturalism, Dualism, and Psychophysical Psychology / 315
Philosophy as Mankind's Self-Reflection; the Self-Realization
of Reason / 335
[Objectivity and the World of Experience] / 343
[The Origin of Geometry] / 353
[The Life-World and the World of Science] / 379
Fink's Appendix on the Problem of the "Unconscious" / 385
Denial of Scientific Philosophy. Necessity of Reflection. The
Reflection [Must Be] Historical. How Is History Required? /
389
Fink's Outline for the Continuation of the Crisis / 397
Index / 401

Translator's Introduction

ENGLISH-SPEAKING READERS of European phenomenology and existentialism are accustomed to references to Husserl's
"great last work/' The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology subtitled An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy. The work is known to be important
both for its content and for the influence it has had on other
philosophers. In it Husserl makes a last attempt (and since he
began it in his mid-seventies he doubtless knew it would be his
last attempt) to explain and ground his phenomenological philosophy. Only three other books had been published by Husserl
since the Logische Untersuchungen of 1900-1901, and each was
explicitly characterized by its author as an "introduction to
phenomenology."* But this new "introduction," written in the

1. Both the first volume of the Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie (1913) and the Meditations Cartesiennes (published in French in 1931) had been
subtitled "introductions" to phenomenology. Even the Formale und
transzendentale Logik (Halle: Niemeyer, 1929) was described by
Husserl as "eine Emporleitung zur transzendentalen Phänomenologie"
(in a Selbstanzeige quoted by Eugen Fink in "Die Spätphilosophie
Husserls in der Freiburger Zeit," Edmund Husserl 1859-1959 [The
Hague: NijhofF, i959l> P- io5>The Ideen, Volume I, edited by Walter Biemel, is Volume III
(1950) in the Husserliana series, and Cartesianische Meditationen
und Pariser Vorträge, edited by Stephan Strasser, is Volume I (1950).
The series as a whole, titled Husserliana: Edmund Husserl, Gesam[XV]

XVi

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

mid-1930's, differs radically from earlier ones; the author adopts
a wholly new form, and his phenomenology takes on important
new dimensions whose significance is still being disputed. Furthermore, he gives unmistakable and passionate expression,
though in the most general terms, to his position on the turbulent events of the time.
What is usually not mentioned in passing references, however, is the fact that the work is incomplete and that the text
available to us is not a finished version and in some places is
almost fragmentary in character. For those who now turn for the
first time, through this English translation, to the study of
the Crisis, it is important to emphasize this incompleteness; the
reader who approaches it as a finished book may well be disappointed.

I. Husserl's Work on the Crisis
The work on the theme of the Crisis seems to have begun
sometime in 1934, and it continued until the summer of 1937
and the beginning of Husserl's terminal illness, to which he
succumbed on April 27, 1938. The problem of the European
"crisis" was much in the air during this period, for obvious
reasons. Many people, notably the Nazis themselves, were convinced that Europe was confronted not merely with a political
crisis but with a crisis of its very civilization. Philosophers felt
called upon to examine the situation from their point of view.
The beginnings of Husserl's explicit reflections on this subject
seem to have been occasioned by an outside source. They are
found in a letter dated August 30, 1934, to the International
Congress of Philosophy at Prague. The organizing committee of
the Congress had asked Husserl to comment on "the mission of
philosophy in our time," and Husserl's letter was read in the
session bearing that title. The letter contains many ideas and
language similar to the first parts of the Crisis and states that
"the grounding which would give effective force to what I have to
say [on this subject] would require a substantial treatise." 2 Acmelte Werke, is edited by Herman L. van Breda and is published at
The Hague by Martinus Nijhoff. Subsequent references to this series
will be by volume numbers and dates and thereafter by titles of individual volumes.
2. The letter, which will be quoted more extensively below, is
found in the Actes du huitieme Congres Internationale de Philosophie
ä Prague, 2-7 Septembre 1934 (Prague, 1936), pp. XLI-XLV. The

Translators Introduction /

xvii

cording to the recently published correspondence with Roman
Ingarden, Husserl actually wrote a lengthy essay at this time to
accompany his letter to Prague, but the essay was not read.
Husserl describes it as a "hurriedly written (two weeks) outline
of a historical interpretation of the origin of our guiding idea
[Zweckidee] of philosophy." He writes that it has "given me to
think" and that it 'led to deep problems in the philosophy of
history which truly disturb me." 3
Then, in May, 1935, Husserl lectured in Vienna, following
an invitation by the Vienna Kulturbund, on "Philosophy in the
Crisis of European Mankind." 4 In November of the same year he
lectured in Prague on "The Crisis of European Sciences and
Psychology," and it was this series of lectures which served as
the basis for the projected work. As a Jew who was denied any
public platform in Germany, Husserl had to publish, as he had
lectured, outside his own country. An international yearbook
called Philosophia, edited by Arthur Liebert in Belgrade, arranged to publish the Crisis in installments. After his return
from Prague, Husserl worked feverishly on the essay, and the
first two parts of the present text were published in Philosophia
in 1936. By the time Husserl became ill in 1937, the text of the
third part was longer than that of the first two parts combined
and was still not completed. Eugen Fink, who was Husserl's
research assistant and worked closely with him during this period, had produced a typed version of Husserl's stenographic
manuscript of Part III, and Husserl had gone over it, perhaps
public reading of the letter is reported in the "Feuilleton" of the Frankfurter Zeitung, October 2, 1934, and is confirmed by personal recollections of Professor Herbert Spiegelberg.
3. Edmund Husserl, Briefe an Roman Ingarden (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1968), p. 89 (Letter LXXIII of November 26, 1934; see also Letter LXX, p. 88).
4. For the rest of this account, unless otherwise indicated, see
Walter Biemel's editor's introduction to the posthumous German edition of the Crisis (Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und
die transzendentale Phänomenologie: Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie, Husserliana, Vol. VI [1954; 2nd printing,
1962]). I have not translated Biemel's introduction, primarily because
it deals largely with the preparation and makeup of the German edition, from which this translated version differs in some details. The
relation of this translation to the Biemel edition will be explained
below.
In the following pages, references to the "Krisis" are to Biemel's
German edition, while references to the "Crisis'9 are to the present
volume.

XVÜi

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

more than once, making many changes and expressing much
dissatisfaction with many parts of the text, indicating changes
still to be made. The result was that the third part never reached
the publisher in final form.5 During this period Fink produced an
outline, later approved by Husserl himself, for the completion of
Part HI and for two more parts in addition to the three already
worked on.6 We can see that the Crisis was to be an immense
work, much longer than the present text. But no manuscript has
been found for the conclusion of Part III or for the text of Parts
IV and V.

2. The Text, the German Edition,
and This Translation
Thus the Crisis cannot be regarded as a finished work in any
sense of the word. Not only does it break off incompleted; the
text we have is in very rough shape, and the ideas it presents
flow unevenly. Needless repetitions occur, which might have
been eliminated by a leisurely overview of the work. In many
places the obvious is belabored, while other passages are among
the most dense Husserl ever wrote. Often, intricate trains of
thought are introduced which seem to refer to investigations
already completed but for which the reader has not been prepared.
In his posthumous German edition of 1954, the editor, Walter Biemel, simply reproduced the published version of Parts I
and II from Philosophia; the original manuscript had apparently
been destroyed. But even these parts of the text give evidence of
being patched together and hurriedly prepared, since they contain quite obvious repetitions and other purely textual or grammatical faults (cf. pp. 59, 97, below). And indeed, in certain
correspondence during this period Husserl reveals that he added
lengthy sections of a historical and critical nature to Part II even
after it was in print, and he speaks of the feverishness of his
5. Stephan Strasser, in his introduction to the German edition of
the Cartesian Meditations (p. xxx) says that Husserl "demanded the
return" of the manuscript of Part III "that he had already sent to the
publisher, in order to correct it." Biemel (Krisis, p. xvi) simply says
that he "held [it] back because of plans for revision." It is likely (and
a reported conversation with Fink confirms this) that Part IIIA was
sent to the publisher and was then returned at Husserl's request. Husserl then began an introduction to a revised version of Part IIIA (see
below, p. 102, note 1) but never completed the revision itself.
6. See Appendix X, p. 397, below.

Translators Introduction /

xix

work and the despair he must have caused his editor.7 Thus,
even though Parts I and II were published, their literary quality
leaves something to be desired.
As for the third part, Biemel had to deal with a very difficult
text, a typescript containing HusserTs corrections on almost
every page, in both longhand and shorthand, and even some
inserts by Fink. Inevitably, a heavy editorial hand was required
in order to decide whether marginal notes should be inserted in
the text—and, if so, where—or whether they should be reproduced as footnotes, etc. In the admirable scholarly fashion which
is typical of Husserliana editions, Biemel has given a complete
account in the textkritischer Anhang (pp. 517-43) of the variants, marginal notes, etc., involved in his preparation of the
text.
This translation is based on Biemel's edition. However, in
connection with Part III, puzzlement over the text drove me
again and again to the textkritischer Anhang and from there to
the original typescript in the Archives. In most cases my puzzlement simply remained, and I was filled with sympathy for Biemel's task and admiration for his work. I could not question his
reading of Husserl's shorthand, of course, since I could not
decipher it. In a few cases, however, I was forced to differ with
his interpretation and to make changes. These few changes
involve the position of inserted sentences, the character of interpolations, and the elimination of repetitions, and they are clearly
indicated in my footnotes to the translation. These mark the
extent to which my translation differs with the German edition
as far as the text of the Crisis itself is concerned.8
7. Husserl remarks in one of his letters that the additions
amounted to one and a half signatures—"almost a treatise in itself."
Comparison of the Crisis with the original Prague lecture, of which a
transcription has been made, suggests that the added section was the
long § 9 on Galileo. (I am indebted to Professor Spiegelberg and the
staff of the Husserl Archives at Louvain for allowing me to examine
this transcription and certain late correspondence of Husserl.) It is
interesting to speculate that the Galileo section might have resulted
from a reported visit during this period by Husserl's friend and former
student Alexander Koyre, who published his monumental Etudes Galileennes in 1940. The striking similarity between Husserl's and
Koyre's interpretation of the significance of Renaissance science is
best seen in the latter's From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1957).
8. A minor change involves Husserl's very extensive use of typographical emphasis (the German equivalent of italics). For better

XX

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

BiemeFs edition of the Crisis, however, is presented in a
volume containing some other materials. These are writings of
varying lengths and literary appearance, all having to do with
the subjects covered in the Crisis. Most were written during the
same period as the Crisis. While some are stylistically well formulated and even seem to indicate that they were meant for
inclusion in the text (see, in particular, Appendixes V and VI,
below), most are Husserl's famous
Forschungsmanuskripte—
Husserl thinking on paper, often in incomplete sentences, often
expressing a view not his own without clearly indicating it, etc.
Although I have used Biemel's edition of these texts, I have taken
the liberty of presenting them in a different way in this volume.
My reasons for doing this are the following:
First, Biemel adds one of these manuscripts to the text of the
Crisis itself as "§ 73. Schlusswort" (Krisis, pp. 269 ff.). He justifies this (p. 519) by saying that the manuscript rounds out the
interrupted text, has a summarizing character, and corresponds
to the theme of the projected concluding part of the Crisis in
Fink's outline. But several considerations speak against this
choice. First, the manuscript in question (K III 6, pp. 150-56)
bears the note "zu K I" after its title, which I take to mean "to
Krisis, Part I," an interpretation borne out by its subject matter
and phraseology. Second, the text differs drastically in both style
and content from the preceding paragraphs, and it is disturbing
to have it follow these, separated only by a paragraph title. In
terms of its content it should at least be set off by itself and not
be included in Part III B; as for its style, it is clearly a Forschungsmanuskript and should not be treated as part of a work
meant for publication. Finally, it gives the impression, no matter
how clearly it is marked, that the Crisis is completed when it is
not. These considerations have led me to include this text in an
appendix (Appendix IV) with other Forschungsmanuskripte.
Biemel then presents three Abhandlungen
("treatises"),
the third of which is the important Vienna lecture. In my opinion, the first two of these texts do not rate the title Abhandlungen and should not be placed alongside the Vienna lecture. What
distinguishes them seems to be the fact that they were found in
typescript rather than shorthand and that they were written
before 1930 and show the early development of some of the
conformity to English style I have been more restrained in the use of
italics.

Translators Introduction /

xxi

ideas in the Crisis. But their rough style clearly places them in
the category of Forschungsmanuskripte, whereas the relatively
polished literary presentation and the thematic importance of
the Vienna lecture require its being placed in a class by itself.
Consequently, I have presented the Vienna lecture by itself as
Appendix I, while the two early manuscripts are placed at the
beginning of Part II of the appendixes, where other Forschungsmanuskripte are found. They are followed by the manuscript
referred to above as Biemers Schlusswort, as it relates to Part I
of the Crisis.
In his section of Beilagen, Biemel presents 29 items totaling 167 pages. These were selected from hundreds of pages of
manuscripts from the period of the Crisis. All of those selected
by Biemel are of interest to the serious Husserl scholar. But
many, I feel, do not add significantly to material presented in the
Crisis itself except by way of emphasis or expression, while some
stand out as especially valuable supplements to the reading of
the Crisis. For reasons of economy I have translated only a
selection of Biemers selection. I think that the needs of the
English-speaking reader, seeking insight into this period of Husserl's thought, will be satisfied by this selection. Thus the
makeup of this volume differs somewhat from that of Biemers
Husserliana edition.9

3. Problems of Translation
Translation always involves interpretation. Husserl is difficult to translate at the best of times. There is no concealing the
fact that he is simply not a careful writer; he has little thought
for literary niceties or for the capacity of his readers to take in
interminable and complex sentences, and little thought, it must
be said, even for terminological exactness and consistency. In
the present case of a text that was for the most part still in the
process of revision, and of purely private Forschungsmanuskripte, the problems are multiplied.
The ordinary problems are those of terminology and sentence structure. In the case of some writers who are careful in
their use of technical terms, precisely defined in advance, it may
be possible to devise a sort of one-to-one correspondence in
9. For readers seeking the German text of materials translated in
the appendixes, the translator's notes refer to the original designations
and the page numbers of the Biemel edition.

XXÜ

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

translation so that the reader will always know what German
word is meant and so that a glossary of terms can be produced.
Husserl was not such a writer; unlike Heidegger, for example, he
was not attentive to language as a valuable tool to be carefully
fashioned and put to use in communicating his ideas. His assumption is that terms, even those he invents, take on their own
meanings in context and convey them adequately.10 And when
he does speak of terminology in general, it is usually to warn the
reader that the phenomenologist's language must necessarily
remain "in flux" and that a demand for mathematical exactness
of definitions is totally inappropriate in phenomenology.11 There
is some consistency, of course, but on the whole the result is that
each sentence must be translated almost ad hoc, much as one
must translate ordinary (as opposed to technical) language,
namely, on the assumption that words must be translated differently according to the context. Some translators have unfortunately seen their task as that of providing a kind of system for
deciphering the German text, full of neologisms to correspond to
every terminological nuance. The result is often that one has
neither the German text, nor a readable translation, nor, most
importantly, a comprehensible rendering of the sense of Husserl's work. This last is the primary responsibility of the translator which I have sought to fulfill. Naturally I have tried to be as
consistent as possible, but this possibility is limited. Another
tendency of overzealous translators has been to suppose that
every noun must be translated by a noun. In the case of some of
Husserl's lengthier noun compounds I have used a phrase instead of a noun. This may depart from the literal, but it better
conveys the sense, in my opinion, than an outlandish neologism
which must be explained at great length in a footnote.
I do not mean to suggest that I have been able to turn
Husserl's labored German into a piece of felicitous English
prose. On the contrary, precisely the need to replace nouns by
phrases often results in very involved sentences. Also, it has not
been possible to avoid completely some rather forbidding termi10. Cf. Ideen, Vol. I, § 66: "The words used may stem from ordinary language, being ambiguous and vague in their changing meaning. [But] as soon as they 'coincide* [sich decken] in the manner of
immediate [aktuell] expression, with what is given intuitively, they
take on a definite sense which is their immediate and clear sense hie
et nunc" (my translation).
i i . Cf. the remarks at the end of the Introduction to Ideen, Vol. I,
and the note "zur Terminologie" at the end of §84 of the same work.

Translators Introduction /

xxiii

nological innovations. But the worst obstruction to readable style
in this translation is Husserl's involved sentence construction.
One speaks of a translator's "breaking down complex sentences,"
but this is easier said than done if one is to preserve the sense. I
have done this as often as I could. But to make a subordinate
clause, or especially one of those lengthy adjectival clauses Husserl is so fond of, into a separate sentence is to give it an
importance it was not meant to have and thus really to violate
the flow (if this is the word) of the text. Husserl wrote as most
of us speak, with many asides, afterthoughts, and qualifications
thrown in. This is a matter not just of style but of content, since
it concerns the priority and subordination of ideas. The attempt
to preserve this has, unfortunately, resulted in some rather long
sentences.
The special problems of this translation are related to the
state of the text described above. Probably because of the hurried
way in which it was prepared, it contains numerous sentences
which do not hang together logically or even grammatically. As
an editor, Biemel was correct in presenting these sentences as
they were, for the most part, leaving the reader to figure out
what Husserl meant. A translator, however, should hardly try to
render grammatical and logical nonsense in another language.
Thus I have been forced to intervene in the text on some occasions, sometimes with bracketed words or phrases, sometimes by
translating the sentence I thought Husserl must have meant to
write, explaining the difficulty in a footnote. Thus the present
translation is perhaps more of an "interpretation" than most.
Like most translators, of course, I have also used bracketed
insertions of a less interpretative sort simply to clarify the text.
Bracketed insertions made by Biemel in the German edition are
identified as such in the notes.
The translator's notes deal primarily with terminology and
other matters concerning the text. Occasional references are
made to other works. In connection with Part III, I have mentioned or quoted some of Husserl's own marginal comments on
the manuscript drawn from Biemel's critical apparatus and my
own consultation of the original text. These will help the reader
to appreciate the state of flux the work was in and to know what
Husserl thought of some parts of it. In a few instances I have
offered a brief paraphrase or commentary on passages I thought
were unusually obscure.
My footnotes are numbered. Husserl's few notes are marked
by asterisks.

XXiv

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

4. The Significance of the Crisis
What distinguishes the Crisis from those works already
known to English-speaking readers? We have noted that the
work marks Husserl's last published attempt at an "introduction
to phenomenology/' a systematic, definitive presentation of the
fundamentals of his method. A glance suffices to convince us,
however, that by comparison to the other "introductions" available in English—the Ideas, Volume I, and the Cartesian
Meditations M —the Crisis is radically different in format. Husserl's brief Preface to the original published version of Part I
(see p. 3, note 1) makes this clear in a few words:
The work that I am beginning with the present essay, and shall
complete in a series of further articles in Philosophia, makes the attempt, by way of a teleological-historical reflection upon the origins
of our critical scientific and philosophical situation, to establish
the unavoidable necessity of a transcendental-phenomenological
reorientation of philosophy. Accordingly, it becomes, in its own
right, an introduction to transcendental phenomenology.
The earlier works mentioned above are both characterized
explicitly by a "Cartesian" approach. In them, Husserl begins by
inviting his readers to reflect upon the world and upon one's own
consciousness of and thought about the world and to see that a
certain new attitude, embodied in certain methodical procedures, will enable us to answer the questions of philosophy, to
solve or dissolve its problems. Here, by contrast, Husserl announces "a teleological-historical reflection upon the origins of
our critical scientific and philosophical situation." 13 True to his
12. Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, translated by W. R. Boyce Gibson (London: Allen & Unwin, 1931), and
Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology, translated
by Dorion Cairns (The Hague: Nijhoff, i960).
13. It is not only by contrast to these two earlier works that the
Crisis is unusual. Formale und transzendentale Logik (1929), which
Husserl also characterized as an introduction to phenomenology, does
not share the Cartesian approach, but it takes up a much earlier
theme, that of the Logische Untersuchungen (Halle: Niemeyer, 19001901; rev. ed., 1913). Such a comparison can also be made with other
earlier "introductions" since published posthumously, notably Die Idee
der Phänamenologie, SL series of lectures from 1907 (Husserliana,
Vol. II, edited by Walter Biemel [1950]; English translation, The Idea
of Phenomenology, by William P. Alston and George Nakhnikian [The
Hague: Nijhoff, 1964]), the Encyclopaedia Britannica article (14th
ed.; London, 1927), and the Amsterdam lectures of 1928, the last two

Translators Introduction /

xxv

word, he begins with an exposition of "the crisis of the sciences,"
which he interprets as an "expression of the radical life-crisis of
European humanity" (Part I ) . Then, in search of the origins
of this "critical situation," Husserl proceeds to a long discussion
of Greek philosophy and mathematics, the rise of modern science
with Galileo, and its philosophical interpretations from Descartes to Kant (Part II).

5. The Circumstances Surrounding the Writing
of the Crisis
What could have motivated Husserl to take such a novel
approach in his final attempt to present phenomenology? Certainly considerable importance must be attached to what we
might call "external" considerations. It is well known that Husserl was always disappointed at the tendency of his students to
go their own way, to embark upon fundamental revisions of
phenomenology rather than engage in the communal task of
concrete "research" based on principles laid down by Husserl.
This situation was worse than ever at the end of his life; and
while there is abundant evidence that Husserl was increasingly
bitter toward the revisionists themselves, it is also clear that he
held himself at least partly responsible for the fact that his
phenomenology had not had the effect he desired. A new mode
of presentation was called for.
In particular, Husserl's phenomenology was being eclipsed in
both academic circles and the public mind by the increasingly
popular Eocistenzphilosophie of Jaspers and Heidegger. Husserl
had no kind words for this philosophy itself; but the Crisis and
the Vienna lecture make clear his growing awareness of the
profound malaise among the educated to which the existentialists were directly speaking. Husserl's bitterness, especially
against his former protege Heidegger (who, like many others,
appropriated the term "phenomenology"), did not prevent him
from seeing that existentialism had given needed expression to
something real: a deeply felt lack of direction for man's existence as a whole, a sense of the emptiness of Europe's cultural
values, a feeling of crisis and breakdown, the demand that philospublished in Phänomenologische Psychologie (edited by Walter Biemel; Husserliana, IX [1962], 237-301 and 302-49, respectively). The
last two begin with a discussion of psychology and are to that extent
like Part IIIB of the Crisis. But all these lack the historical dimension
which sets the tone for the Crisis as a whole.

XXVi

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

ophy be relevant to life. And these texts are full of Husserl's
tacit admissions that his philosophy had not seemed to speak to
these needs. In describing the crisis itself, he refers to the
"younger generation's" justified hostility toward the science of
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. "In our vital need—so
we are told—this science has nothing to say to us" (Crisis, p. 6).
Later Husserl sees this attitude applied—mistakenly, to be sure
—to phenomenology's own emphasis on "rigorous science" and
method: "This way of looking at it makes it appear as if, once
again, a new, purely theoretical interest, a new 'science* with a
new vocational technique, is to be established, carried on either
as an intellectualistic game with very ideal pretensions or as a
higher-level intellectual technique in the service of the positive
sciences" (ibid., p. 136). Again, in the Vienna lecture, he writes:
Is it not the case that what we have presented here is something
rather inappropriate to our time, an attempt to rescue the honor
of rationalism, of "enlightenment," of an intellectualism which
loses itself in theories alienated from the world . . . ? Does this
not mean that we are being led again into the fateful error of believing that science makes men wise, that it is destined to create a
genuine and contented humanity that is master of its fate? Who
would still take such notions seriously today? (ibid., Appendix I,
pp. 289 f.).
Husserl was convinced that his philosophy was every bit as
relevant to human problems as existentialism, and he is at pains
to show this in the Crisis. This no doubt influenced his attention
to the "crisis" theme itself, his emphasis on values, on the practical aspects of existence, on 'life," and hence his borrowing of
many terms made popular by existentialism (Dasein, Existenz,
existentiell, etc.). But for Husserl, existentialism, whatever its
value as an expression of man's problems and Europe's problems, was precisely a symptom and the farthest thing from a
proper remedy. It attacked the old rationalism, with its sterile
legacy of nineteenth-century positivism, simply by turning it
upside down; it was "irrationalism" pure and simple, upon which
Husserl makes his most vigorous attacks.14
14. Another threat to philosophy of which Husserl was aware was
the logical positivism of the Vienna Circle, whose famous manifesto
had been published in 1929. Husserl did not consider this a form of
irrationalism and even saw it as an attempted "bulwark" against it;
but he was hardly sympathetic to it: in a letter to Ingarden (Briefe an
Roman Ingarden, p. 93) he wrote that against "irrationalistic skepticism" "the bulwark of mathematical positivism will not help for long,

Translators Introduction /

xxvii

But existentialism was not only symptomatic of Europe's
problems; it was also symptomatic of the desperate and false
solutions being accepted by society as a whole. The scope of
Husserl's attacks on "irrationalism" makes it unmistakably clear
that he had in mind not merely a philosophical "direction" that
was fashionable among the educated. Antirationalism and antiintellectualism were everywhere, and not merely "in the air";
they were explicit elements of Nazi ideology and propaganda.
Husserl's blanket indictment gives expression to a clear link in
his mind between philosophical antirationalism and political
antirationalism. Heidegger's actual connection with the Nazis at
one time during this period simply underlined in fact what for
Husserl was a kinship in essence.
These strains in both the Crisis and the Vienna lecture are
couched in the most general terms. Reasons of prudence alone
would have dictated this, of course, but in any case Husserl's
concern was not a political polemic but a sober philosophical
diagnosis of the roots of the problem. His perhaps most explicit
public remarks are contained in the open letter, mentioned
above (note 2), to the Prague congress of 1934. Philosophy, he
says there, is the "force which has transformed mere internationality through power into a completely new sort of internationality, and sustains it, namely a solidarity [Verbundenheit]
through the spirit of autonomy." But the spirit of philosophy is
hindered, he goes on, by skepticism and specialization:
To this we must add the influence of great fateful events [Schicksale] that completely upset the international community insofar
as, through them, the general faith in the idea and the practical
ideal of Europe, that of a harmonious unity of the life of nations
with its sources in the rational spirit, has been undermined.
At present we are faced with the imminent danger of the extinction of philosophy in this sense, and with it necessarily the
extinction of a Europe founded on the spirit of truth (p. XLIII).

6. Internal Significance of the Approach of the Crisis
But it is a mistake to suppose that Husserl's novel approach,
his "teleological-historical reflection upon the origins of our critical scientific and philosophical situation," represents nothing but
an attempt to respond to the particular situation of his place and
since people will ultimately discover that it is a sham philosophy and
not a true philosophy."

XXVÜi

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

time. If this were true, we might regard the "crisis" theme and
the historical sections as a piece de circonstance, to be set apart
from the "systematic" introduction to phenomenology, i.e., from
its true exposition and genuine grounding for all time. It is true
that the historical considerations proper characterize only Parts
I and II of the Crisis as it stands and that the longer Part III
seeks "the way into" phenomenology through a reflection first
upon the life-world (Part A) and then upon psychology (Part
B). Thus the third part, even though it differs from earlier books
in important ways, could still be described, Uke them, as a
"reflection upon the world and upon one's own consciousness of
and thought about the world." Husserl himself compared Parts I
and II to an overture preparing for the "actual work (the opera
itself)" to follow (see p. 102, note 1, below). Besides, the discussion of other philosophers and the history of philosophy, it might
be argued, is not really new to Husserl. One recalls the 1910
article 'Thilosophy as Rigorous Science,"16 criticizing the current
scene in philosophy; and even the early pages of the Ideen
contain a critique of empiricism. Furthermore, like most philosophy professors, he often began his lecture courses with a historical account of views on the problem to be taken up, showing that
earlier philosophers were unable to solve the problems he would
proceed to solve by means of phenomenology. The lectures of
1923-24 on "first philosophy," with their long introductory "critical history of ideas,"16 are a good example of this. And there are
many resemblances between this historical section and the one
in the Crisis.
But even the most cursory comparison between the Crisis
and these earlier writings makes it clear that the historical considerations of this work play a much more important role. Husserl does make the point, in the text in which the "overture"
analogy occurs, that he has especially emphasized "certain prejudices" that are "dominant in our philosophical present" (Krisis,
p. 438). He apologizes for this, in effect, noting that "philosophy
is not a private matter" (p. 439) and must be directed at the
contemporary world. But at the same time he explicitly insists
that his historical reflections on philosophy are not "accidental"
15. 'Thilosophie als strenge Wissenschaft," Logos, I (1910-11),
289-341; English translation in Quentin Lauer, Edmund Husserl:
Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy (New York: Harper &
Row, 1965), PP- 69-147.
16. Erste Philosophie, Part I: Kritische Ideengeschichte, edited by
Rudolf Boehm, Husserliana, Vol. VII (1956).

Translators Introduction /

xxix

aspects of his method "chosen for the sake of an impressive
presentation" (p. 441). We must remember that the whole work
is announced by reference to the "teleological-historical reflections" and that the introduction to phenomenology they present
is called eigenständig—it stands on its own; furthermore, the
work is thematically continuous in the sense that the discussions
of Part III are explicitly set up and made possible by the earlier
sections; finally, if we can regard Fink's plan for the continuation of the Crisis as authoritative, the fifth and concluding section of the work was to be entitled "the indispensable task of
philosophy: the responsibility of humanity for itself' (see below,
p. 400). Thus the Crisis was to end on the note with which it
began, placing the whole work within the framework of the
"teleological-historical reflections" referred to by Husserl in his
Preface.
The work must be approached as a whole, then, and not
divided into "purely introductory" and "systematic" parts. Only
the particular features of the European "crisis" of Husserl's time
can be set apart, perhaps; but even they are interwoven with
general historical reflections on philosophy. And this is the work
that Husserl regarded as his definitive exposition of phenomenology. Alfred Schutz reported that "in the last conversation which
the writer had the good fortune of having with Husserl, he
repeatedly designated this series of essays as the summary and
the crowning achievement of his life work."17 Now Husserl had
said something very similar about the Cartesian Meditations
while working on a version to be published in German. In a letter
to Roman Ingarden dated March 19,1930, he wrote:
I . . . should . . . not postpone the German version of the Cartesian Meditations. For it will be the major work of my life, a basic
outline of the philosophy that has accrued to me, a fundamental
work of method and of philosophical problematics. At least for me
[it will represent] a conclusion and ultimate clarity, which I can
defend and with which I can die contented.18
Yet, only a few years later, Husserl had apparently abandoned
the task of giving final form to the Cartesian Meditations, pinning his hopes instead on a work which was explicitly historical
in its fundamental approach.
17. "Phenomenology and the Social Sciences/' in Philosophical
Essays in Memory of Edmund Husserl, edited by Marvin Färber
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1940), p. 165.
18. Briefe an Roman Ingarden, p. 59.

XXX

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

It is important to realize the significance of this. In earlier
works, discussions of other philosophers are not part of the
introduction to phenomenology, strictly speaking, but form either a kind of "introduction to the introduction" or a series of
asides. A constant strain throughout Husserl's career is his disdain for the tendency of some philosophers to conjure up a
doctrine of their own simply by an ingenious dialectical combination of the doctrines of others. The true introduction to phenomenology—and thus to philosophy, for Husserl—is to be found
precisely by turning away from the opinions of philosophers and
by turning toward "the things themselves" {zu den Sachen
selbst!). In the Crisis, by contrast, as stated in the Preface, the
teleological-historical reflection serves "in its own right" as an
introduction to phenomenology. That is, if we take the word
eigenständig seriously, it is not in need of other elements to
make it a true introduction. Furthermore, as Husserl indicates in
the strongest possible terms,19 this kind of introduction is not
only one among other possible kinds of introduction to philosophy but is a necessary one and indeed the most fundamental
one.
Thus while the notion of the European crisis itself, and
Husserl's mention of its particular features, may represent the
philosopher's response to his circumstances, the historical reflections undertaken in search of the origins of this crisis are seen as
an essential part of the introduction to a genuine philosophy.
This historical discussion, as is generally agreed, is one of the
truly new elements in Husserl's philosophy which make their
appearance in the Crisis. And the other innovation usually mentioned in this connection, the concept of the life-world, is so
intimately bound up with this dimension that it must be considered as issuing directly from Husserl's historical reflections.
These two themes and their interconnection must be examined in order to assess the significance of the Crisis not merely as
a document of its time but as a general statement of Husserl's
phenomenology. Such an examination is all the more important
in light of an opinion first expressed by Merleau-Ponty 20 and
19. See pp. 71 fF., below.
20. Phenomenologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 1945),
p. 61 n.: "It was in his last period that Husserl himself became fully
conscious of what the return to the phenomenon meant and tacitly
broke with the philosophy of essences." Merleau-Ponty gives repeated
expression to this conviction in many of his writings, and the Crisis
was one of the main texts on which his opinion was based. He was one
of the first scholars outside Husserl's immediate circle to study Part

Translators Introduction /

xxxi

since taken up by many of his followers, the view that these new
dimensions of the Crisis introduce elements into phenomenology
that strain to the breaking point, whether he fully recognized it
or not, Husserl's philosophical program and undermine the results of his earlier works. If this view is correct, it provides an
answer to the question of why the German version of the Cartesian Meditations was abandoned and Husserl embarked on such
an unusual approach at the end of his life.21
This is not the place to embark upon the full-scale examination that would be needed for evaluating this opinion. What we
can do is bring out some of the problems raised by Husserl's new
approach which might serve as perspectives from which to study
the Crisis.

7. The Problem of History
What is the relation between phenomenology and history? In
III of the Crisis, having visited the new Husserl Archives in Louvain
in April, 1939 (H. L. van Breda, "Maurice Merleau-Ponty et les Archives-Husserl ä Louvain," Revue de metaphysique et de morale,
LXVII [1962], 410-30). The influence of this text, especially its concept of the life-world, on Merleau-Ponty is well known.
21. My remark "whether he fully recognized it or not" should be
underlined. Whatever the validity of Merleau-Ponty's view, it does not
support the myth that Husserl explicitly gave up in despair the ideal
of a rigorous science of philosophy, a myth often supported by quoting
Husserrs statement "Philosophy as99a rigorous science—the dream is
over [der Traum ist ausgeträumt]. The text in which this phrase occurs appeared as a Beilage to the German edition of the Crisis and is
translated below in Appendix IX, and it is clear from the context that
Husserl was attributing this view to his age, not asserting it himself.
Even Merleau-Ponty attributes to Husserl only a "tacit" break with his
philosophy of essences. It is amazing that this passage should still be
quoted as if it were Husserl's final assessment when the full text has
been available since 1954 (see, e.g., Johannes-Jürgen Meister, Wesen
und Bewusstsein, Inaugural Dissertation [Munich, 1967], p. 199).
Ingarden claims to have heard it from Fink as Husserl's own opinion
and repeated it as such in a memorial address in 1959. Yet it is no
more borne out by letters to him than by the Crisis or the text in question, as he admits (Briefe an Roman Ingarden, p. 181). This fact,
however, does not refute Merleau-Ponty's view as described above.
One possibility is that Husserl developed a new idea of philosophical
"science" that was radically different from or even incompatible with
the earlier one; another is that the investigations of the Crisis and
other manuscripts of the period imply a denial of scientific philosophy
even though Husserl did not recognize it or would not admit it to himself,

XXXii

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

presenting his "teleological-historical" treatise as being "in its
own right" an introduction to phenomenology, did Husserl now
believe that access to the genuine philosophical method could
somehow proceed without recourse to the Sachen selbst? If this
were the case, it would indeed constitute an abandonment of one
of his firmest principles. A more appropriate interpretation, however, seems to be that the historical matters under discussion in
the Crisis, or even the phenomenon of history generally in some
sense, had come to be seen by Husserl as numbering among the
Sachen to which we must turn in order to solve the problems of
philosophy.
But what is Husserl's approach to the phenomenon of history? In search of the "origins of our critical scientific and philosophical situation," he discusses primarily the history of Western
science and philosophy. But this raises the question of the point
of view or "attitude"—to use a good Husserlian term—under
which this discussion is conducted. If Husserl is simply engaging
in a bit of intellectual history, he would seem to share the
ontological commitment of the "natural attitude" involved in all
normal historical inquiry by his own account, i.e., the concern
with men who actually existed and in this case with their theories, which we believe they held on the basis of certain documentary evidence. How could such an investigation of history
serve the purposes of an introduction to phenomenology? If it is,
as Husserl suggests, really essential to such an introduction, it
means that it is no longer sufficient simply to bracket the views
of other philosophers and turn with an unprejudiced gaze to a
reflection on consciousness. On the contrary, we must consider
the views of others in great detail and in their historical sequence. And in doing so, rather than departing from the natural
attitude, which is the sine qua non of all earlier approaches to
phenomenology, we seem to be committed to a special version of
it.
Of course we must remember that Husserl describes the
Crisis as a teleological-histoncBl reflection and that he places
this reflection in a broad cultural context, explicitly denying that
he is engaged merely in a bit of intellectual history. In both the
Crisis and the Vienna lecture he speaks not only of philosophy
but of the European spirit as such. "True," he says,
universal philosophy, together with all the special sciences, makes
up only a partial manifestation of European culture. Inherent in
the sense of my whole presentation, however, is that this part is the

Translators Introduction /

xxxiii

functioning brain, so to speak, on whose normal function the genuine, healthy European spiritual life depends.22
Philosophers do not think for themselves alone but are, in their
philosophizing, "functionaries for mankind" (Crisis, p. 17). "The
genuine spiritual struggles of European humanity as such take
the form of struggles between the philosophies" (p. 15). With
philosophy thus placed at the head of European culture, a teleological-historical reflection on philosophy becomes a teleological
reflection on the history of the European spirit as such.
Hence the view of many commentators that "Husserl's history of philosophy is at the same time, even primarily, a philosophy of history." 23 "In this historical regress [Husserl] seeks to
grasp the historical development [Gewordenheit] and its teleology: its inner driving force and lawfulness." 24
Husserl does indeed speak in terms of a philosophy of history. What most commentators have failed to appreciate, however, is the possible anomaly this presents in the context of
Husserl's earlier phenomenological program. If a treatise on the
history of philosophy seems out of keeping with Husserl's phenomenological approach, a philosophy of history, at least in the
most familiar sense of that term, seems even more so. By placing
philosophy in the context of the European Geist as a whole with
the function of reflecting its development, and by speaking repeatedly of the "teleology" of that development, Husserl has
invited obvious comparison with Hegel. His use on several occasions of rather typical Hegelian turns of phrase 25 adds to the
impression of a Hegelian influence on Husserl's later years,
something that has not escaped the commentators. Is Husserl's
philosophy of history to be understood after the model of Hegel's? Is Husserl concerned with revealing the "reason in history"
by accounting for the actual cultural events of the past in terms
of an overarching dynamic logic or design which renders these
events necessary? After all, like Hegel, he seems to be spealdng
of the particular events of European history, to which he accords
a special significance in relation to other civilizations, even
though, unlike Hegel, he concentrates on philosophical events
22. Vienna Lecture, Appendix I, pp. 290 f., below.
23. Aron Gurwitsch, "The Last Work of Edmund Husserl," in
Studies in Phenomenology and Psychology (Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1966), p. 401.
24. Hubert Hohl, Lebenswelt und Geschichte (Freiburg and Munich: Alber, 1962), p. 21.
25. See especially Appendix IV, below.

XXXiV

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

alone. Are the philosophies under discussion presented as necessarily abstract and one-sided because they reflect an incomplete
stage of the developing spirit? Does phenomenology represent
the necessary culmination for which the generations of philosophers, unbeknown to themselves, have been steadily preparing
the way?
Such an impression, it must be admitted, is often given by
Husserl's writings of this period. But if this is really Husserl's
intent, then it would appear that his earlier phenomenological
approach has been discarded in favor of something very different indeed. To give a causal explanation of actual particular
events in the past or present which shows why they must occur
in the order in which they do occur is something the earlier
phenomenological method is not designed to do and which it has
no means of grounding. Nor would this seem to be affected by
the fact that the particular events in question are mental or
spiritual events and that the causality involved is final or teleological rather than efficient. Even Husserl's phenomenology of
"internal time" or his "genetic phenomenology" are not explanations of any particular series of mental events. And to move to
the explanation of such a series spanning a plurality of conscious subjects would be to enter the sphere of intersubjective or
objective time. Such an explanation would constitute a science
of fact rather than a science of essence, an account of why
things are actual rather than how they are possible.
Not only would such a "philosophy of history" seem to find
no justification in phenomenological terms; it might even directly contradict the results obtained by that method. Husserl's
earlier account of reason 26 as the relation in consciousness between intention and self-evident fulfillment would be drastically
transformed because the ego would be subjected in its quest to
the order of world history lying outside it. The description of this
objective order would be an objective account of the transcendent being to which consciousness is subject. This is the sense of
Paul Ricoeur's question: "How can a philosophy of the cogito, of
the radical return to the ego as the founder of all being, become
capable of a philosophy of history?" 27 And a fortiori, how can
26. See "Reason and Reality," the fourth section of Ideen, Vol. I.
27. "Husserl and the Sense of History" in Husserl: An Analysis
of His Phenomenology (Evanston: Northwestern University Press,
1967), p. 145. See ibid., pp. 145-50, for an excellent account of "the
opposition of transcendental phenomenology to historical considerations."

Translators Introduction /

xxxv

such a philosophy of history serve as an introduction "in its own
right" to a transcendental phenomenology which bears any resemblance to Husserl's earlier philosophy?
Finally, how could such a "Hegelian" attitude toward history
be compatible even with the "crisis" theme itself? The very idea
of a true crisis of man, with the fate of the human spirit undecided and hanging in the balance, is unthinkable in the context
of the Hegelian "theodicy." The failure of philosophy to fulfill its
task for humanity at any given stage in history must be seen as
only an apparent failure, the crisis as only an apparent crisis,
whose purpose is to prepare for the necessary fulfillment which
is to come. By insisting on the reality of the crisis as a turning
point for man, Husserl is being consistent with the indeterminism he elsewhere attributes to consciousness in its relation to the
world and to its own reason.
The fact is that the text of the Crisis itself does not adequately clear up these puzzles about the treatment of history.
The question of historical genesis is explicitly banned from
phenomenology per se in Husserl's writings up through the
Cartesian Meditations. Yet in the Crisis it suddenly makes its
appearance as something the author obviously thinks is important. At the same time, Husserl is apparently not simply adopting an approach he had earlier ruled out, for he repeatedly
claims a new approach to the phenomenon of history. But what
is this new approach? As Jacques Derrida says: "Though it is
constantly practiced in the Crisis . . . itself, this new access to
history is never made a problem there." 28
Now Husserl was not unaware of the problem, as can be seen
in many of the working manuscripts translated in this volume,
some of which were tentatively meant for inclusion in the Crisis.
But most of his remarks do little more than pose the problem:
historical reflection is necessary; but what kind of reflection is it,
and why and in what sense is it necessary? 29 Perhaps the most
illuminating remarks are found in the text on "the origin of
geometry" (Appendix VI, below). There he refers to his reflections on Galileo and the origins of modern physics as opening up
"depth-problems" which throw a "clarifying light" on "our whole
28. Edmund Husserl, L'Origine de la geometrie, French translation, with an introduction by Jacques Derrida (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1962), Translator's Introduction, p. 8. An English
translation of Husserl's text is given in Appendix VI, below.
29. See Appendix IX, the title and passim. See also the last pages
of Appendix V.

XXXVI

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

undertaking." "For, as will become evident here in connection
with one example, our investigations are historical in an unusual
sense, namely, in virtue of a thematic direction which opens up
depth-problems quite unknown to ordinary history, problems
which, [however,] in their own way, are undoubtedly historical
problems." Thus "our problems and expositions concerning Galilean geometry take on an exemplary significance" (pp. 353 f.,
below). The key word here is "example/* If Galileo, and indeed
all the historical developments described by Husserl, have
merely an "exemplary" function, they can be seen as serving an
inquiry into the essence of history as such rather than one
concerned with facts directly. And indeed, Husserl speaks of
himself as seeking "what is essential to history" (p. 377) and of
"methodically and systematically [bringing] to recognition the a
priori of history" (Appendix V, p. 349). Thus his primary concern is man's general character of being historical, what has
come to be called his "historicity."
Now this notion is clearly compatible with Husserl's earlier
"eidetic" approach to the extent that it concerns not particular
events but an essential trait of consciousness as such: its
character of being laden in its relation to the world with preconceptions derived from its social milieu. A constant theme throughout the Crisis itself, the Vienna lecture, and the supplementary
texts is the engagement of consciousness in the rntersubjective
community, its tacit acceptance of what Husserl calls the Selbstverständlichkeiten (what is "obvious," "taken for granted") of
that community, and its motivation to action and thought in
terms of the norms provided thereby. Husserl's description of
social consciousness in the process of inheriting and handingdown amounts to a general theory of tradition or of the very
eidos of history itself, which becomes an aspect of an eidetic
theory of consciousness.
The concern with historicity might seem to reflect another
aspect of Husserl's interaction with Heidegger, considering the
importance of this concept in the later pages of Sein und Zeit.*0
Actually it represents Husserl's attempt to come to terms with an
adversary of much longer standing, namely, the historicism he
had attacked in "Philosophy as Rigorous Science." Dilthey is the
key figure here rather than Heidegger. In fact, Dilthey is a
commanding figure not only in Husserl's treatment of history
30. Husserl often uses the word Geschichtlichkeit, but only rarely
in a sense that is comparable to Heidegger's use of the term.

Translators Introduction /

xxxvii

but also in his section on psychology in Part III B of the Crisis
and in other writings devoted to psychology in the later years.81
While "Philosophy as Rigorous Science" was concerned with
distinguishing phenomenology sharply from both psychology
and Geisteswissenschaft, many of Husserl's later writings stress
the affinities rather than the differences.
In this case Husserl could be seen as still trying to avoid
the skeptical implications of historicism and Weltanschauungsphilosophie while according considerable legitimacy to their
notion of the socially and historically conditioned character
of consciousness. But this elevation of Husserl's treatment of
history to the eidetic level does not remove all its problems.
The question is whether he can accept what is good in historicism without being forced to accept the bad. This problem
becomes acute in light of Husserl's admission, indeed his insistence, that historicity is a character not only of mores, religion,
etc., but also of scientific thinking itself. In the section on Galileo
(pp. 23 ff.) and in the manuscript on "The Origin of Geometry"
(pp. 353 ff.) Husserl presents science as a historical process involving its own sort of tradition, its inherited way of looking at
the world and its unquestioned assumptions about it derived from
the past. Now philosophy, as Husserl presents it in the Crisis and
the Vienna lecture, is science par excellence, the all-encompassing
science of which all special sciences are branches. If historicity
is really an essential trait of the scientific endeavor, what becomes of the ideal of "philosophy as a rigorous science," i.e., a
science with no unquestioned assumptions, no unexamined tradition?
One implication of Husserl's new awareness of historicity
seems clear, and it constitutes a significant innovation in phenomenological procedure. In Ideen, Volume I, Husserl refers to
what he calls the "philosophical kiroxh"—"not to be confused with
[the kwoxv] that shapes philosophy itself as a method, i.e., the phenomenological reduction"—and disposes of it in one sentence:
31. Those writings, including lectures on psychology from 1925
in which Dilthey is explicitly discussed as the true reformer of psychology, are presented in Phänomenologische Psychologie (see n. 13,
above). Biemel's editor's introduction to that volume (pp. XVIII-XXI)
gives excerpts from a letter in which Husserl denies that he was attacking Dilthey when he attacked historicism in "Philosophy as
Rigorous Science"; but that article leaves little doubt that Husserl considered Dilthey's theory inadequate to overcome the skeptical implications of its treatment of history.

XXXViÜ

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The philosophical kiroxv • • • expressly formulated, consists in this,
that we completely abstain from judgment respecting the doctrinal
content of all pre-existing philosophy, and conduct all our expositions within the framework of this abstention.32
If the notion of historicity, especially as it applies to philosophy
itself, is to be taken seriously, then the "philosophical eirox'h" would
seem to be a much more difficult procedure, something that
requires as much mental effort and explanation as the "phenomenological reduction" per se. Indeed, HusserFs entire treatment
of the facts of Western philosophy could be seen as the attempt to
accomplish what he thought, in the Ideen, had been done in one
sentence.
But the paradox we are left with is this: If the notion of
historicity is really taken seriously, how can such an attempt
ever be successful?

8. The Problem of the Life-World
It is HusserFs reflections on "the origin of philosophy" in the
Vienna lecture that provide the best direct link between the problem of historicity and that of the life-world, the subject of Part
III A of the Crisis. And this problem raises similar difficulties
for HusserFs program. Both the Vienna lecture and "The Origin
of Geometry" complement the Crisis in important ways, and
one wishes they could have been included in the body of the
work itself. In this case HusserFs point is that it is not merely our
various theoretical approaches to the world that derive from a
tradition. The very notion or motive of approaching the world
"theoretically" at all is itself a tradition, one whose origin we
normally associate with the Greeks. In order to understand Galileo's accomplishment, for example, we must understand not only
his inheritance of the "ready-made" science of geometry but also
his inheritance of the very idea of science, the task of finding
nonrelative truths about the world as such, the task the Greeks
defined by distinguishing between "appearance" and "reality,"
between 86£a and einvTrniri. What we associate with the "origin of
philosophy" in Greece must be seen not as the presentation of a
new hypothesis about the nature of the world but as a change in
man's recognition of his relation to his surroundings, a change
in his style of life which first made questions about the nature of
the world "as such" possible. What this amounts to is not a
32. Ideen, Vol. I, pp. 40 f. and note.

Translators Introduction

/

xxxix

change of doctrine, or even of method, but a change of attitude.
Now if the "theoretical attitude" of the Greeks is really new,
it must be distinguished by reference to some prior attitude or
style of life. This Husserl describes as the "natural primordial
attitude," that of "original natural life" (Crisis, p. 281). Husserl
uses the term "natural attitude" here, but he is clearly talking
about something other than the "natural attitude" of Ideen, Volume L There the natural attitude is explicitly described as a
"theoretical" attitude 33—it is the theory of naive realism—while
the attitude described here is precisely not directed essentially
toward theory or episteme, toward the knowledge of the world as
it is in itself. "Natural life," he says,
can be characterized as a life naively, straightforwardly directed
at the world, the world being always in a certain sense consciously
present as a universal horizon without, however, being thematic
as such. What is thematic is whatever one is directed toward. Waking life is always a directedness toward this or that, being directed
toward it as an end or as means, as relevant and irrelevant, toward
the interesting or the indifferent, toward the private or public, toward what is daily required or obtrusively new (Crisis, p. 281).
Husserl uses the term "natural" to refer to what is original
and naive, prior to critical reflection. While the "natural attitude"
of the Ideen is perhaps "natural" to the theoretical orientation,34
what is described here is "natural" to life itself, or rather waking
life, i.e., consciousness. The naive, pretheoretical life is not totally devoid of critical reflection, of course, but its criticism is
always practical, relative to the end in view rather than to the
goal of an absolute, nonrelative truth.
But Husserl means to do more than merely distinguish between the theoretical and pretheoretical attitudes. He tries to
33. Ibid., p. 10.

34. The relation between the natural attitude of the Ideen and
the pretheoretical attitude described here raises interesting problems.
If the former is truly "theoretical" and is actually a sort of "naive
realism," perhaps it is nothing but the popularized version of the "objectivism" which Husserl describes in the Crisis as a peculiarly modern phenomenon. Thus it is not so much natural as historical, and the
"suspension of the natural attitude" which forms the core of the phenomenological reduction in the Ideen now becomes part of the philosophical eiroxh described above. The truly phenomenological reduction
"that shapes philosophy itself as a method" is now no longer the
suspension of any particular historical theoretical attitude but the
bracketing of the theoretical attitude generally, so as to reveal the pretheoretical life and its life-world.

Xl

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

show the relation between them, preparing the way for the theory
of the life-world that emerges in the Crisis. If one attitude is
"natural" to consciousness, how do we characterize the emergence
of the other? Husserl follows Plato and Aristotle in attributing the
origin of philosophy to Oavuäfavj simple wonder at things being
the way they are. But while such wonder constitutes at most a recurring, fleeting pause in the natural course of life, the theoretical
attitude reverses the priorities: the concern with "the way things
are" which was intrusive and nonessential to natural life becomes
the primary concern, while the nontheoretical life, which still
remains, is subordinated to the theoretical life. "In other words,"
Husserl says, "man becomes a nonparticipating spectator, surveyor of the world; he becomes a philosopher" (Appendix I, p.
285, below).
Yet contained in this description of the emergence of the
theoretical attitude, and developed at length in the Crisis, is a
theory of its dependence upon the naive attitude that precedes it.
The naive, pretheoretical life is engaged in the world, the milieu
and horizon of its activity. The world with which the philosopher, the scientist, attempts to deal is this very world-horizon in
which the naive life runs its course. This is the life-world, which
is always "already there," "pregiven," when theory begins its
work. But the world's very pregivenness, the structure through
which it envelops conscious life and provides the ground (Boden)
on which it moves, is always presupposed by any theoretical
activity.
The pretheoretical attitude of naive world-life, and the lifeworld which is its horizon, are thus found to be prior to all
theory, and not merely in the historical sense. In fact, they can
be said to be necessarily prior historically because they are essentially prior at all times, even after the birth and elaborate
development of the European theoretical spirit. Again Husserl's
apparently historical reflections can be seen as issuing in a series
of eidetic claims about conscious life and historicity generally.
The life-world's pretheoretical character, its pregivenness
[Vorgegebenheit] in relation to theory, is the notion stressed by
Husserl in his preoccupation with European science and its
relation to man's crisis. But many other descriptions go to make
up the sections on the life-world in this work, and there is some
question whether all these descriptions operate on the same level
and whether they are all compatible with one another. At time?
Husserl refers to the life-world as the "world of immediate experience," the prepredicative world described in Formale und trän-

Translators Introduction

/

xli

szendentale Logik and Erfahrung und Urteil Yet this world is
also described as a cultural world, richly organized for practical
ends and laden with linguistic tradition. Such a world could be
pretheoretical but could hardly be described as prepredicative.
And of course its very social or intersubjective character places
it, on Husserl's earlier scheme, in a secondary position in regard
to the immediate world of perception. Here it often seems, in
keeping with Husserl's stress on historicity, that the individual's
world of immediate experience, rather than grounding the cultural world, is determined by it.
And what of the life-world of those who live in the tradition
of Western scientific theory? Husserl frequently insists that the
theories of our scientific culture "flow into" the life-world; compounded of such theories, it forms the traditional Boden of both
our theoretical and our extratheoretical life and is thus certainly
pregiven. But in this case it could not be described as pretheoretical. This seems to contrast sharply with repeated descriptions of
the life-world as one whose very essence is to envelop or underlie
all theoretical interpretations of it.
These apparent inconsistencies make the concept of the lifeworld a difficult one to understand. Perhaps they are not insoluble and could be ironed out by a richer and many-leveled
exposition of the notion. But in any case the life-world presents
Husserl's phenomenological program with two overarching
difficulties. One questions one of the most important aspects of
Husserl's over-all theory, and the other threatens to undermine
its claim to scientific rigor. In the first case, if we take seriously
the "pregivenness" of the life-world, upon which the author repeatedly insists, Husserl's earlier idealism seems to be in difficulty. While the theoretically known world may depend on consciousness for its "constitution/' the life-world seems to provide
the given materials with which consciousness deals. If it is in
turn to be dealt with in terms of transcendental constitution, as
Husserl also insists, then it seems to lose precisely what was
described as one of its essential features, its pregivenness. But in
either case the second difficulty arises, namely, that the attempt
to describe the life-world, as Husserl admits, is itself a theoretical activity, indeed, theöria of the highest order, phenomenology.
But if every theoretical activity presupposes the structures of the
life-world, this must also be true of phenomenology, which in
this case cannot be without presuppositions. If phenomenology
is to overcome this difficulty, there must be something special
about it which distinguishes it sharply from all other theoretical

Xlü

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

activity, which Husserl would of course not deny. But then we
must ask how it can be presented as the fulfillment of the sense
implicit in all attempts at theöria since the Greeks, being thus
placed on a continuum with other forms. The presupposition of
the life-world is either essential to theoretical activity or it is not.
Husserl must show how it is that phenomenology can fulfill the
telos of all theory without being caught up in its arche, its
rootedness in the life-world.
Husserl is not unaware of this issue; indeed, it is involved at
every step of his attempt to give an adequate grounding to his
philosophy. In fact, all the problems I have mentioned are seen
and dealt with by Husserl, either in the Crisis itself or in the
supplementary texts of the period. And I do not mean to suggest
that it is impossible, as his critics claim, to resolve those problems in a way that is consistent with his earlier writings. What is
clear, and what contributes to the importance and vitality of this
unfinished work, is that Husserl had caught sight of new horizons at the end of his life; and here we find him passionately
engaged in beginning philosophy again in an effort to understand them.
In preparing this translation I have had the assistance of
many persons. Above all I am indebted to Professor Herbert
Spiegelberg of Washington University for his advice and kind
encouragement at every step of the way. Not only did he read my
entire translation of the Crisis text itself with the utmost care,
offering valuable suggestions on every page; he also provided me
with much material from his ongoing historical researches
which contributed to my understanding of the work and helped
in preparing this introduction. I could not have hoped for a
better aid in this project than one who combines a native understanding of the German language with great erudition in the
subject matter and infinite patience.
I also wish to thank Professor James M. Edie, the associate
editor of this series, for encouraging me to undertake the translation; Professor H. L. van Breda and the staff of the Husserl
Archives at Louvain for permission to consult the extant manuscript of the Crisis and other manuscripts of the period and for
additional materials that have come to me through Professor
Spiegelberg; the New School for Social Research, and Professor
Aron Gurwitsch in particular, for allowing me to examine some
of its copies of the Husserl papers; and the Philosophy Department of Yale University for generously providing for much

Translators Introduction /

xliii

stenographic assistance, primarily in the person of Mrs. Nancy
Kaplan. Valuable suggestions and corrections of English style
have been made by Mr. David Hemmendinger, Mr. and Mrs.
Allan H. Merrill, and my wife, Leslie, who also typed early versions of the translation.
DAVID CARR

Yale University
April, 1969

P A R T I
The Crisis of the
Sciences as Expression
of the Radical Life-Crisis
of European Humanity

§ 1.

Is there, in view of their constant successes,
really a crisis of the sciences?

I EXPECT THAT AT THIS PLACE, dedicated as it is to the
sciences, the very title of these lectures, "The Crisis of European
Sciences and Psychology,"* will incite controversy. A crisis of
our sciences as such: can we seriously speak of it? Is not this
talk, heard so often these days, an exaggeration? After all, the
crisis of a science indicates nothing less than that its genuine
scientific character, the whole manner in which it has set its task
and developed a methodology for it, has become questionable.
This may be true of philosophy, which in our time threatens to
succumb to skepticism, irrationalism, and mysticism. The same
may hold for psychology, insofar as it still makes philosophical
claims rather than merely wanting a place among the positive
sciences. But how could we speak straightforwardly and quite
seriously of a crisis of the sciences in general—that is, also of
the positive sciences, including pure mathematics and the exact
natural sciences, which we can never cease to admire as models
i. This was the original title of the lecture series before the "Cercle philosophique de Prague pour les recherches sur Tentendement
humain." In Philosophia, Vol. I, where Parts I and II of the Crisis were
published, Husserl prefaced the text with the following remarks:
"The work that I am beginning with the present essay, and shall
complete in a series of further articles in Philosophia, makes the attempt, by way of a teleological-historical reflection upon the origins of
our critical scientific and philosophical situation, to establish the
unavoidable necessity of a transcendental-phenomenological reorientation of philosophy. Accordingly, it becomes, in its own right, an
introduction to transcendental phenomenology.
"The work has grown from the development of ideas that made up
the basic content of a series of lectures I gave in November, 1935, in
Prague (half in the hospitable rooms of the German university, half
in those of the Czech university), following a kind invitation by the
'Cercle philosophique de Prague pour les recherches sur Tentendement humain/ "
The German text of this preface is given in Krisis, p. XIV, note
3. (In these footnotes, references to Krisis are to the German edition
edited by Walter Biemel. See Translator's Introduction, note 4.)
[3]

4

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

of rigorous and highly successful scientific discipline? To be
sure, they have proved to be changeable in the total style of their
systematic theory-building and methodology. Only recently they
overcame, in this respect, a threatening paralysis, under the title
of classical physics—threatening, that is, as the supposed classical consummation of the confirmed style of centuries. But does
the victorious struggle against the ideal of classical physics, as
well as the continuing conflict over the appropriate and genuine
form of construction for pure mathematics, mean that previous
physics and mathematics were not yet scientific or that they did
not, even though affected with certain unclarities or blind spots,
obtain convincing insights within their own field of endeavor?
Are these insights not compelling even for us who are freed from
such blind spots? Can we not thus, placing ourselves back into
the attitude of the classical theorists, understand completely
how it gave rise to all the great and forever valid discoveries,
together with the array of technical inventions which so deserved the admiration of earlier generations? Physics, whether
represented by a Newton or a Planck or an Einstein, or whomever else in the future, was always and remains exact science. It
remains such even if, as some think, an absolutely final form of
total theory-construction is never to be expected or striven for.
The situation is clearly similar in regard to another large
group of sciences customarily counted among the positive sciences,2 namely, the concrete humanistic sciences, however it
may stand with their controversial reference back to the ideal of
exactness in the natural sciences—a difficulty, incidentally,
which concerns even the relation of the biophysical ("concrete"
natural-scientific) disciplines to those of the mathematically
exact natural sciences. The scientific rigor of all these disciplines, the convincingness of their theoretical accomplishments,
and their enduringly compelling successes are unquestionable.
Only of psychology must we perhaps be less sure, in spite of its
claim to be the abstract, ultimately explanatory, basic science
of the concrete humanistic disciplines. But generally we let psychology stand, attributing its obvious retardation of method and
accomplishment to a naturally slower development. At any rate,
the contrast between the "scientific'' character of this group of
sciences and the "unscientific" character of philosophy is unmis2. As is usual in German, the term Wissenschaften is applied to
the humanities as well as the natural and social sciences. The term
"science" will be used in this inclusive sense, though I have sometimes
translated Geisteswissenschaften as "humanistic disciplines."

Part 1 / 5
takable. Thus we concede in advance some justification to the
first inner protest against the title of these lectures from scientists who are sure of their method.

§2.

The positivistic reduction of the idea
of science to mere factual science. The
"crisis" of science as the loss of its
meaning for life.

IT MAY BE, HOWEVER, that motives arise from another
direction of inquiry—that of the general lament about the crisis
of our culture and the role here ascribed to the sciences—for
subjecting the scientific character of all sciences to a serious and
quite necessary critique without sacrificing their primary sense
of scientific discipline, so unimpeachable within the legitimacy
of their methodic accomplishments.
The indicated change in the whole direction of inquiry is
what we wish, in fact, to undertake. In doing this we shall soon
become aware that the difficulty which has plagued psychology,
not just in our time but for centuries—its own peculiar "crisis"
—has a central significance both for the appearance of puzzling,
insoluble obscurities in modern, even mathematical sciences
and, in connection with that, for the emergence of a set of
world-enigmas which were unknown to earlier times. They all
lead back to the enigma of subjectivity and are thus inseparably
bound to the enigma of psychological subject matter and
method. This much, then, as a first indication of the deeper
meaning of our project in these lectures.
We make our beginning with a change which set in at the
turn of the past century in the general evaluation of the sciences. It concerns not the scientific character of the sciences but
rather what they, or what science in general, had meant and
could mean for human existence.1 The exclusiveness with which

i. menschliches Dasein. Husserl makes rather extensive use in
this work of the word Dasein as applied specifically to man's existence. This is probably a conscious or unconscious concession to the
popularity of Heidegger's work. His use of the term Existenz will be
noted below ( § 5, note 1).

6

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

the total world-view of modern man, in the second half of the
nineteenth century, let itself be determined by the positive sciences and be blinded by the "prosperity" 2 they produced, meant
an indifferent turning-away from the questions which are decisive for a genuine humanity. 3 Merely fact-minded sciences make
merely fact-minded people. The change in public evaluation was
unavoidable, especially after the war, and we know that it has
gradually become a feeling of hostility among the younger generation. In our vital need—so we are told—this science has nothing to say to us. It excludes in principle precisely the questions
which man, given over in our unhappy times to the most portentous upheavals, finds the most burning: questions of the meaning or meaninglessness of the whole of this human existence. Do
not these questions, universal and necessary for all men, demand universal reflections and answers based on rational
insight? In the final analysis they concern man as a free, selfdetermining being in his behavior toward the human and
extrahuman surrounding world 4 and free in regard to his capacities for rationally shaping himself and his surrounding world.
What does science have to say about reason and unreason or
about us men as subjects of this freedom? The mere science of
bodies clearly has nothing to say; it abstracts from everything
subjective. As for the humanistic sciences, on the other hand, all
the special and general disciplines of which treat of man's
spiritual 5 existence, that is, within the horizon of his historicity:
their rigorous scientific character requires, we are told, that the
scholar carefully exclude all valuative positions, all questions of
the reason or unreason of their human subject matter and its
cultural configurations. Scientific, objective truth is exclusively a
matter of establishing what the world, the physical as well as the
spiritual world, is in fact. But can the world, and human existence in it, truthfully have a meaning if the sciences recognize as
2. Husserl uses the English word.
3. Menschentum. Husserl uses this term and Menschheit i ^ i s tinguishably. The distinction made by Paul Ricoeur (Husserl: An
Analysis of His Phenomenology [Evanston: Northwestern University
Press, 1967], p. 159) seems to me to be unfounded, though I have
generally translated the latter as "mankind." Difficulty arises when
Husserl begins using Menschheit in the plural. See below, § 6, note 1.
4. Umwelt. "Surrounding world" will be used throughout.
5. geistig. The translating difficulties with Geist and its derivatives
are too well known to require comment. I have usually opted for
"spirit" as the least of several evils. Sometimes "mental" is used for
the adjectival form.

Part

I / 7

true only what is objectively established in this fashion, and if
history has nothing more to teach us than that all the shapes of
the spiritual world, all the conditions of life, ideals, norms upon
which man relies, form and dissolve themselves like fleeting
waves, that it always was and ever will be so, that again and
again reason must turn into nonsense, and well-being into
misery? 6 Can we console ourselves with that? Can we live in
this world, where historical occurrence is nothing but an unending concatenation of illusory progress and bitter disappointment?

§ 3.

The founding of the autonomy of European
humanity through the new formulation of
the idea of philosophy in the Renaissance.

IT WAS NOT ALWAYS THE CASE that science understood
its demand for rigorously grounded truth in the sense of that
sort of objectivity which dominates our positive sciences in respect to method and which, having its effect far beyond the
sciences themselves, is the basis for the support and widespread
acceptance of a philosophical and ideological positivism. The
specifically human questions were not always banned from the
realm of science; their intrinsic relationship to all the sciences
—even to those of which man is not the subject matter, such as
the natural sciences—was not left unconsidered. As long as this
had not yet happened, science could claim significance—indeed,
as we know, the major role—in the completely new shaping of
European humanity which began with the Renaissance. Why
science lost this leadership, why there occurred an essential
change, a positivistic restriction of the idea of science—to understand this, according to its deeper motives,1 is of great importance for the purpose of these lectures.

6. A paraphrase from Faust, Part I, line 1976: "Vernunft wird
Unsinn, Wohltat Plage."
1. Husserl's use of Motif, motivieren, and Motivation is so important in this work that I have simply used "motive," "motivate," "motivation," etc., to translate them, even though Husserl's use often
exceeds the bounds of standard English usage of these terms. It is
hoped that Husserl's sense will emerge from the context.

8

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

In the Renaissance, as is well known, European humanity
brings about a revolutionary change. It turns against its previous
way of existing—the medieval—and disowns it, seeking to
shape itself anew in freedom. Its admired model is ancient
humanity. This mode of existence is what it wishes to reproduce
in itself.
What does it hold to be essential to ancient man? After some
hesitation, nothing less than the "philosophical" form of existence: freely giving oneself, one's whole life, its rule through pure
reason or through philosophy. Theoretical philosophy is primary.
A superior survey of the world must be launched, unfettered by
myth and the whole tradition: universal knowledge, absolutely
free from prejudice, of the world and man, ultimately recognizing in the world its inherent reason and teleology and its highest
principle, God. Philosophy as theory frees not only the theorist
but any philosophically educated person. And theoretical autonomy is followed by practical autonomy. According to the guiding
ideal of the Renaissance, ancient man forms himself with insight through free reason. For this renewed "Platonism" this
means not only that man should be changed ethically [but that]
the whole human surrounding world, the political and social
existence of mankind, must be fashioned anew through free
reason, through the insights of a universal philosophy.
In accordance with this ancient model, recognized at first
only by individuals and small groups, a theoretical philosophy
should again be developed which was not to be taken over
blindly from the tradition but must grow out of independent
inquiry and criticism.
It must be emphasized here that the idea of philosophy
handed down from the ancients is not the concept of present-day
schoolbooks, merely comprising a group of disciplines; in the
first centuries of the modern period—even though it changes not
insignificantly as soon as it is taken up—it retains the formal
meaning of the one all-encompassing science, the science of the
totality of what is.2 Sciences in the plural, all those sciences ever
to be established or already under construction, are but dependent branches of the One Philosophy. In a bold, even extravagant,
elevation of the meaning of universality, begun by Descartes,
this new philosophy seeks nothing less than to encompass, in the
2. I have used "what is," "that which is," and sometimes "that
which exists" to translate Seiendes, das Seiende, etc. This particular
locution may be another result of Heidegger's influence.

Part 1 / 9
unity of a theoretical system, all meaningful questions in a
rigorous scientific manner, with an apodictically intelligible
methodology, in an unending but rationally ordered progress of
inquiry. Growing from generation to generation and forever, this
one edifice of definitive, theoretically interrelated truths was to
solve all conceivable problems—problems of fact and of reason,
problems of temporality and eternity.
Thus the positivistic concept of science in our time is, historically speaking, a residual concept. It has dropped all the questions which had been considered under the now narrower, now
broader concepts of metaphysics, including all questions vaguely
termed "ultimate and highest." Examined closely, these and all
the excluded questions have their inseparable unity in the fact
that they contain, whether expressly or as implied in their meaning, the problems of reason—reason in all its particular forms.
Reason is the explicit theme in the disciplines concerning knowledge (i.e., of true and genuine, rational knowledge), of true and
genuine valuation (genuine values as values of reason), of ethical action (truly good acting, acting from practical reason); here
reason is a title for "absolute," "eternal," "supertemporal," "unconditionally" valid ideas and ideals. If man becomes a "metaphysical" or specifically philosophical problem, then he is in
question as a rational being; if his history is in question, it is a
matter of the "meaning" or reason in history. The problem of
God clearly contains the problem of "absolute" reason as the
teleological source of all reason in the world—of the "meaning"
of the world. Obviously even the question of immortality is a
question of reason, as is the question of freedom. All these
"metaphysical" questions, taken broadly—commonly called specifically philosophical questions—surpass the world understood
as the universe of mere facts. They surpass it precisely as being
questions with the idea of reason in mind. And they all claim a
higher dignity than questions of fact, which are subordinated to
them even in the order of inquiry. Positivism, in a manner of
speaking, decapitates philosophy. Even the ancient idea of philosophy, as unified in the indivisible unity of all being, implied a
meaningful order of being and thus of problems of being. Accordingly, metaphysics, the science of the ultimate and highest
questions, was honored as the queen of the sciences; its spirit
decided on the ultimate meaning of all knowledge supplied by
the other sciences. This, too, was taken over by the reviving
philosophy [of the Renaissance]; indeed, it even believed it had
discovered the true, universal method through which such a

10

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

systematic philosophy, culminating in metaphysics, could be
constructed as a serious philosophia perennis.
In light of this we can understand the energy which animated all scientific undertakings, even the merely factual sciences of the lower level; in the eighteenth century (which called
itself the philosophical century) it filled ever widening circles
with enthusiasm for philosophy and for all the special sciences
as its branches. Hence the ardent desire for learning, the zeal for
a philosophical reform of education and of all of humanity's
social and political forms of existence, which makes that muchabused Age of Enlightenment so admirable. We possess an undying testimony to this spirit in the glorious "Hymn to Joy" of
Schiller and Beethoven. It is only with painful feelings that we
can understand this hymn today. A greater contrast with our
present situation is unthinkable.

§ 4.

The failure of the new science after its
initial success; the unclarified motive for
this failure.

Now IF THE NEW HUMANITY, animated and blessed
with such an exalted spirit, did not hold its own, it must have
been because it lost the inspiring belief in its ideal of a universal
philosophy and in the scope of the new method. And such,
indeed, was the case. It turned out that this method could bring
unquestionable successes only in the positive sciences. But it
was otherwise in metaphysics, i.e., in problems considered philosophical in the special sense—though hopeful, apparently
successful beginnings were not lacking even here. Universal
philosophy, in which these problems were related—unclearly—to
the factual sciences, took the form of system-philosophies, which
were impressive but unfortunately were not unified, indeed were
mutually exclusive. If the eighteenth century still held the conviction of proceeding toward unity, of arriving at a critically
unassailable edifice which grew theoretically from generation to
generation, as was undisputedly the case in the universally admired positive sciences—this conviction could not survive for
long. The belief in the ideal of philosophy and method, the
guideline of all movements since the beginning of the modern

Parti

/

ii

era, began to waver; this happened not merely for the external
motive that the contrast became monstrous between the repeated failures of metaphysics and the uninterrupted and ever
increasing wave of theoretical and practical successes in the
positive sciences. This much had its effect on outsiders as well as
scientists, who, in the specialized business of the positive sciences, were fast becoming unphilosophical experts. But even
among those theorists who were filled with the philosophical
spirit, and thus were interested precisely in the highest metaphysical questions, a growing feeling of failure set in—and in
their case because the most profound, yet quite unclarified, motives protested ever more loudly against the deeply rooted assumptions of the reigning ideal. There begins a long period,
extending from Hume and Kant to our own time, of passionate
struggle for a clear, reflective understanding of the true reasons
for this centuries-old failure; it was a struggle, of course, only on
the part of the few called and chosen ones; the mass of others
quickly found and still find formulas with which to console
themselves and their readers.

§ 5.

The ideal of universal philosophy and the
process of its inner dissolution.

T H E NECESSARY CONSEQUENCE was a peculiar change in
the whole way of thinking. Philosophy became a problem for
itself, at first, understandably, in the form of the [problem of
the] possibility of a metaphysics; and, following what we said
earlier, this concerned implicitly the meaning and possibility of
the whole problematics of reason. As for the positive sciences, at
first they were untouchable. Yet the problem of a possible metaphysics also encompassed eo ipso that of the possibility of the
factual sciences, since these had their relational meaning—that
of truths merely for areas of what is—in the indivisible unity of
philosophy. Can reason and that-which-is be separated, where
reason, as knowing, determines what is? This question suffices
to make clear in advance that the whole historical process has a
remarkable form, one which becomes visible only through an
interpretation of its hidden, innermost motivation. Its form is
not that of a smooth development, not that of a continual growth

12

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

of lasting spiritual acquisitions or of a transformation of spiritual configurations—concepts, theories, systems—which can be
explained by means of the accidental historical situations. A
definite ideal of a universal philosophy and its method forms the
beginning; this is, so to speak, the primal establishment of the
philosophical modern age and all its lines of development. But
instead of being able to work itself out in fact, this ideal suffers
an inner dissolution. As against attempts to carry out and newly
fortify the ideal, this dissolution gives rise to revolutionary, more
or less radical innovations. Thus the problem of the genuine
ideal of universal philosophy and its genuine method now actually becomes the innermost driving force of all historical philosophical movements. But this is to say that, ultimately, all
modern sciences drifted into a peculiar, increasingly puzzling
crisis with regard to the meaning of their original founding as
branches of philosophy, a meaning which they continued to bear
within themselves. This is a crisis which does not encroach upon
the theoretical and practical successes of the special sciences;
yet it shakes to the foundations the whole meaning of their
truth. This is not just a matter of a special form of culture—
"science" or "philosophy"—as one among others belonging to
European mankind. For the primal establishment of the new
philosophy is, according to what was said earlier, the primal
establishment of modern European humanity itself—humanity
which seeks to renew itself radically, as against the foregoing
medieval and ancient age, precisely and only through its new
philosophy. Thus the crisis of philosophy implies the crisis of all
modern sciences as members of the philosophical universe: at
first a latent, then a more and more prominent crisis of European humanity itself in respect to the total meaningfulness of its
cultural life, its total "Existenz."*
Skepticism about the possibility of metaphysics, the collapse
of the belief in a universal philosophy as the guide for the new
man, actually represents a collapse of the belief in "reason,"
understood as the ancients opposed episteme to doxa. It is reason
which ultimately gives meaning to everything that is thought to
be, all things, values, and ends—their meaning understood as
their normative relatedness to what, since the beginnings of phii. Husserl uses the term made popular by Jaspers and Heidegger.
This and existentiell are used in a rather loose and popular sense
throughout this work.

Part I /

13

lojcphy, is meant by the word "truth"—truth in itself—and
correlaüvely the term "what is"—6VTW 6V. Along with this falls
the faith in "absolute" reason, through which the world has its
meaning, the faith in the meaning of history, of humanity, the
faith in man's freedom, that is, his capacity to secure rational
meaning for his individual and common human existence.
If man loses this faith, it means nothing less than the loss of
faith "in himself," in his own true being. This true being is not
something he always already has, with the self-evidence of the
"I am," but something he only has and can have in the form of
the struggle for his truth, the struggle to make himself true. True
being is everywhere an ideal goal, a task of episteme or "reason,"
as opposed to being which through doxa is merely thought to be,
unquestioned and "obvious." Basically every person is acquainted
with this difference—one related to his true and genuine humanity—just as truth as a goal or task is not unknown to him
even in everyday life—though here it is merely isolated and
relative. But this prefiguration is surpassed by philosophy: in its
first, original establishment, ancient philosophy, it conceives of
and takes as its task the exalted idea of universal knowledge
concerning the totality of what is. Yet in the very attempt to
fulfill it, the naive obviousness of this task is increasingly transformed—as one feels already in the opposition of the ancient
systems—into unintelligibility. More and more the history of
philosophy, seen from within, takes on the character of a struggle for existence, i.e., a struggle between the philosophy which
lives in the straightforward pursuit of its task—the philosophy
of naive faith in reason—and the skepticism which negates or
repudiates it in empiricist fashion. Unremittingly, skepticism
insists on the validity of the factually experienced [erlebte]
world, that of actual experience [Erfahrung],2 and finds in it
nothing of reason or its ideas. Reason itself and its [object,] "that
which is," become more and more enigmatic—reason as giving,
of itself, meaning to the existing world and, correlatively, the
world as existing through reason—until finally the consciously
recognized world-problem of the deepest essential interrelation
between reason and what is in general, the enigma of all enigmas, has to become the actual theme of inquiry.
2. "Experience" will be used to translate Erfahrung unless otherwise indicated. Erlebnis and erleben, so important in Husserl's earlier
writings, are seldom used in this text.

14

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Our interest is confined here to the philosophical modern
age.3 But this is not merely a fragment of the greater historical
phenomenon we have just described, that is, humanity struggling to understand itself (for this phrase expresses the whole
phenomenon). Rather—as the reestablishment of philosophy
with a new universal task and at the same time with the sense of
a renaissance of ancient philosophy—it is at once a repetition
and a universal transformation of meaning. In this it feels
called to initiate a new age, completely sure of its idea of philosophy and its true method, and also certain of having overcome all
previous naivetes, and thus all skepticism, through the radicalism of its new beginning. But it is the fate of the philosophical
modern age, laden with its own unnoticed naivetes, that it has
first to seek out, in the course of a gradual self-disclosure motivated by new struggles, the definitive idea of philosophy, its true
subject matter and its true method; it has first to discover the
genuine world-enigmas and steer them in the direction of a
solution.
As men of the present, having grown up in this development,
we find ourselves in the greatest danger of drowning in the
skeptical deluge and thereby losing our hold on our own truth.
As we reflect in this plight, we gaze backward into the history of
our present humanity. We can gain self-understanding, and thus
inner support, only by elucidating the unitary meaning which is
inborn in this history from its origin through the newly established task [of the Renaissance], the driving force of all [modern]
philosophical attempts.

§ 6.

The history of modern philosophy as a
struggle for the meaning of man.

I F WE CONSIDER the effect of the development of philosophical ideas on (nonphilosophizing) mankind as a whole, we
must conclude the following:
Only an understanding from within of the movement of

3. This is true of the whole historical part of the Crisis. Part II begins with a study of Galileo. An important supplement to this text is
provided by the Vienna lecture (see Appendix I, pp. 269 ff.), which
treats of the beginnings of philosophy in the Greek context.

Parti

/

15

modern philosophy from Descartes to the present, which is coherent despite all its contradictions, makes possible an understanding of the present itself. The true struggles of our time, the
only ones which are significant, are struggles between humanity
which has already collapsed and humanity which still has roots
but is struggling to keep them or find new ones. The genuine
spiritual struggles of European humanity as such take the form
of struggles between the philosophies, that is, between the skeptical philosophies—or nonphilosophies, which retain the word
but not the task—and the actual and still vital philosophies. But
the vitality of the latter consists in the fact that they are struggling for their own true and genuine meaning and thus for the
meaning of a genuine humanity. To bring latent reason to the
understanding of its own possibilities and thus to bring to insight the possibility of metaphysics as a true possibility—this is
the only way to put metaphysics or universal philosophy on the
strenuous road to realization. It is the only way to decide
whether the telos which was inborn in European humanity at
the birth of Greek philosophy—that of humanity which seeks to
exist, and is only possible, through philosophical reason, moving
endlessly from latent to manifest reason and forever seeking its
own norms through this, its truth and genuine human nature—
whether this telos, then, is merely a factual, historical delusion,
the accidental acquisition of merely one among many other
civilizations * and histories,2 or whether Greek humanity was not
rather the first breakthrough to what is essential to humanity as
such, its entelechy. To be human at all is essentially to be a
human being in a socially and generatively united civilization;
and if man is a rational being (animal rationale), it is only
insofar as his whole civilization is a rational civilization, that is,
one with a latent orientation toward reason or one openly oriented toward the entelechy which has come to itself, become
manifest to itself, and which now of necessity consciously directs human becoming. Philosophy and science would ac1. Menschheiten. "Civilizations" comes closest to what Husserl
means when he uses this term in the plural. Clearly something similar
is implied when he qualifies it in the singular ("European humanity"
as opposed to Chinese, for example, or "present-day humanity"), but
here the use of "humanity" in English does not seem to violate its accepted meaning.
2. Geschichtlichkeiten. Husserl often uses Geschichtlichkeit in
this text in a sense which is almost indistinguishable from Geschichte,
Sometimes it denotes a particular line of historical development. Only
occasionally is "historicity" appropriate.

16

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

cordingly be the historical movement through which universal
reason, "inborn* in humanity as such, is revealed.
This would be the case if the as yet unconcluded movement
[of modern philosophy] had proved to be the entelechy, properly
started on the way to pure realization, or if reason had in fact
become manifest, fully conscious of itself in its own essential
form, i.e., the form of a universal philosophy which grows
through consistent apodictic insight and supplies its own norms
through an apodictic method. Only then could it be decided
whether European humanity bears within itself an absolute idea,
rather than being merely an empirical anthropological type like
"China" or "India"; it could be decided whether the spectacle of
the Europeanization of all other civilizations bears witness to the
rule of an absolute meaning, one which is proper to the sense,
rather than to a historical non-sense, of the world.
We are now certain that the rationalism of the eighteenth
century, the manner in which it sought to secure the necessary
roots of European humanity, was naive. But in giving up this
naive and (if carefully thought through) even absurd rationalism, is it necessary to sacrifice the genuine sense of rationalism?
And what of the serious clarification of that naivete, of that
absurdity? And what of the rationality of that irrationalism
which is so much vaunted and expected of us? Does it not have
to convince us, if we are expected to listen to it, with rational
considerations and reasons? Is its irrationality not finally rather a
narrow-minded and bad rationality, worse than that of the old
rationalism? Is it not rather the rationality of "lazy reason,"
which evades the struggle to clarify the ultimate data [die letzten
Vorgegebenheiten] and the goals and directions which they alone
can rationally and truthfully prescribe?
But enough of this. I have advanced too quickly, in order to
make felt the incomparable significance attaching to the clarification of the deepest motives of this crisis—a crisis which developed very early in modern philosophy and science and which
extends with increasing intensity to our own day.

§ 7.

The project of the investigations of this work.

BUT NOW we ourselves, we philosophers of the present
—what can and must reflections of the sort we have just carried
out mean for us? Did we just want to hear an academic oration?

Part I

/

17

Can we simply return again to the interrupted vocational work
on our "philosophical problems," that is, each to the further
construction of his own philosophy? Can we seriously do that
when it seems certain that our philosophy, like that of all our
fellow philosophers, past and present, will have its fleeting day
of existence only among the flora of ever growing and ever dying
philosophies?
Precisely herein lies our own plight—the plight of all of us
who are not philosophical literati but who, educated by the
genuine philosophers of the great past, live for truth, who only
in this way are and seek to be in our own truth. But as philosophers of the present we have fallen into a painful existential
contradiction. The faith in the possibility of philosophy as a task,
that is, in the possibility of universal knowledge, is something we
cannot let go. We know that we are called to this task as serious
philosophers. And yet, how do we hold onto this belief, which
has meaning only in relation to the single goal which is common
to us all, that is, philosophy as such?
We have also become aware in the most general way
[through the foregoing reflections] that human philosophizing
and its results in the whole of man's existence mean anything
but merely private or otherwise limited cultural goals. In our
philosophizing, then—how can we avoid it?—we are functionaries of mankind. The quite personal responsibility of our own true
being as philosophers, our inner personal vocation, bears within
itself at the same time the responsibility for the true being of
mankind; the latter is, necessarily, being toward a telos and can
only come to realization, if at all, through philosophy—through
us, if we are philosophers in all seriousness. Is there, in this
existential "if," a way out? If not, what should we, who believe,
do in order to be able to believe? We cannot seriously continue
our previous philosophizing; it lets us hope only for philosophies,
never for philosophy.
Our first historical reflection has not only made clear to us
the actual situation of the present and its distress as a sober fact;
it has also reminded us that we as philosophers are heirs of the
past in respect to the goals which the word "philosophy" indicates, in terms of concepts, problems, and methods. What is
clearly necessary (what else could be of help here?) is that we
reflect back, in a thorough historical and critical fashion, in
order to provide, before all decisions, for a radical self-understanding: we must inquire back into what was originally and
always sought in philosophy, what was continually sought by all

18

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

the philosophers and philosophies that have communicated with
one another historically; but this must include a critical consideration of what, in respect to the goals and methods [of philosophy], is ultimate, original, and genuine and which, once seen,
apodictically conquers the will.
How this is really to be carried out, and what this apodicticity could ultimately be which would be decisive for our existential being as philosophers, is at first unclear. In the following I
shall attempt to show the paths that I myself have taken, the
practicability and soundness of which I have tested for decades.
From now on we proceed together, then, armed with the most
skeptical, though of course not prematurely negativistic, frame
of mind. We shall attempt to strike through the crust of the
externalized "historical facts'" of philosophical history, interrogating, exhibiting, and testing their inner meaning and hidden
teleology. Gradually, at first unnoticed but growing more and
more pressing, possibilities for a complete reorientation of view
will make themselves felt, pointing to new dimensions. Questions never before asked will arise; fields of endeavor never
before entered, correlations never before grasped or radically
understood, will show themselves. In the end they will require
that the total sense of philosophy, accepted as "obvious" throughout all its historical forms, be basically and essentially transformed. Together with the new task and its universal apodictic
ground, 1 the practical possibility of a new philosophy will prove
itself: through its execution. But it will also become apparent
that all the philosophy of the past, though unbeknown to itself,
was inwardly oriented toward this new sense of philosophy. In
this regard, the tragic failure of modern psychology in particular, its contradictory historical existence, will be clarified and
made understandable: that is, the fact that it had to claim
(through its historically accumulated meaning) to be the basic
philosophical science, while this produced the obviously paradoxical consequences of the so-called "psychologism."
I seek not to instruct but only to lead, to point out and
describe what I see. I claim no other right than that of speaking
according to my best lights, principally before myself but in the
same manner also before others, as one who has lived in all its
seriousness the fate of a philosophical existence.
i. Boden. "Ground" is always used to translate this word, unless
otherwise indicated (e.g., Grund, in one of its senses). Boden is much
used in connection with the concept of the life-world; it suggests nourishing soil and support, rather than a logical ground or cause.

P A R T
II
Clarification of the Origin
of the Modern Opposition
between Physicalistic Objectivism
and Transcendental Subjectivism

§ 8.

The origin of the new idea of the
universality of science in the reshaping
of mathematics.

T H E FIRST THING we must do is understand the fundamental transformation of the idea, the task of universal philosophy which took place at the beginning of the modern age when
the ancient idea was taken over. From Descartes on, the new
idea governs the total development of philosophical movements
and becomes the inner motive behind all their tensions.
The reshaping begins with prominent special sciences inherited from the ancients: Euclidean geometry and the rest of
Greek mathematics, and then Greek natural science. In our eyes
these are fragments, beginnings of our developed sciences. But
one must not overlook here the immense change of meaning
whereby universal tasks were set, primarily for mathematics (as
geometry and as formal-abstract theory of numbers and magnitudes)—tasks of a style which was new in principle, unknown to
the ancients. Of course the ancients, guided by the Platonic
doctrine of ideas, had already idealized empirical numbers, units
of measurement, empirical figures in space, points, lines, surfaces, bodies; and they had transformed the propositions and
proofs of geometry into ideal-geometrical propositions and
proofs. What is more, with Euclidean geometry had grown up
the highly impressive idea of a systematically coherent deductive
theory, aimed at a most broadly and highly conceived ideal goal,
resting on "axiomatic" fundamental concepts and principles,
proceeding according to apodictic arguments—a totality formed
of pure rationality, a totality whose unconditioned truth is available to insight and which consists exclusively of unconditioned
truths recognized through immediate and mediate insight. But
Euclidean geometry, and ancient mathematics in general, knows
only finite tasks, a finitely closed a priori. Aristotelian syllogistics
belongs here also, as an a priori which takes precedence over all
others. Antiquity goes this far, but never far enough to grasp the
possibility of the infinite task which, for us, is linked as a matter

F21]

22

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

of course with the concept of geometrical space and with the
concept of geometry as the science belonging to it. To ideal space
belongs, for us, a universal, systematically coherent a priori, an
infinite, and yet—in spite of its infinity—self-enclosed, coherent
systematic theory which, proceeding from axiomatic concepts
and propositions, permits the deductively univocal construction
of any conceivable shape which can be drawn in space. What
"exists" ideally in geometric space is univocally decided, in all its
determinations, in advance. Our apodictic thinking, proceeding
stepwise to infinity through concepts, propositions, inferences,
proofs, only "discovers" what is already there, what in itself
already exists in truth.
What is new, unprecedented, is the conceiving of this idea of
a rational infinite totality of being with a rational science systematically mastering it. An infinite world, here a world of idealities, is conceived, not as one whose objects 1 become accessible
to our knowledge singly, imperfectly, and as it were accidentally,
but as one which is attained by a rational, systematically coherent method. In the infinite progression of this method, every
object is ultimately attained according to its full being-in-itself
[nach seinem vollen An-sich-sein],
But this is true not only in respect to ideal space. Even less
could the ancients conceive of a similar but more general idea
(arising from formalizing abstraction), that of a formal mathematics. Not until the dawn of the modern period does the actual
discovery and conquest of the infinite mathematical horizons
begin. The beginnings of algebra, of the mathematics of continua, of analytic geometry arise. From here, thanks to the boldness and originality peculiar to the new humanity, the great
ideal is soon anticipated of a science which, in this new sense, is
rational and all-inclusive, or rather the idea that the infinite
totality of what is in general is intrinsically a rational all-encompassing unity that can be mastered, without anything left over,
by a corresponding universal science. Long before this idea
comes to maturity, it determines further developments as an
unclear or half-clear presentiment. In any case it does not stop
with the new mathematics. Its rationalism soon overtakes natural science and creates for it the completely newjidea of mathei. Objekte. There is no difference in meaning between Objekt and
Gegenstand as Husserl uses these terms and hence no reason for following Dorion Cairns (Cartesian Meditations [The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, i960], translator's note 2, p. 3) in trying to distinguish them
in translation.

Part II /

23

matical natural science—Galilean science, as it was rightly
called for a long time. As soon as the latter begins to move
toward successful realization, the idea of philosophy in general
(as the science of the universe, of all that is) is transformed.

§ 9.

Galileo's mathematization of nature.

the real 1 had a more or less perfect
methexis in the ideal. This afforded ancient geometry possibilities of a primitive application to reality. [But] through Galileos
mathematization of nature, nature itself is idealized under the
guidance of the new mathematics; nature itself becomes—to
express it in a modern way—a mathematical manifold
[Mannigfaltigkeit].
What is the meaning of this mathematization of nature?
How do we reconstruct the train of thought which motivated it?
Prescientifically, in everyday sense-experience, the world is
given in a subjectively relative way. Each of us has his own
appearances; and for each of us they count as [gelten als] that
which actually is. In dealing with one another, we have long
since become aware of this discrepancy between our various
on tic validities.2 But we do not think that, because of this, there
are many worlds. Necessarily, we believe in the world, whose
things only appear to us differently but are the same. [Now] have
we nothing more than the empty, necessary idea of things which
FOR PLATONISM,

1. das Reale. I have used "real" almost exclusively for the German
real and its derivatives. For Husserl this term refers to the spatiotemporal world as conceived by physics (or to the psychic when it is
mistakenly conceived on the model of the physical). The more general Wirklichkeit has usually been translated by the etymologically
correct term "actuality."
2. Seinsgeltungen. Geltung is a very important word for Husserl,
especially in this text. It derives from gelten, which is best translated
"to count (as such and such) (for me)," as in the previous sentence,
or "to be accepted (as, etc.)" or "to have the validity (of such and
such) (for me)." Gültigkeit is the more common substantive but is
less current in Husserl. Thus "validity" ("our validities," etc.) seems
an appropriate shortcut for such more exact but too cumbersome expressions as "that which counts (as)," "those things which we accept
(as)," etc., in this case, "those things that we accept as existing." I
have used "ontic" when Husserl compounds Sein with this and other
words, e.g., Seinssinn, Seinsgeurissheit.

24

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

exist objectively in themselves? Is there not in the appearances
themselves a content we must ascribe to true nature? Surely this
includes everything which pure geometry, and in general the
mathematics of the pure form of space-time, teaches us, with the
self-evidence of absolute, universal validity, about the pure
shapes it can construct idealiter—and here I am describing,
without taking a position, what was "obvious" 3 to Galileo and
motivated his thinking.
We should devote a careful exposition to what was involved
in this "obviousness" for Galileo and to whatever else was taken
for granted by him in order to motivate the idea of a mathematical knowledge of nature in his new sense. We note that he, the
philosopher of nature and "trail-blazer" of physics, was not yet a
physicist in the full present-day sense; that his thinking did not,
like that of our mathematicians and mathematical physicists,
move in the sphere of symbolism, far removed from intuition;
and that we must not attribute to him what, through him and
the further historical development, has become "obvious" to us.

a. "Pure geometry."
Let us first consider "pure geometry," the pure mathematics
of spatiotemporal shapes in general, pregiven 4 to Galileo as an
old tradition, involved in a process of lively forward development
—in other words, in generally the same way we still find it: [on
the one hand] as a science of "pure idealities" which is, on the
other hand, constantly being practically applied to the world of
sense-experience. So familiar to us is the shift between a priori
theory and empirical inquiry in everyday life that we usually
tend not to separate the space and the spatial shapes geometry
talks about from the space and spatial shapes of experiential
actuality, as if they were one and the same. If geometry is
to be understood as the foundation for the meaning
[Sinnesfundament] of exact physics, however, we must be very
precise here as elsewhere. In order to clarify the formation of
Galileo's thought we must accordingly reconstruct not only what
3, Selbstverständlichkeit is another very important word in this
text. It refers to what is unquestioned but not necessarily unquestionable, "Obvious" works when the word is placed in quotation marks, as
it is here. In other cases I have used various forms of the expression
"taken for granted."
4. vorgegeben. Implying "already there," as material to be worked
with. This term is much used later on as applied to the life-world.

Part II /

25

consciously motivated him. It will also be instructive to bring to
light what was implicitly included in his guiding model of mathematics, even though, because of the direction of his interest, it
was kept from his view: as a hidden, presupposed meaning it
naturally had to enter into his physics along with everything
else.
In the intuitively given surrounding world, by abstractively
directing our view to the mere spatiotemporal shapes, we experience "bodies"—not geometrical-ideal bodies but precisely those
bodies that we actually experience, with the content which is the
actual content of experience. No matter how arbitrarily we may
transform these bodies in fantasy, the free and in a certain sense
"ideal" possibilities we thus obtain are anything but geometricalideal possibilities: they are not the geometrically "pure" shapes
which can be drawn in ideal space—"pure" bodies, "pure"
straight lines, "pure" planes, "pure" figures, and the movements
and deformations which occur in the "pure" figures. Thus geometrical space does not mean anything like imaginable space or,
generally speaking, the space of any arbitrarily imaginable (conceivable) world. Fantasy can transform sensible shapes only
into other sensible shapes. Such shapes, in actuality or fantasy,
are thinkable only in gradations: the more or less straight, flat,
circular, etc.
Indeed, the things of the intuitively given surrounding world
fluctuate, in general and in all their properties, in the sphere of
the merely typical: their identity with themselves, their selfsameness and their temporally enduring sameness, are merely
approximate, as is their likeness with other things. This affects
all changes, and their possible samenesses and changes. Something like this is true also of the abstractly conceived shapes of
empirically intuited bodies and their relations. This gradualness
can be characterized as that of greater or less perfection. Practically speaking there is, here as elsewhere, a simple perfection in
the sense that it fully satisfies special practical interests. But
when interests change, what was fully and exactly satisfactory
for one is no longer so for another; and of course there is a limit
to what can be done by means of the normal technical capacity
of perfecting, e.g., the capacity to make the straight straighter
and the flat flatter. But technology progresses along with mankind, and so does the interest in what is technically more refined; and the ideal of prefection is pushed further and further.
Hence we always have an open horizon of conceivable improvement to be further pursued.

26

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Without going more deeply into the essential interconnections
involved here (which has never been done systematically and is
by no means easy), we can understand that, out of the praxis of
perfecting, of freely pressing toward the horizons of conceivable
perfecting "again and again/' limit-shapesß emerge toward
which the particular series of perfectings tend, as. toward invariant and never attainable poles. If we are interested in these
ideal shapes and are consistently engaged in determining them
and in constructing new ones out of those already determined,
we are "geometers." The same is true of the broader sphere
which includes the dimension of time: we are mathematicians
of the "pure" shapes whose universal form is the coidealized
form of space-time. In place of real praxis—that of action or
that of considering empirical possibilities having to do with
actual and really [i.e., physically] possible empirical bodies—we
now have an ideal praxis of "pure thinking" which remains
exclusively within the realm of pure limit-shapes. Through a
method of idealization and construction which historically has
long since been worked out and can be practiced intersubjectively in a community, these limit-shapes have become acquired
tools that can be used habitually and can always be applied to
something new—an infinite and yet self-enclosed world of ideal
objects as a field for study. Like all cultural acquisitions which
arise out of human accomplishment, they remain objectively
knowable and available without requiring that the formulation
of their meaning be repeatedly and explicitly renewed. On the
basis of sensible embodiment, e.g., in speech and writing, they
are simply apperceptively e grasped and dealt with in our operations. Sensible "models" function in a similar way, including
especially the drawings on paper which are constantly used
during work, printed drawings in textbooks for those who learn
by reading, and the like. It is similar to the way in which certain
cultural objects (tongs, drills, etc.) are understood, simply
"seen," with their specifically cultural properties, without any
renewed process of making intuitive what gave such properties
their true meaning. Serving in the methodical praxis of mathematicians, in this form of long-understood acquisitions, are
5. Limesgestalten. Husserl has in mind the mathematic concept
of limit.
6. apperzeptiv. Husserl uses this term in the Leibnizian sense to
denote a self-conscious act (but not necessarily an act of reflection)
under a certain point of view or "attitude" (Einstellung), here the
mathematical.

Part II /

27

significations which are, so to speak, sedimented in their embodiments. And thus they make mental manipulation possible in the
geometrical world of ideal objects. (Geometry represents for us
here the whole mathematics of space-time.)
But in this mathematical praxis we attain what is denied us in
empirical praxis: "exactness"; for there is the possibility of determining the ideal shapes in absolute identity, of recognizing them
as substrates of absolutely identical and methodically, univocally
determinable qualities. This occurs not only in particular cases,
according to an everywhere similar method which, operating on
sensibly intuitable shapes chosen at random, could carry out
idealizations everywhere and originally create, in objective and
univocal determinateness, the pure idealities which correspond
to them. For this, [rather,] certain structures stand out, such as
straight lines, triangles, circles. But it is possible—and this was
the discovery which created geometry—using these elementary
shapes, singled out in advance as universally available, and
according to universal operations which can be carried out with
them, to construct not only more and more shapes which, because of the method which produces them, are intersubjectively
and univocally determined. For in the end the possibility
emerges of producing constructively and univocally, through an
a priori, all-encompassing systematic method, all possibly conceivable ideal shapes.
The geometrical methodology of operatively determining
some and finally all ideal shapes, beginning with basic shapes as
elementary means of determination, points back to the methodology of determination by surveying and measuring in general,
practiced first primitively and then as an art in the prescientific,
intuitively given surrounding world. The undertaking of such
measurement has its obvious origin in the essential form of that
surrounding world. The shapes in it that are sensibly experienceable and sensibly-intuitively conceivable, and the types [of
shapes] that are conceivable at any level of generality, fade into
each other as a continuum. In this continuity they fill out (sensibly intuited) space-time, which is their form. Each shape in this
open infinitude, even if it is given intuitively in reality as a fact,
is still without "objectivity"; it is not thus intersubjectively determinable, and communicable in its determinations, for everyone
—for every other one who does not at the same time factually
see it. This purpose [of procuring objectivity] is obviously served
by the art of measuring. This art involves a great deal, of which
the actual measuring is only the concluding part: on the one

28

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

hand, for the bodily shapes of rivers, mountains, buildings, etc.,
which as a rule lack strictly determining concepts and names, it
must create such concepts—first for their "forms" (in terms of
pictured similarity), and then for their magnitudes and relations
of magnitude, and also for the determinations of position,
through the measurement of distances and angles related to
known places and directions which are presupposed as being
fixed. The art of measuring discovers practically the possibility
of picking out as [standard] measures certain empirical basic
shapes, concretely fixed on empirical rigid bodies which are in
fact generally available; and by means of the relations which
obtain (or can be discovered) between these and other bodyshapes it determines the latter intersubjectively and in practice
univocally—at first within narrow spheres (as in the art of
surveying land), then in new spheres where shape is involved. So it is understandable how, as a consequence of the
awakened striving for "philosophical" knowledge, knowledge
which determines the "true," the objective being of the world, the
empirical art of measuring and its empirically, practically objectivizing function, through a change from the practical to the
theoretical interest, was idealized and thus turned into the
purely geometrical way of thinking. The art of measuring thus
becomes the trail-blazer for the ultimately universal geometry
and its "world" of pure limit-shapes.

b. The basic notion of Galilean physics:
nature as a mathematical universe.
The relatively advanced geometry known to Galileo, already
broadly applied not only to the earth but also in astronomy, was
for him, accordingly, already pregiven by tradition as a guide to
his own thinking, which [then] related empirical matters to the
mathematical ideas of limit. Also available to him as a tradition,
of course—itself partially determined in the meantime by geometry—was the art of measuring, with its intention of ever increasing exactness of measurement and the resulting objective
determination of the shapes themselves. If the empirical and
very limited requirements of technical praxis had originally motivated those of pure geometry, so now, conversely, geometry
had long since become, as "applied" geometry, a means for
technology, a guide in conceiving and carrying out the task of
systematically constructing a methodology of measurement for

Part II /

29

objectively determining shapes in constantly increasing "approximation" to the geometrical ideals, the limit-shapes.
For Galileo, then, this was given—and of course he, quite
understandably, did not feel the need to go into the manner in
which the accomplishment of idealization originally arose (i.e.,
how it grew on the underlying basis of the pregeometrical, sensible world and its practical arts) or to occupy himself with questions about the origins of apodictic, mathematical self-evidence.
There is no need for that in the attitude of the geometer: one
has, after all, studied geometry, one "understands" geometrical
concepts and propositions, is familiar with methods of operation
as ways of dealing with precisely defined structures and of making proper use of figures on paper ("models"). It did not enter
the mind of a Galileo that it would ever become relevant, indeed
of fundamental importance, to geometry, as a branch of a universal knowledge of what is (philosophy), to make geometrical
self-evidence—the "how" of its origin—into a problem. For us,
proceeding beyond Galileo in our historical reflections, it will be
of considerable interest to see how a shift of focus became
urgent and how the "origin" of knowledge had to become a major
problem.
Here we observe the way in which geometry, taken over with
the sort of naivete of a priori self-evidence that keeps every
normal geometrical project in motion, determines Galileo's
thinking and guides it to the idea of physics, which now arises
for the first time in his life-work. Starting with the practically
understandable manner in which geometry, in an old traditional
sphere, aids in bringing the sensible surrounding world to univocal determination, Galileo said to himself: Wherever such a
methodology is developed, there we have also overcome the relativity of subjective interpretations which is, after all, essential to
the empirically intuited world. For in this manner we attain an
identical, nonrelative truth of which everyone who can understand and use this method can convince himself. Here, then, we
recognize something that truly is—though only in the form of a
constantly increasing approximation, beginning with what is
empirically given, to the geometrical ideal shape which functions as a guiding pole.
However, all this pure mathematics has to do with bodies
and the bodily world only through an abstraction, i.e., it has to
do only with abstract shapes within space-time, and with these,
furthermore, as purely "ideal" limit-shapes. Concretely, however,

30

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

the actual and possible empirical shapes are given, at first in
empirical sense-intuition, merely as "forms" of a "matter/* of a
sensible p l e n u m ; 7 thus they are given together with what shows
itself, with its own gradations, in the so-called "specific" sensequalities: * color, sound, smell, and the like.
To the concreteness of sensibly intuitable bodies, of their
being in actual and possible experience, belongs also the fact
that they are restricted by the [type of] changeability that is
essential to them. Their changes of spatiotemporal position, or
of form- or plenum-characteristics, are not accidental and arbitrary but depend on one another in sensibly typical ways. Such
types of relatedness between bodily occurrences are themselves
m o m e n t s of everyday experiencing intuition. They are experienced as that which gives the character of belonging together to
bodies which exist together simultaneously and successively, i.e.,
as that which binds their being [Sein] to their being-such
[Sosein]. Often, though not always, we are clearly confronted in
experience with the connected elements which make u p these
real-causal interdependencies. Where that is not the case, and
* It is a bad legacy of the psychological tradition since Locke's
time that the sense-qualities of actually experienced bodies in the
everyday, intuited surrounding world—colors, touch-qualities, smells,
warmth, heaviness, etc., which are perceived as belonging to the
bodies themselves, as their properties—are always surreptitiously replaced by the [so-called] "sense data" [sinnliche Daten, Empfindungsdaten. Both terms must be translated by the same expression.—
TRANS.]; these are also indiscriminately called sense-qualities and, at
least in general, are not at all differentiated from [properties as such].
Where a difference is felt, instead of thoroughly describing the peculiarities of this difference, which is quite necessary, one holds to the
completely mistaken opinion (and we shall speak of this later) that
"sense-data" constitute what is immediately given. What corresponds
to them in the [perceived] bodies themselves is then ordinarily replaced by their mathematical-physical [properties]—when it is precisely the origin of the meaning [of these properties] that we are
engaged in investigating. Here and everywhere we shall speak—
giving faithful expression to actual experience—of qualities or
properties of the bodies which are actually perceived through these
properties. And when we characterize them as the plena of shapes,
we also take these shapes to be "qualities" of the bodies themselves,
indeed sense-qualities; except that, as ato^a KOIVO. they are not related to sense-organs belonging to them alone, as are the aiadijTä Wta.
7. einer sinnlichen Fülle. I have used the word plenum to translate this strange use of Fülle: the sensible content which "fills in" the
shapes of the world, the "secondary qualities" that are left over after
pure shape has been abstracted. Cf. the related but not identical use
of Fülle in Logische Untersuchung VI, § 21.

Part II /

31

where something happens which is strikingly new, we nevertheless immediately ask why and look around us into the spatiotemporal circumstances. The things of the intuited surrounding
world (always taken as they are intuitively there for us in everyday life and count as actual) have, so to speak, their "habits"—
they behave similarly under typically similar circumstances. If
we take the intuitable world as a whole, in the flowing present in
which it is straightforwardly there for us, it has even as a whole
its "habit," i.e., that of continuing habitually as it has up to now.
Thus our empirically intuited surrounding world has an empirical over-all style. However we may change the world in imagination or represent to ourselves the future course of the world,
unknown to us, in terms of its possibilities, "as it might be," we
necessarily represent it according to the style in which we have,
and up to now have had, the world. We can become explicitly
conscious of this style by reflecting and by freely varying these
possibilities. In this manner we can make into a subject of
investigation the invariant general style which this intuitive
world, in the flow of total experience, persistently maintains.
Precisely in this way we see that, universally, things and their
occurrences do not arbitrarily appear and run their course but
are bound a priori by this style, by the invariant form of the
intuitable world. In other words, through a universal causal
regulation, all that is together in the world has a universal
immediate or mediate way of belonging together; through this
the world is not merely a totality [Allheit] but an all-encompassing unity [Alleinheit], a whole (even though it is infinite). This
is self-evident a priori, no matter how little is actually experienced of the particular causal dependencies, no matter how little
of this is known from past experience or is prefigured about
future experience.
This universal causal style of the intuitively given surrounding world makes possible hypotheses, inductions, predictions
about the unknowns of its present, its past, and its future. In the
life of prescientific knowing we remain, however, in the sphere
of the [merely] approximate, the typical. How would a "philosophy," a scientific knowledge of the world, be possible if we were
to stop at the vague consciousness of totality whereby, amidst
the vicissitudes of temporary interests and themes of knowledge,
we are also conscious of the world as horizon? Of course we can,
as has been shown, also thematically reflect on this world-whole
and grasp its causal style. But we gain thereby only the empty,
general insight that any experienceable occurrence at any place

32

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

and at any time is causally determined. But what about the
specifically determined world-causality, the specifically determined network of causal interdependencies that makes concrete
all real events at all times? Knowing the world in a seriously
scientific way, "philosophically," can have meaning and be possible only if a method can be devised of constructing, systematically and in a sense in advance, the world, the infinitude of
causalities, starting from the meager supply of what can be
established only relatively in direct experience, and of compellingly verifying this construction in spite of the infinitude [of
experience]. How is this thinkable?
But here mathematics offers its services as a teacher. In
respect to spatiotemporal shapes it had already blazed the trail,
in two ways in fact. First: by idealizing the world of bodies in
respect to what has spatiotemporal shape in this world, it created ideal objects. Out of the undetermined universal form of the
life-world, space and time, and the manifold of empirical intuitable shapes that can be imagined into it, it made for the first time
an objective world in the true sense—i.e., an infinite totality of
ideal objects which are de terminable univocally, methodically,
and quite universally for everyone. Thus mathematics showed
for the first time that an infinity of objects that are subjectively
relative and are thought only in a vague, general representation
is, through an a priori all-encompassing method, objectively determinable and can actually be thought as determined in itself
or, more exactly, as an infinity which is determined, decided in
advance, in itself, in respect to all its objects and all their
properties and relations. It can be thought in this way, I said—
i.e., precisely because it is constructible ex datis in its objectively
true being-in-itself, through its method which is not just postulated but is actually created, apodictically generated.8
Second: coming into contact with the art of measuring and
then guiding it, mathematics—thereby descending again from
the world of idealities to the empirically intuited world—showed
that one can universally obtain objectively true knowledge of a
completely new sort about the things of the intuitively actual
world, in respect to that aspect of them (which all things necessarily share) which alone interests the mathematics of shapes,
i.e., a [type of] knowledge related in an approximating fashion to
its own idealities. All the things of the empirically intuitable
world have, in accord with the world-style, a bodily character,
8. Reading erzeugte for erzeugende.

Part II /

33

are res extensae, are experienced in changeable collocations
which, taken as a whole, have their total collocation; in these,
particular bodies have their relative positions, etc. By means of
pure mathematics and the practical art of measuring, one can
produce, for everything in the world of bodies which is extended
in this way, a completely new kind of inductive prediction;
namely, one can "calculate" with compelling necessity, on the
basis of given and measured events involving shapes, events
which are unknown and were never accessible to direct measurement. Thus ideal geometry, estranged from the world, becomes
"applied" geometry and thus becomes in a certain respect a
general method of knowing the real.
But does not this manner of objectifying, to be practiced on
one abstract aspect of the world, give rise to the following
thought and the conjectural question:
Must not something similar he possible for the concrete
world as such? If one is already firmly convinced, moreover, like
Galileo—thanks to the Renaissance's return to ancient philosophy—of the possibility of philosophy as episteme achieving an
objective science of the world, and if it had just been revealed
that pure mathematics, applied to nature, consummately fulfills
the postulate of episteme in its sphere of shapes: did not this
also have to suggest to Galileo the idea of a nature which is
constructively determinable in the same manner in all its other
aspects?
But is this not possible only if the method of measuring
through approximations and constructive determinations extends to all real properties and real-causal relations of the
intuitable world, to everything which is ever experienceable in
particular experiences? But how can we do justice to this general
anticipation, [and] how can it become a practicable method for a
concrete knowledge of nature?
The difficulty here lies in the fact that the material plena—
the "specific*' sense-qualities—which concretely fill out the spatiotemporal shape-aspects of the world of bodies cannot, in their
own gradations, be directly treated as are the shapes themselves.
Nevertheless, these qualities, and everything that makes up the
concreteness of the sensibly intuited world, must count as manifestations of an "objective" world. Or rather, they must continue
to count as such; because (such is the way of thinking which
motivates the idea of the new physics) the certainty, binding us
all, of one and the same world, the actuality which exists in
itself, runs uninterrupted through all changes of subjective in-

34

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

terpretation; all aspects of experiencing intuition manifest something of this world. It becomes attainable for our objective
knowledge when those aspects which, like sensible qualities, are
abstracted away in the pure mathematics of spatiotemporal
form and its possible particular shapes, and are not themselves
directly mathematizable, nevertheless become mathematizable
indirectly.

c. The problem of the mathematizability of the
"plena."
The question now is what an indirect
mathematization
would mean.
Let us first consider the more profound reason why a direct
mathematization (or an analogue of approximative construction), in respect to the specifically sensible qualities of bodies, is
impossible in principle.
These qualities, too, appear in gradations, and in a certain
way measurement applies to them as to all gradations—we "assess" the "magnitude" of coldness and warmth, of roughness and
smoothness, of brightness and darkness, etc. But there is no
exact measurement here, no growth of exactness or of the methods of measurement. Today, when we speak of measuring, of
units of measure, methods of measure, or simply of magnitudes,
we mean as a rule those that are already related to idealities and
are "exact"; so it is difficult for us to carry out the abstract
isolation of the plena which is so necessary here: i.e., to consider
—experimentally, so to speak—the world of bodies exclusively
according to the "aspect" of those properties belonging under the
title "specific sense-qualities," through a universal abstraction
opposed to the one which gives rise to the universal world of
shapes.
What constitutes "exactness"? Obviously, nothing other than
what we exposed above: empirical measuring with increasing
precision, but under the guidance of a world of idealities, or
rather a world of certain particular ideal structures that can be
correlated with given scales of measurement—such a world having been objectified in advance through idealization and construction. And now we can make the contrast clear in a word.
We have not two but only one universal form of the world: not
two but only one geometry, i.e., one of shapes, without having a
second for plena. The bodies of the empirical-intuitable world
are such, in accord with the world-structure belonging to this

Part II /

35

world-a priori, that each body has—abstractly speaking—an
extension of its own and that all these extensions are yet shapes
of the one total infinite extension of the world. As world, as the
universal configuration of all bodies, it thus has a total form
encompassing all forms, and this form is idealizable in the way
analyzed and can be mastered through construction.
To be sure, it is also part of the world-structure that all
bodies have their specific sense-qualities. But the qualitative configurations based purely on these are not analogues of spatiotemporal shapes, are not incorporated into a world-form peculiar to
them. The limit-shapes of these qualities are not idealizable in
an analogous sense; the measurement ("assessing") of them
cannot be related to corresponding idealities in a constructible
world already objectivized into idealities. Accordingly, the concept of "approximation" has no meaning here analogous to that
within the mathematizable sphere of shapes—the meaning of an
objectifying achievement.
Now with regard to the "indirect" mathematization of that
aspect of the world which in itself has no mathematizable
world-form: such mathematization is thinkable only in the sense
that the specifically sensible qualities ("plena") that can be experienced in the intuited bodies are closely related in a quite peculiar and regulated way with the shapes that belong essentially to
them. If we ask what is predetermined a priori by the universal
world-form with its universal causality—i.e., if we consult the
invariant, general style of being to which the intuited world, in
its unending change, adheres: on the one hand the form of
space-time is predetermined, and everything that belongs to it a
priori (before idealization), as encompassing all bodies in respect
to shape. It is further predetermined that, in each case of real
bodies, factual shapes require factual plena and vice versa; that,
accordingly, this sort of general causality obtains, binding together aspects of a concretum which are only abstractly, not
really, separable. What is more, considering everything as a
totality, there obtains a universal concrete causality. This causality contains the necessary anticipation that the intuitively given
world can be intuited as a world only as an endlessly open
horizon and hence that the infinite manifold of particular causalities can be anticipated only in the manner of a horizon and is
not itself given. We are thus in any case, and a priori, certain,
not only that the total shape-aspect of the world of bodies generally requires a plenum-aspect pervading all the shapes, but also
that every change, whether it involves aspects of shape or of

36

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

plenum, occurs according to certain causalities, immediate or
mediate, which make it necessary. This is the extent, as we said,
of the undetermined general anticipation a priori.
This is not to say, however, that the total behavior of plenumqualities, in respect to what changes and what does not change,
follows causal rules in such a way that this whole abstract aspect
of the world is dependent in a consistent way on what occurs
causally in the shape-aspect of the world. In other words, we do
not have an a priori insight that every change of the specific
qualities of intuited bodies which is experienced or is conceivable in actual or possible experience refers causally to occurrences in the abstract shape-stratum of the world, i.e., that every
such change has, so to speak, a counterpart in the realm of
shapes in such a way that any total change in the whole plenum
has its causal counterpart in the sphere of shapes.
Put in this way, this conception might appear almost fantastic. Still, let us take into account the long-familiar idealization
of the form of space-time with all its shapes, carried out (in large
areas, though by no means completely) for thousands of years,
together with the changes and configurations of change relating
to this form. The idealization of the art of measurement was, as
we know, included in this, not merely as the art of measuring
things but as the art of empirical causal constructions (in which
deductive inferences helped, of course, as they do in every art).
The theoretical attitude and the thematization of pure idealities
and constructions led to pure geometry (under which we include
here all pure mathematics of shapes); and later—in the reversal
which has by now become understandable—applied geometry
(as we remember) arose, as the practical art of measuring,
guided by idealities and the constructions ideally carried out with
them: i.e., an objectification of the concrete causal world of bodies within corresponding limited spheres. As soon as we bring all
this to mind, the conception proposed above, which at first appeared almost eccentric, loses its strangeness for us and takes on
—thanks to our earlier scientific schooling—the character of
something taken for granted. What we experienced, in prescientific life, as colors, tones, warmth, and weight belonging to the
things themselves and experienced causally as a body's radiation
of warmth which makes adjacent bodies warm, and the like,
indicates in terms of physics, of course, tone-vibrations,
warmth-vibrations, i.e., pure events in the world of shapes. This
universal indication is taken for granted today as unquestionable. But if we go back to Galileo, as the creator of the conception

Part II /

37

which first made physics possible: what came to be taken for
granted only through his deed could not be taken for granted by
him. He took for granted only pure mathematics and the old
familiar way of applying it.
If we adhere strictly to Galileo's motivation, considering the
way in which it in fact laid the foundation for the new idea of
physics, we must make clear to ourselves the strangeness of his
basic conception in the situation of his time; and we must ask,
accordingly, how he could hit upon this conception, namely, that
everything which manifests itself as real through the specific
sense-qualities must have its mathematical index in events belonging to the sphere of shapes—which is, of course, already
thought of as idealized—and that there must arise from this the
possibility of an indirect mathematization, in the fullest sense,
i.e., it must be possible (though indirectly and through a particular inductive method) to construct ex datis, and thus to determine objectively, all events in the sphere of the plena. The whole
of infinite nature, taken as a concrete universe of causality—for
this was inherent in that strange conception—became [the object of] a 'peculiarly applied mathematics.
But first let us answer the question of what, in the pregiven
world which was already mathematized in the old limited way,
could have incited Galileo's basic conception.

d. The motivation of Galileo's conception of nature.
Now there were some occasions, rather scanty, to be sure, of
manifold but disconnected experiences, within the totality of
prescientific experience, which suggested something like the indirect quantifiability of certain sense-qualities and thus a certain
possibility of characterizing them by means of magnitudes and
units of measurement. Even the ancient Pythagoreans had been
stimulated by observing the functional dependency of the pitch
of a tone on the length of a string set vibrating. Many other
causal relations of a similar sort were, of course, generally
known. Basically, all concrete intuitively given events in the
familiar surrounding world contain easily discernible dependencies of plenum-occurrences on those of the sphere of shapes. But
there was generally no motive for taking an analytical attitude
toward the nexus of causal dependencies. In their vague indeterminateness they could not incite interest. It was different in
cases where they took on the character of a determinateness
which made them susceptible to determining induction; and this

38

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

leads us back to the measurement of plena. Not everything
which concomitantly and visibly changed on the side of shapes
was measurable through the old, developed measuring methods.
Also, it was a long way from such experiences to the universal
idea and hypothesis that all specifically qualitative events function as indices for precisely corresponding constellations and
occurrences of shape. But it was not so far for the men of the
Renaissance, who were inclined to bold generalizations everywhere and in whom such exuberant hypotheses immediately
found a receptive audience. Mathematics as a realm of genuine
objective knowledge (and technology under its direction)—that
was, for Galileo and even before him, the focal point of "modern"
man's guiding interest in a philosophical knowledge of the world
and a rational praxis. There must be measuring methods for
everything encompassed by geometry, the mathematics of
shapes with its a priori ideality. And the whole concrete world
must turn out to be a mathematizable and objective world if we
pursue those individual experiences and actually measure everything about them which, according to the presuppositions,
comes under applied geometry—that is, if we work out the
appropriate method of measuring. If we do that, the sphere of
the specifically qualitative occurrences must also be mathematized indirectly.
In interpreting what was taken for granted by Galileo, i.e.,
the universal applicability of pure mathematics, the following
must be noted: In every application to intuitively given nature,
pure mathematics must give up its abstraction from the intuited
plenum, whereas it leaves intact what is idealized in the shapes
(spatial shapes, duration, motion, deformation). But in one respect this involves the performance of coidealization of the
sensible plena belonging to the shapes. The extensive and intensive infinity which was substructed through the idealization of
the sensible appearances, going beyond all possibilities of actual
intuition—separability and divisibility in infinitum, and thus
everything belonging to the mathematical continuum—implies a
substruction of infinities for the pZenww-qualities which themselves are eo ipso cosubstructed. The whole concrete world of
bodies is thus charged with infinities not only of shape but also
of plena. But it must also be noted once again that the "indirect
mathematizability" which is essential for the genuine Galilean
conception of physics is not yet given thereby.
As far as we have come, only a general idea has been attained or, more precisely, a general hypothesis: that a universal

Part II /

39

inductivity 9 obtains in the intuitively given world, one which
announces itself in everyday experiences but whose infinity is
hidden.
To be sure, this inductivity was not understood by Galileo as
a hypothesis. For him a physics was immediately almost as
certain as the previous pure and applied mathematics. The hypothesis also immediately traced out for him [its own] path of
realization (a realization whose success necessarily has the
sense, in our eyes, of a verification of the hypothesis—this by no
means obvious hypothesis related to the [previously] inaccessible
factual structure of the concrete world).10 What mattered for
him first, then, was the attainment of farther reaching and ever
more perfectible methods in order actually to develop, beyond
those which had thus far in fact been developed, all the methods
of measuring that were prefigured as ideal possibilities in the
ideality of pure mathematics—to measure, for example, speeds
and accelerations. But the pure mathematics of shapes itself
required a richer development as constructive quantification—
which later on led to analytic geometry. The task now was to
grasp systematically, by means of these aids, the universal causality—or, as we may say, the peculiar universal inductivity—of
the world of experience which was presupposed in the hypothesis. It is to be noted, [then,] that along with the new, concrete,
and thus two-sided idealization of the world, which was involved
in Galileo's hypothesis, the obviousness of a universal, exact
causality was also given—a universal causality which is not, of
course, first arrived at by induction through the demonstration
of individual causalities but which precedes and guides all induction of particular causalities—this being true even of the
concretely general, intuitable causality which makes up the concretely intuitable form of the world as opposed to particular,
individual causalities experienceable in the surrounding world of
life [Lebensumtuelt].
This universal idealized causality encompasses all factual
shapes and plena in their idealized infinity. Obviously, if the
measurements made in the sphere of shapes are to bring about
truly objective determinations, occurrences on the side of the
plena must also be dealt with methodically. All the fully concrete
9. eine universale Induktivität, i.e., that all types of occurrence
in the world are such as to be susceptible to induction.
10. "Our eyes," referring to us who are engaged in this historical
reflection. Once we have removed our own prejudices, we see this as a
strange hypothesis rather than simply taking it for granted.

40

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

things and occurrences—or rather the ways in which factual
plena and shapes stand in causal relation—must be included in
the method. The application of mathematics to plena of shape
given in reality makes, because of the concreteness involved,
causal presuppositions which must be brought to determinateness. How one should actually proceed here, how one should
regulate methodically the work to be accomplished completely
within the intuitively given world; how the factually accessible
bodily data, in a world charged through hypothetical idealization
with as yet unknown infinities, are to be brought to causal
determination in both aspects; n how the hidden infinities in
these data are to be progressively disclosed according to methods
of measuring; how, through growing approximations in the
sphere of shapes, more and more perfect indices of the qualitative plena of the idealized bodies become apparent; how the
bodies themselves, as concrete, become determinable through
approximations in respect to all their ideally possible occurrences: all this was a matter of discovery in physics. In other
words, it was a matter for the passionate praxis of inquiry and
not a matter for prior systematic reflection upon what is possible
in principle, upon the essential presuppositions of a mathematical objectification which is supposed to be able to determine the
concretely real within the network of universal concrete causality.
Discovery is really a mixture of instinct and method. One
must, of course, ask whether such a mixture is in the strict sense
philosophy or science—whether it can be knowledge of the
world in the ultimate sense, the only sense that could serve us as
a [genuine] understanding of the world and ourselves. As a
discoverer, Galileo went directly to the task of realizing his idea,
of developing methods for measuring the nearest data of common experience; and actual experience demonstrated (through a
method which was of course not radically clarified) what his
hypothetical anticipation in each case demanded; he actually
found causal interrelations which could be mathematically expressed in "formulae/*
The actual process of measuring, applied to the intuited data
of experience, results, to be sure, only in empirical, inexact
magnitudes and their quantities. But the art of measuring is, in
itself, at the same time the art of pushing the exactness of
measuring further and further in the direction of growing
i i . I.e., the aspect of shape and the aspect of plenum.

Part II /

41

perfection. It is an art not [only] in the sense of a finished
method for completing something; it is at the same time a
method for improving [this very] method, again and again,
through the invention of ever newer technical means, e.g., instruments. Through the relatedness of the world, as field of
application, to pure mathematics, this "again and again" acquires the mathematical sense of the in infinitum, and thus
every measurement acquires the sense of an approximation to
an unattainable but ideally identical pole, namely, one of the
definite mathematical idealities or, rather, one of the numerical
constructions belonging to them.
From the beginning, the whole method has a general sense,
even though one always has to do with what is individual and
factual. From the very beginning, for example, one is not concerned with the free fall of this body; the individual fact is rather
an example, embedded from the start in the concrete totality of
types belonging to intuitively given nature, in its empirically
familiar invariance; and this is naturally carried over into the
Galilean attitude of idealizing and mathematizing. The indirect
mathematization of the world, which proceeds as a methodical
objectification of the intuitively given world, gives rise to general
numerical formulae which, once they are formed, can serve by
way of application to accomplish the factual objectification of
the particular cases to be subsumed under them. The formulae
obviously express general causal interrelations, "laws of nature,"
laws of real dependencies in the form of the "functional" dependencies of numbers. Thus their true meaning does not lie in the
pure interrelations between numbers (as if they were formulae
in the purely arithmetical sense); it lies in what the Galilean
idea of a universal physics, with its (as we have seen) highly
complicated meaning-content, gave as a task to scientific humanity and in what the process of its fulfillment through successful physics results in—a process of developing particular
methods, and mathematical formulae and "theories" shaped by
them.

e. The verificational character of natural science's
fundamental hypothesis.
According to our remark [above, pp. 38-39]—which of
course goes beyond the problem of merely clarifying Galileo's
motivation and the resulting idea and task of physics—the Galilean idea is a hypothesis, and a very remarkable one at that; and

42

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

the actual natural science throughout the centuries of its verification is a correspondingly remarkable sort of verification. It is
remarkable because the hypothesis, in spite of the verification,
continues to be and is always a hypothesis; its verification (the
only kind conceivable for it) is an endless course of verifications.
It is the peculiar essence of natural science, it is a priori its way
of being, to be unendingly hypothetical and unendingly verified.
Here verification is not, as it is in all practical life, merely
susceptible to possible error, occasionally requiring corrections.
There is in every phase of the development of natural science a
perfectly correct method and theory from which "error" is
thought to be eliminated. Newton, the ideal of exact natural
scientists, says "hypotheses non jingo'9 and implied in this is the
idea that he does not miscalculate and make errors of method. In
the total idea of an exact science, just as in all the individual
concepts, propositions, and methods which express an "exactness" (i.e., an ideality)—and in the total idea of physics as well
as the idea of pure mathematics—is embedded the in infinitum,
the permanent form of that peculiar inductivity which first
brought geometry into the historical world. In the unending
progression of correct theories, individual theories characterized
as "the natural science of a particular time," we have a progression of hypotheses which are in every respect hypotheses and
verifications. In the progression there is growing perfection, and
for all of natural science taken as a totality this means that it
comes more and more to itself, to its "ultimate" true being, that
it gives us a better and better "representation" ["Vorstellung"] of
what "true nature" is. But true nature does not lie in the infinite
in the same way that a pure straight line does; even as an
infinitely distant "pole" it is an infinity of theories and is thinkable only as verification; thus it is related to an infinite historical
process of approximation. This may well be a topic for philosophical thinking, but it points to questions which cannot yet be
grasped here and do not belong to the sphere of questions we
must now deal with. For our concern is to achieve complete
clarity on the idea and task of a physics which in its Galilean
form originally determined modern philosophy, [to understand
it] as it appeared in Galileo's own motivation, and to understand
what flowed into this motivation from what was traditionally
taken for granted and thus remained an unclarified presupposition of meaning, as well as what was later added as seemingly
obvious, but which changed its actual meaning.

Part II /

43

In this connection it is not necessary to go more concretely
into the first beginnings of the enactment of Galileo's physics
and of the development of its method.

f. The problem of the sense of natural-scientific
"formulae."
But one thing more is important for our clarification. The
decisive accomplishment which, in accord with the total sense of
natural-scientific method, makes determined, systematically ordered predictions immediately possible, going beyond the sphere
of immediately experiencing intuitions and the possible experiential knowledge of the prescientific life-world, is the establishment of the actual correlation among the mathematical
idealities which are hypothetically substructed in advance in
undetermined generality but still have to be demonstrated in
their determined form. If one still has a vivid awareness of this
correlation in its original meaning, then a mere thematic focus
of attention on this meaning is sufficient in order to grasp the
ascending orders of intuitions (now conceived as approximations) indicated by the functionally coordinated quantities (or,
more briefly, by the formulae); or rather one can, following
these indications, bring the ascending orders of intuitions vividly
to mind. The same is true of the coordination itself, which is
expressed in functional forms; and thus one can outline the
empirical regularities of the practical life-world which are to be
expected. In other words, if one has the formulae, one already
possesses, in advance, the practically desired prediction of what
is to be expected with empirical certainty in the intuitively given
world of concretely actual life, in which mathematics is merely a
special [form of] praxis. Mathematization, then, with its realized
formulae, is the achievement which is decisive for life.
Through these considerations we see that, from the very first
conceiving and carrying-out of the method, the passionate interest of the natural scientist was concentrated on this decisive,
fundamental aspect of the above-mentioned total accomplishment, i.e., on the formulae, and on the technical 12 method ("natural-scientific method," "method of the true knowledge of
nature") of acquiring them and grounding them logically and
compellingly for all. And it is also understandable that some
12. kunstmässig, i.e., having the character of a technique.

44

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

were misled into taking these formulae and their formula-meaning for the true being of nature itself.
This "formula-meaning" requires a more detailed clarification, now, in respect to the superficialization of meaning 13 which
unavoidably accompanies the technical development and practice of method. Measurements give rise to numbers on a scale,
and, in general propositions about functional dependencies of
measured quantities, they result not in determined numbers but
in numbers in general, stated in general propositions which
express laws of functional dependencies. Here we must take into
account the enormous effect—in some respects a blessing, in
others portentous—of the algebraic terms and ways of thinking
that have been widespread in the modern period since Vieta
(thus since even before Galileo's time). Initially this means an
immense extension of the possibilities of the arithmetic thinking
that was handed down in old, primitive forms. It becomes free,
systematic, a priori thinking, completely liberated from all intuited actuality, about numbers, numerical relations, numerical
laws. This thinking is soon applied in all its extensions—in
geometry, in the whole pure mathematics of spatiotemporal
shapes—and the latter are thoroughly formalized algebraically
for methodical purposes. Thus an "arithmetization of geometry"
develops, an arithmetization of the whole realm of pure shapes
(ideal straight lines, circles, triangles, motions, relations of position, etc.). They are conceived in their ideal exactness as measurable; the units of measurement, themselves ideal, simply have
the meaning of spatiotemporal magnitudes.
This arithmetization of geometry leads almost automatically,
in a certain way, to the emptying of its meaning. The actually
spatiotemporal idealities, as they are presented firsthand
[originär] in geometrical thinking under the common rubric of
"pure intuitions," are transformed, so to speak, into pure numerical configurations, into algebraic structures. In algebraic calculation, one lets the geometric signification recede into the
background as a matter of course, indeed drops it altogether; one
calculates, remembering only at the end that the numbers signify magnitudes. Of course one does not calculate "mechanically," as in ordinary numerical calculation; one thinks, one
13. Sinnesveräusserlichung, literally, "externalization of meaning" but with the sense of rendering it superficial, separating it from
its origin.

Part II /

45

invents, one may make great discoveries—but they have acquired, unnoticed, a displaced, "symbolic" meaning. Later this
becomes a fully conscious methodical displacement, a methodical transition from geometry, for example, to pure analysis,
treated as a science in its own right; and the results achieved in
this science can be applied to geometry. We must go into this
briefly in more detail.
TTiis process of method-transformation, carried out instinctively, unreflectively in the praxis of theorizing, begins in the
Galilean age and leads, in an incessant forward movement, to
the highest stage of, and at the same time a surmounting of,
"arithmetization"; it leads to a completely universal "formalization." This happens precisely through an improvement and a
broadening of the algebraic theory of numbers and magnitudes
into a universal and thus purely formal "analysis," "theory of
manifolds," "logistic"—words to be understood sometimes in a
narrower, sometimes a broader, sense, since until now, unfortunately, there has been no unambiguous characterization of what
in fact, and in a way practically understandable in mathematical
work, a coherent mathematical field is. Leibniz, though far
ahead of his time, first caught sight of the universal, self-enclosed idea of a highest form of algebraic thinking, a mathesis
universalis, as he called it, and recognized it as a task for the
future. Only in our time has it even come close to a systematic
development. In its full and complete sense it is nothing other
than a formal logic carried out universally (or rather to be
carried out in infinitum in its own essential totality), a science
of the forms of meaning of the "something-in-generar which can
be constructed in pure thought and in empty, formal generality.
On this basis it is a science of the "manifolds" which, according
to formal elementary laws of the noncontradiction of these constructions, can be built up systematically as in themselves free
of contradiction. At the highest level it is a science of the universe of the "manifolds" as such which can be conceived in this
way. "Manifolds" are thus in themselves compossible totalities of
objects in general, which are thought of as distinct only in
empty, formal generality and are conceived of as defined by
determinate modalities of the something-in-general. Among
these totalities the so-called "definite" manifolds are distinctive.
Their definition through a "complete axiomatic system" gives a
special sort of totality in all deductive determinations to the
formal substrate-objects contained in them. With this sort of

46

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

totality, one can say, the formal-logical idea of a "world-in-general" is constructed. The "theory of manifolds" in the special
sense is the universal science of the definite manifolds.*

g. The emptying of the meaning of mathematical
natural science through "technization."14
This most extreme extension of the already formal but limited algebraic arithmetic has immediate applications, in its a
priori fashion, within all "concretely material" [konkret sachhaltige] pure mathematics, the mathematics of "pure intuitions,"
and can thus be applied to mathematized nature; but it also has
applications to itself, to previous algebraic arithmetic, and,
again by extension, to all its own formal manifolds; in this way
it is related back to itself. Like arithmetic itself, in technically
developing its methodology it is drawn into a process of transformation, through which it becomes a sort of technique; that is, it
becomes a mere art of achieving, through a calculating technique according to technical rules, results the genuine sense of
whose truth can be attained only by concretely intuitive thinking
actually directed at the subject matter itself. But now [only]
those modes of thought, those types of clarity which are indispensable for a technique as such, are in action. One operates
with letters and with signs for connections and relations ( + , x ,
=, etc.), according to rules of the game for arranging them
together in a way essentially not different, in fact, from a game
of cards or chess. Here the original thinking that genuinely gives
meaning to this technical process and truth to the correct results
(even the "formal truth" peculiar to the formal mathesis universalis) is excluded; in this manner it is also excluded in the
formal theory of manifolds itself, as in the previous algebraic
theory of number and magnitude and in all the other applications of what has been obtained by a technique, without recourse
to the genuine scientific meaning; this includes also the application to geometry, the pure mathematics of spatiotemporal
shapes.
* For a more exact exposition of the concept of the definite manifold see Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie (1913), PP- 135 ff. [i.e., § 72]. On the idea of the
mathesis universalis see Logische Untersuchungen, Vol. I (1900; rev.
ed., 1913) [§§ 60, 69, 70], and, above all, Formale und transzendentale Logik (Halle: Niemeyer, 1930) [§ 23].
14. Technisierung, i.e., the process of becoming a technique.

Part II /

47

Actually the process whereby material mathematics is put
into formal-logical form, where expanded formal logic is made
self-sufficient as pure analysis or theory of manifolds, is perfectly legitimate, indeed necessary; the same is true of the technization which from time to time completely loses itself in merely
technical thinking. But all this can and must be a method which
is understood and practiced in a fully conscious way. It can be
this, however, only if care is taken to avoid dangerous shifts of
meaning by keeping always immediately in mind the original
bestowal of meaning [Sinngebung] upon the method, through
which it has the sense of achieving knowledge about the world.
Even more, it must be freed of the character of an unquestioned
tradition which, from the first invention of the new idea and
method, allowed elements of obscurity to flow into its meaning.
Naturally, as we have shown, the formulae—those obtained
and those to be obtained—count most for the predominant interest of the discovering scientist of nature. The further physics has
gone in the actual mathematization of the intuited, pregiven
nature of our surrounding world, the more mathematical-scientific propositions it has at its disposal, the further the instrument
destined for it, the mathesis universalis, has been developed: the
greater is the range of its possible deductive conclusions concerning new facts of quantified nature and thus the range of
indicated corresponding verifications to be made. The latter devolve upon the experimental physicist, as does the whole work of
ascending from the intuitively given surrounding world, and the
experiments and measurements performed in it, to the ideal
poles. Mathematical physicists, on the other hand, settled in the
arithmetized sphere of space-time, or at the same time in the
formalized mathesis universalis, treat the mathematical-physical
formulae brought to them as special pure structures of the formal mathesis, naturally keeping invariant the constants which
appear in them as elements of functional laws of factual nature.
Taking into account all the "natural laws already proved or in
operation as working hypotheses," and on the basis of the whole
available formal system of laws belonging to this mathesis, they
draw the logical consequences whose results are to be taken over
by the experimenters. But they also accomplish the formation
of the available logical possibilities for new hypotheses, which of
course must be compatible with the totality of those accepted as
valid at the time. In this way, they see to the preparation of those
forms of hypotheses which now are the only ones admissible, as
hypothetical possibilities for the interpretation of causal regular-

48

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

ities to be empirically discovered through observation and experiment in terms of the ideal poles pertaining to them, i.e., in
terms of exact laws. But experimental physicists, too, are constantly oriented in their work toward ideal poles, toward
numerical magnitudes and general formulae. Thus in all naturalscientific inquiry these are at the center of interest. All the
discoveries of the old as well as the new physics are discoveries
in the formula-world which is coordinated, so to speak, with
nature.
The formula-meaning of this world lies in idealities, while
the whole toilsome work of achieving them takes on the character of a mere pathway to the goal. And here one must take into
consideration the influence of the above-characterized technization of formal-mathematical thinking: the transformation of its
experiencing, discovering way of thinking, which forms, perhaps
with great genius, constructive theories, into a way of thinking
with transformed concepts, "symbolic" concepts. In this process
purely geometrical thinking is also depleted, as is its application
to factual nature in natural-scientific thinking. In addition, a
technization takes over all other methods belonging to natural
science. It is not only that these methods are later "mechanized."
To the essence of all method belongs the tendency to superficialize itself in accord with technization. Thus natural science undergoes a many-sided transformation and covering-over of its
meaning. The whole cooperative interplay between experimental
and mathematical physics, the enormous intellectual work constantly accomplished here, takes place within a transformed
horizon of meaning. One is, of course, to some degree conscious
of the difference between rkxvn and science. But the reflection
back upon the actual meaning which was to be obtained for
nature through the technical method stops too soon. It no longer
reaches far enough even to lead back to the position of the idea
of mathematizing nature sketched out in Galileo's creative meditation, to what was wanted from this mathematization by Galileo
and his successors and what gave meaning to their endeavors to
carry it out.

h. The life-world as the forgotten meaning-fundament
of natural science.
But now we must note something of the highest importance
that occurred even as early as Galileo: the surreptitious substitution of the mathematically substructed world of idealities for the

Part II /

49

only real world, the one that is actually given through perception, that is ever experienced and experienceable—our everyday life-world. This substitution was promptly passed on to his
successors, the physicists of all the succeeding centuries.
Galileo was himself an heir in respect to pure geometry. The
inherited geometry, the inherited manner of "intuitive" conceptualizing, proving, constructing, was no longer original
geometry: in this sort of "intuitiveness" it was already empty of
meaning. Even ancient geometry was, in its way, rexvv, removed
from the sources of truly immediate intuition and originally
intuitive thinking, sources from which the so-called geometrical
intuition, i.e., that which operates with idealities, has at first
derived its meaning. The geometry of idealities was preceded by
the practical art of surveying, which knew nothing of idealities.
Yet such a pregeometrical achievement was a meaning-fundament for geometry, a fundament for the great invention of
idealization; the latter encompassed the invention of the ideal
world of geometry, or rather the methodology of the objectifying
determination of idealities through the constructions which create "mathematical existence/' It was a fateful omission that
Galileo did not inquire back into the original meaning-giving
achievement which, as idealization practiced on the original
ground of all theoretical and practical life—the immediately
intuited world (and here especially the empirically intuited
world of bodies)—resulted in the geometrical ideal constructions. He did not reflect closely on all this: on how the free,
imaginative variation of this world and its shapes results only in
possible empirically intuitable shapes and not in exact shapes;
on what sort of motivation and what new achievement was
required for genuinely geometric idealization. For in the case of
inherited geometrical method, these functions were no longer
being vitally practiced; much less were they reflectively brought
to theoretical consciousness as methods which realize the meaning of exactness from the inside. Thus it could appear that
geometry, with its own immediately evident a priori "intuition"
and the thinking which operates with it, produces a self-sufficient, absolute truth which, as such—"obviously"—could be applied without further ado. That this obviousness was an illusion
—as we have pointed out above in general terms, thinking for
ourselves in the course of our exposition of Galileo's thoughts—
that even the meaning of the application of geometry has
complicated sources: this remained hidden for Galileo and the
ensuing period. Immediately with Galileo, then, begins the sur-

50

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

reptitious substitution of idealized nature for prescientifically
intuited nature.
Thus all the occasional (even "philosophical") reflections
which go from technical [scientific] work back to its true meaning always stop at idealized nature; they do not carry out the
reflection radically, going back to the ultimate purpose which the
new science, together with the geometry which is inseparable
from it, growing out of prescientific life and its surrounding
world, was from the beginning supposed to serve: a purpose
which necessarily lay in this prescientific life and was related to
its life-world. Man (including the natural scientist), living in
this world, could put all his practical and theoretical questions
only to it—could refer in his theories only to it, in its open,
endless horizons of things unknown. All knowledge of laws
could be knowledge only of predictions, grasped as lawful, about
occurrences of actual or possible experiential phenomena, predictions which axe indicated when experience is broadened
through observations and experiments penetrating systematically into unknown horizons, and which are verified in the manner of inductions. To be sure, everyday induction grew into
induction according to scientific method, but that changes nothing of the essential meaning of the pregiven world as the horizon
of all meaningful induction. It is this world that we find to be the
world of all known and unknown realities. To it, the world of
actually experiencing intuition, belongs the form of space-time
together with all the bodily [körperlich] shapes incorporated in
it; it is in this world that we ourselves live, in accord with our
bodily [leiblich],15 personal way of being. But here we find nothing of geometrical idealities, no geometrical space or mathematical time with all their shapes.
This is an important remark, even though it is so trivial. Yet
this triviality has been buried precisely by exact science, indeed
-since the days of ancient geometry, through that substitution of
a methodically idealized achievement for what is given immediately as actuality presupposed in all idealization, given by a [type
of] verification which is, in its own way, unsurpassable. This
actually intuited, actually experienced and experienceable world,
15. Körper means a body in the geometric or physical sense; Leib
refers to the body of a person or animal. Where possible, I have translated Leib as "living body" (Leib is related to Leben); Körper is
translated as "body" or sometimes "physical body." In cases where
adjectival or adverbial forms are used, as here, it is sometimes necessary to insert the German words or refer to them in a footnote.

Part II /

51

in which practically our whole life takes place, remains unchanged as what it is, in its own essential structure and its own
concrete causal style, whatever we may do with or without techniques. Thus it is also not changed by the fact that we invent a
particular technique, the geometrical and Galilean technique
which is called physics. What do we actually accomplish through
this technique? Nothing but prediction extended to infinity. All
life rests upon prediction or, as we can say, upon induction. In
the most primitive way, even the ontic certainty 16 of any
straightforward experience is inductive. Things "seen" are always more than what we "really and actually" see of them.
Seeing, perceiving, is essentially having-something-itself
[Selbsthaben] and at the same time having-something-in-advance [Vor-haben], meaning-something-in-advance [Vor-meinen].
All praxis, with its projects [Vorhaben], involves inductions; it
is just that ordinary inductive knowledge (predictions), even if
expressly formulated and "verified," is "artless" compared to the
artful "methodical" inductions which can be carried to infinity
through the method of Galilean physics with its great productivity.
In geometrical and natural-scientific mathematization, in the
open infinity of possible experiences, we measure the life-world
—the world constantly given to us as actual in our concrete
world-life—for a well-fitting garb of ideas, that of the so-called
objectively scientific truths. That is, through a method which (as
we hope) can be really carried out in every particular and constantly verified, we first construct numerical indices for the
actual and possible sensible plena of the concretely intuited
shapes of the life-world, and in this way we obtain possibilities of
predicting concrete occurrences in the intuitively given lifeworld, occurrences which are not yet or no longer actually given.
And this kind of prediction infinitely surpasses the accomplishment of everyday prediction.
Mathematics and mathematical science, as a garb of ideas,
or the garb of symbols of the symbolic mathematical theories,
encompasses everything which, for scientists and the educated
generally, represents the life-world, dresses it up as "objectively
actual and true" nature. It is through the garb of ideas that we
take for true being what is actually a method—a method which
is designed for the purpose of progressively improving, in infinitum, through "scientific" predictions, those rough predictions
16. Seinsgetvissheit, i.e., certainty of being.

52

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

which are the only ones originally possible within the sphere of
what is actually experienced and experienceable In the lifeworld. It is because of the disguise of ideas that the true meaning of the method, the formulae, the "theories," remained
unintelligible and, in the naive formation of the method, was
never understood.
Thus no one was ever made conscious of the radical problem
of how this sort of naivete actually became possible and is still
possible as a living historical fact; how a method which is actually directed toward a goal, the systematic solution of an endless
scientific task, and which continually achieves undoubted results, could ever grow up and be able to function usefully
through the centuries when no one possessed a real understanding of the actual meaning and the internal necessity of such
accomplishments. What was lacking, and what is still lacking, is
the actual self-evidence through which he who knows and accomplishes can give himself an account, not only of what he
does that is new and what he works with, but also of the implications of meaning which are closed off through sedimentation or
traditionalization, i.e., of the constant presuppositions of his
[own] constructions, concepts, propositions, theories. Are science and its method not like a machine, reliable in accomplishing obviously very useful things, a machine everyone can learn
to operate correctly without in the least understanding the inner
possibility and necessity of this sort of accomplishment? But
was geometry, was science, capable of being designed in advance, like a machine, without 17 an understanding which was,
in a similar sense, complete—scientific? Does 18 this not lead to
a regressus in infinitum?
Finally, does this problem not link up with the problem of
the instincts in the usual sense? Is it not the problem of hidden
reason, which knows itself as reason only when it has become
manifest?
Galileo, the discoverer—or, in order to do justice to his precursors, the consummating discoverer—of physics, or physical
nature, is at once a discovering and a concealing genius
[entdeckender und verdeckender Genius]. He discovers mathematical nature, the methodical idea, he blazes the trail for the
infinite number of physical discoveries and discoverers. By contrast to the universal causality of the intuitively given world (as
17. Reading ohne ein for aus einem.
18. Reading führt for führte.

Part II /

53

its invariant form), he discovers what has since been called
simply the law of causality, the "a priori form" of the "true"
(idealized and mathematized) world, the "law of exact lawfulness" according to which every occurrence in "nature"—
idealized nature—must come under exact laws. All this is discovery-concealment, and to the present day we accept it as
straightforward truth. In principle nothing is changed by the
supposedly philosophically revolutionary critique of the "classical
law of causality" made by recent atomic physics. For in spite of
all that is new, what is essential in principle, it seems to me,
remains: namely, nature, which is in itself mathematical; it is
given in formulae, and it can be interpreted only in terms of the
formulae.
I am of course quite serious in placing and continuing to
place Galileo at the top of the list of the greatest discoverers of
modern times. Naturally I also admire quite seriously the great
discoverers of classical and postclassical physics and their
intellectual accomplishment, which, far from being merely mechanical, was in fact astounding in the highest sense. This accomplishment is not at all disparaged by the above elucidation of it
as rkxvri or by the critique in terms of principle, which shows
that the true meaning of these theories—the meaning which is
genuine in terms of their origins—remained and had to remain
hidden from the physicists, including the great and the greatest.
It is not a question of a meaning which has been slipped in
through metaphysical mystification or speculation; it is, rather,
with the most compelling self-evidence, the true, the only real
meaning of these theories, as opposed to the meaning of being a
method, which has its own comprehensibility in operating with
the formulae and their practical application, technique.
How what we have said up to now is still one-sided, and what
horizons of problems, leading into new dimensions, have not
been dealt with adequately—horizons which can be opened up
only through a reflection on this life-world and man as its subject—can be shown only when we are much further advanced in
the elucidation of the historical development according to its
innermost moving forces.

i. Portentous misunderstandings resulting from lack
of clarity about the meaning of mathematization.
With Galileo's mathematizing reinterpretation of nature,
false consequences established themselves even beyond the

54

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

realm of nature which were so intimately connected with this
reinterpretation that they could dominate all further developments of views about the world up to the present day. I mean
Galileo's famous doctrine of the merely subjective character of
the specific sense-qualities,19 which soon afterward was consistently formulated by Hobbes as the doctrine of the subjectivity of
all concrete phenomena of sensibly intuitive nature and world in
general. The phenomena are only in the subjects; they are there
only as causal results of events taking place in true nature,
which events exist only with mathematical properties. If the
intuited world of our life is merely subjective, then all the truths
of pre- and extrascientific life which have to do with its factual
being are deprived of value. They have meaning only insofar as
they, while themselves false, vaguely indicate an in-itself which
lies behind this world of possible experience and is transcendent
in respect to it.
In connection with this we arrive at a further consequence of
the new formation of meaning, a self-interpretation of the physicists which grows out of this new formation of meaning as
"obvious" and which was dominant until recently:
Nature is, in its "true being-in-itself," mathematical. The
pure mathematics of space-time procures knowledge, with apodictic self-evidence, of a set of laws of this "in-itself" which are
unconditionally, universally valid. This knowledge is immediate
in the case of the axiomatic elementary laws of the a priori
constructions and comes to be through infinite mediations in the
case of the other laws. In respect to the space-time form of
nature we possess the "innate" faculty (as it is later called) of
knowing with definiteness true being-in-itself as mathematically
ideal being (before all actual experience). Thus implicitly the
space-time form is itself innate in us.
It is otherwise with the more concrete universal lawfulness
of nature, although it, too, is mathematical through and
through. It is inductively accessible a posteriori through factual
experiential data. In a supposedly fully intelligible way, the a
priori mathematics of spatiotemporal shapes is sharply distinguished from natural science which, though it applies pure
mathematics, is inductive. Or, one can also say: the purely
19. This doctrine is perhaps best expressed in Galileo's II Saggiatore (The Assayer). See Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo, trans.
Stillman Drake (Garden City: Doubleday Anchor Original, 1957),
pp. 274 ff.

Part II /

55

mathematic relationship of ground and consequent is sharply
distinguished from that of real ground and real consequent, i.e.,
that of natural causality.
And yet an uneasy feeling of obscurity gradually asserts
itself concerning the relation between the mathematics of nature
and the mathematics of spatiotemporal form, which, after all,
belongs to the former, between the latter "innate" and the former
"non-innate" mathematics. Compared to the absolute knowledge
we ascribe to God the creator, one says to oneself, our knowledge
in pure mathematics has only one lack, i.e., that, while it is
always absolutely self-evident, it requires a systematic process in
order to bring to realization as knowing, i.e., as explicit mathematics, all the shapes that "exist" in the spatiotemporal form. In
respect to what exists concretely in nature, by contrast, we have
no a priori self-evidence at all. The whole mathematics of nature, beyond the spatiotemporal form, we must arrive at inductively through facts of experience. But is nature in itself not
thoroughly mathematical? Must it not also be thought of as a
coherent mathematical system? Must it not be capable of being
represented in a coherent mathematics of nature, precisely the
one that natural science is always merely seeking, as encompassed by a system of laws which is "axiomatic" in respect of
form, the axioms of which are always only hypotheses and thus
never really attainable? Why is it, actually, that they are not?
Why is it that we have no prospect of discovering nature's own
axiomatic system as one whose axioms are apodictically self-evident? Is it because the appropriate innate faculty is lacking in us
in a factual sense?
In the superficialized, more or less already technized meaning-pattern of physics and its methods, the difference in question
was "completely clear": it is the difference between "pure" (a
priori) and "applied" mathematics, between "mathematical existence" (in the sense of pure mathematics) and the existence of
the mathematically formed real (i.e., that of which mathematical shape is a component in the sense of a real property). And
yet even such an outstanding genius as Leibniz struggled for a
long time with the problem of grasping the correct meaning of
the two kinds of existence—i.e., universally the existence of the
spatiotemporal form as purely geometrical and the existence of
universal mathematical nature with its factual, real form—and
of understanding the correct relation of each to the other.
The significance of these obscurities for the Kantian problem
of synthetic judgments a priori and for his division between the

56

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

synthetic judgments of pure mathematics and those of natural
science will concern us in detail later [see below, § 25].
The obscurity was strengthened and transformed still later
with the development and constant methodical application of
pure formal mathematics. "Space" and the purely formally defined "Euclidean manifold" were confused; the true axiom (i.e.,
in the old, customary sense of the term), as an ideal norm with
unconditional validity, grasped with self-evidence in pure geometric thought or in arithmetical, purely logical thought, was
confused with the inauthentic [uneigentliches] "axiom"—a word
which in the theory of manifolds signifies not judgments ("propositions") but forms of propositions as components of the definition of a "manifold" to be constructed formally without internal
contradiction.

k. Fundamental significance of the problem of the origin of mathematical natural science.20
Like all the obscurities exhibited earlier, [the preceding] follow from the transformation of a formation of meaning which
was originally vital, or rather of the originally vital consciousness of the task which gives rise to the methods, each with its
special sense. The developed method, the progressive fulfillment of the task, is, as method, an art (rkxvo) which is handed
down; but its true meaning is not necessarily handed down with
it. And it is precisely for this reason that a theoretical task and
achievement like that of a natural science (or any science of the
world)—which can master the infinity of its subject matter only
through infinities of method 21 and can master the latter infinities only by means of a technical thought and activity which are
empty of meaning—can only be and remain meaningful in a
4rue and original sense if the scientist has developed in himself
the ability to inquire back into the original meaning of all his
meaning-structures and methods, i.e., into the historical meaning of their primal establishment, and especially into the meaning of all the inherited meanings taken over unnoticed in this
primal establishment, as well as those taken over later on.
But the mathematician, the natural scientist, at best a highly
brilliant technician of the method—to which he owes the discov20. There is no section "j." In German one does not distinguish
between "i" and "j" in an enumeration of this sort.
21. I.e., the infinite pursuit of its method.

Part II /

57

eries which are his only aim—is normally not at all able to carry
out such reflections. In his actual sphere of inquiry and discovery he does not know at all that everything these reflections must
clarify is even in need of clarification, and this for the sake of
that interest which is decisive for a philosophy or a science, i.e.,
the interest in true knowledge of the world itself, nature itself.
And this is precisely what has been lost through a science which
is given as a tradition and which has become a rkxvy, insofar as
this interest played a determining role at all in its primal establishment. Every attempt to lead the scientist to such reflections,
if it comes from a nonmathematical, nonscientific circle of
scholars, is rejected as "metaphysical." The professional who has
dedicated his life to these sciences must, after all—it seems so
obvious to him—know best what he is attempting and accomplishing in his work. The philosophical needs ("philosophicomathematical," "philosophicoscientific" needs), aroused even
in these scholars by historical motives to be elucidated later, are
satisfied by themselves in a way that is sufficient for them—but
of course in such a way that the whole dimension which must be
inquired into is not seen at all and thus not at all dealt with.

1. Characterization of the method of our exposition.
In conclusion let us say a word about the method we have
followed in the very intricate considerations of this section, in
the service of our over-all aim. The historical reflections we
embarked upon, in order to arrive at the self-understanding
which is so necessary in our philosophical situation, demanded
clarity concerning the origin of the modern spirit and, together
with that—because of the significance, which cannot be overestimated, of mathematics and mathematical natural science—
clarity concerning the origin of these sciences. That is to say:
clarity concerning the original motivation and movement of
thought which led to the conceiving of their idea of nature, and
from there to the movement of its realization in the actual
development of natural science itself. With Galileo the idea in
question appears for the first time, so to speak, as full-blown;
thus I have linked all our considerations to his name, in a certain
sense simplifying and idealizing the matter; a more exact historical analysis would have to take account of how much of his
thought he owed to his "predecessors/' (I shall continue, incidentally, and for good reasons, in a similar fashion.) In respect to
the situation as he found it and to the way in which it had to

58

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

motivate him and did motivate him according to his known
pronouncements, much can be established immediately, so that
we understand the beginning of the whole bestowal of meaning
[Sinngebung] upon natural science. But in this very process we
come upon the shifts and concealments of meaning of later and
most recent times. For we ourselves, who are carrying out these
reflections (and, as I may assume, my readers), stand under the
spell of these times. Being caught up in them, we at first have no
inkling of these shifts of meaning—we who all think we know so
well what mathematics and natural science "are* and do. For
who today has not learned this in school? But the first elucidation of the original meaning of the new natural science and of its
novel methodical style makes felt something of the later shifts in
meaning. And clearly they influence, or at least make more
difficult, the analysis of the motivation [of science].
Thus we find ourselves in a sort of circle. The understanding
of the beginnings is to be gained fully only by starting with
science as given in its present-day form, looking back at its
development. But in the absence of an understanding of the beginnings the development is mute as a development of meaning.
Thus we have no other choice than to proceed forward and backward in a zigzag pattern; the one must help the other in an interplay. Relative clarification on one side brings some elucidation on
the other, which in turn casts light back on the former. In this
sort of historical consideration and historical critique, then, which
begins with Galileo (and immediately afterward with Descartes)
and must follow the temporal order, we nevertheless have constantly to make historical leaps which are thus not digressions
but necessities. They are necessities if we take upon ourselves,
as we have said, the task of self-reflection which grows out of the
"breakdown" situation of our time, with its "breakdown of science" itself. Of first importance for this task, however, is the
reflection on the original meaning of the new sciences, above all
that of the exact science of nature; for the latter was and still is,
through all its shifts of meaning and misplaced self-interpretations, of decisive significance (in a manner to be pursued
further) for the becoming and being of the modern positive sciences, of modern philosophy, and indeed of the spirit of modern
European humanity in general.
The following also belongs to the method: readers, especially
those in the natural sciences, may have become irritated by the
fact—it may appear to them almost as dilettantism—that no use
has been made of the natural-scientific way of speaking. It has

Part II /

59

been consciously avoided. In the kind of thinking which everywhere tries to bring "original intuition" to the fore—that is, the
pre- and extrascientific life-world, which contains within itself
all actual life, including the scientific life of thought, and nourishes it as the source of all technical constructions of meaning—
in this kind of thinking one of the greatest difficulties is that one
must choose the naive way of speaking of [everyday] life, but
must also use it in a way which is appropriate for rendering evident what is shown.
It will gradually become clearer, and finally be completely
clear, that the proper return to the naivete of life—but in a
reflection which rises above this naivete—is the only possible
way to overcome the philosophical naivete which lies in the
[supposedly] "scientific" character of traditional objectivistic philosophy. This will open the gates to the new dimension we have
repeatedly referred to in advance.
We must add here that, properly understood, all our expositions are supposed to aid understanding only from the relative
[perspective of our] position and that our expression of doubts,
given in the criticisms [of Galileo, etc.] (doubts which we, living
in the present, now carrying out our reflections, do not conceal),
has the methodical function of preparing ideas and methods
which will gradually take shape in us as results of our reflection
and will serve to liberate us.22 All reflection undertaken for "existential" reasons is naturally critical But we shall not fail to bring
to a reflective form of knowledge, later on, the basic meaning of
the course of our reflections and our particular kind of critique.
22. This is a rough guess at a passage which is so obscure that I
suspect something is missing (cf. Translator's Introduction, p. xviii).
The sense, borne out by subsequent sentences, seems to be: In the
historical but also critical reflections of this section, it is not yet clear
(at least to the reader) from what point of view we are criticizing
Galileo, Descartes, et al., or where it will all lead. This point of view or
attitude will gradually emerge as the phenomenological attitude
which takes the form (in this case a historical-critical form) of liberating us from our prejudices.

60

§ 10.

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The origin of dualism in the prevailing
exemplary role of natural science.
The rationality of the world more geometrico.

ONE BASIC ELEMENT of the novel conception of nature
has yet to be brought to the fore. In his view of the world from
the perspective of geometry, the perspective of what appears to
the senses and is mathematizable, Galileo abstracts from the
subjects as persons leading a personal life; he abstracts from all
that is in any way spiritual, from all cultural properties which
are attached to things in human praxis. The result of this abstraction is the things purely as bodies; but these are taken as
concrete real objects, the totality of which makes up a world
which becomes the subject matter of research. One can truly say
that the idea of nature as a really self-enclosed world of bodies
first emerges with Galileo. A consequence of this, along with
mathematization, which was too quickly taken for granted, is
[the idea of] a self-enclosed natural causality in which every
occurrence is determined unequivocally and in advance. Clearly
the way is thus prepared for dualism, which appears immediately afterward in Descartes.
In general we must realize that the conception of the new
idea of "nature" as an encapsuled, really and theoretically selfenclosed world of bodies soon brings about a complete transformation of the idea of the world in general. The world splits, so to
speak, into two worlds: nature and the psychic world, although
the latter, because of the way in which it is related to nature,
does not achieve the status of an independent world. The ancients had individual investigations and theories about bodies,
but not a closed world of bodies as subject matter of a universal
science of nature. They also had investigations of the human
and the animal soul, but they could not have a psychology in the
modern sense, a psychology which, because it had universal
nature and a science of nature before it [as a model], could strive
for a corresponding universality, i.e., within a similarly selfenclosed field of its own.
The splitting of the world and the transformation of its
meaning were the understandable consequences of the exemplary role of natural-scientific method—or, to put it another

Part II

/

61

way, natural-scientific rationality—a role which was indeed
quite unavoidable at the beginning of the modern period. Implied in the mathematization of nature, as the idea and the task
were understood, was the supposition of the coexistence of the
infinite totality of its bodies in space-time as mathematically
rational; though natural science, as inductive, could have only
inductive access to interconnections which, in themselves, are
mathematical. In any case, natural science possessed the highest
rationality because it was guided by pure mathematics and
achieved, through inductions, mathematical results. Should this
not become the model of all genuine knowledge? Should knowledge, if it is to attain the status of a genuine science which goes
beyond nature, not follow the example of natural science or,
even better, that of pure mathematics, insofar as we have, perhaps, in other spheres of knowledge, the "innate" faculty of
apodictic self-evidence through axioms and deductions? It is no
wonder that we already find the idea of a universal mathematics
in Descartes. Of course the weight of the theoretical and practical successes [of science], beginning immediately with Galileo,
had its effect. Thus the world and, correlatively, philosophy, take
on a completely new appearance. The world must, in itself, be a
rational world, in the new sense of rationality taken from mathematics, or mathematized nature; correspondingly, philosophy,
the universal science of the world, must be built up as a unified
rational theory more geometrico.

§11.

Dualism as the reason for the
incomprehensibility of the problems
of reason; as presupposition for the
specialization of the sciences; as the
foundation of naturalistic psychology.

OF COURSE, if scientifically rational nature is a world of
bodies existing in itself—which was taken for granted in the
given historical situation—then the world-in-itself must, in a
sense unknown before, be a peculiarly split world, split into
nature-in-itself and a mode of being which is different from this:
that which exists psychically. At first this was to introduce con-

62

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

siderable difficulties, even in respect to the idea of God coming
from religion, an idea which had by no means been given up.
Was God not unavoidable as the principle of rationality? Does
not rational being, even [merely] as nature, in order to be thinkable at all, presuppose rational theory and a subjectivity which
accomplishes it? Does not nature, then, indeed the world-in-itself, presuppose God as reason existing absolutely? Does this not
mean that, within being-in-itself, psychic being takes precedence
as subjectivity existing purely for itself? It is, after all, subjectivity, whether divine or human.
In general, the separating-off of the psychic caused greater
and greater difficulties whenever problems of reason made themselves felt. Of course it was only later that these difficulties
became so pressing that they became the central theme of philosophy, in the great investigations on human understanding, in
"critiques of reason." But the power of rationalistic motives was
as yet unbroken; everywhere men proceeded, full of confidence,
to carry through the rationalistic philosophy on all fronts. And
they were not without success in acquiring undoubtedly valuable
knowledge; even if this knowledge did "not yet" correspond to
the ideal, it could be interpreted as a preliminary stage. Every
establishment of a special science was now eo ipso guided by the
idea of a rational theory, or of a rational domain, corresponding
to it. The specialization of philosophy into particular sciences
accordingly has a deeper meaning, one exclusively related to the
modern attitude. The specializations of ancient scientists could
not result in particular sciences in our sense. Galileo's natural
science did not arise through a specialization. It was only the
subsequent new sciences which by contrast specialized the idea
of a rational philosophy motivated by the new natural science; it
was from this idea that they received the momentum to make
progress and conquer new domains, rationally closed special
regions within the rational totality of the universe.
Naturally, as soon as Descartes had proclaimed the idea of a
rational philosophy and the division of nature and spirit, a new
psychology was an immediate requirement, and it already made
its appearance in Descartes's contemporary, Hobbes. It was, as
we have already indicated, a psychology of a sort completely
unknown to earlier times, designed concretely as a psychophysical anthropology in the rationalistic spirit.
One should not be misled by the usual contrast between
empiricism and rationalism. The naturalism of a Hobbes wants

Part II /

63

to be physicalism, and like all physicalism it follows the model of
physical rationality.*
This is also true of the other sciences of the modern period,
the biological, etc. The dualistic split, the consequence of the
physicalistic conception of nature, brings about in them a development in the form of split disciplines. The biophysical sciences,
those which at first concentrate, in a one-sided fashion, purely
on what pertains to the physical body, still find it necessary to
begin by grasping the concrete entities descriptively, analyzing
and classifying them intuitively; but the physicalistic view of
nature makes it obvious that a further-developed physics would
in the end "explain" all these concrete entities in a physicalistically rational way. Thus the flourishing of the biophysicaldescriptive sciences, especially in view of their occasional use of
knowledge taken from physics, is considered a success of the
scientific method, always interpreted in the sense of physics.
In regard to the soul, on the other hand, which is left over
after the animal and the human bodies have been separated off
as belonging inside the closed region of nature: here the exemplary role of physics' conception of nature, and of the scientific
method, has the understandable effect—this since the time of
Hobbes—that a type of being is ascribed to the soul which is
similar in principle to that of nature; and to psychology is ascribed a progression from description to ultimate theoretical
"explanation" similar to that of biophysics. This notwithstanding
the Cartesian doctrine that bodily and psychic "substance" are
separated by radically different attributes. This naturalization of
the psychic comes down through John Locke to the whole modern period up to the present day. Locke's image of the white
paper1 is characteristic—the tabula rasa on which psychic data
come and go, somehow ordered like the events of bodies in nature. This novel, physicalistically oriented naturalism is, in Locke,
not yet consistently worked out, not thought through to the
end as positivistic sensationalism. But it spreads rapidly, and
in a way which is fateful for the historical development of all
* When I use the term "physicalism," here and elsewhere, I use it
exclusively in the general sense which is understood throughout the
course of our own investigations, i.e., to stand for philosophical errors
resulting from misinterpretations of the true meaning of modern
physics. Thus the word does not refer here specifically to the "physicalistic movement" ("Vienna Circle," "logical empiricism").
1. Husserl uses the English term.

64

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

philosophy. In any case, the new naturalistic psychology was
from the beginning more than an empty promise; it enters the
stage impressively, in great writings, claiming to give the lasting
formulation of a universal science.
Borne by the same spirit, all the new sciences seem to succeed, even the highest, metaphysics. Where physicalistic rationalism could not be carried through in earnest, as precisely in the
case of metaphysics, aid was sought in unclear qualifications,
through the use of variations of Scholastic concepts. For the
most part, in fact, the guiding sense of the new rationality was
not precisely thought out, even though it was the driving force
behind the movements. Its explication in more precise terms was
itself a part of philosophy's intellectual labor up to the time of
Liebniz and Christian Wolff. In Spinoza's Ethica we have a
classical example of how the new naturalistic rationalism
thought itself capable of creating ordine geometrico a systematic
philosophy—metaphysics, a science of the ultimate and highest
questions, questions of reason, but also questions of fact.
One must, of course, correctly understand Spinoza's historical meaning. It is a complete misunderstanding to interpret
Spinoza according to what is visible on the surface of his "geometrical" method of demonstration. Beginning as a Cartesian, he
is at first, of course, completely convinced that not only nature
but the totality of being as such must be a coherent rational
system. That was taken for granted in advance. The mathematical system of nature must be enclosed in the total system—but,
as part of a system, the former cannot be self-sufficient. One
cannot leave physics to the physicists as if it were truly a complete system and then entrust to psychological specialists the
task of developing a rational system proper to the psychological
arm of the dualism. God, the absolute substance, would also
have to belong within the unity of the rational total system as a
subject for theory. Spinoza is confronted with the task of discovering the postulated rational total system of what is—discovering first of all the conditions of its being thought in coherent
fashion—and then of systematically realizing it through actual
construction. It is only thus, through the deed, that the actual
conceivability of a rational totality of being is established. Prior
to this, in spite of the self-evidence this attitude found in the
exemplary character of natural science, it was only a postulate;
for the dualism of radically different "substances," with the one
absolute and most real substance above them, the possibility of
its being thought through was not at all clear. Of course, Spinoza

Part II /

65

was interested only in what was systematically general—his
Ethica is the first universal ontology. Through it, he believed, the
actual systematic meaning of existing natural science could be
obtained, together with that of the psychology which was to be
similarly constructed as a parallel to it. Without this meaning
both remain incomprehensible.

§ 12.

Over-all characterization of modern
physicalistic rationalism.

PHILOSOPHY IN ITS ancient origins wanted to be
"science," universal knowledge of the universe of what is; it
wanted to be not vague and relative everyday knowledge—86fa—
but rational knowledge—kmaTVßv* But the true idea of rationality,
and in connection with that the true idea of universal science,
was not yet attained in ancient philosophy—such was the conviction of the founders of the modern age. The new ideal was
possible only according to the model of the newly formed mathematics and natural science. It proved its possibility in the inspiring pace of its realization. What is the universal science of this
new idea but—thought of as ideally completed—omniscience?
This, then, is for philosophy truly a realizable, though infinitely
distant, goal—not for the individual or a given community of researchers but certainly for the infinite progression of the generations and their systematic researches. The world is in itself a
rational systematic unity—this is thought to be a matter of apodictic insight—in which each and every singular detail must be
rationally determined. Its systematic form (the universal structure of its essence) can be attained, is indeed known and ready
for us in advance, at least insofar as it is purely mathematical.
Only its particularity remains to be determined; and unfortunately this is possible only through induction. This is the path—
infinite, to be sure—to omniscience. Thus one lives in the happy
certainty of a path leading forth from the near to the distant,
from the more or less known into the unknown, as an infallible
method of broadening knowledge, through which truly all of the
totality of what is will be known as it is 'ln-itself"—in an infinite
progression. To this always belongs another progression: that of
approximating what is given sensibly and intuitively in the

66

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

surrounding life-world to the mathematically ideal, i.e., the
perfecting of the always merely approximate "subsumptions" of
empirical data under the ideal concepts pertaining to them. This
involves the development of a methodology, the refinement of
measurements, the growing efficiency of instruments, etc.
Along with his growing, more and more perfect cognitive
power over the universe, man also gains an ever more perfect
mastery over his practical surrounding world, one which expands in an unending progression. This also involves a mastery
over mankind as belonging to the real surrounding world, i.e.,
mastery over himself and his fellow man, an ever greater power
over his fate, and thus an ever fuller "happiness"—"happiness"
as rationally conceivable for man. For he can also know what is
true in itself about values and goods. All this lies within the
horizon of this rationalism as its obvious consequence for man.
Man is thus truly an image of God. In a sense analogous to that
in which mathematics speaks of infinitely distant points,
straight lines, etc., one can say metaphorically that God is the
"infinitely distant man." For the philosopher, in correlation with
his mathematization of the world and of philosophy, has in a
certain sense mathematically idealized himself and, at the same
time, God.
There is no doubt that the new ideal of the universality and
rationality of knowledge entails an enormous advance in the
area in which it began, mathematics and physics—provided, of
course, in accord with our earlier analysis, that it is brought to a
correct understanding of itself and is kept free of all transformations of meaning. Is there in the history of the world anything
more worthy of philosophical wonder than the discovery of infinite totalities of truth, realizable in infinite progress either
purely (in pure mathematics) or in approximations (in inductive natural science)? Is it not almost a miracle, what was
actually accomplished and continued to grow? The purely theoretical-technical accomplishment is a miracle, even if, through a
transformation of meaning, it is taken for science itself. It is
something else to ask how far the exemplary character of these
sciences should be stretched and whether the philosophical reflections, which were said to be responsible for the new conceptions of the world and of world sciences, were at all adequate.
How little that was the case, even in respect to nature, was
demonstrated (though only in most recent times) by the weakening of the firm belief that all natural science was ultimately
physics—that the biological and all the concrete sciences of

Part II /

67

nature would, in the advance of their researches, resolve themselves more and more into physics. This belief was so weakened,
in fact, that these sciences found it necessary to undertake
reforms of method. Of course this did not take place on the basis
of a fundamental revision of the ideas which originally established modern natural science and which became depleted in the
process of becoming method.

§ 13.

The first difficulties of physicalistic
naturalism in psychology: the
incomprehensibility of functioning
subjectivity.

YET MUCH EARLIER than this, the dubious character of
the mathematization of the world, or rather of the rationalization unclearly imitating it—philosophy ordine geometrico—
made itself felt in the new naturalistic psychology. Its domain
included, after all, the rational knowing activity and the knowledge of the philosophers, mathematicians, scientists of nature,
etc., the activity in which the new theories developed as its
intellectual constructions and which, as such, bore within itself
the ultimate truth-meaning of the world. This caused such difficulties that in the case of Berkeley and Hume a paradoxical
skepticism developed, one that was felt to be nonsense but was
not properly understood [as such]. This directed itself at first
precisely against the models of rationality, mathematics and
physics, and even tried to invalidate their basic concepts, indeed
even the sense of their domains (mathematical space, material
nature) by calling them psychological fictions. In the case of
Hume this skepticism was carried through to the end, to the
uprooting of the whole ideal of philosophy, the whole manner in
which the new sciences were scientific. Not only the modern
philosophical ideal was affected—and this is of great significance—but the entire philosophy of the past, the very formulation of the task of philosophy as universal objective science. A
paradoxical situation! Highly successful accomplishments, daily
growing more numerous, at least in a large number of new
sciences, were at hand. Those working in these sciences, and

68

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

those carefully following and understanding them, experienced
a kind of self-evidence neither they nor anyone could ignore.
And yet this whole accomplishment, this very self-evidence, had
become completely incomprehensible through a certain new way
of looking at it, from the viewpoint of psychology, in whose
domain the accomplishing activity took place. Even more than
this: not only the new sciences and their world, the world
interpreted as rational, were affected, but also everyday worldconsciousness and world-life, the prescientific world in the everyday sense, the world within whose obvious validity of being the
activities and dealings of men untouched by science take place
—the world which is ultimately also that of the scientist, and
not merely when he returns to everyday praxis.
[Even] the most radical skepticism of earlier times did not
focus its attack on this world but only pointed to its relativity, in
order to negate kmarripri and the world-in-itself substructed
through it by philosophy. This was [the extent of] its agnosticism.
Thus world-enigmas now enter the stage, of a sort previously
never imagined, and they bring about a completely new manner
of philosophizing, the "epistemological" philosophy, that of the
"theory of reason." Soon they also give rise to systematic philosophies with completely novel goals and methods. This greatest of
all revolutions must be characterized as the transformation of
scientific objectivism—not only modern objectivism but also
that of all the earlier philosophies of the millennia—into a
transcendental subjectivism.

§ 14

Precursory characterization of objectivism
and transcendentalism. The struggle
between these two ideas as the sense of
modern spiritual history.

WHAT CHARACTERIZES OBJECTIVISM is that it moves
upon the ground of the world which is pregiven, taken for
granted through experience, seeks the "objective truth" of this
world, seeks what, in this world, is unconditionally valid for
every rational being, what it is in itself. It is the task of episteme,

Part II /

69

ratio, or philosophy to carry this out universally. Through these
one arrives at what ultimately is; beyond this, no further
questions would have a rational sense.
Transcendentalism, on the other hand, says: the ontic
meaning [Seinssinn] of the pregiven life-world* is a subjective
structure [Gebilde], it is the achievement of experiencing, prescientific life. In this life the meaning and the ontic validity
[Seinsgeltung] of the world are built up—of that particular
world, that is, which is actually valid for the individual experiencer. As for the "objectively true" world, the world of science, it
is a structure at a higher level, built on prescientific experiencing
and thinking, or rather on its accomplishments of validity
[Geltungsleistungen]. Only a radical inquiry back into subjectivity—and specifically the subjectivity which ultimately brings
about all world-validity, with its content and in all its prescientific and scientific modes, and into the "what" and the "how" of
the rational accomplishments—can make objective truth comprehensible and arrive at the ultimate ontic meaning of the
world. Thus it is not the being of the world as unquestioned,
taken for granted, which is primary in itself; and one has not
merely to ask what belongs to it objectively; rather, what is
primary in itself is subjectivity, understood as that which naively
pregives 2 the being of the world and then rationalizes or (what
is the same thing) objectifies it.
Yet already one is threatened with absurdity here. For it first
appears obvious that this subjectivity is man, i.e., psychological
subjectivity. Mature transcendentalism protests against psychological idealism and, questioning objective science as philosophy,
claims to have initiated a completely new sort of scientific procedure, the transcendental. Past philosophy had not even the
slightest conception of a subjectivism in this transcendental
style. Effective motives for the appropriate change of attitude
were lacking, although such a change might have been conceivable from the direction of ancient skepticism, precisely through
its anthropologistic relativism.
1. Husserl probably means to include Hume under transcendentalism, as is his usual practice. This sentence would not strictly apply
to Kant, according to Husserl (cf. § 28, below), since Kant's transcendentalism did not penetrate to the role of the pregiven life-world in
subjective life. In this sense Hume was for Husserl the more radical
transcendental philosopher.
2. vorgibt A peculiarly Husserlian twist: that which is (pre)given
is (pre)given by subjectivity through its meaning-bestowing acts.

70

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The whole history of philosophy since the appearance of
"epistemology" and the serious attempts at a transcendental philosophy is a history of tremendous tensions between objectivistic
and transcendental philosophy. It is a history of constant attempts to maintain objectivism and to develop it in a new form
and, on the other side, of attempts by transcendentalism to
overcome the difficulties entailed by the idea of transcendental
subjectivity and the method it requires. The clarification of the
origin of this internal split in the philosophical development, the
analysis of the ultimate motives for this most radical transformation of the idea of philosophy, is of the utmost importance. It
affords the first insight into the thoroughgoing meaning fulness
[Sinnhaftigkeit] which unifies the whole movement of philosophical history in the modern period: a unity of purpose binding
generations of philosophers together, and through this a direction for all the efforts of individual subjects and schools. It is a
direction, as I shall try to show here, toward a final form of
transcendental philosophy—as phenomenology. This also contains, as a suspended moment [aufgehobenes Moment], the final
form of psychology which uproots the naturalistic sense of modern psychology.

§15.

Reflection on the method of our historical
manner of investigation.

T H E TYPE OF INVESTIGATION that we must carry out,
and which has already determined the style of our preparatory
suggestions, is not that of a historical investigation in the usual
sense. Our task is to make comprehensible the teleology in the
historical becoming of philosophy, especially modern philosophy, and at the same time to achieve clarity about ourselves, who
are the bearers of this teleology, who take part in carrying it out
through our personal intentions. We are attempting to elicit and
understand the unity running through all the [philosophical]
projects of history that oppose one another and work together in
their changing forms. In a constant critique, which always regards the total historical complex as a personal one, we are
attempting ultimately to discern the historical task which we can
acknowledge as the only one which is personally our own. This

Part II

/

71

we seek to discern not from the outside, from facts, as if the
temporal becoming in which we ourselves have evolved were
merely an external causal series. Rather, we seek to discern it from
the inside. Only in this way can we, who not only have a spiritual
heritage but have become what we are thoroughly and exclusively in a historical-spiritual manner, have a task which is truly
our own. We obtain it not through the critique of some present
or handed-down system, of some scientific or prescientific <eWeltanschauung" (which might as well be Chinese, in the end), but
only through a critical understanding of the total unity of history
—our history. For it has spiritual unity through the unity and
driving force of the task which, in the historical process—in the
thinking of those who philosophize for one another and with one
another across time—seeks to move through the various stages
of obscurity toward satisfying clarity until it finally works its
way through to perfect insight. Then the task stands before us
not merely as factually required but as a task assigned to us, the
present-day philosophers. For we are what we are as functionaries of modern philosophical humanity; we are heirs and cobearers of the direction of the will which pervades this humanity; we
have become this through a primal establishment which is at
once a reestablishment [Nachstiftung] and a modification of the
Greek primal establishment. In the latter lies the teleological
beginning, the true birth of the European spirit as such.
This manner of clarifying history by inquiring back into the
primal establishment of the goals which bind together the chain
of future generations, insofar as these goals live on in sedimented forms yet can be reawakened again and again and, in
their new vitality, be criticized; this manner of inquiring back
into the ways in which surviving goals repeatedly bring with
them ever new attempts to reach new goals, whose unsatisfactory character again and again necessitates their clarification,
their improvement, their more or less radical reshaping—this, I
say, is nothing other than the philosopher's genuine self-reflection on what he is truly seeking, on what is in him as a will
coming from the will and as the will of his spiritual forefathers.
It is to make vital again, in its concealed historical meaning, the
sedimented conceptual system which, as taken for granted,
serves as the ground of his private and nonhistorical work. It is
to carry forward, through his own self-reflection, the self-reflection of his forebears and thus not only to reawaken the chain of
thinkers, the social interrelation of their thinking, the community of their thought, and transform it into a living present for

72

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

us but, on the basis of the total unity thus made present, to carry
out a responsible critique, a peculiar sort of critique which has
its ground in these historical, personal projects, partial fulfillments, and exchanges of criticism rather than in what is privately taken for granted by the present philosopher. If he is to be
one who thinks for himself [Selbstdenker], an autonomous philosopher with the will to liberate himself from all prejudices, he
must have the insight that all the things he takes for granted are
prejudices, that all prejudices are obscurities arising out of a
sedimentation of tradition—not merely judgments whose truth
is as yet undecided 1 —and that this is true even of the great task
and idea which is called "philosophy." All judgments which
count as philosophical are related back to this task, this idea.
A historical, backward reflection of the sort under discussion
is thus actually the deepest kind of self-reflection aimed at a
self-understanding in terms of what we are truly seeking as the
historical beings we are. Self-reflection serves in arriving at a
decision; and here this naturally means immediately carrying on
with the task which is most truly ours and which has now been
clarified and understood through this historical self-reflection,
the task set for us all in the present.
But to every primal establishment [Urstiftung] essentially
belongs a final establishment [Endstiftung] assigned as a task to
the historical process. This final establishment is accomplished
when the task is brought to consummate clarity and thus to an
apodictic method which, in every step of achievement, is a constant avenue to new steps having the character of absolute
success, i.e., the character of apodictic steps. At this point philosophy, as an infinite task, would have arrived at its apodictic
beginning, its horizon of apodictic forward movement. (It
would, of course, be completely wrong to confuse the sense of
the apodictic which is indicated here, and which is the most
fundamental sense, with the usual sense taken from traditional
mathematics.)
But we must be warned of a misunderstanding: Every historical philosopher performs his self-reflections, carries on his dealings with the philosophers of his present and past. He expresses
himself about all this, fixes through these confrontations his
own position, and thus creates a self-understanding of his own
deeds in accord with the way his published theories have grown
up within him in the consciousness of what he was striving for.
i. I.e., pre-judices (Vor-Urteile) in the literal sense.

Part II /

73

But no matter how precisely we may be informed, through
historical research, about such "self-interpretations" (even about
those of a whole series of philosophers), we learn nothing in this
way about what, through all these philosophers, "the point of it"
ultimately was, in the hidden unity of intentional inwardness
which alone constitutes the unity of history. Only in the final
establishment is this revealed; only through it can the unified
directedness of all philosophies and philosophers open up. From
here elucidation can be attained which enables us to understand
past thinkers in a way that they could never have understood
themselves.
This makes it clear that the peculiar truth of such a "teleological consideration of history" can never be decisively refuted by
citing the documented "personal testimony" of earlier philosophers. This truth is established only in the self-evidence of a
critical over-all view which brings to light, behind the "historical
facts" of documented philosophical theories and their apparent
oppositions and parallels, a meaningful, final harmony.

§ 16. Descartes as the primal founder
not only of the modern idea of objectivistic
rationalism but also of the transcendental
motif which explodes it.
WE SHALL NOW BEGIN actually to carry out the clarification of the unifying sense of the modern philosophical movements. Here the particular role assigned to the development of
the new psychology will soon become evident. To this end we
must go back to the primally founding genius of all modern
philosophy, Descartes. After Galileo had carried out, slightly
earlier, the primal establishment of the new natural science, it
was Descartes who conceived and at the same time set in systematic motion the new idea of universal philosophy: in the
sense of mathematical or, better expressed, physicalistic, rationalism—philosophy as "universal mathematics." And immediately it had a powerful effect.
This does not mean, then (in accord with our exposition
above), that he had fully and systematically thought out this

74

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

idea in advance, much less that his contemporaries and successors, constantly guided by it in the sciences, had it in mind in
explicit form. For this it would have been necessary to have the
higher systematic development of pure mathematics under the
new idea of universality which appears in its first, relative maturity in Leibniz (as mathesis universalis) and which is now, in
more mature form, still a subject of lively research as the mathematics of definite manifolds. Like all historical ideas that result
in great developments, those in the new mathematics, the new
natural science, and the new philosophy live in very diverse
noetic modes in the consciousness of the persons who function
as the bearers of their development: sometimes they strive forward like instincts, without these persons having any ability to
give an account of where they are going; sometimes they are the
results of a more or less clear realization, as plainly and simply
grasped goals, possibly crystallizing into ever more precise goals
through repeated consideration. On the other hand, there are
modes in which these ideas become leveled down, are made
unclear when ideas are taken over which have been made precise in another area and now take on different kinds of vagueness (we have already learned to understand this kind of
thing): ideas emptied [of meaning] which have been obscured
and have become mere word-concepts; ideas burdened, through
attempts at exposition, with false interpretations, etc. In spite of
all this, they are driving forces in the development. And the
ideas which interest us here also have their effect on those who
are not trained in mathematical thinking. It is well to take note
of this when one speaks of the power of the new idea of philosophy, having its effect throughout the whole modern period in all
sciences and culture, as it was first grasped and mastered in a
relatively stable way by Descartes.
But it was not merely in the inauguration of this idea that
Descartes was the founding father of the modern period. It is
highly remarkable at the same time that it was he, in his Meditations—and precisely in order to provide a radical foundation for
the new rationalism and then eo ipso for dualism—who accomplished the primal establishment of ideas which were destined,
through their own historical effects (as if following a hidden
teleology of history), to explode this very rationalism by uncovering its hidden absurdity. Precisely those ideas which were
supposed to ground this rationalism as aeterna veritas bear
within themselves a deeply hidden sense, which, once brought to
the surface, completely uproots it.

Part II /

§ 17.

75

Descartes''s return to the ego cogito.
Exposition of the sense of the Cartesian
epoche.

LET US CONSIDER the progress of the first two Cartesian
meditations from a perspective which allows its general structures to come to the fore—the progress to the ego cogito, the ego
of the cogitationes of the various cogitata. This beloved examination question for philosophical children, then, shall be our subject. In truth, there is in these first meditations a depth which is
so difficult to exhaust that even Descartes was unable to do it, to
the extent that he let slip away the great discovery he had in his
hands. Even today, and perhaps especially today, everyone who
would think for himself ought, it seems to me, to study these
first meditations in the utmost depth, not being frightened off by
the appearance of primitiveness, by the well-known use of the
new ideas for the paradoxical and basically wrong proofs of the
existence of God, or by many other obscurities and ambiguities
—and also not being too quickly comforted by one's own refutations. It is with good reasons that I now devote considerable
space to my attempt at a careful exposition, not repeating what
Descartes said, but extracting what was really involved in his
thinking and then separating what he became conscious of from
what was concealed from him, or rather what was smuggled into
his ideas, because of certain things—of course very natural
things—taken for granted. These were not merely remains of
Scholastic traditions, not merely accidental prejudices of his
time, but were things taken for granted throughout the millennia which can be overcome only by clarifying and thinking
through to the end what was original in Descartes's thought.
Philosophical knowledge is, according to Descartes, absolutely grounded knowledge; it must stand upon a foundation of
immediate and apodictic knowledge whose self-evidence excludes all conceivable doubt. Every step of mediate knowledge
must be able to attain the same sort of self-evidence. A survey
of his hitherto existing convictions, acquired or taken over,
shows him that doubts or possibilities of doubt arise on all sides.
In this situation it is unavoidable that he, and anyone who

76

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

seriously seeks to be a philosopher, begin with a sort of radical,
skeptical epoche which places in question all his hitherto existing convictions, which forbids in advance any judgmental use of
them, forbids taking any position as to their validity or invalidity. Once in his life every philosopher must proceed in this way;
if he has not done it, and even already has "his philosophy," he
must still do it. Prior to the epoche "his philosophy" is to be
treated like any other prejudice. The "Cartesian epoche" has in
truth a hitherto unheard-of radicalism, for it encompasses expressly not only the validity of all previous sciences—even mathematics, which claims apodictic self-evidence, is not excluded—
but even the validity of the pre- and extrascientific life-world,
i.e., the world of sense-experience constantly pregiven as taken
for granted unquestioningly and all the life of thought which is
nourished by it—the unscientific and finally even the scientific.
The lowest stratum of all objective knowledge, the cognitive
ground of all hitherto existing sciences, all sciences of "the"
world, is, we can say, for the first time called into question in the
manner of a "critique of knowledge." It is experience in the usual
sense which is thus called into question, "sense" experience—
and its correlate, the world itself, as that which has sense and
being for us in and through this experience, just as it is constantly valid for us, with unquestioned certainty, as simply there
[vorhanden], having such and such a content of particular real
objects [Realitäten], and which is occasionally devaluated as
doubtful or as invalid illusion only in individual details. But
from this point on, even all the accomplishments of meaning
and validity which are founded on experience are called into
question. Indeed, this is the historical beginning, as we have
already said, of a "critique of knowledge," and specifically a
radical critique of objective knowledge.
It must be recalled again that the ancient skepticism begun
by Protagoras and Gorgias calls into question and denies episteme, i.e., scientific knowledge of what is in-itself, but that it
does not go beyond such agnosticism, beyond the denial of the
rational substructions of a "philosophy" which, with its supposed
truths-in-themselves, assumes a rational in-itself and believes
itself capable of attaining it. [According to skepticism] "the"
world is not rationally knowable; human knowledge cannot extend beyond the subjective-relative appearances. Starting from
this point (for example, from Gorgias' ambiguous proposition
"There is nothing"), it might have been possible to push radicalism farther; but in reality it never came to this. The skepticism

Part II /

77

v,l::ch was negativistically oriented toward the practical and
ethical (political) lacked, even in all later times, the original
Cartesian motif: that of pressing forward through the hell of an
unsurpassable, quasi-skeptical epoche toward the gates of the
heaven of an absolutely rational philosophy, and of constructing
the latter systematically.
But how is this epoche supposed to accomplish this? If it
puts out of play, with one blow, all knowledge of the world, in all
its forms, including those of the straightforward experience of
the world, and thus loses its grasp on the being of the world, how
is it that precisely through the epoche a primal ground of immediate and apodictic self-evidences should be exhibited? The answer is: If I refrain from taking any position on the being or
nonbeing of the world, if I deny myself every ontic validity
related to the world, not every ontic validity is prohibited for me
within this epoche. I, the ego * carrying out the epoche, am not
included in its realm of objects but rather—if I actually carry
out the epoche radically and universally—am excluded in principle. I am necessary as the one carrying it out. It is precisely
herein that I find just the apodictic ground I was seeking, the
one which absolutely excludes every possible doubt. No matter
how far I may push my doubt, and even if I try to think that
everything is dubious or even in truth does not exist, it is absolutely self-evident that I, after all, would still exist as the doubter
and negator of everything. Universal doubt cancels itself. Thus,
during the universal epoche, the absolutely apodictic self-evidence "I am" is at my disposal. But within this self-evidence a
great deal is comprised. A more concrete version of the self-evident statement sum cogitans is: ego cogito—cogitata qua cogitata. This takes in all cogitationes, individual ones as well as
their flowing synthesis into the universal unity of one cogitatio
in which, as cogitatum, the world and what I have variously
attributed to it in thought had and still has ontic validity for me
—except that now, as one who is philosophizing, I may no
longer straightforwardly effect these validities and use them as
knowledge in the natural way. Standing above them all in my
posture of epoche I may no longer take part in performing them.
Thus my whole life of acts—experiencing, thinking, valuing,
etc.—remains, and indeed flows on; but what was before my
eyes in that life as "the" world, having being and validity for me,
i. I have usually translated both das Ego and das Ich as "the ego,"
since Husserl makes no distinction between these terms. Occasionally
I have used "the!.'"

78

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

has become a mere "phenomenon," and this in respect to all
determinations proper to it. In the epoche, all these determinations, and the world itself, have been transformed into my ideae;
they are inseparable components of my cogitationes, precisely as
their cogitata. Thus here we would have, included under the title
"ego," an absolutely apodictic sphere of being rather than merely
the one axiomatic proposition ego cogito or sum cogitans.
But something else, something especially remarkable, must
be added. Through the epoche I have penetrated into the sphere
of being which is prior in principle to everything which conceivably has being for me, and to all its spheres of being—as their
absolutely apodictic presupposition. Or, what for Descartes
counts as the same thing: I, the ego performing the epoche, am
the only thing that is absolutely indubitable, that excludes in
principle every possibility of doubt. Whatever else enters the
stage as apodictic, as, for example, mathematical axioms, certainly does leave open possibilities of doubt and thus also the
conceivability of their being false. The latter is excluded, and the
claim to apodicticity justified, only with the success of an indirect and absolutely apodictic grounding which traces these
things back to that sole absolute, primal self-evidence from
which all scientific knowledge must—if a philosophy is to be
possible—be derived.

§ 18.

Descartes's misinterpretation of himself.
The psychologistic falsification of the
pure ego attained through the epoche.

HERE WE MUST BRING UP certain things about which
we have deliberately been silent in the exposition up to now.
Thereby a hidden double meaning of Descartes's ideas will become evident: there arise two possible ways of taking these ideas,
developing them, and setting scientific tasks; whereas for Descartes only one of these was obvious from the start. Thus the
sense of his presentations is factually (i.e., as his own sense) unambiguous; but unfortunately this unambiguousness stems from
the fact that he does not actually carry through the original radicalism of his ideas, that he does not actually subject to the epoche

V art II /

79

(or "bracket") all his prior opinions, the world in all respects, that
he, obsessed by his goal, does not draw out precisely what is most
significant in what he gained through the "ego" of the epoche, so
as to unfold, purely in connection with this ego, a philosophical
6av}ia$eiv. In comparison with what such an unfolding could yield,
indeed very soon, everything new in what Descartes actually
brought to light was in a certain sense superficial, in spite of its
originality and widespread effects. In addition, it loses its value
by Descartes's own interpretation of it. Namely: in wonder over
this ego, first discovered in the epoche, he himself asks what kind
of an ego it is, whether the ego is the human being, the sensibly
intuited human being of everyday life. Then he excludes the living body—this, like the sensible world in general, falls under the
epoche—and thus the ego becomes determined, for Descartes, as
mens sive animus sive intellectus.
But here we have several questions. Is not the epoche related
to the totality of what is pregiven to me (who am philosophizing) and thus related to the whole world, including all human
beings, and these not only in respect to their bodies? Is it not
thus related to me as a whole man as I am valid for myself in my
natural possession of the world [Welthabe]? Is Descartes here
not dominated in advance by the Galilean certainty of a universal and absolutely pure world of physical bodies, with the distinction between the merely sensibly experience able and the
mathematical, which is a matter of pure thinking? Does he not
already take it for granted that sensibility points to a realm of
what is in-itself, but that it can deceive us; and that there must
be a rational way of resolving this [deception] and of knowing
what is in-itself with mathematical rationality? But is all this not
at once bracketed with the epoche, indeed even as a possibility?
It is obvious that Descartes, in spite of the radicalism of the
presuppositionlessness he demands, has, in advance, a goal in
relation to which the breakthrough to this "ego" is supposed to be
the means. He does not see that, by being convinced of the
possibility of the goal and of this means, he has already left this
radicalism behind. It is not achieved by merely deciding on the
epoche, on the radical withholding of [judgment on] all that is
pregiven, on all prior validities of what is in the world; the
epoche must seriously be and remain in effect. The ego is not a
residuum of the world but is that which is absolutely apodictically posited; and this is made possible only through the epoche,
only through the "bracketing" of the total world-validity; and it is
the only positing thus made possible. The soul, however, is the

80

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

residuum of a previous abstraction of the pure physical body,
and according to this abstraction, at least apparently, is a complement of this body. But this abstraction (and we must not
overlook this) occurs not in the epoche but in the natural scientist's or psychologist's way of looking at things, on the natural
ground of the world as pregiven and taken for granted. We shall
have occasion to speak again about these abstractions and about
the appearance of their obviousness. Here it suffices to be clear
about the fact that in the foundation-laying reflections of the
Meditations—those in which the epoche and its ego are introduced—a break of consistency occurs when this ego is identified
with the pure soul. The whole gain, the great discovery of this
ego, loses its value through an absurd misconstruction: a pure
soul has no meaning at all in the epoche, unless it is as "soul" in
"brackets," i.e., as mere "phenomenon" no less than the living
body. One should not overlook, [by the way,] the new concept of
"phenomenon" which arises for the first time with the Cartesian
epoche.
We can see how difficult it is to maintain and use such an
unheard-of change of attitude as that of the radical and universal epoche. Right away "natural common sense," some aspect of
the naive validity of the world, breaks through at some point and
adulterates the new kind of thinking made possible and necessary in the epoche. (Whence also the naive objections of almost
all my philosophical contemporaries to my "Cartesianism" or to
the "phenomenological reduction" for which I have prepared the
way through this presentation of the Cartesian epoche.) This
nearly ineradicable naivete is also responsible for the fact that
for centuries almost no one took exception to the "obviousness"
of the possibility of inferences from the ego and its cognitive life
to an "outside," and no one actually raised the question of
whether, in respect to this egological sphere of being, an "outside" can have any meaning at all—which of course turns this
ego into a paradox, the greatest of all enigmas. Yet perhaps a
great deal, indeed everything for a philosophy, turns upon this
enigma; and perhaps the way in which Descartes himself was
shaken by the discovery of this ego is significant as an indication
to us lesser spirits that something truly great, indeed of the
greatest magnitude, is announced in it, something which should
one day emerge, through all the errors and confusions, as the
"Archimedean point" of any genuine philosophy.
The new motif of returning to the ego, once it had entered
history, revealed its inner strength through the fact that in spite

Part II

/

81

of falsifications and obfuscations it introduced a new philosophical age and implanted within it a new telos.

§ 19,

Descartes's obtrusive interest in
objectivism as the reason for his
self-misinterpretation.

FOR DESCARTES, the Meditations work themselves out
in the portentous form of a substitution of one's own psychic ego
for the [absolute] ego, of psychological immanence for egological
immanence, of the evidence of psychic, "inner," or "self-perception" for egological self-perception; and this is also their continuing historical effect up to the present day. Descartes himself
really believes he is able to establish the dualism of finite substances by way of inferences to what transcends his own soul,
mediated through the first inference to the transcendence of
God. Likewise he thinks he is solving the problem which is
meaningful for his absurd attitude and which returns later, in a
modified form, in Kant: the problem of how the rational structures engendered in my reason (my own clarae et distinctae
perceptiones)—those of mathematics and mathematical natural
science—can claim an objectively "true," a metaphysically transcendent validity. What the modern period calls the theory of the
understanding or of reason—in the pregnant sense "critique of
reason," transcendental problematics—has the roots of its meaning in the Cartesian Meditations. The ancient world was not
acquainted with this sort of thing, since the Cartesian epoche
and its ego were unknown. Thus, in truth, there begins with
Descartes a completely new manner of philosophizing which
seeks its ultimate foundations in the subjective. That Descartes,
however, persists in pure objectivism in spite of its subjective
grounding was possible only through the fact that the mens,
which at first stood by itself in the epoche and functioned as the
absolute ground of knowledge, grounding the objective sciences
(or, universally speaking, philosophy), appeared at the same
time to be grounded along with everything else as a legitimate
subject matter within the sciences,1 i.e., in psychology. Descartes

i. Reading denselben for derselben»

82

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

does not make clear to himself that the ego, his ego deprived of
its worldly character [entweltlicht] through the epoche, in whose
functioning cogitationes the world has all the ontic meaning it
can ever have for him, cannot possibly turn up as subject matter
in the world, since everything that is of the world derives its
meaning precisely from these functions—including, then, one's
own psychic being, the ego in the usual sense. Even more inaccessible to him, and naturally so, was the consideration that the
ego as it is disclosed in the epoche, existing for itself, is as yet
not at all "an" ego which can have other or many fellow egos
outside itself. It remained hidden from Descartes that all such
distinctions as *T and "you," "inside" and "outside," first "constitute" themselves in the absolute ego. Thus it is understandable
why Descartes, in his haste to ground objectivism and the exact
sciences as affording metaphysical, absolute knowledge, does not
set himself the task of systematically investigating the pure ego
—consistently remaining within the epoche—with regard to
what acts, what capacities, belong to it and what it brings about,
as intentional accomplishment, through these acts and capacities. Since he does not stop here, the immense set of problems
cannot reveal itself to him, i.e., those of beginning with the
world as a "phenomenon" in the ego and systematically inquiring
back, to find out which of the actually demonstrable immanent
accomplishments of the ego have given the world its ontic meaning. An analysis of the ego as mens was obviously for him a
matter for a future objective psychology.

§20.

"Intentionality" in Descartes.

ACCORDINGLY, the foundation-laying first meditations
were actually a piece of psychology; but one element in them
remains to be brought out expressly as highly significant, though
completely undeveloped: intentionality, which makes up the essence of egological life. Another word for it is cogitatio, having
something consciously [etwas bewussthaben], e.g., in experiencing, thinking, feeling, willing, etc.; for every cogitatio has its
cogitatum. Each is in the broadest sense an act of believing [ein
Vermeinen] and thus there belongs to each some mode of
certainty—straightforward certainty, surmise, holding-to-beprobable, doubting, etc. In connection with these there are the

Part II /

83

distinctions between confirmation and disconfirmation or true
and false. We can already see that the problem entitled "intentionality" contains within itself, inseparably, the problems of the
understanding or of reason. To be sure, there is no question of a
true presentation and treatment of the subject of intentionality
[in Descartes]. On the other hand, the whole supposed founding
of the new universal philosophy on the ego must be characterized as a "theory of knowledge," i.e., a theory of how the ego, in
the intentionality of its reason (through acts of reason) brings
about objective knowledge. For Descartes, of course, this means
knowledge which metaphysically transcends the ego.

§21,

Descartes as the starting point of two lines
of development, rationalism and empiricism.

I F WE NOW FOLLOW the lines of development which
proceeded from Descartes, one, the "rationalistic," leads through
Malebranche, Spinoza, Leibniz, and the Wolff school to Kant, the
turning point. Here the spirit of the new kind of rationalism, as
implanted by Descartes, thrusts forward enthusiastically and
unfolds in great systems. Here the conviction reigns, then, that
through the method of mos geometricus an absolutely grounded,
universal knowledge of the world, thought of as a transcendent
"in-itself," can be realized. Precisely against this conviction,
against the new science as having such scope as to extend to
something "transcendent/' indeed finally against this "transcendent" itself, English empiricism reacts—even though it is likewise
strongly influenced by Descartes. But it is a reaction similar to
that of ancient skepticism against the systems of rational philosophy of its time. The new skeptical empiricism already sets in
with Hobbes. Of greater interest for us, however, because of its
immense effect on psychology and the theory of knowledge, is
Locke's critique of the understanding, together with its subsequent continuations in Berkeley and Hume. This line of development is especially significant in that it is an essential segment of
the historical path on which the psychologically adulterated
transcendentalism of Descartes (if we may already so call his
original turn to the ego) seeks, through unfolding its consequences, to work its way through to the realization of its untena-

84

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

bility and, from there, to a transcendentalism which is more
genuine and more conscious of its true meaning. The primary
and historically most important thing here was the self-revelation of empirical psychologism (of the sensationalistic, naturalistic cast) as an intolerable absurdity.

§22.

Locke's naturalistic-epistemological
psychology.

IT IS IN THE EMPIRICIST development, as we know, that
the new psychology, which was required as a correlate to pure
natural science when the latter was separated off, is brought to
its first concrete execution. Thus it is concerned with investigations of introspective psychology in the field of the soul, which
has now been separated from the body, as well as with physiological and psychophysical explanations. On the other hand, this
psychology is of service to a theory of knowledge which, compared with the Cartesian one, is completely new and very differently worked out. In Locke's great work this is the actual intent
from the start. It offers itself as a new attempt to accomplish
precisely what Descartes's Meditations intended to accomplish:
an epistemological grounding of the objectivity of the objective
sciences. The skeptical posture of this intent is evident from the
beginning in questions like those of the scope, the extent, and
the degrees of certainty of human knowledge. Locke senses
nothing of the depths of the Cartesian epoche and of the reduction to the ego. He simply takes over the ego as soul, which
becomes acquainted, in the self-evidence of self-experience, with
its inner states, acts, and capacities. Only what inner self-experience shows, only our own "ideas," are immediately, self-evidently
given. Everything in the external world is inferred.
What comes first, then, is the internal-psychological analysis
purely on the basis of the inner experience—whereby use is
made, quite naively, of the experiences of other human beings
and of the conception of self-experience as what belongs to me,
one human being among human beings; that is, the objective
validity of inferences to others is used; just as, in general, the
whole investigation proceeds as an objective psychological one,

Part II /

85

indeed even has recourse to the physiological—when it is precisely all this objectivity, after all, which is in question.
The actual problem of Descartes, that of transcending egological (interpreted as internal-psychological) validities, including all manners of inference pertaining to the external world,
the question of how these, which are, after all, themselves cogitationes in the encapsuled soul, are able to justify [assertions
about] extrapsychic being—these problems disappear in Locke
or turn into the problem of the psychological genesis of the real
experiences of validity or of the faculties belonging to them.
That sense-data, extracted from the arbitrariness of their production, are affections from the outside and announce bodies in
the external world, is not a problem for him but something taken
for granted.
Especially portentous for future psychology and theory of
knowledge is the fact that Locke makes no use of the Cartesian
first introduction of the cogitatio as cogitatio of cogitata—that
is, intentionality; he does not recognize it as a subject of investigation (indeed the most authentic subject of the foundation-laying investigations). He is blind to the whole distinction. The soul
is something self-contained and real by itself, as is a body; in
naive naturalism the soul is now taken to be like an isolated
space, like a writing tablet, in his famous simile, on which
psychic data come and go. This data-sensationalism, together
with the doctrine of outer and inner sense, dominates psychology and the theory of knowledge for centuries, even up to the
present day; and in spite of the familiar struggle against
"psychic atomism/' the basic sense of this doctrine does not
change. Of course one speaks quite unavoidably, [even] in the
Lockean terminology, of perceptions, representations "of"
things, or of believing "in something/' willing "something/' and
the like. But no consideration is given to the fact that in the
perceptions, in the experiences of consciousness themselves,
that of which we are conscious is included as such—that the
perception is in itself a perception of something, of "this tree."
How is the life of the soul, which is through and through a
life of consciousness, the intentional life of the ego, which has
objects of which it is conscious, deals with them through knowing, valuing, etc.—how is it supposed to be seriously investigated
if intentionality is overlooked? How can the problems of reason
be attacked at all? Can they be attacked at all as psychological
problems? In the end, behind the psychological-epistemological
problems, do we not find the problems of the "ego" of the Carte-

86

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

sian epoche, touched upon but not grasped by Descartes? Perhaps these are not unimportant questions, which give a direction
in advance to the reader who thinks for himself. In any case they
are an indication of what will become a serious problem in later
parts of this work, or rather will serve as a way to a philosophy
which can really be carried through "without prejudice/' a philosophy with the most radical grounding in its setting of problems,
in its method, and in work which is systematically accomplished.
It is also of interest that the Lockean skepticism in respect to
the rational ideal of science, and its limitation of the scope of the
new sciences (which are supposed to retain their validity), leads
to a new sort of agnosticism. It is not that the possibility of
science is completely denied, as in ancient skepticism, although
again unknowable things-in-themselves are assumed. [But] our
human science depends exclusively on our representations and
concept-formations; by means of these we may, of course, make
inferences extending to what is transcendent; but in principle
we cannot obtain actual representations of the things-in-themselves, representations which adequately express the proper essence of these things. We have adequate representations and
knowledge only of what is in our own soul.

§ 23.

Berkeley. David Hume's psychology as
fictionalistic theory of knowledge:
the "bankruptcy9' of philosophy and science.

LOCKE'S NAIVETES and inconsistencies lead to a rapid
further development of his empiricism, which pushes toward a
paradoxical idealism and finally ends in a consummated absurdity. The foundation continues to be sensationalism and what
appears to be obvious, i.e., that the sole indubitable ground of all
knowledge is self-experience and its realm of immanent data.
Starting from here, Berkeley reduces the bodily things which
appear in natural experience to the complexes of sense-data
themselves through which they appear. No inference is thinkable, [according to Berkeley,] through which conclusions could be
drawn from these sense-data about anything but other such

Part II /

87

data. It could only be inductive inference, i.e., inference growing
out of the association of ideas. Matter existing in itself, a je ne
sais quoi, according to Locke, is [for Berkeley] a philosophical
invention. It is also significant that at the same time he dissolves
the manner in which rational natural science builds concepts
and transforms it into a sensationalistic critique of knowledge.
In this direction, Hume goes on to the end. All categories of
objectivity—the scientific ones through which an objective, extrapsychic world is thought in scientific life, and the prescientific
ones through which it is thought in everyday life—are fictions.
First come the mathematical concepts: number, magnitude,
continuum, geometrical figure, etc. We would say that they are
methodically necessary idealizations of what is given intuitively.
For Hume, however, they are fictions; and the same is true,
accordingly, of the whole of supposedly apodictic mathematics.
The origin of these fictions can be explained perfectly well psychologically (i.e., in terms of immanent sensationalism),
namely, through the immanent lawfulness of the associations
and the relations between ideas. But even the categories of the
prescientific world, of the straightforwardly intuited world—
those of corporeity (i.e., the identity of persisting bodies supposedly found in immediate, experiencing intuition), as well as
the supposedly experienced identity of the person—are nothing but fictions. We say, for example, "that" tree over there,
and distinguish from it its changing manners of appearing
[Erscheinungsweisen]. But immanently, psychically, there is
nothing there but these "manners of appearing." These are complexes of data, and again and again other complexes of data—
"bound together," regulated, to be sure, by association, which
explains the illusion of experiencing something identical. The
same is true of the person: an identical "I" is not a datum but a
ceaselessly changing bundle of data. Identity is a psychological
fiction. To the fictions of this sort also belongs causality, or
necessary succession. Immanent experience exhibits only a post
hoc. The propter hoc, the necessity of the succession, is a fictive
misconstruction. Thus, in Hume's Treatise, the world in general,
nature, the universe of identical bodies, the world of identical
persons, and accordingly also objective science, which knows
these in their objective truth, are transformed into fiction. To be
consistent, we must say: reason, knowledge, including that of
true values, of pure ideals of every sort, including the ethical—
all this is fiction.

88

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

This is indeed, then, a bankruptcy of objective knowledge.
Hume ends up, basically, in a solipsism. For how could inferences from data to other data ever reach beyond the immanent
sphere? Of course, Hume did not ask the question, or at least did
not say a word, about the status of the reason—Hume's—which
established this theory as truth, which carried out these analyses
of the soul and demonstrated these laws of association. How do
rules of associative ordering "bind"? Even if we knew about
them, would not that knowledge itself be another datum on the
tablet?
Like all skepticism, all irrationalism, the Humean sort cancels itself out. Astounding as Hume's genius is, it is the more
regrettable that a correspondingly great philosophical ethos is
not joined with it. This is evident in the fact that Hume takes
care, throughout his whole presentation, blandly to disguise or
interpret as harmless his absurd results, though he does paint a
picture (in the final chapter of Volume I of the Treatise) of the
immense embarrassment in which the consistent theoretical philosopher gets involved. Instead of taking up the struggle against
absurdity, instead of unmasking those supposedly obvious views
upon which this sensationalism, and psychologism in general,
rests, in order to penetrate to a coherent self-understanding and
a genuine theory of knowledge, he remains in the comfortable
and very impressive role of academic skepticism. Through this
attitude he has become the father of a still effective, unhealthy
positivism which hedges before philosophical abysses, or covers
them over on the surface, and comforts itself with the successes
of the positive sciences and their psychologistic elucidation.

§ 24.

The genuine philosophical motif hidden
in the absurdity of Hume's skepticism:
the shaking of objectivism.

LET US STOP FOR A MOMENT. Why does Hume's Treatise
(in comparison to which the Essay Concerning Human Understanding is badly watered down) represent such a great historical event? What happened there? The Cartesian radicalism of
presuppositionlessness, with the goal of tracing genuine seien-

Part II /

89

tific knowledge back to the ultimate sources of validity and of
grounding it absolutely upon them, required reflections directed
toward the subject, required the regression to the knowing ego in
his immanence. No matter how little one may have approved of
Descartes's epistemological procedure, one could no longer escape the necessity of this requirement. But was it possible to
improve upon Descartes's procedure? Was his goal, that of
grounding absolutely the new philosophical rationalism, still attainable after the skeptical attacks? Speaking in favor of this
from the start was the immense force of discoveries in mathematics and natural science that were proceeding at breakneck
speed. And so all who themselves took part in these sciences
through research or study were already certain that its truth, its
method, bore the stamp of finality and exemplariness. And now
empiricist skepticism brings to light what was already present in
the Cartesian fundamental investigation but was not worked
out, namely, that all knowledge of the world, the prescientific as
well as the scientific, is an enormous enigma. It was easy to
follow Descartes, when he went back to the apodictic ego, in
interpreting the latter as soul, in taking the primal self-evidence
to be the self-evidence of "inner perception." And what was more
plausible than the way in which Locke illustrated the reality of
the detached soul and the history [Geschichtlichkeit] running its
course within it, its internal genesis, by means of the "white
paper" 1 and thus naturalized this reality? But now, could the
Idealism" of Berkeley and Hume, and finally skepticism with all
its absurdity, be avoided? What a paradox! Nothing could cripple the peculiar force of the rapidly growing and, in their own
accomplishments, unassailable exact sciences or the belief in
their truth. And yet, as soon as one took into account that they
are the accomplishments of the consciousness of knowing subjects, their self-evidence and clarity were transformed into incomprehensible absurdity. No offense was taken if, in Descartes,
immanent sensibility engendered pictures of the world; but in
Berkeley this sensibility engendered the world of bodies itself;
and in Hume the entire soul, with its "impressions" and "ideas,"
the forces belonging to it, conceived of by analogy to physical
forces, its laws of association (as parallels to the law of gravity!), engendered the whole world, the world itself, not merely
something like a picture—though, to be sure, this product was
1. Husserl uses the English term.

90

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

merely a fiction, a representation put together inwardly which
was actually quite vague. And this is true of the world of the
rational sciences as well as that of experientia vaga.
Was there not, here, in spite of the absurdity which may
have been due to particular aspects of the presuppositions, a
hidden and unavoidable truth to be felt? Was this not the revelation of a completely new way of assessing the objectivity of the
world and its whole ontic meaning and, correlatively, that of the
objective sciences, a way which did not attack their 2 own validity but did attack their philosophical or metaphysical claim, that
of absolute truth? Now at last it was possible and necessary to
become aware of the fact—which had remained completely unconsidered in these sciences—that the life of consciousness is a
life of accomplishment: the accomplishment, right or wrong, of
ontic meaning, even sensibly intuited meaning, and all the more
of scientific meaning. Descartes had not pondered the fact that,
just as the sensible world, that of everyday life, is the cogitatum
of sensing cogitationes, so the scientific world is the cogitatum of
scientific cogitationes; and he had not noticed the circle in which
he was involved when he presupposed, in his proof of the existence of God, the possibility of inferences transcending the ego,
when this possibility, after all, was supposed to be established
only through this proof. The thought was quite remote from him
that the whole world could itself be a cogitatum arising out of
the universal synthesis of the variously flowing cogitationes and
that, on a higher level, the rational accomplishment of the scientific cogitationes, built upon the former ones, could be constitutive of the scientific world. But was this thought not suggested,
now, by Berkeley and Hume—under the presupposition that the
absurdity of their empiricism lay only in [a belief] that was
supposedly obvious, through which immanent reason had been
driven out in advance? Through Berkeley's and Hume's revival
and radicalization of the Cartesian fundamental problem, "dogmatic" objectivism was, from the point of view of our critical
presentation, shaken to the foundations. This is true not only of
the mathematizing objectivism, so inspiring to people of the
time, which actually ascribed to the world itself a mathematicalrational in-itself (which we copy, so to speak, better and better
in our more or less perfect theories); it was also true of the
general objectivism which had been dominant for millennia.
2. Reading deren for dessen.

Part II /

§25.

91

The "transcendental" motif in rationalism:
KanVs conception of a transcendental
philosophy.

As is KNOWN, Hume has a particular place in history
also because of the turn he brought about in the development of
Kant's thinking. Kant himself says, in the much-quoted words,
that Hume roused him from his dogmatic slumbers and gave his
investigations in the field of speculative philosophy a different
direction. Was it, then, the historical mission of Kant to experience the shaking of objectivism, of which I just spoke, and to
undertake in his transcendental philosophy the solution of the
task before which Hume drew back? The answer must be negative. It is a new sort of transcendental subjectivism which begins
with Kant and changes into new forms in the systems of German
idealism. Kant does not belong to the development which expands in a continuous line from Descartes through Locke, and
he is not the successor of Hume. His interpretation of the Humean skepticism and the way in which he reacts against it are
determined by his own provenance in the Wolffian school. The
"revolution of the way of thinking" motivated by Hume's impulse
is not directed against empiricism but against post-Cartesian
rationalism's way of thinking, whose great consummator was
Leibniz and which was given its systematic textbook-like presentation, its most effective and by far most convincing form, by
Christian Wolff.
First of all, what is the meaning of the "dogmatism," taken
quite generally, that Kant uproots? Although the Meditations
continued to have their effect on post-Cartesian philosophy, the
passionate radicalism which drove them was not passed on to
Descartes's successors. They were quite prepared to accept what
Descartes only wished to establish, and found so hard to establish, by inquiring back into the ultimate source of all knowledge:
namely, the absolute metaphysical validity of the objective sciences, or, taking these together, of philosophy as the one objective universal science; or, what comes to the same thing, the
right of the knowing ego to let its rational constructs, in virtue of

92

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

the self-evidences occurring in its mens, count as nature with a
meaning transcending this ego. The new conception of the world
of bodies, self-enclosed as nature, and the natural sciences related to them, the correlative conception of the self-enclosed
souls and the task, related to them, of a new psychology with a
rational method according to the mathematical model—all this
had established itself. In every direction rational philosophy was
under construction; of primary interest were discoveries, theories, the rigor of their inferences, and correspondingly the general problem of method and its perfection. Thus knowledge was
very much discussed, and from a scientifically general point of
view. This reflection on knowledge, however, was not transcendental reflection but rather a reflection on the praxis of knowledge
and was thus similar to the reflection carried out by one who
works in any other practical sphere of interest, the kind which is
expressed in the general propositions of a technology. It is a
matter of what we are accustomed to call logic, though in a
traditional, very narrow, and limited sense. Thus we can say
quite correctly (broadening the meaning): it is a matter of a
logic as a theory of norms and a technology 1 with the fullest
universality, to the end of attaining a universal philosophy.
The thematic direction was thus twofold: on the one hand,
toward a systematic universe of "logical laws," the theoretical
totality of the truths destined to function as norms for all judgments which shall be capable of being objectively true—and to
this belongs, in addition to the old formal logic, also arithmetic,
all of pure analytic mathematics, i.e., the mathesis universalis of
Leibniz, and in general everything that is purely a priori.
On the other hand, the thematic direction was toward general considerations about those who make judgments as those
striving for objective truth: how they are to make normative use
of those laws so that the self-evidence through which a judgment
is certified as objectively true can appear, and similarly about
the ways and temptations of failure, etc.
Now clearly, in all the laws which are in the broader sense
"logical," beginning with the principle of noncontradiction,
metaphysical truth was contained eo ipso. The systematically
worked-out theory of these laws had, of itself, the meaning of a
general ontology. What happened here scientifically was the
work of pure reason operating exclusively with concepts innate
in the knowing soul. That these concepts, that logical laws, that
i. Kunstlehre. See Husserl's discussion of logic as a Kunstlehre in
Logische Untersuchungen, Vol. I, Chapters I and II.

Part II /

93

pure rational lawfulness in general contained metaphysicalobjective truth was "obvious/' Occasionally appeal was made to
God as a guarantee, in remembrance of Descartes, with little
concern for the fact that it was rational metaphysics which first
had to establish God's existence.
Over against the faculty of pure a priori thinking, that of
pure reason, stood that of sensibility, the faculty of outer and
inner experience. The subject, affected in outer experience from
"outside," thereby becomes certain of affecting objects, but in
order to know them in their truth he needs pure reason, i.e., the
system of norms in which reason displays itself, as the 'logic5' for
all true knowledge of the objective world. Such is the [typical
rationalist] conception.
As for Kant, who had been influenced by empiricist psychology: Hume had made him sensitive to the fact that between the
pure truths of reason and metaphysical objectivity there remained a gulf of incomprehensibility, namely, as to how
precisely these truths of reason could really guarantee the knowledge of things. Even the model rationality of the mathematical
natural sciences was transformed into an enigma. That it owed
its rationality, which was in fact quite indubitable—that is, its
method—to the normative a priori of pure logicomathematical
reason, and that the latter, in its disciplines, exhibited an unassailable pure rationality, remained unquestioned. Natural science is, to be sure, not purely rational insofar as it has need of
outer experience, sensibility; but everything in it that is rational
it owes to pure reason and its setting of norms; only through
them can there be rationalized experience. As for sensibility, on
the other hand, it had generally been assumed that it gives rise
to the merely sensible data, precisely as a result of affection
from the outside. And yet one acted as if the experiential world
of the prescientific man—the world not yet logicized by mathematics—was the world pregiven by mere sensibility.
Hume had shown that we naively read causality into this
world and think that we grasp necessary succession in intuition.
The same is true of everything that makes the body of the
everyday surrounding world into an identical thing with identical properties, relations, etc. (and Hume had in fact worked this
out in detail in the Treatise, which was unknown to Kant). Data
and complexes of data come and go, but the thing, presumed to
be simply experienced sensibly, is not something sensible which
persists through this alteration. The sensationalist thus declares
it to be a fiction.

94

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

He is substituting, we shall say, mere sense-data for perception, which after all places things (everyday things) before our
eyes. In other words, he overlooks the fact that mere sensibility,
related to mere data of sense, cannot account for objects of experience. Thus he overlooks the fact that these objects of
experience point to a hidden mental accomplishment and to the
problem of what kind of an accomplishment this can be. From
the very start, after all, it must be a kind which enables [the
objects of] prescientific experience, through logic, mathematics,
mathematical natural science, to be knowable with objective
validity, i.e., with a necessity which can be accepted by and is
binding for everyone.
But Kant says to himself: undoubtedly things appear, but
only because the sense-data, already brought together in certain
ways, in concealment, through a priori forms, are made logical
in the course of their alteration—without any appeal to reason
as manifested in logic and mathematics, without its being
brought into normative function. Now is this quasilogical
[function] something that is psychologically accidental? If we
think of it as absent, can a mathematics, a logic of nature, ever
have the possibility of knowing objects through mere sensedata?
These are, if I am not mistaken, the inwardly guiding
thoughts of Kant. Kant now undertakes, in fact, to show,
through a regressive procedure, that if common experience is
really to be experience of objects of nature, objects which can
really be knowable with objective truth, i.e., scientifically, in
respect to their being and nonbeing, their being-such and beingotherwise [So- und Andersbeschaffensein], then the intuitively
appearing world must already be a construct of the faculties of
"pure intuition" and "pure reason," the same faculties that express themselves in explicit thinking in mathematics and logic.
In other words, reason has a twofold way of functioning and
showing itself. One way is its systematic self-exposition, selfrevelation in free and pure mathematizing, in the practice of the
pure mathematical sciences. Here it presupposes the forming
character of "pure intuition," which belongs to sensibility itself.
The objective result of both faculties is pure mathematics as
theory. The other way is that of reason constantly functioning in
concealment, reason ceaselessly rationalizing sense-data and always having them as already rationalized. Its objective result is
the sensibly intuited world of objects—the empirical presupposition of all natural-scientific thinking, i.e., the thinking which,

Part II /

95

through manifest mathematical reason, consciously gives norms
to the experience of the surrounding world. Like the intuited
world of bodies, the whole world of natural science (and with it
the dualistic world which can be known scientifically) is a
subjective construct of our intellect; only the material of the
sense-data arises from a transcendent affection by "things in
themselves." The latter are in principle inaccessible to (objective-scientific) knowledge. For according to this theory, man's
science, as an accomplishment bound by the interplay of the
subjective faculties "sensibility" and "reason" (or, as Kant says
here, "understanding"), cannot explain the origin, the "cause,"
of the factual manifolds of sense-data. The ultimate presuppositions of the possibility and actuality of objective knowledge cannot be objectively knowable.
Whereas natural science had pretended to be a branch of
philosophy, the ultimate science of what is, and had believed
itself capable of knowing, through its rationality, what is in
itself, beyond the subjectivity of the factualities of knowledge,
for Kant, now, objective science, as an accomplishment remaining within subjectivity, is separated off from his philosophical
theory. The latter, as a theory of the accomplishments necessarily carried out within subjectivity, and thus as a theory of the
possibility and scope of objective knowledge, reveals the naivet6
of the supposed rational philosophy of nature-in-itself.
We know how this critique is for Kant nevertheless the
beginning of a philosophy in the old sense, for the universe of
being, thus extending even to the rationally unknowable in-itself
—how, under the titles "critique of practical reason" and "critique of judgment," he not only limits philosophical claims but
also believes he is capable of opening ways toward the "scientifically" unknowable in-itself. Here we shall not go into this. What
interests us now is—speaking in formal generality—that Kant,
reacting against the data-positivism of Hume (as he understands
it) outlines a great, systematically constructed, and in a new
way still scientific philosophy in which the Cartesian turn to
conscious subjectivity works itself out in the form of a transcendental subjectivism.2
Irrespective of the truth of the Kantian philosophy, about
which we need not pass judgment here, we must not pass over
the fact that Hume, as he is understood by Kant, is not the real
Hume.
2. See note 4 in this section.

96

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Kant speaks of the "Humean problem." What is the actual
problem, the one which drives Hume himself? We find it when
we transform Hume's skeptical theory, his total claim, back into
his problem, extending it to those consequences which do not
quite find their complete expression in the theory—although it is
difficult to suppose that a genius with a spirit like Hume's did not
see these consequences, which are not expressly drawn and not
theoretically treated. If we proceed in this way, we find nothing
less than this universal problem:
How is the naive obviousness of the certainty of the world,
the certainty in which we live—and, what is more, the certainty
of the everyday world as well as that of the sophisticated theoretical constructions built upon this everyday world—to be made
comprehensible? 3
What is, in respect to sense and validity, the "objective
world," objectively true being, and also the objective truth of
science, once we have seen universally with Hume (and in
respect to nature even with Berkeley) that "world" is a validity
which has sprung up within subjectivity, indeed—speaking from
my point of view, who am now philosophizing—one which has
sprung up within my subjectivity, with all the content it ever
counts as having for me?
The naivete of speaking about "objectivity" without ever considering subjectivity as experiencing, knowing, and actually concretely accomplishing, the naivete of the scientist of nature or of
the world in general, who is blind to the fact that all the truths
he attains as objective truths and the objective world itself as the
substratum of his formulae (the everyday world of experience as
well as the higher-level conceptual world of knowledge) axe his
own life-construct developed within himself—this naivete is naturally no longer possible as soon as life becomes the point of
focus. And must this liberation not come to anyone who seriously immerses himself in the Treatise and, after unmasking
Hume's naturalistic presuppositions, becomes conscious of the
power of his motivation?
But how is this most radical subjectivism, which subjectivizes the world itself, comprehensible? The world-enigma in the
deepest and most ultimate sense, the enigma of a world whose
being is being through subjective accomplishment, and this with
3. Husserl plays on words: how is the naive Selbstverständlichkeit of our certainty of the world to be transformed into a true Verständlichkeit?

Part II /

97

the self-evidence that another world cannot be at all conceivable
—that, and nothing else, is Hume's problem.
Kant, however, for whom, as can easily be seen, so many
presuppositions are "obviously" valid, presuppositions which in
the Humean sense are included within this world-enigma, never
penetrated to the enigma itself. For his set of problems stands on
the ground of the rationalism extending from Descartes through
Leibniz to Wolff.
In this way, through the problem of rational natural science
which primarily guides and determines Kant's thinking, we seek
to make understandable Kant's position, so difficult to interpret,
in relation to his historical setting. What particularly interests us
now—speaking first in formal generality—is the fact that in
reaction to the Humean data-positivism, which in his fictionalism gives up philosophy as a science, a great and systematically
constructed scientific philosophy appears for the first time since
Descartes—a philosophy which must be called transcendental
subjectivism.4

§ 26.

Preliminary discussion of the concept of
the "transcendental" which guides us here.

I SHOULD LIKE TO NOTE the following right away: the
expression "transcendental philosophy" has been much used
since Kant, even as a general title for universal philosophies
whose concepts are oriented toward those of the Kantian type. I
myself use the word "transcendental" in the broadest sense for
the original motif, discussed in detail above, which through
Descartes confers meaning upon all modern philosophies, the
motif which, in all of them, seeks to come to itself, so to speak
—seeks to attain the genuine and pure form of its task and its
systematic development. It is the motif of inquiring back into the
ultimate source of all the formations of knowledge, the motif of
the knower's reflecting upon himself and his knowing life in
4. This sentence is almost identical to the sentence indicated by
note 1 above, which gives a good indication of the rough state of the
missing MS, even though it was submitted and published in Philosophia. See Translator's Introduction, p. xviii.

98

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

which all the scientific structures that are valid for him occur
purposefully, are stored up as acquisitions, and have become and
continue to become freely available. Working itself out radically,
it is the motif of a universal philosophy which is grounded
purely in this source and thus ultimately grounded. This source
bears the title I-myself, with all of my actual and possible knowing life and, ultimately, my concrete life in general. The whole
transcendental set of problems circles around the relation of
this, my "I"—the "ego"—to what it is at first taken for granted to
be—my soul—and, again, around the relation of this ego and
my conscious life to the world of which I am conscious and
whose true being I know through my own cognitive structures.
Of course this most general concept of the "transcendentaF
cannot be supported by documents; it is not to be gained through
the internal exposition and comparison of the individual systems. Rather, it is a concept acquired by pondering the coherent
history of the entire philosophical modern period: the concept of
its task which is demonstrable only in this way, lying within it as
the driving force of its development, striving forward from
vague dynamis towards its energeia.
This is only a preliminary indication, which has already been
prepared to a certain extent by our historical analysis up to this
point; our subsequent presentations are to establish the justification for our kind of "teleologicaT approach to history and its
methodical function for the definitive construction of a transcendental philosophy which satisfies its most proper meaning.
This preliminary indication of a radical transcendental subjectivism will naturally seem strange and arouse skepticism. I welcome this, if this skepticism bespeaks, not the prior resolve of
rejection, but rather a free withholding of any judgment.

§ 27.

The philosophy of Kant and his followers
seen from the perspective of our guiding
concept of the "transcendental." The task
of taking a critical position.

RETURNING AGAIN TO KANT : his system can certainly be
characterized, in the general sense defined, as one of "transcen-

Part II /

99

dental philosophy," although it is far from accomplishing a truly
radical grounding of philosophy, the totality of all sciences. Kant
never permitted himself to enter the vast depths of the Cartesian
fundamental investigation, and his own set of problems never
caused him to seek in these depths for ultimate groundings and
decisions. Should I, in the following presentations, succeed—as I
hope—in awakening the insight that a transcendental philosophy is the more genuine, and better fulfills its vocation as philosophy, the more radical it is and, finally, that it comes to its
actual and true existence, to its actual and true beginning, only
when the philosopher has penetrated to a clear understanding of
himself as the subjectivity functioning as primal source, we
should still have to recognize, on the other hand, that Kant's
philosophy is on the way to this, that it is in accord with the
formal, general sense of a transcendental philosophy in our
definition. It is a philosophy which, in opposition to prescientific
and scientific objectivism, goes back to knowing subjectivity as
the primal locus of all objective formations of sense and ontic
validities, undertakes to understand the existing world as a
structure of sense and validity, and in this way seeks to set in
motion an essentially new type of scientific attitude and a new
type of philosophy. In fact, if we do not count the negativistic,
skeptical philosophy of a Hume, the Kantian system is the first
attempt, and one carried out with impressive scientific seriousness, at a truly universal transcendental philosophy meant to be
a rigorous science in a sense of scientific rigor which has only
now been discovered and which is the only genuine sense.
Something similar holds, we can say in advance, for the
great continuations and revisions of Kantian transcendentalism
in the great systems of German Idealism. They all share the
basic conviction that the objective sciences (no matter how
much they, and particularly the exact sciences, may consider
themselves, in virtue of their obvious theoretical and practical
accomplishments, to be in possession of the only true method
and to be treasure houses of ultimate truths) are not seriously
sciences at all, not cognitions ultimately grounded, i.e., not ultimately, theoretically responsible for themselves—and that they
are not, then, cognitions of what exists in ultimate truth. This
can be accomplished [according to German Idealism] only by a
transcendental-subjective method and, carried through as a system, transcendental philosophy. As was already the case with
Kant, the opinion is not that the self-evidence of the positive-scientific method is an illusion and its accomplishment an illusory

100

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

accomplishment but rather that this self-evidence is itself a
problem; that the objective-scientific method rests upon a never
questioned, deeply concealed subjective ground whose philosophical elucidation will for the first time reveal the true
meaning of the accomplishments of positive science and, correctively, the true ontic meaning of the objective world—precisely
as a transcendental-subjective meaning.
Now in order to be able to understand the position of Kant
and of the systems of transcendental idealism proceeding from
him, within modern philosophy's teleological unity of meaning,
and thus to make progress in our own self-understanding, it is
necessary to critically get closer to the style of Kant's scientific
attitude and to clarify the lack of radicalism we are attacking in
his philosophizing. It is with good reason that we pause over
Kant, a significant turning point in modern history. The critique
to be directed against him will reflect back and elucidate all
earlier philosophical history, namely, in respect to the general
meaning of scientific discipline which all earlier philosophies
strove to realize—as the only meaning which lay and could
possibly lie within their spiritual horizon. Precisely in this way a
more profound concept—the most important of all—of "objectivism" will come to the fore (more important than the one we
were able to define earlier), and with it the genuinely radical
meaning of the opposition between objectivism and transcendentalism.
Yet, over and above this, the more concrete critical analyses
of the conceptual structures of the Kantian turn, and the contrast between it and the Cartesian turn, will set in motion our
own concurrent thinking in such a way as to place us, gradually
and of its own accord, before the final turn and the final decisions. We ourselves shall be drawn into an inner transformation
through which we shall come face to face with, to direct experience of, the long-felt but constantly concealed dimension of the
"transcendental." The ground of experience, opened up in its
infinity, will then become the fertile soil of a methodical working
philosophy, with the self-evidence, furthermore, that all conceivable philosophical and scientific problems of the past are to be
posed and decided by starting from this ground.

P A R T

I I I

The Clarification of the
Transcendental Problem
and the Related
Function of Psychology1
i. The appendix to the German edition contains a manuscript
entitled "Foreword to the Continuation of the Crisis/' which begins
with the following paragraph:
"Herewith appears, unfortunately very much delayed, the continuation of this work which was begun in the first volume of Philosophia with two introductory sections. Insurmountable inhibitions, the
effects of my faltering health, forced me to neglect drafts which were
long since ready. With this there arose a pause which is dangerous
for the understanding of the teleological-historical way attempted
here to the conception of the idea and method of transcendental phenomenology. The resulting situation has become somewhat similar to
that which would arise if the presentation of a great musical work
were to break off with the conclusion of the overture, and indeed in
such a way that the actual work (the opera itself) to which it points
the way, and which it has created a vital readiness to understand, was
then to be performed sometime later without repetition of the overture" (Krisis, p. 435).
The rest of this "Foreword" (some n pages) reveals that it was
destined for a revision of Part III which was never made. It gives reasons for postponing the further critique of Kant promised at the end
of Part II in favor of a nonhistorical exposition, presumably that of
the life-world; whereas the extant version of Part III does deal with
Kant at the beginning. It is for this reason that I have not included a
full translation of this text. Some interesting passages are quoted in
the Translator's Introduction, pp. xxviiif. (See also p. xviii, note 5.)

A.
THE WAY INTO PHENOMENOLOGICAL
TRANSCENDENTAL PHILOSOPHY BY INQUIRING
BACK FROM THE P R E G I V E N

§28.

LlFE-WoRLD

KanVs unexpressed "presupposition": the
surrounding world of life, taken for granted
as valid.

KANT IS CERTAIN that his philosophy will bring the
dominant rationalism to its downfall by exhibiting the inadequacy of its foundations. He rightly reproaches rationalism for
neglecting questions which should have been its fundamental
questions; that is, it had never penetrated to the subjective
structure of our world-consciousness prior to and within scientific knowledge and thus had never asked how the world, which
appears straightforwardly to us men, and to us as scientists,
comes to be knowable a priori—how, that is, the exact science of
nature is possible, the science for which, after all, pure mathematics, together with a further pure a priori, is the instrument of
all knowledge which is objective, [i.e.,] unconditionally valid for
everyone who is rational (who thinks logically).
But Kant, for his part, has no idea that in his philosophizing
he stands on unquestioned presuppositions and that the undoubtedly great discoveries in his theories are there only in
concealment; that is, they are not there as finished results, just
as the theories themselves are not finished theories, i.e., do not
have a definitive scientific form. What he offers demands new
work and, above all, critical analysis. An example of a great
discovery—a merely preliminary discovery—is the "understand-

[103]

104

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

ing" which has, in respect to nature, two functions: 1 understanding interpreting itself, in explicit self-reflection, as normative
laws, and, on the other hand, understanding ruling in concealment, i.e., ruling as constitutive of the always already
developed and always further developing meaning-configuration
"intuitively given surrounding world." This discovery could never
be actually grounded or even be fully comprehensible in the
manner of the Kantian theory, i.e., as a result of his merely
regressive method. In the "transcendental deduction" of the first
edition of the Critique of Pure Reason Kant makes an approach
to a direct grounding, one which descends to the original
sources, only to break off again almost at once without arriving
at the genuine problems of foundation which are to be opened
up from this supposedly psychological side.
We shall begin our considerations by showing that Kant's
inquiries in the critique of reason have an unquestioned ground
of presuppositions which codetermine the meaning of his questions. Sciences to whose truths and methods Kant attributes
actual validity become a problem, and with them the spheres of
being [Seinssphären] themselves to which these sciences refer.
They become a problem in virtue of certain questions which take
knowing subjectivity, too, into account, questions which find
their answer in theories about transcendentally forming subjectivity, about the transcendental achievements of sensibility, of
the understanding, etc., and, on the highest level, theories about
functions of the "I" of "transcendental apperception." What had
become an enigma, the achievement of mathematical natural
science and of pure mathematics (in our broadened sense) as its
logical method, was supposed to have been made comprehensible through these theories; but the theories also led to a revolutionary reinterpretation of the actual ontic meaning of nature as
the world of possible experience and possible knowledge and
thus correlatively to the reinterpretation of the actual truthmeaning of the sciences concerned.
Naturally, from the very start in the Kantian manner of
posing questions, the everyday surrounding world of life is presupposed as existing—the surrounding world in which all of us
(even I who am now philosophizing) consciously have our existence; here are also the sciences, as cultural facts in this world,
with their scientists and theories. In this world we are objects
among objects in the sense of the life-world, namely, as being
i. Reading ". . . ist der hinsichtlich der Natur doppelt fungierende Verstand. . . ."

Part III A /

105

here and there, in the plain certainty of experience, before anything that is established scientifically, whether in physiology,
psychology, or sociology. On the other hand, we are subjects for
this world, namely, as the ego-subjects experiencing it, contemplating it, valuing it, related to it purposefully; for us this surrounding world has only the ontic meaning given to it by our
experiencings, our thoughts, our valuations, etc.; and it has the
modes of validity (certainty of being, possibility, perhaps illusion, etc.) which we, as the subjects of validity, at the same time
bring about or else possess from earlier on as habitual acquisitions and bear within us as validities of such and such a content
which we can reactualize at will. To be sure, all this undergoes
manifold alterations, whereas "the" world, as existing in a unified way, persists throughout, being corrected only in its content.
Clearly the content-alteration of the perceived object, being
change or motion perceived as belonging to the object itself, is
distinguished with self-evidence from the alteration of its manners of appearing (e.g., the perspectives, the near and far
appearances) through which something objective of this type exhibits itself as being itself present. We see this in the change of
[our] attitude. [If we are] directed straightforwardly toward the
object and what belongs to it, [our] gaze passes through the
appearances toward what continuously appears through their
continuous unification: the object, with the ontic validity of the
mode "itself present." In the reflective attitude, [by contrast,] we
have not a one but a manifold. Now the sequence of the appearances themselves is thematic, rather than what appears in them.
Perception is the primal mode of intuition [Anschauung]; it
exhibits with primial originality, that is, in the mode of self-presence. In addition, there are other modes of intuition which in
themselves consciously have the character of [giving us] modifications of this "itself there" as themselves present. These are
presentifications, modifications of presentations; 2 they make us
conscious of the modalities of time, e.g., not that which zs-itselfthere but that which was-itself-there or that which is in the
future, that which will-be-itseHc-iheie. Presentifying intuitions
"recapitulate"—in certain modifications belonging to them—all
the manifolds of appearance through which what is objective
exhibits itself perceptively. Recollecting intuition, for example,
2. Vergegenwärtigungen, i.e., modifications of Gegenwärtigungen. The former are explicit acts of rendering consciously present
that which is not "itself present," as in the case of recollection or imagination.

106

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

shows the object as having-been-itself-there, recapitulating the
perspectivization and other manners of appearing, though in
recollective modifications. I am now conscious of this perspectivization as one which has been, a sequence of subjective "exhibitions of," having-been in my earlier ontic validities.
Here we can now clarify the very limited justification for
speaking of a sense-world, a world of sense-intuition, a sensible
world of appearances. In all the verifications of the life of our
natural interests, which remain purely in the life-world, the
return to "sensibly" experiencing intuition plays a prominent
role. For everything that exhibits itself in the life-world as a
concrete thing obviously has a bodily character, even if it is not a
mere body, as, for example, an animal or a cultural object, i.e.,
even if it also has psychic or otherwise spiritual properties. If we
pay attention now purely to the bodily aspect of the things, this
obviously exhibits itself perceptively only in seeing, in touching,
in hearing, etc., i.e., in visual, tactual, acoustical, and other such
aspects. Obviously and inevitably participating in this is our
living body, which is never absent from the perceptual field, and
specifically its corresponding "organs of perception" (eyes, hands,
ears, etc.). In consciousness they play a constant role here;
specifically they function in seeing, hearing, etc., together with
the ego's motility belonging to them, i.e., what is called kinesthesis. All kinestheses, each being an "I move," "I do," [etc.] are
bound together in a comprehensive unity—in which kinesthetic
holding-still is [also] a mode of the "I do." Clearly the aspect-exhibitions of whatever body is appearing in perception, and the
kinestheses, are not processes [simply running] alongside each
other; rather, they work together in such a way that the aspects
have the ontic meaning of, or the validity of, aspects of the body
only through the fact that they are those aspects continually required by the kinestheses—by the kinesthetic-sensual total situation in each of its working variations of the total kinesthesis by
setting in motion this or that particular kinesthesis—and that
they correspondingly fulfill the requirement.
Thus sensibility, the ego's active functioning of the living
body or the bodily organs, belongs in a fundamental, essential
way to all experience of bodies. It proceeds in consciousness not
as a mere series of body-appearances, as if these in themselves,
through themselves alone and their coalescences, were appearance of bodies; rather, they are such in consciousness only in
combination with the kinesthetically functioning living body
[Leiblichkeit], the ego functioning here in a peculiar sort of

Part III A /

107

activity and habituality. In a quite unique way the living body is
constantly in the perceptual field quite immediately, with a completely unique ontic meaning, precisely the meaning indicated
by the word "organ" (here used in its most primitive sense),
[namely, as] that through which I exist in a completely unique
way and quite immediately as the ego of affection and actions,
[as that] in which I hold sway 3 quite immediately, kinesthetically—articulated into particular organs through which I hold
sway, or potentially hold sway, in particular kinestheses corresponding to them. And this "holding-sway," here exhibited as
functioning in all perception of bodies—the familiar, total system of kinestheses available to consciousness—is actualized in
the particular kinesthetic situation [and] is perpetually bound to
a [general] situation in which bodies appear, i.e., that of the field
of perception. To the variety of appearances through which a
body is perceivable as this one-and-the-same body correspond, in
their own way, the kinestheses which belong to this body; as
these kinestheses are allowed to run their course, the corresponding required appearances must show up in order to be
appearances of this body at all, i.e., in order to be appearances
which exhibit in themselves this body with its properties.
Thus, purely in terms of perception, physical body and living
body [Körper und Leib]4 are essentially different; living body,
that is, [understood] as the only one which is actually given [to
me as such] in perception: my own living body. How the consciousness originates through which my living body nevertheless
acquires the ontic validity of one physical body among others,
and how, on the other hand, certain physical bodies in my
perceptual field come to count as living bodies, living bodies of
"alien" ego-subjects—these are now necessary questions.
In our reflections we confined ourselves to the perceiving
consciousness of things, to one's own perceiving of them, to my
perceptual field. Here my own living body alone, and never an
alien living body, can be perceived as living; the latter is per3. walten. "Holding sway" is somewhat awkward in Enerlish, but
it seems to best approximate Husserl's use of this archaic term. The
latter is often used in religious language (Gottes Walten) to signify
God's rule and power over the world and his intervention in its affairs.
The English "wield" is related to it but is transitive. Husserl uses the
term primarily in connection with the living body (unlike Heidegger,
who resurrected it for a different purpose), meaning one's "wielding"
of the body and its organs so as to have some control of one's surroundings.
4. See § 9, note 15.

I08

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

ceived only as a physical body. In my perceptual field I find
myself holding sway as ego through my organs and generally
through everything belonging to me as an ego in my ego-acts and
faculties. However, though the objects of the life-world, if they
are to show their very own being, necessarily show themselves as
physical bodies, this does not mean that they show themselves
only in this way; and [similarly] we, though we are related
through the living body to all objects which exist for us, are not
related to them solely as a living body. Thus if it is a question of
objects in the perceptual field, we are perceptually also in the
field;5 and the same is true, in modification, of every intuitive
field, and even of every nonintuitive one, since we are obviously
capable of "representing" to ourselves everything which is nonintuitively before us (though we are sometimes temporally limited
in this). [Being related] "through the living body" clearly does
not mean merely [being related] "as a physical body"; rather, the
expression refers to the kinesthetic, to functioning as an ego in
this peculiar way, primarily through seeing, hearing, etc.; and of
course other modes of the ego belong to this (for example,
lifting, carrying, pushing, and the like).
But being an ego through the living body [die leibliche Ichlichkeit] is of course not the only way of being an ego, and none
of its ways can be severed from the others; throughout all their
transformations they form a unity. Thus we are concretely in the
field of perception, etc., and in the field of consciousness, however broadly we may conceive this, through our living body, but
not only in this way, as full ego-subjects, each of us as the
full-fledged "I-the-man." Thus in whatever way we may be conscious of the world as universal horizon, as coherent universe of
existing objects, we, each "I-the-man" and all of us together,
belong to the world as living with one another in the world; and
the world is our world, valid for our consciousness as existing
precisely through this "living together." We, as living in wakeful
world-consciousness, are constantly active on the basis of our
passive having of the world; it is from there, by objects pregiven
in consciousness, that we are aflPected; it is to this or that object
that we pay attention, according to our interests; with them we
deal actively in different ways; through our acts they are "thematic" objects. As an example I give the observant explication of
the properties of something which appears perceptively, or our
activity of combining, relating, actively identifying and distin5. I.e., as a physical body (Körper).

Part III A /

109

guishing, or our active evaluation, our projection of plans, our
active realization of the planned means and ends.
As subjects of acts (ego-subjects) we are directed toward
thematic objects in modes of primary and secondary, and perhaps also peripheral, directedness. In this preoccupation with
the objects the acts themselves are not thematic. But we are
capable of coming back and reflecting on ourselves and our
current activity: it now becomes thematic and objective through
a new act, the vitally functioning one, which itself is now unthematic.
The consciousness of the world, then, is in constant motion;
we are conscious of the world always in terms of some objectcontent or other, in the alteration of the different ways of being
conscious (intuitive, nonintuitive, determined, undetermined,
etc.) and also in the alteration of affection and action, in such a
way that there is always a total sphere of affection and such that
the affecting objects are now thematic, now unthematic; here we
also find ourselves, we who always and inevitably belong to the
affective sphere, always functioning as subjects of acts but only
occasionally being thematically objective as the object of preoccupation with ourselves.
Obviously this is true not only for me, the individual ego;
rather we, in living together, have the world pregiven in this
"together," as the world valid as existing for us and to which we,
together, belong, the world as world for all, pregiven with this
ontic meaning. Constantly functioning in wakeful life, we also
function together, in the manifold ways of considering, together,
objects pregiven to us in common, thinking together, valuing,
planning, acting together. Here we find also that particular thematic alteration in which the we-subjectivity, somehow constantly functioning, becomes a thematic object, whereby the acts
through which it functions also become thematic, though always
with a residuum which remains unthematic—remains, so to
speak, anonymous—namely, the reflections which are functioning in connection with this theme.*
* Naturally all activity, and thus also this reflecting activity, gives
rise to its habitual acquisitions. In observing, we attain habitual
knowledge, acquaintance with the object which exists for us in terms
of its previously unknown characteristics—and the same is true of
self-knowledge through self-observation. In the evaluation of ourselves and the plans and actions related to ourselves and our fellows,
we likewise attain self-values and ends concerning ourselves [which
become] our habitually persisting validities. But all knowledge in
general, all value-validities and ends in general, are, as having been

HO

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Considering ourselves in particular as the scientists that we
here factually find ourselves to be, what corresponds to our
particular manner of being as scientists is our present functioning in the manner of scientific thinking, putting questions and
answering them theoretically in relation to nature or the world
of the spirit; and [the latter are] at first nothing other than the
one or the other aspect of the life-world which, in advance, is
already valid, which we experience or are otherwise conscious of
either prescientifically or scientifically. Cofunctioning here are
the other scientists who, united with us in a community of
theory, acquire and have the same truths or, in the communalization of accomplishing acts, are united with us in a critical
transaction aimed at critical agreement. On the other hand, we
can be for others, and they for us, mere objects; rather than
being together in the unity of immediate, driving, common theoretical interest, we can get to know one another observingly,
taking note of others' acts of thought, acts of experiencing, and
possibly other acts as objective facts, but "disinterestedly," without joining in performing these acts, without critically assenting
to them or taking exception to them.
Naturally, all these things are the most obvious of the obvious. Must one speak about them, and with so much ado? In life
certainly not. But not as a philosopher either? Is this not the
opening-up of a realm, indeed an infinite realm, of always ready
and available but never questioned on tic validities? Are they not
constant presuppositions of scientific and, at the highest level,
philosophical thinking? Not, however, that it would or could
ever be a matter of utilizing these ontic validities in their objective truth.
It belongs to what is taken for granted, prior to all scientific
thought and all philosophical questioning, that the world is—always is in advance—and that every correction of an opinion,
whether an experiential or other opinion, presupposes the already existing world, namely, as a horizon of what in the given
case is indubitably valid as existing, and presupposes within this
horizon something familiar and doubtlessly certain with which
that which is perhaps canceled out as invalid came into conflict.
Objective science, too, asks questions only on the ground of this
world's existing in advance through prescientific life. Like all
praxis, objective science presupposes the being of this world, but
acquired through our activity, at the same time persisting properties
of ourselves as ego-subjects, as persons, and can be found in the reflective attitude as making up our own being.

Part III A /

in

it sets itself the task of transposing knowledge which is imperfect and prescientific in respect of scope and constancy into
perfect knowledge—in accord with an idea of a correlative
which is, to be sure, infinitely distant, i.e., of a world which in
itself is fixed and determined and of truths which are idealiter
scientific ("truths-in-themselves") and which predicatively interpret this world. To realize this in a systematic process, in stages
of perfection, through a method which makes possible a constant advance: this is the task.
For the human being in his surrounding world there are
many types of praxis, and among them is this peculiar and
historically late one, theoretical praxis. It has its own professional methods; it is the art of theories, of discovering and
securing truths with a certain new ideal sense which is foreign
to prescientific life, the sense of a certain "final validity," "universal validity."
Here we have again offered an example of exhibiting what is
"obvious," but this time in order to make clear that in respect to
all these manifold validities-in-advance, i.e., "presuppositions" of
the philosopher, there arise questions of being in a new and
immediately highly enigmatic dimension. These questions, too,
concern the obviously existing, ever intuitively pregiven world;
but they are not questions belonging to that professional praxis
and rkxvq which is called objective science, not questions belonging to that art of grounding and broadening the realm of
objectively scientific truths about this surrounding world; rather,
they are questions of how the object, the prescientifically and
then the scientifically true object, stands in relation to all the
subjective elements which everywhere have a voice in what is
taken for granted in advance.

§29.

The life-world can be disclosed as a realm
of subjective phenomena which have remained
"anonymous."

W H E N WE PROCEED, philosophizing with Kant, not by
starting from his beginning and moving forward in his paths but
by inquiring back into what was thus taken for granted (that of
which Kantian thinking, like everyone's thinking, makes use as

112

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

unquestioned and available), when we become conscious of it as
"presuppositions" and accord these their own universal and theoretical interest, there opens up to us, to our growing astonishment, an infinity of ever new phenomena belonging to a new
dimension, coming to light only through consistent penetration
into the meaning- and validity-implications of what was thus
taken for granted—an infinity, because continued penetration
shows that every phenomenon attained through this unfolding
of meaning, given at first in the life-world as obviously existing,
itself contains meaning- and validity-implications whose exposition leads again to new phenomena, and so on. These are purely
subjective phenomena throughout, but not merely facts involving psychological processes of sense-data; rather, they are mental [geistige] processes which, as such, exercise with essential
necessity the function of constituting forms of meaning
[Sinnesgestalten]. But they constitute them in each case out of
mental "material" which [itself] proves in turn, with essential
necessity, to be mental form, i.e., to be constituted; just as any
newly developed form [of meaning] is destined to become material, namely, to function in the constitution of [some new] form.
No objective science, no psychology—which, after all,
sought to become the universal science of the subjective—and
no philosophy has ever made thematic and thereby actually
discovered this realm of the subjective—not even the Kantian
philosophy, which sought, after all, to go back to the subjective
conditions of the possibility of an objectively experienceable and
knowable world. It is a realm of something subjective which is
completely closed off within itself, existing in its own way, functioning in all experiencing, all thinking, all life, thus everywhere
inseparably involved; yet it has never been held in view, never
been grasped and understood.
Does philosophy fulfill the sense of its primal establishment
as the universal and ultimately grounding science if it leaves this
realm to its "anonymity"? Can it do this, can any science do this
which seeks to be a branch of philosophy, i.e., which would
tolerate no presuppositions, no basic sphere of beings beneath
itself of which no one knows, which no one interrogates scientifically, which no one has mastered in a knowing way? I called the
sciences in general branches of philosophy, whereas it is such a
common conviction that the objective, the positive, sciences
stand on their own, are self-sufficient in virtue of their supposedly fully grounding and thus exemplary method. But in the end
is not the teleological unifying meaning running through all

Part III A /

113

attempted systems in the whole history of philosophy that of
achieving a breakthrough for the insight that science is only
possible at all as universal philosophy, the latter being, in all the
sciences, yet a single science, possible only as the totality of all
knowledge? And did this not imply that they all repose upon one
single ground [Grund], one to be investigated scientifically in
advance of all the others? And can this ground be, I may add,
any other than precisely that of the anonymous subjectivity we
mentioned? But one could and can realize this only when one
finally and quite seriously inquires into that which is taken for
granted, which is presupposed by all thinking, all activity of life
with all its ends and accomplishments, and when one, by consistently interrogating the ontic and validity-meaning of these
ends and accomplishments, becomes aware of the inviolable
unity of the complex of meaning and validity running through
all mental accomplishments. This applies first of all to all the
mental accomplishments which we human beings carry out in
the world, as individual, personal, or cultural accomplishments.
Before all such accomplishments there has always already been
a universal accomplishment, presupposed by all human praxis
and all prescientific and scientific life. The latter have the spiritual acquisitions of this universal accomplishment as their constant substratum, and all their own acquisitions are destined to
flow into it. We shall come to understand that the world which
constantly exists for us through the flowing alteration of manners of givenness is a universal mental acquisition, having developed as such and at the same time continuing to develop as the
unity of a mental configuration, as a meaning-construct
[Sinngebilde]—as the construct of a universal, ultimately
functioning 1 subjectivity. It belongs essentially to this worldconstituting accomplishment that subjectivity objectifies itself
as human subjectivity, as an element of the world. All objective
consideration of the world is consideration of the "exterior" and
grasps only "externals," objective entities [Objektivitäten], The
radical consideration of the world is the systematic and purely
internal consideration of the subjectivity which "expresses" [or
"externalizes"]2 itself in the exterior. It is like the unity of a
living organism, which one can certainly consider and dissect
from the outside but which one can understand only if one goes
back to its hidden roots and systematically pursues the life
1. letzt fungierende, i.e., functioning at the ultimate or deepest
level.
2, der sich selbst im Aussen "äussernden" Subjektivität

114

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

which, in all its accomplishments, is in them and strives upward
from them, shaping from within. But is this not simply a metaphor? Is it not in the end our human being, and the life of
consciousness belonging to it, with its most profound worldproblematics, which is the place where all problems of living
inner being and external exhibition are to be decided?

§ 30.

The lack of an intuitive exhibiting
method as the reason for KanVs mythical
constructions.

THERE IS SOME COMPLAINT about the obscurities of the
Kantian philosophy, about the incomprehensibility of the evidences of his regressive method, his transcendental-subjective
"faculties," "functions," "formations," about the difficulty of understanding what transcendental subjectivity actually is, how its
function, its accomplishment, comes about, how this is to make
all objective science understandable. And in fact Kant does get
involved in his own sort of mythical talk, whose literal meaning
points to something subjective, but a mode of the subjective
which we are in principle unable to make intuitive to ourselves,
whether through factual examples or through genuine analogy.
If we try to do it with the intuitively negotiable meaning to
which the words refer, we find ourselves in the psychological
sphere of the human person, the soul. But then we remember the
Kantian doctrine of inner sense, according to which everything
that can be exhibited in the self-evidence of inner experience has
already been formed by a transcendental function, that of temporalization [Zeitigung], But how are we supposed to arrive at a
clear meaning for concepts of something transcendentally
subjective, out of which the scientifically true world constitutes
itself as objective "appearance," if we cannot give to "inner
perception" some meaning other than the psychological one—if
it is not a truly apodictic meaning which ultimately furnishes
the experiential ground (a ground like that of the Cartesian ego
cogito), [available to us] through a type of experience which is
not Kantian scientific experience and does not have the certainty
of objective being in the sense of science, as in physics, but is a
truly apodictic certainty, that of a universal ground which finally
can be exhibited as the apodictically necessary and ultimate

Part III A

/

115

ground of all scientific objectivity and makes the latter understandable? This is where the source of all ultimate concepts of
knowledge must lie; here is the source of essential, general
insights through which any objective world can become scientifically understandable and through which an absolutely self-supporting philosophy can achieve systematic development.
Perhaps a deeper critique could show that Kant, though he
attacks empiricism, still remains dependent upon this very empiricism in his conception of the soul and the range of tasks of a
psychology, that what counts for him as the soul is the soul
which is made part of nature and conceived of as a component
of the psychophysical human being within the time of nature,
within space-time. Hence the transcendentally subjective could
certainly not be [identical with] the psychic. But is truly apodictic inner perception (self-perception reduced to the truly apodictic) to be identified with the self-perception of this naturalized
soul, with its [supposed] self-evidence of the "writing tablet" and
its data and even of its faculties as the powers ascribed to it in
the manner of natural powers? Because he understands inner
perception in this empiricist, psychological sense and because,
warned by Hume's skepticism, he fears every recourse to the
psychological as an absurd perversion of the genuine problem of
the understanding, Kant gets involved in his mythical conceptformation. He forbids his readers to transpose the results of his
regressive procedure into intuitive concepts, forbids every attempt to carry out a progressive construction which begins with
original and purely self-evident intuitions and proceeds through
truly self-evident individual steps. His transcendental concepts
are thus unclear in a quite peculiar way, such that for reasons of
principle they can never be transposed into clarity, can never be
transformed into a formation of meaning which is direct and
procures self-evidence.
The clarity of all [these] concepts and problems posed would
have been quite different if Kant, instead of being a child of his
time, completely bound by its naturalistic psychology (as patterned after natural science and as its parallel), had tackled in a
truly radical way the problem of a priori knowledge and its
methodical function in rational objective knowledge. This would
have required a fundamentally and essentially different regressive method from that of Kant, which rests on those unquestioned assumptions: not a mythically, constructively inferring
[schliessende] method, but a thoroughly intuitively disclosing
[erschliessende] method, intuitive in its point of departure and in

Il6

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

everything it discloses—even though the concept of intuitiveness
may have to undergo a considerable expansion in comparison to
the Kantian one, and indeed even though intuition, here, may
lose its usual sense altogether through a new attitude, taking on
only the general sense of original self-exhibition, but precisely
only within the new sphere of being.
Thus one must quite systematically inquire back into those
things taken for granted which, not only for Kant but for all
philosophers, all scientists, make up an unspoken ground
[Grund] of their cognitive accomplishments, hidden in respect to
its deeper mediating functions. Further, there must be a systematic disclosure of the intentionality which vitally holds sway and
is sedimented in this ground—in other words, there must be a
genuine, i.e., an "intentional analysis" of mental being in its
absolute ultimate peculiarity and of that which has come to be in
and through the mind, an analysis which does not permit the
reigning psychology to substitute for it a realistic [reale] analysis
of a naturaistically conceived soul, [which would be] alien to the
essence of the mental.*

§31.

Kant and the inadequacy of the psychology
of his day. The opaqueness of the distinction
between transcendental subjectivity and soul

IN ORDER TO MAKE palpably understandable what is
concretely meant here and in this way to illuminate the situation
which was peculiarly opaque to that whole historical epoch, we

* Yet this [fault] does not lie in [a psychological] beginning.
[In fact,] the first thing Kant [should have done, if he] had taken the
everyday world as the world of human consciousness, was to pass
through psychology—but a psychology which allowed the subjective
experiences of world-consciousness actually to come to expression
as they showed themselves experientially. This would have been possible if Descartes's seminal hints about cogitata qua cogitata had
been brought to germination as intentional psychology instead of
being overlooked by the dominant Lockean philosophy. [This note
derives from a stenographic marginal comment, and Biemel's version
of the first two sentences makes little sense. I have given what I
hope is an understandable interpretation.—TRANS.]

Part III A

/

117

shall initiate a reflection which admittedly belongs to a very late
fulfillment of the sense of the historical process.
The pregiven point of departure for all the enigmas of knowledge was that of the development of a modern philosophy in
accord with its own peculiar rationalistic ideal of science (systematically expanding itself into its special sciences). This
thrust in the development of sometimes clearly successful, sometimes hopefully attempted special sciences was suddenly
checked. In the construction of one of these sciences, psychology, enigmas emerged which put all of philosophy in question.
Naturally, the psychology of Locke—with the natural science of a Newton before it as a model—found particularly interesting subjects for study in the merely subjective aspects of the
appearances (which had been maligned since Galileo) and likewise generally in everything coming from the subjective side
that interfered with rationality: the lack of clarity in concepts,
the vagueness of judgmental thinking, the faculties of the understanding and of reason in all their forms. It was, of course, a
matter of the human being's faculties for psychic accomplishments—precisely those accomplishments which were supposed
to procure genuine science and with it a genuine practical life of
reason. Thus, questions of the essence and the objective validity
of purely rational knowledge, of logical and mathematical
knowledge, and the peculiar nature of natural-scientific and metaphysical knowledge belong in this sphere. Looked at in this
general way, was this not actually required? Without doubt it
was right and a good thing that Locke understood the sciences as
psychic accomplishments (though he also directed his gaze too
much at what occurs in the individual soul) and everywhere
posed questions of origin. After all, accomplishments can be
understood only in terms of the activity that accomplishes them.
To be sure, in Locke this was done with a superficiality, an
unmethodical confusion, and indeed even a naturalism that resulted precisely in Humean fictionalism.
Thus, obviously, Kant could not simply go back and take up
the psychology of Locke. But was it for this reason correct to
drop the general idea of the Lockean—the psychological-epistemological—approach? Was not every question inspired by
Hume first and quite correctly to be taken as a psychological
question? If rational science becomes a problem, if the claim of
the purely a priori sciences to have unconditional objective validity, and thus to be the possible and necessary method for ra-

118

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

tional sciences of fact, becomes a problem, it should first be
taken into consideration (as we emphasized above) that science
in general is a human accomplishment, an accomplishment of
human beings who find themselves in the world, the world
of general experience, [and that it is] one among other types of
practical accomplishments which is aimed at spiritual structures
of a certain sort called theoretical. Like all praxis, this one is
related, in a sense which is its own and of which the practitioner
of it is conscious, to the pregiven world of experience and at the
same time takes its ordered place within this world. Thus enigmas about how a spiritual accomplishment comes to pass can be
clarified, one will say, only through psychological demonstrations, and they remain thus within the pregiven world. If Kant,
on the other hand, in the questions he posed and in his regressive method, also naturally makes use of the pregiven world but
at the same time constructs a transcendental subjectivity
through whose concealed transcendental functions, with unswerving necessity, the world of experience is formed, he runs
into the difficulty that a particular quality of the human soul
(which itself belongs to the world and is thus presupposed with
it) is supposed to accomplish and to have already accomplished
a formative process which shapes this whole world. But as soon
as we distinguish this transcendental subjectivity from the soul,
we get involved in something incomprehensibly mythical,

§ 32.

The possibility of a hidden truth in KanVs
transcendental philosophy: the problem of a
"new dimension.'9 The antagonism between the
"life of the plane" and the "life of depth"

WERE THE KANTIAN THEORY nevertheless to contain
some truth, a truth to be made actually accessible to insight—
which is indeed the case—it would be possible only through the
fact that the transcendental functions which are supposed to
explain the above-mentioned enigmas concerning objectively
valid knowledge belong to a dimension of the living spirit that
had to remain hidden, because of very natural inhibitions, from
humanity and even from the scientists of the ages—whereas this

Part III A

/

119

dimension can be made accessible to scientific understanding,
through a method of disclosure appropriate to it, as a realm of
experiential and theoretical self-evidence. The fact that this dimension remained hidden through the ages, the fact that, even
after it made itself felt, it never aroused a habitual and consistent theoretical interest, can (and will) be explained by displaying a peculiar antagonism between the entry into this dimension
and the preoccupations involved in all the interests which make
.up the naturally normal human world-life.
Since this is to be a matter of spiritual functions which
exercise their accomplishments in all experiencing and thinking,
indeed in each and every preoccupation of the human world-life,
functions through which the world of experience, as the constant horizon of existing things, values, practical plans, works,
etc., has meaning and validity for us, it would certainly be
understandable that all objective sciences would lack precisely
the knowledge of what is most fundamental, namely, the knowledge of what could procure meaning and validity for the theoretical constructs of objective knowledge and [which] thus first
gives them the dignity of a knowledge which is ultimately
grounded.
This schema for a possible clarification of the problem of
objective science reminds us of Helmholtz* well-known image
of the plane-beings, who have no idea of the dimension of depth,
in which their plane-world is a mere projection. Everything of
which men—the scientists and all the others—can become conscious in their natural world-life (experiencing, knowing, practically planning, acting) as a field of external objects—as ends,
means, processes of action, and final results related to these
objects—and on the other hand, also, in self-reflection, as the
spiritual life which functions thereby—all this remains on the
"plane," which is, though unnoticed, nevertheless only a plane
within an infinitely richer dimension of depth. But this [image]
is universally valid whether it concerns a life which is merely
practical in the usual sense or a theoretical life, [i.e.,] scientific
experiencing, thinking, planning, acting, or scientific experiential data, ideas, goals of thinking, premises, true results.
This explanatory schema, of course, leaves several pressing
questions open. How could the development of the positive sciences purely upon the "plane" appear for so long in the form of a
superabundant success? Why was it so late before, in the need
for complete transparency in its methodical accomplishments,
the difficulties, indeed incomprehensibilities, announced them-

120

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

selves, such that not even the most painstaking construction of
logical technique could improve the situation? Why did the later
attempts at an "intuitionistic" deepening, which in fact touched
upon the higher dimension, and all efforts to clarify the situation
in this way not lead to unanimously accepted, truly compelling
scientific results? It is not the case that this is a matter of merely
turning our gaze toward a sphere which up to now has simply
not been noticed but which is accessible without further effort to
theoretical experience and experiential knowledge. Everything
experienceable in this way is the object and domain of possible
positive knowledge; it lies on the "plane/* in the world of actual
and possible experience, experience in the natural sense of the
word. We shall soon understand what extraordinary difficulties
—grounded in the essence of the matters involved—greeted the
methodical efforts actually to approach the depth-sphere, to approach first of all the possibility of its pure grasp of itself in the
manner of experiencing proper to it; and it will become clear
thereby how great the antagonism is between the "patent" life of
the plane and the "latent" life of depth. Of course the power
of historical prejudices also plays a constant role here, especially
of those which, coming from the origin of the modern positive
sciences, dominate us all. It is of the very essence of such
prejudices, drilled into the souls even of children, that they are
concealed in their immediate effects. The abstract general will to
be without prejudice changes nothing about them.
Nevertheless, these are the slightest difficulties compared to
those which have their ground in the essence of the new dimension and its relation to the old familiar field of life. Nowhere else
is the distance so great from unclearly arising needs to goaldetermined plans, from vague questionings to first working
problems—through which actual working science first begins.
Nowhere else is it so frequent that the explorer is met by logical
ghosts emerging out of the dark, formed in the old familiar and
effective conceptual patterns, as paradoxical antinomies, logical
absurdities. Thus nowhere is the temptation so great to slide into
logical aporetics and disputation, priding oneself on one's scientific discipline, while the actual substratum of the work, the
phenomena themselves, is forever lost from view.
All this will be confirmed as I now leave the reference to
Kant behind and attempt to show, to those willing to understand,
one of the paths I have actually taken; as a path actually taken,
it offers itself as one that can at any time be taken again. Indeed,
it is a path which at every step allows just this self-evidence to be

Part III A

/

121

renewed and tested as apodictic, i.e., the self-evidence of a path
capable of being taken repeatedly at will and capable of being
followed further at will in repeatedly verifiable experiences and
cognitions.

§33.

The problem of the "life-world" as a
partial problem within the general
problem of objective science.

BRIEFLY REMINDING OURSELVES of our earlier discussions, let us recall the fact we have emphasized, namely, that
science is a human spiritual accomplishment which presupposes
as its point of departure, both historically and for each new
student, the intuitive surrounding world of life, pregiven as
existing for all in common. Furthermore, it is an accomplishment which, in being practiced and carried forward, continues
to presuppose this surrounding world as it is given in its particularity to the scientist. For example, for the physicist it is the
world in which he sees his measuring instruments, hears timebeats, estimates visible magnitudes, etc.—the world in which,
furthermore, he knows himself to be included with all his activity and all his theoretical ideas.
When science poses and answers questions, these are from
the start, and hence from then on, questions resting upon the
ground of, and addressed to, the elements of this pregiven world
in which science and every other life-praxis is engaged. In this
life-praxis, knowledge, as prescientific knowledge, plays a constant role, together with its goals, which are in general satisfactorily achieved in the sense which is intended and in each case
usually in order to make practical life possible. But a new civilization (philosophical, scientific civilization), rising up in
Greece, saw fit to recast the idea of "knowledge" and "truth" in
natural existence and to ascribe to the newly formed idea of
"objective truth" a higher dignity, that of a norm for all knowledge. In relation to this, finally, arises the idea of a universal
science encompassing all possible knowledge in its infinity, the
bold guiding idea of the modern period. If we have made this
clear to ourselves, then obviously an explicit elucidation of the
objective validity and of the whole task of science requires that

122

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

we first inquire back into the pregiven world. It is pregiven to us
all quite naturally, as persons within the horizon of our fellow
men, i.e., in every actual connection with others, as "the" world
common to us all. Thus it is, as we have explained in detail, the
constant ground of validity, an ever available source of what is
taken for granted, to which we, whether as practical men or as
scientists, lay claim as a matter of course.
Now if this pregiven world is to become a subject of investigation in its own right, so that we can arrive, of course, at
scientifically defensible assertions, this requires special care in
preparatory reflections. It is not easy to achieve clarity about
what kind of peculiar scientific and hence universal tasks are to
be posed under the title "life-world* and about whether something philosophically significant will arise here. Even the first
attempt to understand the peculiar ontic sense of the life-world,
which can be taken now as a narrower, now as a broader one,
causes difficulties.
The manner in which we here come to the life-world as a
subject for scientific investigation makes this subject appear an
ancillary and partial one within the full subject of objective
science in general. The latter has become generally, that is, in all
its particular forms (the particular positive sciences), incomprehensible as regards the possibility of its objective accomplishment. If science becomes a problem in this way, then we must
withdraw from the operation of it and take up a standpoint
above it, surveying in generality its theories and results in the
systematic context of predicative thoughts and statements, and
on the other side we must also survey the life of acts practiced by
working scientists, working with one another—their setting of
goals, their termination in a given goal, and the terminating
self-evidence. And what also comes under consideration here is
precisely the scientists' repeated recourse, in different general
manners, to the life-world with its ever available intuited data; to
this we can immediately add the scientists' statements, in each
case simply adapted to this world, statements made purely descriptively in the same prescientific manner of judging which is
proper to the "occasional" 1 statements of practical, everyday life.
Thus the problem of the life-world, or rather of the manner in
which it functions and must function for scientists, is only a
i. okkasionelle. A term from the second of the Logische Untersuchungen, § 26 (1913 ed., Vol. II, p. 81): an expression is "essentially subjective and occasional" if its actual meaning depends "on
the occasion [Gelegenheit], the person speaking, and his situation/'

Part III A

/

123

partial subject within the above-designated whole of objective
science (namely, in the service of its full grounding).
It is clear, however, that prior to the general question of its
function for a self-evident grounding of the objective sciences
there is good reason to ask about the life-world's own and constant ontic meaning for the human beings who live in it. These
human beings do not always have scientific interests, and even
scientists are not always involved in scientific work; also, as
history teaches us, there was not always in the world a civilization that lived habitually with long-established scientific
interests. The life-world was always there for mankind before science, then, just as it continues its manner of being in the epoch
of science. Thus one can put forward by itself the problem of the
manner of being of the life-world; one can place oneself completely upon the ground of this straightforwardly intuited world,
putting out of play all objective-scientific opinions and cognitions, in order to consider generally what kind of "scientific"
tasks, i.e., tasks to be resolved with universal validity, arise in
respect to this world's own manner of being. Might this not yield
a vast theme for study? Is it not the case that, in the end,
through what first appears as a special subject in the theory of
science, that "third dimension" is opening up, immediately destined in advance to engulf the whole subject matter of objective
science (as well as all other subject matters on the "plane")? At
first this must appear peculiar and unbelievable. Many paradoxes will arise; yet they will be resolved. What imposes itself
here and must be considered before everything else is the correct
comprehension of the essence of the life-world and the method
of a "scientific" treatment appropriate to it, from which "objective" scientific treatment, however, is excluded.

§ 34.

Exposition of the problem of a science
of the life-world.

a. The difference between objective science
and science in general.
Is not the life-world as such what we know best, what is
always taken for granted in all human life, always familiar to us

124

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

in its typology through experience? Are not all its horizons of the
unknown simply horizons of what is just incompletely known,
i.e., known in advance in respect of its most general typology?
For prescientific life, of course, this type of acquaintance suffices, as does its manner of converting the unknown into the
known, gaining "occasional" knowledge on the basis of experience (verifying itself internally and thereby excluding illusion)
and induction. This suffices for everyday praxis. If, now, something more can be and is to be accomplished, if a "scientific"
knowledge is supposed to come about, what can be meant other
than what objective science has in view and does anyway? Is
scientific knowledge as such not "objective" knowledge, aimed at
a knowledge substratum which is valid for everyone with unconditioned generality? And yet, paradoxically, we uphold our assertion and require that one not let the handed-down concept of
objective science be substituted, because of the century-old tradition in which we have all been raised, for the concept of science
in general.
The x title "life-world" makes possible and demands perhaps
various different, though essentially interrelated, scientific undertakings; and perhaps it is part of genuine and full scientific
discipline that we must treat these all together, though following
their essential order of founding, rather than treating, say, just
the one, the objective-logical one (this particular accomplishment within the life-world) by itself, leaving the others completely out of scientific consideration. There has never been a
scientific inquiry into the way in which the life-world constantly
functions as subsoil, into how its manifold prelogical validities
act as grounds for the logical ones, for theoretical truths. 2 And
perhaps the scientific discipline which this life-world as such, in
its universality, requires is a peculiar one, one which is precisely
not objective and logical but which, as the ultimately grounding
one, is not inferior but superior in value. But how is this completely different sort of scientific discipline, for which the objective sort has always been substituted up to now, to be realized?
The idea of objective truth is predetermined in its whole meaning by the contrast with the idea of the truth in pre- and extrascientific life. This latter truth has its ultimate and deepest source
of verification in experience which is "pure" in the sense
i. This whole paragraph is crossed out in the MS.
2. This sentence was added by Fink. It does not seem tofitin, and
it breaks the continuity between the preceding and following sentences.

Part III A

/

125

designated above, in all its modes of perception, memory, etc.
These words, however, must be understood actually as prescientific life understands them; thus one must not inject into them,
from current objective science, any psychophysical, psychological interpretation. And above all—to dispose of an important
point right away—one must not go straight back to the supposedly immediately given "sense-data," as if they were immediately
characteristic of the purely intuitive data of the life-world. What
is actually first is the "merely subjective-relative" intuition of
prescientific world-life. For us, to be sure, this "merely" has, as
an old inheritance, the disdainful coloring of the h&a. In prescientific life itself, of course, it has nothing of this; there it is a
realm of good verification and, based on this, of well-verified
predicative cognitions and of truths which are just as secure as
is necessary for the practical projects of life that determine their
sense. The disdain with which everything "merely subjective and
relative" is treated by those scientists who pursue the modern
ideal of objectivity changes nothing of its own manner of being,
just as it does not change the fact that the scientist himself must
be satisfied with this realm whenever he has recourse, as he
unavoidably must have recourse, to it.

b. The use of subjective-relative experiences
for the objective sciences, and the science
of them.
The sciences build upon the life-world as taken for granted
in that they make use of whatever in it happens to be necessary
for their particular ends. But to use the life-world in this way is
not to know it scientifically in its own manner of being. For
example, Einstein uses the Michelson experiments and the corroboration of them by other researchers, with apparatus copied
from Michelson's, with everything required in the way of scales
of measurement, coincidences established, etc. There is no doubt
that everything that enters in here—the persons, the apparatus,
the room in the institute, etc.—can itself become a subject of
investigation in the usual sense of objective inquiry, that of the
positive sciences. But Einstein could make no use whatever of a
theoretical psychological-psychophysical construction of the
objective being of Mr. Michelson; rather, he made use of the
human being who was accessible to him, as to everyone else in
the prescientific world, as an object of straightforward experi-

126

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

ence, the human being whose existence, with this vitality, in
these activities and creations within the common life-world, is
always the presupposition for all of Einstein's objective-scientific
lines of inquiry, projects, and accomplishments pertaining to
Michelson's experiments. It is, of course, the one world of experience, common to all, that Einstein and every other researcher
knows he is in as a human being, even throughout all his activity
of research. [But] precisely this world and everything that happens in it, used as needed for scientific and other ends, bears, on
the other hand, for every natural scientist in his thematic orientation toward its "objective truth/' the stamp "merely subjective
and relative." The contrast to this determines, as we said, the
sense of the "objective" task. This "subjective-relative" is supposed to be "overcome"; one can and should correlate with it a
hypothetical being-in-itself, a substrate for logical-mathematical
"truths-in-themselves" that one can approximate through ever
newer and better hypothetical approaches, always justifying
them through experiential verification. This is the one side. But
while the natural scientist is thus interested in the objective and
is involved in his activity, the subjective-relative is on the other
hand still functioning for him, not as something irrelevant that
must be passed through but as that which ultimately grounds
the theoretical-logical ontic validity for all objective verification,
i.e., as the source of self-evidence, the source of verification. The
visible measuring scales, scale-markings, etc., are used as actually existing things, not as illusions; thus that which actually
exists in the life-world, as something valid, is a premise.

c. Is the subjective-relative an object
for psychology?
Now the question of the manner of being of this subjective
sphere, or the question of the science which is to deal with it in
its own universe of being, is normally disposed of by the natural
scientist by referring to psychology. But again one must not
allow the intrusion of what exists in the sense of objective
science when it is a question of what exists in the life-world. For
what has always gone under the name of psychology, at any rate
since the founding of modern objectivism regarding knowledge
of the world, naturally has the meaning of an "objective" science
of the subjective, no matter which of the attempted historical
psychologies we may choose. Now in our subsequent reflections
the problem of making possible an objective psychology will

Part III A /

127

have to become the object of more detailed discussions. But
first we must grasp clearly the contrast between objectivity and
the subjectivity of the life-world as a contrast which determines
the fundamental sense of objective-scientific discipline itself,
and we must secure this contrast against the great temptations
to misconstrue it.

d. The life-world as universe of what
is intuitable in principle; the
"objective-true" world as in principle
nonintuitable 'logical" substruction.
Whatever may be the chances for realizing, or the capacity
for realizing, the idea of objective science in respect to the
mental world (i.e., not only in respect to nature), this idea of
objectivity dominates the whole universitas of the positive
sciences in the modern period, and in the general usage it dominates the meaning of the word "science." This already involves
a naturalism insofar as this concept is taken from Galilean
natural science, such that the scientifically "true," the objective, world is always thought of in advance as nature, in an
expanded sense of the word. The contrast between the subjectivity of the life-world and the "objective," the "true" world, lies in
the fact that the latter is a theoretical-logical substruction, the
substruction of something that is in principle not perceivable, in
principle not experienceable in its own proper being, whereas
the subjective, in the life-world, is distinguished in all respects
precisely by its being actually experienceable.*
The life-world is a realm of original self-evidences.3 That
which is self-evidently given is, in perception, experienced as
* In life the verification of being, terminating in experience, yields
a full conviction. Even when it is inductive, the inductive anticipation is of a possible experienceability which is ultimately decisive.
Inductions can be verified by other inductions, working together. Because of their anticipations of experienceability, and because every
direct perception itself includes inductive moments (anticipation of
the sides of the object which are not yet experienced), everything is
contained in the broader concept of "experience" or "induction." [Cf.
p. 51, above].
3. Husserl's use of Evidenz does not permit of its always being
translated in the same way. But when used in its most special or
technical sense, as it is here, "self-evidence" is better than simply
"evidence." As can be seen from the context here, it means "self-

128

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

"the thing itself,"4 in immediate presence, or, in memory, remembered as the thing itself; and every other manner of
intuition is a presentification of the thing itself. Every mediate
cognition belonging in this sphere—broadly speaking, every manner of induction—has the sense of an induction of something
intuitable, something possibly perceivable as the thing itself or rememberable as having-been-perceived, etc. All conceivable verification leads back to these modes of self-evidence because the
"thing itself" (in the particular mode) lies in these intutitions
themselves as that which is actually, intersubjectively experienceable and verifiable and is not a substruction of thought;
whereas such a substruction, insofar as it makes a claim to
truth, can have actual truth only by being related back to such
self-evidences.
It is of course itself a highly important task, for the scientific
opening-up of the life-world, to bring to recognition the primal
validity of these self-evidences and indeed their higher dignity in
the grounding of knowledge compared to that of the objectivelogical self-evidences. One must fully clarify, i.e., bring to ultimate self-evidence, how all the self-evidence of objective-logical
accomplishments, through which objective theory (thus mathematical and natural-scientific theory) is grounded in respect of
form and content, has its hidden sources of grounding in the
ultimately accomplishing life, the life in which the self-evident
givenness of the life-world forever has, has attained, and attains
anew its prescientific ontic meaning. From objective-logical selfevidence (mathematical "insight," natural-scientific, positive-scientific "insight," as it is being accomplished by the inquiring and
grounding mathematician, etc.), the path leads back, here, to
the primal self-evidence in which the life-world is ever pregiven.
One may at first find strange and even questionable what has
been simply asserted here, but the general features of the contrast among levels of self-evidence are unmistakable. The empiricist talk of natural scientists often, if not—for the most part,
gives the impression that the natural sciences are based on the
givenness"; whereas the English word "evidence" usually has a very
different meaning, that of something testifying to the existence of
something else (e.g., evidence in a trial).
4. "es selbst." The use of the word "thing" in this expression is
not out of place as long as Husserl is talking about perception. But in
another context that which is "itself" given might not be a "thing"; it
could be an ideal state of affairs, for example in mathematical or logical intuition.

Part III A

/

129

experience of objective nature. But it is not in this sense true
that these sciences are experiential sciences, that they follow
experience in principle, that they all begin with experiences, that
all their inductions must finally be verified through experiences;
rather, this is true only in that other sense whereby experience
[yields] a self-evidence taking place purely in the life-world and
as such is the source of self-evidence for what is objectively
established in the sciences, the latter never themselves being
experiences of the objective. The objective is precisely never
experienceable as itself; and scientists themselves, by the way,
consider it in this way whenever they interpret it as something
metaphysically transcendent, in contrast to their confusing empiricist talk. The experienceability of something objective is no
different from that of an infinitely distant geometrical construct
and in general no different from that of all infinite "ideas,"
including, for example, the infinity of the number series. Naturally, "rendering ideas intuitive" in the manner of mathematical
or natural-scientific "models" is hardly intuition of the objective
itself but rather a matter of life-world intuitions which are suited
to make easier the conception of the objective ideals in question.
Many [such] conceptual intermediaries are often involved,
[especially since] the conception itself does not always occur so
immediately, cannot always be made so self-evident in its way,
as is the case in conceiving of geometrical straight lines on the
basis of the life-world self-evidence of straight table-edges and
the like.
As can be seen, a great deal of effort is involved here in order
to secure even the presuppositions for a proper inquiry, i.e., in
order first to free ourselves from the constant misconstructions
which mislead us all because of the scholastic dominance of
objective-scientific ways of thinking.

e. The objective sciences as subjective
constructs—those of a particular
praxis, namely, the theoretical-logical,
which itself belongs to the full
concreteness of the life-world.
If the contrast [under discussion] has been purified, we must
now do justice to the essential interrelatedness [of the elements
contrasted]: objective theory in its logical sense (taken universally: science as the totality of predicative theory, of the system

130

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

of statements meant "logically" as "propositions in themselves,"
"truths in themselves," and in this sense logically joined) is
rooted, grounded in the life-world, in the original self-evidences
belonging to it. Thanks to this rootedness objective science has a
constant reference of meaning to the world in which we always
live, even as scientists and also in the total community of scientists—a reference, that is, to the general life-world. But at the
same time, as an accomplishment of scientific 5 persons, as individuals and as joined in the community of scientific activity,
objective science itself belongs to the life-world. Its theories, the
logical constructs, are of course not things in the life-world like
stones, houses, or trees. They are logical wholes and logical parts
made up of ultimate logical elements. To speak with Bolzano,
they are "representations-in-themselves" ["Vorstellungen an sich"]
"propositions in themselves," inferences and proofs "in themselves," ideal unities of signification whose logical ideality
is determined by their telos, "truth in itself."
But this or any other ideality does not change in the least the
fact that these are human formations, essentially related to
human actualities and potentialities, and thus belong to this
concrete unity of the life-world, whose concreteness thus extends farther than that of "things." Exactly the same thing is
true, correlative to this, of scientific activities—those of experiencing, those of arriving at logical formations "on the basis of"
experience—activities through which these formations appear
in original form and original modes of variation in the individual
scientists and in the community of scientists: the original status
of the proposition or demonstration dealt with by all.
But here we enter an uncomfortable situation. If we have
made our contrast with all necessary care, then we have two
different things: life-world and objective-scientific world, though
of course [they are] related to each other. The knowledge of the
objective-scientific world is "grounded" in the self-evidence of the
life-world. The latter is pregiven to the scientific worker, or the
working community, as ground; yet, as they build upon this,
what is built is something new, something different. If we cease
being immersed in our scientific thinking, we become aware that
we scientists are, after all, human beings and as such are among
the components of the life-world which always exists for us, ever
pregiven; and thus all of science is pulled, along with us, into the
5. The text reads "prescientific persons," which must be a mistake,

Part III A /

131

—merely "subjective-relative"—life-world. And what becomes of
the objective world itself? What happens to the hypothesis of
being-in-itself, related first to the "things" of the life-world, the
"objects," the "real" bodies, real animals, plants, and also human
beings within the "space-time" of the life-world—all these concepts being understood, now, not from the point of view of the
objective sciences but as they are in prescientific life?
Is it not the case that this hypothesis, which in spite of the
ideality of scientific theories has direct validity for the scientific
subjects (the scientists as human beings), is but one among the
many practical hypotheses and projects which make up the life
of human beings in this life-world—which is at all times consciously pregiven to them as available? Do not all goals, whether
they are "practical" in some other, extrascientific sense or are
practical under the title of "theory," belong eo ipso to the unity of
the life-world, if only we take the latter in its complete and full
concreteness?
On the other hand, we have seen also that the propositions,
the theories, the whole edifice of doctrine in the objective sciences are structures attained through certain activities of scientists bound together in their collaborative work—or, to speak
more exactly, attained through a continued building-up of activities, the later of which always presuppose the results of the
earlier. And we see further that all these theoretical results have
the character of validities for the life-world, adding themselves
as such to its own composition and belonging to it even before
that as a horizon of possible accomplishments for developing
science. The concrete life-world, then, is the grounding soil [der
gründende Boden] of the "scientifically true" world and at the
same time encompasses it in its own universal concreteness.
How is this to be understood? How are we to do justice systematically—that is, with appropriate scientific discipline—to the allencompassing, so paradoxically demanding, manner of being of
the life-world?
We are posing questions whose clarifying answers are by no
means obvious. The contrast and the inseparable union [we have
been exploring] draw us into a reflection which entangles us in
more and more troublesome difficulties. The paradoxical interrelationships of the "objectively true world" and the "life-world"
make enigmatic themanner of being of both. Thus [the idea of
a] true world in any sense, and within it our own being, becomes
an enigma in respect to the sense of this being. In our attempts
to attain clarity we shall suddenly become aware, in the face of

132

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

emerging paradoxes, that all of our philosophizing up to now has
been without a ground. How can we now truly become philosophers?
We cannot escape the force of this motivation. It is impossible for us to evade the issue here through a preoccupation with
aporia and argumentation nourished by Kant or Hegel, Aristotle
or Thomas.

f. The problem of the life-world not as
a partial problem but rather as a
universal problem for philosophy.
Of course, it is a new sort of scientific discipline that is
required for the solution of the enigmas which now disquiet us:
it is not mathematical, nor logical at all in the historical sense; it
cannot already have before it, as an available norm, a finished
mathematics, logic, or logistic, since these are themselves objective sciences in the sense which is presently problematical and,
as included in the problem, cannot be presuppositions used as
premises. At first, as long as one only makes contrasts, is only
concerned with oppositions, it could appear that nothing more
than or different from objective science is needed, just as everyday practical life undertakes its rational reflections, both particular and general, without needing a science for them. It just is
this way, a fact familiar to all, unthinkingly accepted rather
than being formulated as a fundamental fact and thought
through as a subject for thinking in its own right—namely, that
there are two sorts of truth: on the one side, everyday practical
situational truths, relative, to be sure, but, as we have already
emphasized, exactly what praxis, in its particular projects, seeks
and needs; on the other side there are scientific truths, and their
grounding leads back precisely to the situational truths, but in
such a way that scientific method does not suffer thereby in
respect to its own meaning, since it wants to use and must use
precisely these truths.
Thus it could appear—if one allows oneself to be carried
along by the thoughtless naivet6 of life even in the transition
from the extralogical to the logical, to the objective-scientific
praxis of thinking—that a separate investigation under the title
"life-world" is an intellectualistic enterprise born of a mania,
peculiar to modern life, to theorize everything. But, on the other
hand, it has at least become apparent that we cannot let the

Part III A /

133

matter end with this naivete, that paradoxical enigmas announce themselves here: merely subjective relativity is supposedly overcome by objective-logical theory, yet the latter belongs,
as the theoretical praxis of human beings, to the merely subjective and relative and at the same time must have its premises, its
sources of self-evidence, in the subjective and relative. From
here on this much is certain: that all problems of truth and of
being, all methods, hypotheses, and results conceivable for these
problems—whether for worlds of experience or for metaphysical
higher worlds—can attain their ultimate clarity, their evident
sense or the evidence of their nonsense, only through this supposed intellectualistic hypertrophy. This will then include, certainly, all ultimate questions of legitimate sense and of nonsense
in the busy routine of the "resurrected metaphysics" that has
become so vocal and so bewitching of late.
Through this last series of considerations the magnitude, the
universal and independent significance, of the problem of the
life-world has become intelligible to us in an anticipatory insight.
In comparison with this the problem of the "objectively true"
world or that of objective-logical science—no matter how pressing it may repeatedly become, and properly so—appears now as
a problem of secondary and more specialized interest. Though
the peculiar accomplishment of our modern objective science
may still not be understood, nothing changes the fact that it is a
validity for the life-world, arising out of particular activities, and
that it belongs itself to the concreteness of the life-world. Thus
in any case, for the sake of clarifying this and all other acquisitions of human activity, the concrete life-world must first be
taken into consideration; and it must be considered in terms of
the truly concrete universality whereby it embraces, both directly and in the manner of horizons, all the built-up levels of
validity acquired by men for the world of their common life and
whereby it has the totality of these levels related in the end to a
world-nucleus to be distilled by abstraction, namely, the world of
straightforward intersubjective experiences. To be sure, we do
not yet know how the life-world is to become an independent,
totally self-sufficient subject of investigation, how it is supposed
to make possible scientific statements—which as such, after all,
must have their own "objectivity," even if it is in a manner
different from that of our sciences, i.e., a necessary validity to be
appropriated purely methodically, which we and everyone can
verify precisely through this method. We are absolute beginners,
here, and have nothing in the way of a logic designed to provide

134

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

norms; we can do nothing but reflect, engross ourselves in the
still not unfolded sense of our task, and thus secure, with the
utmost care, freedom from prejudice, keeping our undertaking
free of alien interferences (and we have already made several
important contributions to this); and this, as in the case of every
new undertaking, must supply us with our method. The clarification of the sense of the task is, indeed, the self-evidence of the
goal qua goal; and to this self-evidence belongs essentially the
self-evidence of the possible "ways" to it. The intricacy and
difficulty of the preliminary reflections which are still before us
will justify themselves, not only because of the magnitude of the
goal, but also because of the essential strangeness and precariousness of the ideas which will necessarily become involved.
Thus what appeared to be merely a problem of the fundamental basis of the objective sciences or a partial problem within
the universal problem of objective science has indeed (just as we
announced in advance that it would) proven to be the genuine
and most universal problem. It can also be put this way: the
problem first appears as the question of the relation between
objective-scientific thinking and intuition; it concerns, on the
one hand, then, logical thinking as the thinking of logical
thoughts, e.g., the physicist's thinking of physical theory, or
purely mathematical thinking, in which mathematics has its
place as a system of doctrine, as a theory. And, on the other
hand, we have intuiting and the intuited, in the life-world prior
to theory. Here arises the ineradicable illusion of a pure thinking
which, unconcerned in its purity about intuition, already has its
self-evident truth, even truth about the world—the illusion
which makes the sense and the possibility, the "scope," of objective science questionable. Here one concentrates on the separateness of intuiting and thinking and generally interprets the
nature of the "theory of knowledge" as theory of science, carried
out in respect to two correlative sides 6 (whereby science is
always understood in terms of the only concept of science available, that of objective science). But as soon as the empty and
vague notion of intuition—instead of being something negligible
and insignificant compared to the supremely significant logical
sphere in which one supposedly already has genuine truth—has
become the problem of the life-world, as soon as the magnitude
and difficulty of this investigation take on enormous proportions
as one seriously penetrates it, there occurs the great transforma6. I.e., the subjective and the objective.

Part III A /

135

tion of the "theory of knowledge" and the theory of science
whereby, in the end, science as a problem and as an accomplishment loses its self-sufficiency and becomes a mere partial problem.
What we have said also naturally applies to logic, as the a
priori theory of norms for everything "logical"—in the overarching sense of what is logical, according to which logic is a logic of
strict objectivity, of objective-logical truths. No one ever thinks
about the predications and truths which precede science, about
the "logic" which provides norms within this sphere of relativity,
or about the possibility, even in the case of these logical structures conforming purely descriptively to the life-world, of inquiring into the system of principles that give them their norms a
priori. As a matter of course, traditional objective logic is substituted as the a priori norm even for this subjective-relative sphere
of truth.

§ 35.

Analysis of the transcendental epoche.
First step: The epoche of objective science.

BECAUSE OF THE PECULIAR nature of the task which has
arisen for us, the method of access to the new science's field of
work—which must be attained before the working problems of
the science are given—is articulated into a multiplicity of steps,
each of which has, in a new way, the character of an epoche, a
withholding of natural, naive validities and in general of validities already in effect. The first necessary epoche, i.e., the first
methodical step, has already come into view through the preliminary reflections hitherto carried out. But an explicit, universal
formulation is needed. Clearly required before everything else is
the epoche in respect to all objective sciences. This means not
merely an abstraction from them, such as an imaginary transformation, in thought, of present human existence, such that no
science appeared in the picture. What is meant is rather an
epoche of all participation in the cognitions of the objective
sciences, an epoche of any critical position-taking which is interested in their truth or falsity, even any position on their guiding
idea of an objective knowledge of the world. In short, we carry
out an epoche in regard to all objective theoretical interests, all
aims and activities belonging to us as objective scientists or even
simply as [ordinary] people desirous of [this kind of] knowledge.

I36

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Within this epoche, however, neither the sciences nor the
scientists have disappeared for us who practice the epoche. They
continue to be what they were before, in any case: facts in the
unified context of the pregiven life-world; except that, because of
the epoche, we do not function as sharing these interests, as
coworkers, etc. We establish in ourselves just one particular
habitual direction of interest, with a certain vocational attitude,
to which there belongs a particular "vocational time." 1 We find
the same thing here as elsewhere: when we actualize one of our
habitual interests and are thus involved in our vocational activity (in the accomplishment of our work), we assume a posture
of epoche toward our other life-interests, even though these still
exist and are still ours. Everything has "its proper time," and in
shifting [activities] we say something like: "Now it is time to go
to the meeting, to the election," and the like.
In a special sense, of course, we call science, art, military
service, etc., our "vocation," but as normal human beings we are
constantly (in a broadened sense) involved in many "vocations"
(interested attitudes) at the same time: we are at once fathers,
citizens, etc. Every such vocation has its time of actualizing
activities. Accordingly, this newly established vocational interest, whose universal subject matter is called the "life-world,"
finds its place among the other life-interests or vocations and it
has "its proper time" within the one personal time, the form of
the various exercised vocational times.
Of course, to equate the new science in this way with all
"bourgeois" [bürgerliche] vocations, or even with the objective
sciences, is a sort of trivialization, a disregard for the greatest
value-distinction there can be between sciences. Understood in
this way, it was so happily criticized by the modern irrationalistic philosophers. This way of looking at it makes it appear as if,
once again, a new, purely theoretical interest, a new "science"
with a new vocational technique, is to be established, carried on
either as an intellectualistic game with very ideal pretensions or
as a higher-level intellectual technique in the service of the
positive sciences, useful for them, while they themselves, in
turn, have their only real value in their usefulness for life. One is
powerless against the misrepresentations of hurried readers and
listeners who in the end hear only what they want to hear; but in
any case they are part of the indifferent mass audience of the
1. Berufszeit, colloq., "working hours." But I have translated it
literally as "vocational time" in order to preserve the notion of Beruf,
a "calling."

Part III A /

137

philosopher. The few, for whom one [really] speaks, will know
how to restrain such a suspicion, especially after what we have
said in earlier lectures. They will at least wait to see where our
path leads them.
There are good reasons for my stressing so sharply the vocational character of even the "phenomenologist's" attitude. One of
the first things to be described about the epochs in question is
that it is a habitual epoche of accomplishment, one with periods
of time in which it results in work, while other times are devoted
to other interests of work or play; furthermore, and most important, the suspension of its accomplishment in no way changes
the interest which continues and remains valid within personal
subjectivity—i.e., its habitual directedness toward goals which
persist as its validities—and it is for this very reason that it can
be actualized again and again, at different times, in this identical
sense. This by no means implies, however, that the life-world
epoche—to which further significant moments belong, as we
shall show—means no more for human existence, practically
and "existentiaUy," than the vocational epoche of the cobbler, or
that it is basically a matter of indifference whether one is a
cobbler or a phenomenologist, or, also, whether one is a phenomenologist or a positive scientist. Perhaps it will even become
manifest that the total phenomenological attitude and the
epoche belonging to it are destined in essence to effect, at first, a
complete personal transformation, comparable in the beginning
to a religious conversion, which then, however, over and above
this, bears within itself the significance of the greatest existential transformation which is assigned as a task to mankind as
such.

§36

How can the life-world, after the
epoche of the objective sciences,
become the subject matter of a
science? The distinction in principle
between the objective-logical a priori
and the a priori of the life-world.

I F OUR INTEREST is exclusively in the 'life-world," we
must ask: Has the life-world, through the epoche in respect to

138

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

objective science, already been laid open as a universal scientific
subject matter? * Do we already have thereby, the subject matter for statements that are generally valid scientifically, statements about facts that are to be established scientifically? How
do we have the life-world as a universal field, fixed in advance, of
such establishable facts? It is the spatiotemporal world of things
as we experience them in our pre- and extrascientific life and as
we know them to be experienceable beyond what is [actually]
experienced. We have a world-horizon as a horizon of possible
thing-experience [Dingerfahrung], Things: that is, stones, animals, plants, even human beings and human products; but everything here is subjective and relative, even though normally,
in our experience and in the social group united with us in the
community of life, we arrive at "secure" facts; within a certain
range this occurs of its own accord, that is, undisturbed by any
noticeable disagreement; sometimes, on the other hand, when it
* First let us recall that what we call science is, within the constantly valid world, as life-world, a particular type of purposeful
activities and purposeful accomplishments like all human vocations
in the usual sense of the word; to this sphere also belong those practical intentions of a higher level which do not involve types of vocation
or goal-oriented interrelations and accomplishments at all, the more
or less isolated, incidental, more or less fleeting interests. All these
are, from the human point of view, peculiarities of human life and of
human habitualities, and they all lie within the universal framework
of the life-world into which all accomplishments flow and to which
all human beings and all accomplishing activities and capacities
always belong. Of course, the new theoretical interest in the universal
life-world itself, in its own manner of being, requires a certain epoche
in regard to all these interests, i.e., in regard to the pursuit of our
ends, in regard to all the criticism, always belonging to the purposeful life, of the means and the goals or ends themselves, e.g., whether
we should factually persist in them, whether certain paths should be
taken as general directives, etc. Living toward our ends, which are
valid for us habitually, we do, of course, live in the horizon of the lifeworld, no matter which ends are 'Tiaving their turn"; everything that
happens and develops here exists in the life-world and in the manner
of the life-world; but being oriented toward what exists within the
life-world is not the same as focusing on the [life-world] as the universal horizon, not the same as making thematic the end in view as
a being within this horizon, the newly thematic life-world. Thus the
first thing we must do is refrain from the pursuit of all scientific and
other interests. But the epoche alone is not enough: even all setting
of ends, all projecting, presupposes something worldly; the wherewith,
i.e., the life-world, is given prior to all ends. [This last sentence is only
a rough guess at the sense of this somewhat garbled stenographic
note.—TRANS.]

Part III A /

139

is of practical importance, it occurs in a purposive knowing
process, i.e., with the goal of [finding] a truth which is secure for
our purposes. But when we are thrown into an alien social
sphere, that of the Negroes in the Congo, Chinese peasants, etc.,
we discover that their truths, the facts that for them are fixed,
generally verified or verifiable, are by no means the same as
ours. But if we set up the goal of a truth about the objects which
is unconditionally valid for all subjects, beginning with that on
which normal Europeans, normal Hindus, Chinese, etc., agree in
spite of all relativity—beginning, that is, with what makes objects of the life-world, common to all, identifiable for them and
for us (even though conceptions of them may differ), such as
spatial shape, motion, sense-quality, and the like—then we are
on the way to objective science. When we set up this objectivity
as a goal (the goal of a "truth in itself) we make a set of
hypotheses through which the pure life-world is surpassed. We
have precluded this [type of] "surpassing" through the first
epochs (that which concerns the objective sciences), and now
we have the embarrassment of wondering what else can be
undertaken scientifically, as something that can be established
once and for all and for everyone.
But this embarrassment disappears as soon as we consider
that the life-world does have, in all its relative features, a general
structure. This general structure, to which everything that exists
relatively is bound, is not itself relative. We can attend to it in its
generality and, with sufficient care, fix it once and for all in a
way equally accessible to all. As life-world the world has, even
prior to science, the "same" structures that the objective sciences
presuppose in their substruction of a world which exists "in
itself and is determined through "truths in themselves" (this
substruction being taken for granted due to the tradition of
centuries); these are the same structures that they presuppose
as a priori structures and systematically unfold in a priori sciences, sciences of the logos, the universal methodical norms by
which any knowledge of the world existing "in itself, objectively"
must be bound. Prescientifically, the world is already a spatiotemporal world; to be sure, in regard to this spatiotemporality
there is no question of ideal mathematical points, of "pure"
straight lines or planes, no question at all of mathematically
infinitesimal continuity or of the "exactness" belonging to the
sense of the geometrical a priori. The bodies familiar to us in
the life-world are actual bodies, but not bodies in the sense of
physics. The same thing is true of causality and of spatiotem-

I40

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

poral infinity. [These] categorical features of the life-world have
the same names but are not concerned, so to speak, with the
theoretical idealizations and the hypothetical substructions of
the geometrician and the physicist. As we already know, physicists, who are men like other men, who know themselves as
living in the life-world, the world of their human interests, have,
under the title of physics, a particular sort of questions and (in a
broader sense) practical projects directed toward the things of
the life-world, and their "theories" are the practical results. Just
as other projects, practical interests, and their realizations belong to the life-world, presuppose it as ground, and enrich it with
their activity, so it is with science, too, as a human project and
praxis. And this includes, as we have said, everything objectively
a priori, with its necessary reference back to a corresponding a
priori of the life-world. This reference-back is one of a founding
of validity [Geltungsfundierung]. A certain idealizing accomplishment is what brings about the higher-level meaning-formation and ontic validity of the mathematical and every other
objective a priori on the basis of the life-world a priori. Thus the
latter ought first to become a subject of scientific investigation in
its peculiarity and purity, and then one ought to set the systematic task of understanding how, on this basis and in what manners of new meaning-formation, the objective a priori comes
about as a mediated theoretical accomplishment. What is
needed, then, would be a systematic division of the universal
structures—universal life-world a priori and universal "objective" a priori—and then also a division among the universal
inquiries according to the way in which the "objective" a priori is
grounded in the "subjective-relative" a priori of the life-world or
how, for example, mathematical self-evidence has its source of
meaning and source of legitimacy in the self-evidence of the
life-world.
This consideration has a particular interest for us even
though we have already detached our problem of a science of the
life-world from the problem of objective science in that we,
caught up through our schooling in the traditional objectivistic
metaphysics, at first have no means of access whatever to the
idea of a universal a priori belonging purely to the life-world.
What we need first is a separation in principle of the latter from
the objective a priori which is [always] immediately substituted
for it. It is this very separation that is effected by the first epoche
of all objective sciences, if we understand it also as the epoche of
all objective a priori sciences and make it complete through the

Part III A

/

141

considerations we have just carried out. The latter provide us, in
addition, with the fundamental insight that the universal a
priori of the objective-logical level—that of the mathematical
sciences and all others which are a priori in the usual sense—is
grounded in a universal a priori which is in itself prior, precisely
that of the pure life-world. Only through recourse to this a priori,
to be unfolded in an a priori science of its own, can our a priori
sciences, the objective-logical ones, achieve a truly radical, a
seriously scientific, grounding, which under the circumstances
they absolutely require.
Here we can also say: The supposedly completely self-sufficient logic which modern mathematical logicians [Logistiker]
think they are able to develop, even calling it a truly scientific
philosophy, namely, as the universal, a priori, fundamental science for all objective sciences, is nothing but naivete. Its self-evidence lacks scientific grounding in the universal life-world a
priori, which it always presupposes in the form of things taken
for granted, which are never scientifically, universally formulated, never put in the general form proper to a science of
essence. Only when this radical, fundamental science exists can
such a logic itself become a science. Before this it hangs in
mid-air, without support, and is, as it has been up to now, so very
naive that it is not even aware of the task which attaches to
every objective logic, every a priori science in the usual sense,
namely, that of discovering how this logic itself is to be
grounded, hence no longer "logically" but by being traced back to
the universal prelogical a priori through which everything logical, the total edifice of objective theory in all its methodological
forms, demonstrates its legitimate sense and from which, then,
all logic itself must receive its norms.
Yet this insight surpasses the interest in the life-world which
governs us now; for this, as we have said, all that counts is the
distinction in principle between the objective-logical and the
life-world a priori; and the purpose of this is to be able to set in
motion a radical reflection upon the great task of a pure theory
of essence of the life-world.

142

§ 37.

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The formal and most general structures of tHe
life-world: thing and world on the one side, j
thing-consciousness on the other.

I F WE SEEK OUT, simply looking around us, what is
formal and general, what remains invariant in the ltfe-world
throughout all alterations of the relative, we involuntarily stop at
what alone determines for us in life the sense of talking about
the world: the world is the universe of things, which are distributed within the world-form of space-time and are "positional" in
two senses (according to spatial position and temporal position)
—the spatiotemporal onta. Here would thus be found the task of
a life-world ontology, understood as a concretely general doctrine of essence for these onta. For our interest in the present
context it suffices to have indicated this. Rather than spend our
time here, we prefer to move on to a task which is much greater,
as will soon be seen—one which in fact encompasses such a
doctrine. In order to prepare the way for this new subject of
investigation, which also essentially concerns the life-world but
is not ontological, we shall undertake a general reflection—we,
that is, as waking, living human beings in the life-world (and
thus naturally within the epoche regarding all interference of
positive scientific discipline).
This general reflection will at the same time have the function of making evident an essential distinction among the possible ways in which the pregiven world, the ontic universe [das
ontische Universum], can become thematic for us. Calling to
mind what has repeatedly been said: the life-world, for us who
wakingly live in it, is always already there, existing in advance
for us, the "ground" of all praxis whether theoretical or extratheoretical. The world is pregiven to us, the waking, always somehow practically interested subjects, not occasionally but always
and necessarily as the universal field of all actual and possible
praxis, as horizon. To live is always to live-in-certainty-of-theworld. Waking life is being awake to the world, being constantly
and directly "conscious" of the world and of oneself as living in
the world, actually experiencing [erleben] and actually effecting

Part III A /

143

the ontic certainty of the world. The world is pregiven thereby,
in every case, in such a way that individual things are given. But
there exists a fundamental difference between the way we are
conscious of the world and the way we are conscious of things or
objects (taken in the broadest sense, but still purely in the sense
of the life-world), though together the two make up an inseparable unity. Things, objects (always understood purely in the
sense of the life-world), are "given* as being valid for us in each
case (in some mode or other of ontic certainty) but in principle
only in such a way that we are conscious of them as things or
objects within the world-horizon. Each one is something, "something of" the world of which we are constantly conscious as a
horizon. On the other hand, we are conscious of this horizon
only as a horizon for existing objects; without particular objects
of consciousness it cannot be actual [aktuell]. Every object has
its possible varying modes of being valid, the modalizations of
ontic certainty. The world, on the other hand, does not exist as
an entity, as an object, but exists with such uniqueness that the
plural makes no sense when applied to it. Every plural, and
every singular drawn from it, presupposes the world-horizon.
This difference between the manner of being of an object in the
world and that of the world itself obviously prescribes fundamentally different correlative types of consciousness for them.

§ 38.

The two possible fundamental ways of making
the life-world thematic: the naive and
natural straightforward attitude and the
idea of a consistently reflective attitude
toward the "how" of the subjective manner of
givenness of life-world and life-world objects.

THESE MOST GENERAL features of waking life make up
the formal framework within which it now becomes possible to
distinguish the different ways this life is carried on, though in all
cases the world is pregiven and, within this horizon, objects are
given. These ways result in the different manners, we could also

144

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

say, in which we are awake to the world and to the objects in the
world. The first, the naturally normal one which absolutely must
precede the others not for accidental but for essential reasons, is
that of straightforwardly living toward whatever objects are
given, thus toward the world-horizon, in normal, unbroken constancy, in a synthetic coherence running through all acts. This
normal, straightforward living, toward whatever objects are
given, indicates that all our interests have their goals in objects,
The pregiven world is the horizon which includes all our goals,
all our ends, whether fleeting or lasting, in a flowing but constant manner, just as an intentional horizon-consciousness implicitly "encompasses" [everything] in advance. We, the subjects,
in our normal, unbroken, coherent life, know no goals which
extend beyond this; indeed we have no idea that there could be
others. All our theoretical and practical themes, we can also say,
lie always within the normal coherence of the life-horizon
"world." World is the universal field into which all our acts,
whether of experiencing, of knowing, or of outward action, are
directed. From this field, or from objects in each case already
given, come all affections, transforming themselves in each case
into actions.
Yet there can be a completely different sort of waking life
involved in the conscious having of the world. It would consist in
a transformation of the thematic consciousness of the world
which breaks through the normality of straightforward living.
Let us direct our attention to the fact that in general the world
or, rather, objects are not merely pregiven to us all in such a way
that we simply have them as the substrates of their properties
but that we become conscious of them ( and of everything ontically meant) through subjective manners of appearance, or
manners of givenness, without noticing it in particular; in fact
we are for the most part not even aware of it at all. Let us now
shape this into a new universal direction of interest; let us
establish a consistent universal interest in the "how" of the
manners of givenness and in the onta themselves, not straightforwardly but rather as objects in respect to their "how"—that is,
with our interest exclusively and constantly directed toward
how, throughout the alteration of relative validities, subjective
appearances, and opinions, the coherent, universal validity
world—the world—comes into being for us; how, that is, there
arises in us the constant consciousness of the universal existence, of the universal horizon, of real, actually existing objects,

Part III A /

145

each of which we are conscious of only through the alterations
of our relative conceptions [Auffassungen] of it, of its manners of appearing, its modes of validity, even when we are conscious of it in particularity as something simply being there.
In this total change of interest, carried out with a new consistency founded on a particular resolve of the will, we notice
that we acquire a number of never thematically investigated
types, not only of individual things but also of syntheses, in an
inseparable synthetic totality which is constantly produced by
intentionally overlapping horizon-validities; and the latter influence each other reciprocally in the form of corroborating
verifications of existence, or refuting cancelings-out, or other
modalizations. This is the essential character of the synthetic
totality in which we can take possession of something previously
completely unknown, something never envisioned or grasped as a
task for knowledge; this is the universal accomplishing life in
which the world comes to be as existing for us constantly in
flowing particularity, constantly "pregiven" to us. We can also
say: this is the synthetic totality in which we nlow discover, for
the first time, that and how the world, as correlate of a discoverable universe of synthetically connected accomplishments, acquires its ontic meaning and its ontic validity in t^e totality of its
ontic [ontische] structures.
But here we do not need to go into more detailed expositions,
into everything that can become thematic. What ^s essential for
us here is the distinction between the two types of investigation,1
each regarded as a universal investigation.
The natural life, whether it is prescientificalliy or scientifically, theoretically or practically interested, is /life within a
universal unthematic horizon. This horizon isV irpthe natural attitude, precisely the world always pregiven as that which exists.
Simply living on in this manner, one does not need the word
"pregiven"; there is no need to point out that the world is constantly actuality for us. All natural questions, all theoretical and
practical goals taken as themes—as existing, as perhaps existing, as probable, as questionable, as valuable, as project, as
action and result of action—have to do with something or other
within the world-horizon. This is true even of illusions, nonactualities, since everything characterized through some modality
1. This could refer either to the "two ways of making the lifeworld thematic" (cf. section heading) or to the investigation of the
"how" of the objects vs. the investigation of the subjective syntheses.

146

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

of being is, after all, related to actual being. For, in advance,
"world" has the meaning "the universe of the 'actually* existing
actualities": not the merely supposed, doubtful, or questionable
actualities but the actual ones, which as such have actuality for
us only in the constant movement of corrections and revisions of
validities [Umgeltungen von Geltungen]—all this considered
as the anticipation of an ideal unity.
Instead of persisting in this manner of "straightforwardly
living into the world," let us attempt a universal change of
interest in which the new expression "pregivenness of the world"
becomes necessary because it is the title for this differently
directed and yet again universal theme of the manners of pregivenness. In other words, nothing shall interest us but precisely
that subjective alteration of manners of givenness, of manners
of appearing and of the modes of validity in them, which, in its
constant process, synthetically connected as it incessantly flows
on, brings about the coherent consciousness of the straightforward "being" of the world.
Among the objects of the life-world we also find human
beings, with all their human action and concern, works and
suffering, living in common in the world-horizon in their particular social interrelations and knowing themselves to be such. AU
this, too, then, shall be included as we carry out our new universal direction of interest. A coherent theoretical interest shall now
be directed exclusively toward the universe of the subjective, in
which the world, in virtue of the universality of synthetically
bound accomplishments in this universe, comes to have its
straightforward existence for us. In the natural and normal
world-life this subjective manifold constantly goes on, but there
it remains constantly and necessarily concealed. How, by what
method, is it to be revealed? Can it be shown to be a self-enclosed universe with its own theoretical and consistently maintained inquiry, revealing itself as the all-encompassing unity of
ultimately functioning and accomplishing subjectivity which is
to account for the existence of the world—the world for us, our
natural life-horizon? If this is a legitimate and a necessary task,
its execution implies the creation of a new science of a peculiar
sort. In opposition to all previously designed objective sciences,
which are sciences on the ground of the world, this would be a
science of the universal how of the pregivenness of the world, i.e.,
of what makes it a universal ground for any sort of objectivity.
And included in this is the creation of a science of the ultimate
grounds [Gründe] which supply the true force of all objective

Part III A /

147

grounding, the force arising from its ultimate bestowal of meaning.
Our historically motivated path, moving from the interpretation of the interplay of problems between Hume and Kant, has
now led us to the postulate of clarifying the pregiven world's
character of universally "being the ground" for all objective
sciences and—what followed of itself—for all objective praxis;
it has led us, then, to the postulate of that novel universal
science of subjectivity as pregiving the world. We shall now have
to see how we can fulfill this postulate. We notice thereby that
the first step which seemed to help at the beginning, that epochs
through which we freed ourselves from all objective sciences as
grounds of validity, by no means suffices. In carrying out this
epoche, we obviously continue to stand on the ground of the
world; it is now reduced to the life-world which is valid for us
prescientifically; it is just that we may use no sort of knowledge
arising from the sciences as premises, and we may take the
sciences into consideration only as historical facts, taking no
position of our own on their truth.
But nothing about this affects our interested looking-around
in the prescientifically intuited world or our paying attention to
its relative features. In a certain way, concern with this sort of
thing belongs continually even to [one type of] objective investigation, namely, that of the historians, who must, after all, reconstruct the changing, surrounding life-worlds of the peoples and
periods with which they deal. In spite of this, the pregiven world
is still valid as a ground [for them] and has not been transposed
into the universe of the purely subjective, a universal framework
in its own right, which is our concern now.
The same thing holds [even] if we take as our subject of
investigation, in the unity of a systematic survey, all [historical]
periods and peoples and finally the entire spatiotemporal world,
paying constant attention to the relativity of the surrounding
life-worlds of particular human beings, peoples, and periods as
mere matters of fact. It is clear that the same thing is true of this
world survey, in the form of an iterated synthesis of relative,
spatiotemporal life-worlds, that is true of a survey of one such
life-world individually. It is taken one part at a time and then, at
a higher level, one surrounding world, one temporal period, at a
time; each particular intuition [yields] an ontic validity, whether
in the mode of actuality or possibility. As each intuition occurs,
it presupposes others having objective validity—presupposes for
us, the observers, the general ground of the validity of the world.

I48

§ 39.

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The peculiar character of the
transcendental epoche as a total change
of the natural attitude of life.

Now, HOW CAN the pregivenness of the life-world become a universal subject of investigation in its own right?
Clearly, only through a total change of the natural attitude, such
that we no longer live, as heretofore, as human beings within
natural existence, constantly effecting the validity of the pregiven world; rather, we must constantly deny ourselves this.
Only in this way can we arrive at the transformed and novel
subject of investigation, "pregivenness of the world as such": the
world purely and exclusively as—and in respect to how—it has
meaning and ontic validity, and continually attains these in new
forms, in our conscious life. Only thus can we study what the
world is as the ground-validity for natural life, with all its projects and undertakings, and, correlatively, what natural life and
its subjectivity ultimately are, i.e., purely as the subjectivity
which functions here in effecting validity. The life which effects
world-validity in natural world-life does not permit of being
studied from within the attitude of natural world-life. What is
required, then, is a total transformation of attitude, a completely
unique, universal epoche.

§ 40.

The difficulties surrounding the genuine
sense of performing the total epoche.
The temptation to misconstrue it as a
withholding of all individual validities,
carried out step by step.

THE UNIVERSALITY of the epoche in regard to the totality of natural and normal life does indeed have an incomparable,
peculiar character, and as such it is at first open to question in

Part III A /

149

several respects. From the start it is not clear how it is to be
carried out in such a way as to be capable of the methodical accomplishment expected of it, which in turn, in view of its generality, is still in need of clarification. Here many tempting blind
alleys offer themselves, as we shall find out, i.e., ways of understanding the performance of the epoche which surely do not lead
to the goal—as we can make evident to ourselves in advance.
In order to gain a conception of how this total transformation of attitude is to be carried out, let us consider again the style
of natural, normal life. There we move in a current of ever new
experiences, judgments, valuations, decisions. In each of these
acts the ego is directed toward objects in its surrounding world,
dealing with them in one way or another. It is of them that we
are conscious in these acts themselves, sometimes simply as
actual, sometimes in modalities of actuality (for example, as
possible, as doubtful, etc.). None of these acts, and none of the
validities involved in them, is isolated: in their intentions they
necessarily imply an infinite horizon of inactive [inaktuelle] validities which function with them in flowing mobility. The manifold acquisitions of earlier active life are not dead sediments;
even the background (for example, that of the perceptual field),
of which we are always concurrently conscious but which is
momentarily irrelevant and remains completely unnoticed, still
functions according to its implicit validities. All things of this
sort, even though they are momentarily not actualized, are in a
constant motion involving modes of being awakened, immediately or mediately, and modes of affecting the ego and possibly
passing over into active apperception, intervening as validities in
the complex of acts. Thus the particular object of our active
consciousness, and correlatively the active, conscious having of
it, being directed toward it, and dealing with it—all this is
forever surrounded by an atmosphere of mute, concealed, but
cofunctioning validities, a vital horizon into which the active ego
can also direct itself voluntarily, reactivating old acquisitions,
consciously grasping new apperceptive ideas, transforming them
into intuitions. Because of this constantly flowing horizonal
character, then, every straightforwardly performed validity in
natural world-life always presupposes validities extending back,
immediately or mediately, into a necessary subsoil of obscure
but occasionally available reactivatable validities, all of which
together, including the present acts, make up a single indivisible,
interrelated complex of life.
This consideration is of significance for the clarification of

150

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

how the universal epochs is to be performed. We see, namely,
that as an abstention from performing validity, carried out in
individual steps, it cannot lead to the goal.
The abstention from performing individual validities (similar to the way this occurs in a critical attitude, caused by theoretical or practical demands) only creates for each instance a new
mode of validity on the natural ground of the world; and the
situation is not improved if we wish to exercise, through an
anticipatory, universal resolve, the abstention from the performance, one by one, of all validities, even to infinity, i.e., in respect
to all of one's own or alien validities which from now on could
ever suggest themselves.
Instead of this universal abstention in individual steps, a
completely different sort of universal epoche is possible, namely,
one which puts out of action, with one blow, the total performance running through the whole of natural world-life and
through the whole network (whether concealed or open) of
validities—precisely that total performance which, as the coherent "natural attitude," makes up "simple" "straightforward"
ongoing life. Through the abstention which inhibits this whole
hitherto unbroken way of life a complete transformation of all of
life is attained, a thoroughly new way of life. An attitude is
arrived at which is above the pregivenness of the validity of the
world, above the infinite complex whereby, in concealment, the
world's validities are always founded on other validities, above
the whole manifold but synthetically unified flow in which the
world has and forever attains anew its content of meaning and
its ontic validity. In other words, we thus have an attitude above
the universal conscious life (both individual-subjective and intersubjective) through which the world is "there" for those
naively absorbed in ongoing life, as unquestionably present, as
the universe of what is there, 1 as the field of all acquired and
newly established life-interests. They are all put out of action in
advance by the epoche, and with them the whole natural ongoing life which is directed toward the actualities of "the" world.
It is to be noted also that the present, the "transcendental"
epoche is meant, of course, as a habitual attitude which we
resolve to take up once and for all. Thus it is by no means a
temporary act, which remains incidental and isolated in its various repetitions. And again, everything we said about the earlier
i. als fraglos vorhandene, als Universum der Vorhandenheiten.

Part III A

/

151

epoche, in comparing it with vocational attitudes, still holds:
during "vocational time," while it does put all other interests "out
of play/' it by no means gives up their manner of being as
belonging to us (or our own manner of being as those who are
"interested"), as if we were to sacrifice them or even reconsider
whether or not they should continue to be upheld. But we must
also not forget what was said as a protest against a degrading
equation [of this] with other vocations and what was said about
the possibility of radically changing all human existence through
this epoche which reaches into its philosophical depths.

§41.

The genuine transcendental epoche makes
possible the "transcendental reduction"—
the discovery and investigation of the
transcendental correlation between world
and world-consciousness.

WE PERFORM THE epoche—we who are philosophizing
in a new way—as a transformation of the attitude which precedes it not accidentally but essentially, namely, the attitude of
natural human existence which, in its total historicity, in life
and science, was never before interrupted. But it is necessary,
now, to make really transparent the fact that we axe not left with
a meaningless, habitual abstention; rather, it is through this
abstention that the gaze of the philosopher in truth first becomes
fully free: above all, free of the strongest and most universal,
and at the same time most hidden, internal bond, namely, of the
pregivenness of the world. Given in and through this liberation
is the discovery of the universal, absolutely self-enclosed and
absolutely self-sufficient correlation between the world itself and
world-consciousness. By the latter is meant the conscious life of
the subjectivity which effects the validity of the world, the subjectivity which always has the world in its enduring acquisitions
and continues actively to shape it anew. And there results, finally, taken in the broadest sense, the absolute correlation between beings of every sort and every meaning, on the one hand,
and absolute subjectivity, as constituting meaning and ontic

152

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

validity in this broadest manner, on the other hand. What must
be shown in particular and above all is that through the epoche a
new way of experiencing, of thinking, of theorizing, is opened to
the philosopher; here, situated above his own natural being and
above the natural world, he loses nothing of their being and their
objective truths and likewise nothing at all of the spiritual acquisitions of his world-life or those of the whole historical communal life; he simply forbids himself—as a philosopher, in the
uniqueness of his direction of interest—to continue the whole
natural performance of his world-life; that is, he forbids himself
to ask questions which rest upon the ground of the world at
hand, questions of being, questions of value, practical questions,
questions about being or not-being, about being valuable, being
useful, being beautiful, being good, etc. All natural interests are
put out of play. But the world, exactly as it was for me earlier
and still is, as my world, our world, humanity's world, having
validity in its various subjective ways, has not disappeared; it is
just that, during the consistently carried-out epoche, it is under
our gaze purely as the correlate of the subjectivity which gives it
ontic meaning, through whose validities 1 the world "is" at all.
This is not a "view," an "interpretation" bestowed upon the
world. Every view about . . . , every opinion about "the" world,
has its ground in the pregiven world. It is from this very ground
that I have freed myself through the epoche; I stand above the
world, which has now become for me, in a quite peculiar sense, a
phenomenon.

§ 42.

The task of concretely plotting ways
in which the transcendental reduction
can actually be carried out.

BUT HOW IS THE indicated accomplishment, made possible by the epoche—we call it the "transcendental reduction*—
and how is the scientific task which is thus opened up to be made
understandable in more concrete terms? [We are referring to
the] accomplishment of a reduction of "the" world to the transcendental phenomenon "world," a reduction thus also to its
i. Reading Geltungen for Gelten.

Part III A /

153

correlate, transcendental subjectivity, in and through whose
"conscious life" the world, valid for us straightforwardly and
naively prior to all science, attains and always has attained its
whole content and ontic validity. How can we make it more
concretely understandable that the reduction of mankind to the
phenomenon "mankind," which is included as part of the reduction of the world, makes it possible to recognize mankind as a
self-objectification of transcendental subjectivity which is always functioning ultimately and is thus "absolute"? How does it
become possible, thanks to the epoche, to display this subjectivity in its accomplishment, in its transcendental "conscious life,"
extending into hidden subsoils, in the distinct manners in which
it "brings about," within itself, the world as ontic meaning? How
can we bring this to light with self-evidence, not inventing or
mythically constructing? If this is a matter of a new sort of
scientific discipline, of a new sort of theoretical questioning and
resolving of questions, then the ground for these questions, too,
must be prepared. Natural questions about the world have their
ground in the pregiven world as the world of actual and possible
experiences. And the gaze made free by the epoche must likewise
be, in its own way, an experiencing gaze. [But] the accomplishment of the total transformation of attitude must consist in the
fact that the infinity of actual and possible world-experience
transforms itself into the infinity of actual and possible "transcendental experience," in which, as a first step, the world and
the natural experience of it are experienced as "phenomenon."
But how do we begin this, and how do we progress? How, at
first concretely feeling our way, do we attain our first results,
even if only as material for new reflections through which the
method of systematic progressive work and, at the same time,
the genuine and pure sense of our whole project and the quite
peculiar character of this new scientific discipline will become
fully clear? The following reflections will show how much such
material is needed when we no longer move on the old familiar
ground of the world but rather stand, through our transcendental reduction, only at the gate of entrance to the realm, never
before entered, of the "mothers of knowledge"; x they will show
how great the temptation is, here, to misunderstand oneself and
how much—indeed, ultimately, the actual success of a transcendental philosophy—depends upon self-reflective clarity carried to its limits.
1. Cf. Faust, Part II, line 6216.

154

§43.

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Characterization of a new way to
the reduction, as contrasted with
the ''Cartesian way."

W E WISH TO PROCEED, here, by beginning anew, starting purely from natural world-life, and by asking after the how
of the world's pregivenness. At first we understand the question
of the world's pregivenness just as it arises within the natural
attitude and is understandable by all: namely, as the pregivenness of the world of existing things through the constant alteration of relative manners of givenness, the world just as it
essentially, always, obviously exists for us, throughout the whole
of naturally flowing life, with an inexhaustible plenitude of what
is taken for granted and constantly underlies the alteration of
subjective appearances and validities. As such we now consistently make the world our subject of investigation, i.e., as the
ground of all our interests and life-projects, among which the
theoretical projects of the objective sciences make up only a
particular group. But the latter is now to be in no way privileged
as it was when it motivated our inquiries earlier. In this manner,
then, let our subject now be not the world simply, but the world
exclusively as it is constantly pregiven to us in the alteration of
its manners of givenness.
At this point novel and ever broadening systematic tasks are
opened up within a universal epoche which at first offers itself
quite obviously as an immediate necessity. In systematically
carrying out the epoche, or reduction, understood in this way,
however, we find that in all the tasks it sets it requires a clarification and a transformation of its meaning if the new science is
to become capable of being executed in a really concrete way and
without absurdity; or if—what amounts to the same thing—it is
actually to accomplish a reduction to the absolutely ultimate
grounds [Gründe] and to avoid unnoticed, nonsensical admixtures of naturally naive prior validities. Thus we arrive once
again at the transcendental epoche which was introduced in
advance in our previous presentation in a general way. But now
it has not only been enriched by the samples of significant
insights attained along the way; it has also attained a self-under-

Part III A /

155

standing in principle which procures for these insights and for
the epoche itself their ultimate meaning and value.
I note in passing that the much shorter way to the transcendental epoche in my Ideas toward a Pure Phenomenology and
Phenomenological Philosophy, which I call the "Cartesian way"
(since it is thought of as being attained merely by reflectively
engrossing oneself in the Cartesian epoche of the Meditations
while critically purifying it of Descartes's prejudices and confusions), has a great shortcoming: while it leads to the transcendental ego in one leap, as it were, it brings this ego into view as
apparently empty of content, since there can be no preparatory
explication; so one is at a loss, at first, to know what has been
gained by it, much less how, starting with this, a completely new
sort of fundamental science, decisive for philosophy, has been
attained. Hence also, as the reception of my Ideas showed, it is
all too easy right at the very beginning to fall back into the
naive-natural attitude—something that is very tempting in any
case.1

§44.

The life-world as subject matter for a
theoretical interest determined by a
universal epoche in respect to the actuality
of the things of the life-world.

LET us BEGIN our new way by devoting an exclusive, consistently theoretical interest to the "life-world" as the general
"ground" of human world-life and, specifically, to just the way in
which it fulfills this general "ground" function. Since we seek in
vain in world literature for investigations that could serve as preparatory studies for us—investigations which might have understood this task as that of a science in its own right (a peculiar
science, to be sure, since it concerns the disparaged 56£a, which
now suddenly claims the dignity of a foundation for science,

1. It is to be remembered that the German version of the Cartesian Meditations had never been released for publication by Husserl.
These remarks support the theory that Husserl had given up the project of a final version of the Meditations altogether in favor of the
Crisis as the definitive introduction to phenomenology.

I56

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

emarrinr})—we ourselves must make a completely new beginning.
As is the case with all undertakings which are new in principle,
for which not even an analogy can serve as guide, this beginning
takes place with a certain unavoidable naivete. In the beginning
is the deed.1 It makes the still insecure project more definite and
at the same time clearer and clearer by means of samples of successful execution. After this, reflection on method is required (as
the second step) which expressly delimits the general sense of
such a project, the extent to which it can be fulfilled, and the
scope of what has already been accomplished in aspiring to it.
We wish, then, to consider the surrounding life-world concretely, in its neglected relativity and according to all the manners of relativity belonging essentially to it—the world in which
we live intuitively, together with its real entities [Realitäten]; but
[we wish to consider them] as they give themselves to us at first
in straightforward experience, and even [consider] the ways in
which their validity is sometimes in suspense (between being
and illusion, etc.). Our exclusive task shall be to comprehend
precisely this style, precisely this whole merely subjective and
apparently incomprehensible "Heraclitean flux." Thus we are not
concerned with whether and what the things, the real entities of
the world, actually are (their being actual, their actually being
such and such, according to properties, relations, interconnections, etc.); we are also not concerned with what the world,
taken as a totality, actually is, what in general belongs to it in
the way of a priori structural lawfulness or factual "natural
laws." We have nothing like this as our subject matter. Thus we
exclude all knowledge, all statements about true being and
predicative truths for it, such as are required in active life for its
praxis (i.e., situational truths); but we also exclude all sciences,
genuine as well as pseudosciences, with their knowledge of the
world as it is "in itself," in "objective truth." Naturally, in the
present thematic sphere, we also take no part in all the interests
which set any kind of human praxis in motion, especially since
the latter, because of its rootedness in the already existing world,
is always at the same time interested in the true existence or the
nonexistence of the things with which it deals.
This involves a type of universal epoche, then, which serves
here only to isolate the subject matter of subsequent investigations, of whose possible results, by the way, we still have no
conception. The motivation arising out of the need to clarify the
1. Faust, Part I, line 1237: "Im Anfang war die Tat."

Part III A /

157

obvious accomplishments of the positive sciences originally required this topic. But we have already detached ourselves from
this motivation. Deeper reflections are required in order to understand how this topic can become an independent task, a field
of working problems.

§45.

Beginnings of a concrete exposition of what
is given in sense-intuition purely as such.

ONE OF OUR FIRST steps will have to be that of filling in
the empty generality of our theme. As fully "disinterested" 1
spectators (in the indicated sense of the epoche) of the world
purely as subjective-relative world (the one in which our whole
everyday communal life—our efforts, concerns, and accomplishments—takes place), let us now take a first, naive look around;
our aim shall be, not to examine the world's being and beingsuch, but to consider whatever has been valid and continues to
be valid for us as being and being-such in respect to how it is
subjectively valid, how it looks, etc.
For example, there are various individual things of experience at any given time; I focus on one of them. To perceive it,
even if it is perceived as remaining completely unchanged, is
something very complex: it is to see it, to touch it, to smell it, to
hear it, etc.; and in each case I have something different. What
is seen in seeing is in and for itself other than what is touched in
touching. But in spite of this I say: it is the same thing; it is only
the manners of its sensible exhibition, of course, that are different. If I remain purely within the realm of seeing, I find new
differences, arising in very manifold form in the course of any
normal seeing, which, after all, is a continuous process; each
phase is itself a seeing, but actually what is seen in each one is
something different. I express this somewhat in the following
way: the pure thing seen, what is visible "of" the thing, is first of
all a surface, and in the changing course of seeing I see it now
from this "side," now from that, continuously perceiving it from
ever differing sides. But in them the surface exhibits itself to me
in a continuous synthesis; each side is for consciousness a man-

1. Reading uninteressierte for uninteressierter.

158

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

ner of exhibition of it. This implies that, while the surface is
immediately given, I mean more than it offers. Indeed, I have
ontic certainty of this thing [as that] to which all the sides at
once belong, and in the mode in which I see it "best." Each side
gives me something of the seen thing. In the continuous alteration of seeing, the side just seen 2 ceases being actually still seen,
but it is "retained" and "taken" together with those retained from
before; and thus I "get to know" the thing. Similar observations
should be developed at length in respect to nearness and farness.
Even if I stop at perception, I still have the full consciousness of the thing, just as I already have it at the first glance
when I see it as this thing. In seeing I always "mean" it with all
the sides which are in no way given to me, not even in the form
of intuitive, anticipatory presentifications. Thus every perception has, "for consciousness," a horizon belonging to its object
(i.e., whatever is meant in the perception).
But considered more exactly, what we have displayed so far,
i.e., what I attribute to the thing itself—for example, its seen,
colored shape in the alteration of near-and-far orientation—is
again something which exhibits itself in manifold ways. I am
speaking now of the alteration of perspectives. The perspectives
of the shape and also of its color are different, but each is in this
new way an exhibiting of—of this shape, of this color. Something similar to this can be studied in every modality of the
sense-perception (touching, hearing, etc.) of the same thing. In
the course of alteration they all play their role as exhibitings,
now being interrupted, now beginning again; they offer many
types of manifolds of exhibitings, appearances, each of which
functions precisely as an exhibiting of. In running their course
they function in such a way as to form a sometimes continuous
and sometimes discrete synthesis of identification or, better, of
unification. This happens not as a blending of externals; rather,
as bearers of "sense" in each phase, as meaning something, the
perspectives combine in an advancing enrichment of meaning
and a continuing development of meaning, such that what no
longer appears is still valid as retained and such that the prior
meaning which anticipates a continuous flow, the expectation of
"what is to come," is straightway fulfilled and more closely determined. Thus everything is taken up into the unity of validity or
into the one, the thing. For now, this rough beginning of a description must suffice.
2. Reading die eben gesehene for eben die gesehene.

Part III A /

§46.

159

The universal a priori of correlation.

As SOON AS WE BEGIN to be on the lookout for things or
objects in the life-world, not in order to know them as what they
[really] are but rather in order to inquire into the modes of their
subjective manners of givenness, i.e., into how an object—in our
example a perceived object—exhibits itself as being and beingsuch, we enter a realm of more and more involved and very
remarkable expositions. Ordinarily we notice nothing of the
whole subjective character of the manners of exhibiting "of" the
things, but in reflection we recognize with astonishment that
essential correlations obtain here which are the component parts
of a farther-reaching, universal a priori. And what remarkable
"implications" appear, ones that can even be quite immediately,
descriptively displayed. As it was already pointed out briefly
above: I am directly conscious of the thing existing there, yet
changing from moment to moment I have the experience
[Erlebnis] [of an] "exhibiting of," although the latter, with its
remarkable "of," becomes visible only in reflection. Implied in
the particular perception of the thing is a whole "horizon" of
nonactive [nichtaktuelle] and yet cofunctioning manners of appearance and syntheses of validity.
Every first description here is of necessity rough, and soon
one is faced with the enigmas caused by this implication of
nonactive manifolds of appearances, without which no things,
no world of experience, would be given to us. And soon we are
also faced with the difficulties of concretely unfolding this a
priori of correlation. The latter can be displayed only in relativity, in an unfolding of horizons in which one soon realizes that
unnoticed limitations, horizons which have not been felt, push
us on to inquire into new correlations inseparably bound up with
those already displayed. For example, we involuntarily begin
such an "intentional analysis" of perception by giving privileged
status to a thing at rest, remaining qualitatively unchanged. But
the things of the perceptual surrounding world give themselves
only temporarily in this way, and soon the intentional problem
of motion and change arises. But was such a beginning, with the
unchanged thing at rest, actually only accidental? Does the
privileged status of rest not itself have a motive in the necessary

l60

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

course of such investigations? Or, to look at the matter from
another and very important side: involuntarily, we began with
the intentional analysis of perception (purely as perception of its
perceived object) and in fact gave privileged status thereby to
intuitively given bodies. Might this not also point to essential
necessities? The world exists as a temporal, a spatiotemporal,
world in which each thing has its bodily extension and duration
and, again in respect to these, its position in universal time and
in space. It is as such that we are ever conscious of the world in
waking consciousness, as such that it is valid as universal horizon. Perception is related only to the present. But this present is
always meant as having an endless past behind it and an open
future before it. We soon see that we need the intentional analysis of recollection as the original manner of being conscious of
the past; but we also see that such an analysis presupposes in
principle that of perception, since memory, curiously enough,
implies having-perceived. If we consider perception abstractly,
by itself, we find its intentional accomplishment to be presentation, making something present: the object gives itself as
"there," originally there, present. But in this presence, as that of
an extended and enduring object, lies a continuity of what I am
still conscious of, what has flowed away and is no longer intuited
at all, a continuity of "retentions'*—and, in the other direction, a
continuity of "protentions." Yet this is not, like memory in the
usual sense of intuitive "recollection," a phenomenon which
openly, so to speak, plays a part in object- and world-apperception. And thus the different modes of presentification in general
enter into the universal investigation we are undertaking here,
namely, that of inquiring consistently and exclusively after the
how of the world's manner of givenness, its open or implicit
"intention ah ties." In displaying these, we must say to ourselves
again and again that without them the objects and the world
would not be there for us and that the former exist for us only
with the meaning and the mode of being that they receive in
constantly arising or having arisen out of those subjective accomplishments.

Part III A

§47.

/

161

Indication of further directions of inquiry:
the basic subjective phenomena of kinesthesis,
alteration of validity, horizon-consciousness,
and the communalization of experience.

BUT FIRST IT WILL be necessary to continue our groping
entrance into this unknown realm of subjective phenomena and
to carry out several further expositions, which will be understandably still rough and in many respects still imperfectly determined. Let us again give a privileged status to perception.
Previously our gaze was directed at the multiplicity of side-exhibitings of one and the same thing and to the alteration of near
and far perspectives. We soon note that these systems of "exhibiting of" are related back to correlative multiplicities of kinesthetic processes having the peculiar character of the "I do," "I
move" (to which even the "I hold still" must be added). The kinestheses are different from the movements of the living body
which exhibit themselves merely as those of a physical body,
yet they are somehow one with them, belonging to one's own
living body with its two-sided character (internal kinestheses,
external physical-real movements). If we inquire into this "belonging," we notice that in each case "my living body" requires
particular and extensive descriptions, that it has its special peculiarities in the manner of exhibiting itself in multiplicities.
Another extraordinarily important thematic direction has
not yet been named; it is characterized by the phenomenon of
the alteration of validity—for example, the alteration of being
into illusion. In continuous perception a thing is there for me in
the straightforward ontic certainty of immediate presence—
though I must add: normally; for only when, giving my kinestheses free play, I experience concurrent exhibitings as belonging to it is the consciousness sustained of the one thing in
actual presence, exhibiting itself in manifold fashion as itself.
But if I ask what is implied in the fact that the thing-exhibitings
belong to the altering kinestheses, I recognize that a hidden
intentional "if-then" relation is at work here: the exhibitings
must occur in a certain systematic order; it is in this way that
they are indicated in advance, in expectation, in the course of a

162

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

harmonious perception. The actual kinestheses here lie within
the system of kinesthetic capacity, which is correlated with the
system of possible following events harmoniously belonging to
it. This is, then, the intentional background of every straightforward ontic certainty of a presented thing. 1
Often, however, a break in this harmony occurs: being is
transformed into illusion or simply into being doubtful, being
merely possible, being probable, being after all not completely
illusory, etc. The illusion is undone through "correction,*
through changing the sense in which the thing had been perceived. It is easy to see that the change of apperceptive sense
takes place through a change of the expectation-horizon of the
multiplicities anticipated as normal (i.e., as running on harmoniously). For example, one saw a man, but then, upon touching
him, had to reinterpret him as a mannequin (exhibiting itself
visually as a man ).
When our interest is turned in this direction, unexpectedly
manifold phenomena can be noticed in every perception, and not
only in connection with the individual thing. For consciousness
the individual thing is not alone; the perception of a thing is
perception of it within a perceptual field. And just as the individual thing in perception has meaning only through an open
horizon of "possible perceptions," insofar as what is actually perceived "points" to a systematic multiplicity of all possible
perceptual exhibitings belonging to it harmoniously, so the thing
has yet another horizon: besides this "internal horizon" it has an
"external horizon" precisely as a thing within a field of things;
and this points finally to the whole "world as perceptual world."
The thing is one out of the total group of simultaneously actually
perceived things; but this group is not, for us, for consciousness,
the world; rather, the world exhibits itself in it; such a group, as
the momentary field of perception, always has the character for
us of a sector "of the world, of the universe of things for
possible perceptions. Such, then, at any time, is the present
world; it exhibits itself to me in every case through a nucleus of
"original presence" (this designates the continuously subjective
character of what is directly perceived as such) as well as
through its internal and external horizon-validities.
In our—or, for each of us, my 2 —waking life, the world is
i'. Cf. the similar passage on pp. io6f., above.
2. in unserem, je-meinem—a very Heideggerian turn of phrase.

Part III A /

163

always perceived in this way; it always flows on in the unity of
my perceptual conscious life; yet it does so in remarkable fashion, such that, in individual details, a harmonious flow of the
preindicated multiplicities, which results in the consciousness of
the straightforward existence of the thing in question, does not
always occur. Ontic certainty, which involves an anticipatory
certainty of bringing the appropriate multiplicities harmoniously
into a fulfilling flow in the course of further perception through
a voluntary direction of the kinestheses, is often not sustained;
and yet a harmony in the total perception of the world is always
sustained through a correction which actually constantly functions along with it. This includes, for example, the correction
involved in seeing something close up, whereby what was seen
from afar is determined more precisely and thus at the same
time corrected (e.g., what was an undifferentiated red at a
distance shows itself from close up to be spotted).
But instead of inquiring further in the sphere of our own
intuitions, let us turn our attention to the fact that in our continuously flowing world-perceiving we are not isolated but rather
have, within it, contact with other human beings. Each one has
his perceptions, his presentifications, his harmonious experiences, devaluation of his certainties into mere possibilities,
doubts, questions, illusions. But in living with one another each
one can take part in the life of the others. Thus in general the
world exists not only for isolated men but for the community of
men; and this is due to the fact that even what is straightforwardly perceptual is communalized.
In this communalization, too, there constantly occurs an
alteration of validity through reciprocal correction. In reciprocal
understanding, my experiences and experiential acquisitions
enter into contact with those of others, similar to the contact
between individual series of experiences within my (one's own)
experiential life; and here again, for the most part, intersubjective harmony of validity occurs, [establishing what is] "normal"
in respect to particular details, and thus an intersubjective unity
also comes about in the multiplicity of validities and of what is
valid through them; here again, furthermore, intersubjective
discrepancies show themselves often enough; but then, whether
it is unspoken and even unnoticed, or is expressed through
discussion and criticism, a unification is brought about or at
least is certain in advance as possibly attainable by everyone. All
this takes place in such a way that in the consciousness of each

164

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

individual, and in the overarching community consciousness
which has grown up through [social] contact, one and the same
world achieves and continuously maintains constant validity as
the world which is in part already experienced and in part the
open horizon of possible experiences for all; it is the world as the
universal horizon, common to all men, of actually existing
things. Each individual, as a subject of possible experiences, has
his experiences, his aspects, his perceptual interconnections, his
alteration of validity, his corrections, etc.; and each particular
social group has its communal aspects, etc. Here again, properly
speaking, each individual has his experienced things, that is, if
we understand by this what in particular is valid for him, what is
seen by him and, through the seeing, is experienced as straightforwardly existing and being-such. But each individual "knows"
himself to be living within the horizon of his fellow human
beings, with whom he can enter into sometimes actual, sometimes potential contact, as they also can do (as he likewise
knows) in actual and potential living together. He knows that he
and his fellows, in their actual contact, are related to the same
experienced things in such a way that each individual has different aspects, different sides, perspectives, etc., of them but that in
each case these are taken from the same total system of multiplicities of which each individual is constantly conscious (in the
actual experience of the same thing) as the horizon of possible
experience of this thing. If one attends to the distinction between things as "originally one's own" and as "empathized"
from others, in respect to the how of the manners of appearance,
and if one attends to the possibility of discrepancies between
one's own and empathized views, then what one actually experiences originaliter as a perceptual thing is transformed, for each
of us, into a mere "representation of" ["Vorstellung von"], "appearance of/' the one objectively existing thing. From the synthesis these have taken on precisely the new sense "appearance
of," and as such they are henceforth valid. 'The" thing itself is
actually that which no one experiences as really seen, since it is
always in motion, always, and for everyone, a unity for consciousness of the openly endless multiplicity of changing experiences and experienced things, one's own and those of others.
The cosubjects of this experience themselves make up, for me
and for one another, an openly endless horizon of human beings
who are capable of meeting and then entering into actual contact with me and with one another.

Part III A /

§48,

165

Anything that is—whatever its meaning and
to whatever region it belongs—is an index
of a subjective system of correlations.

I N THIS EXCLUSIVE concentration on the multiplicities
of subjective manners of appearing through which the world is
pregiven to us, we arrive, again and again—even though we
have really considered only the world of perception, indeed only
its corporeal features—at the insight that we are not dealing
merely with contingent matters of fact. Rather, no conceivable
human being, no matter how different we imagine him to be,
could ever experience a world in manners of givenness which
differ from the incessantly mobile relativity we have delineated
in general terms, i.e., as a world pregiven to him in his conscious
life and in community with fellow human beings. The fact
which is naively taken for granted, that each person sees things
and the world in general as they appear to him, concealed, as we
now realize, a great horizon of remarkable truths whose uniqueness and systematic interconnection never entered the philosophical purview. The correlation between world (the world of
which we always speak) and its subjective manners of givenness
never evoked philosophical wonder (that is, prior to the first
breakthrough of "transcendental phenomenology" in the Logical
Investigations), in spite of the fact that it had made itself felt
even in pre-Socratic philosophy and among the Sophists—
though here only as a motive for skeptical argumentation. This
correlation never aroused a philosophical interest of its own
which could have made it the object of an appropriate scientific
attitude. Philosophers were confined by what was taken for
granted, i.e., that each thing appeared differently in each case to
each person.
But as soon as we begin to examine carefully the how of the
appearance of a thing in its actual and possible alteration and to
pay consistent attention to the correlation it involves between
appearance and that which appears as such, and if we consider
the alteration as an alteration of validity for the intentionality
occurring in the ego-subjects and their communalization, we are

166

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

forced to recognize a fixed typology with ever widening ramifications. It applies not only to perceiving, to bodies, and to the
penetrable depths of immediate sensibility but to any and every
entity within the spatiotemporal world and to its subjective manners of givenness. Everything thus stands in correlation with its
own manners of givenness, which are by no means merely sensible in character, within a possible experience; and everything
has its modes of validity and its particular manners of synthesis.
Experience, self-evidence, is not an empty generality but is
differentiated according to the species, genera, and regional categories of what is and also according to all spatiotemporal modalities. Whatever exists, whether it has a concrete or abstract, real
or ideal, meaning, has its manners of self-givenness and, on the
side of the ego, its manners of intention in modes of validity; to
this belong the manners of the subjective variation of these
modes in syntheses of individual-subjective and intersubjective
harmony and discrepancy. We also foresee (as even the first
trials made clear in a preliminary way) that this confusingly
manifold typology of correlations, comprising further differentiations at every turn, is not a mere though generally established
fact but rather that the factual indicates an essential necessity
which, with the proper method, can be translated into essentisd
generalities, into an immense system of novel and highly astounding a priori truths. No matter where we turn, every entity
that is valid for me and every conceivable subject as existing in
actuality is thus correlatively—and with essential necessity—an
index of its systematic multiplicities. Each one indicates an ideal
general set of actual and possible experiential manners of givenness, each of which is an appearance of this one entity, such that
every actual concrete experience brings about, from this total
multiplicity, a harmonious flow of manners of givenness which
continuously fulfills the experiencing intention.*
* The first breakthrough of this universal a priori of correlation
between experienced object and manners of givenness (which occurred during work on my Logical Investigations around 1898) affected me so deeply that my whole subsequent life-work has been
dominated by the task of systematically elaborating on this a priori
of correlation. The further course of the reflections in this text will
show how, when human subjectivity was brought into the problems
of correlation, a radical transformation of the meaning of these
problems became necessary which finally led to the phenomenological
reduction to absolute, transcendental subjectivity.
The first, though still unclarified, emergence of the phenomenological reduction occurred several years after the publication of the

Part III A /

167

The total multiplicity of manners of givenness, however, is a
horizon of possibly realizable processes, as opposed to the actual
process, and as such it belongs to each experience, or rather to
the intention which is operative within it. For each subject this
intention is the cogito; the manners of givenness (understood in
the widest sense) make up its cogitatum according to the "what"
and the "how/' and the manners of givenness in turn bring to
"exhibition" the one and the same entity which is their unity.

§49.

Preliminary concept of transcendental
constitution as "original formation of
meaning." The restricted character of the
exemplary analyses carried out so far; an
indication of further horizons of exposition.

W E SEE HOW FAR we must take all this when we realizfe
that, while we are dealing with the total intentional accompljgnment, having many levels, of the subjectivity in question, it is
not that of the isolated subject. We are dealing, rather, with the
entire inter subjectivity which is brought together in the accomplishment—and here the concepts of "what is," of "manners of
givenness," of "syntheses," etc., are repeatedly relativized. Again
and again we realize that, beginning with the superficially visible, the manners of appearing belonging to the unifying multiplicities are themselves unities of multiplicities which lie deeper
and which constitute them through appearances, so that we are
led back to an obscure horizon—which, however, can still be
Logical Investigations (1900-1901); the first attempt at a systematic
introduction to the new philosophy of the transcendental reduction
appeared in 1913 as a fragment (Volume I of Ideas toward a Pure
Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy).
Contemporary philosophy of the decades since then—even that
of the so-called phenomenological schools—preferred to persist in the
old philosophical naivete. To be sure, the first breakthroughs of such
a radical change, a total transformation of the whole natural manner
of life, were difficult to present adequately, especially since certain
considerations, which will become understandable in the following,
constantly give rise to misinterpretations resulting from relapses into
the natural attitude.

168

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

opened up through methodical regressive inquiry. All the levels
and strata through which the syntheses, intentionally overlapping as they are from subject to subject, are interwoven form a
universal unity of synthesis; through it the objective universe
comes to be—the world which is and as it is concretely and
vividly given (and pregiven for all possible praxis). In this
regard we speak of the "intersubjective constitution" of the
world, meaning by this the total system of manners of givenness, however hidden, and also of modes of validity for egos;
through this constitution, if we systematically uncover it, the
world as it is for us becomes understandable as a structure of
meaning formed out of elementary intentionalities. The being of
these intentionalities themselves is nothing but one meaningformation operating together with another, "constituting" new
meaning through synthesis. And meaning is never anything but
meaning in modes of validity, that is, as related to intending
ego-subjects which effect validity. Intentionality is the title
which stands for the only actual and genuine way of explaining,
making intelligible. To go back to the intentional origins and
unities of the formation of meaning is to proceed toward a
comprehension which, once achieved (which is of course an
ideal case), would leave no meaningful question unanswered.
But every serious and genuine move from a "ready-made entity*
back to its intentional origins gives us, in respect to those strata
already uncovered and the clarification of what is accomplished
in them, an understanding which, though merely relative, is yet
an actual understanding as far as it goes.
What we dealt with in the manner of examples was naturally
only a beginning, in fact a beginning of the clarification of
merely the world of perception, which is itself, taken as a whole,
only a "stratum." The world is a spatiotemporal world; spatiotemporality (as "living," not as logicomathematical) belongs to
its own ontic meaning as life-world. Our focus on the world of
perception (and it is no accident that we begin here) gives us, as
far as the world is concerned, only the temporal mode of the
present; this mode itself points to its horizons, the temporal
modes of past and future. Recollection, above all, exercises the
intentional function of forming the meaning of the past—apart
from the fact that perception itself, as the "flowing-static" present, is constituted only through the fact that the static "now"
(as a deeper intentional analysis shows) has a horizon with two
differently structured sides, known in intentional language as a
continuum of retentions and protentions. These first prefigura-

Part III A /

169

tions of temporalization and time, however, remain in the background. In the recollection founded upon them we have before
us, in original intuition, a past—a present which has passed. It
too has "being": it has its multiplicities of manners of givenness,
its manners of coming to original self-givenness (to immediate
self-evidence) as what has passed. Likewise, in expectation or
anticipatory recollection, again understood as an intentional
modification of perception (the future is a present-to-come), is
found the meaning-formation from which arises the ontic meaning of that which is in the future. And the deeper structure of
this can be revealed in more detail. This represents the beginnings of new dimensions of temporalization, or of time and its
time content—quite apart from the fact (which is not to be
elucidated here) that the constitution of every level and sort of
entity is a temporalization which gives to each distinctive meaning of an entity in the constitutive system its own temporal
form, whereas only through the all-inclusive, universal synthesis
which constitutes the world do all these times come together
synthetically into the unity of one time. One thing more should
be pointed out: in the elucidation of the accomplishment of the
intentional syntheses, privileged status is given to the clarification of the syntheses of continuity (for example, the one contained in the flowing unity of perception); these serve as a
ground for elucidating on a higher level the discrete syntheses. I
give as an example [of the latter] the identification of something
perceived as the same thing that, according to recollection, was
there before. This rerecognition, its exposition through the continuity of recollection, the corresponding deeper analyses of these
"obvious" matters—all this leads to difficult investigations.
Here, as everywhere, we can investigate first only what is
nearest to our comprehension. But it should be clear from the
preceding that as soon as one has progressed far enough in the
reorientation of the epoche to see the purely subjective in its own
self-enclosed pure context as intentionality and to recognize it as
the function of forming ontic meaning, the theoretical interest
grows quickly, and one becomes more astonished at each step by
the endless array of emerging problems and important discoveries to be made. To be sure, one is soon beset by extraordinary
difficulties: that of preserving the pure frame of mind, of finding
one's way in an unknown world, where all the concepts, all the
ways of thinking and scientific methods based on the natural
world, as well as all the logical methods of objective science, are
of no help; and that of bringing about a novel and yet scientific

170

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

way of thinking through the required method which is developing in a precursory way. In truth, this is a whole world—and if
we could equate this subjectivity with the faxy of Heraclitus, his
saying would doubtless be true of it: "You will never find the
boundaries of the soul, even if you follow every road; so deep is
its ground." 1 Indeed, every "ground" [Grund] that is reached
points to further grounds, every horizon opened up awakens new
horizons, and yet the endless whole, in its infinity of flowing
movement, is oriented toward the unity of one meaning; not, of
course, in such a way that we could ever simply grasp and
understand the whole; rather, as soon as one has fairly well
mastered the universal form of meaning-formation, the breadths
and depths of this total meaning, in its infinite totality, take on
valuative [axiotische] dimensions: there arise problems of the
totality as that of a universal reason. Yet all this is far from the
beginner; he starts by exhibiting only a few interconnections,
and only gradually does he learn to discover the essential order
of the work to be done or (what amounts to the same thing) to
do justice to those important considerations which, in the course
of exhibiting and describing, are belatedly recognized as determining everything else. Here we can only sketch them in broad
outlines.

§ 50.

First ordering of all working problems
under the headings ego—cogito—cogitatum.

W H E N WE TAKE AN INTEREST in the subjective-relative
life-world, what first arrests our gaze is, naturally: appearance
and that which appears; and we remain at first in the sphere of
the intuitively given, i.e., the sphere of the modes of experience.
The nonintuitive manners of being conscious and their relatedness back to possibilities of intuition remain unconsidered. So
we pursue the synthesis through which the manifold appearances bear within themselves "that which is" as their "objectpole." The latter is in the appearances not as a component part

i. Husserl slightly misquotes Diels's version of Fragment 45: the
last phrase reads "so tiefen Sinn hat sie" (rather than Grund). Cf. Die
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, ed. W. Kranz, 12th ed. (Dublin and
Zurich: Weidman, 1966), p. 161.

Part III A

/

171

[reell] but intentionally, as that of which each, in its own way, is
jui appearance. A thing, for example, in the harmonious synthesis of unification, is just this one thing, showing itself one
side at a time, revealing its identical being through its properties,
which are exhibited in different perspectives. In terms of intentionality, anything straightforwardly experienced as a "thishere," as a thing, is an index of its manners of appearing, which
become intuitable (or experienceable, in their own peculiar
way) when our gaze is reflectively turned. All the above considerations, of course, touch upon the ego in passing, but the ego
ultimately claims its right as the subject matter of a far-reaching
investigation in its own right, namely, as the performer (also
identical, in its own way) of all validities, the intending ego,
directed toward the unity-pole "through" the alterations of the
many-leveled manners of appearing. That is, it is directed toward its sought-after goal (its project [Vorhabe]), which is
meant in advance with greater or less clarity and distinctness,
which fulfills itself, being and becoming, phase by phase—fulfilling the ego's intention. At the same time the ego—as the
ego-pole—continuously carries out a retaining function such
that, while it actively explicates the object through its properties
(i.e., its particular "is"-qualities, which give it its particularity),
it does not let what has been explicated originaliter sink away
into nothingness as perception proceeds but rather holds it in its
meaning grasp even though it is now unperceived. Everything is
centered in the ego-pole, including the modalization of the ontic
certainties—"crossing out" what is illusory, attending to the decision about uncertainties, doubt, etc. Affections, on the other
hand, go toward the ego-pole; they attract the ego with greater or
less insistence, possibly motivating it to turn to them in a truly
active way. These and similar matters point to special analyses
in depth of the ego as ego-pole.
Accordingly we have, in the Cartesian manner of speaking,
the three headings, ego-cogitatio-cogitata: the ego-pole (and
what is peculiar to its identity), the subjective, as appearance
tied together synthetically, and the object-poles. These are different directions our analyses can take, and to them correspond
different aspects of the general notion of intentionality: direction toward something, appearance of something, and something, an objective something, as the unity in its appearances
toward which the intention of the ego-pole, through these appearances, is directed. Although these headings are inseparable
from one another, one must pursue them one at a time and in an

I72

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

order opposite to that suggested by the Cartesian approach. First
comes the straightforwardly given life-world, taken initially as it
is given perceptually: as "normal," simply there, unbroken, existing in pure ontic certainty (undoubted). When the new direction of interest is established, and thus also its strict epoche, the
life-world becomes a first intentional heading, an index or guideline for inquiring back into the multiplicities of manners of
appearing and their intentional structures. A further shift of
direction, at the second level of reflection, leads to the ego-pole
and what is peculiar to its identity. Let us here point out only
what is most important, the most general aspect of the ego's
form, namely, the peculiar temporalization by which it becomes
an enduring ego, constituting itself in its time-modalities: the
same ego, now actually present, is in a sense, in every past that
belongs to it, another—i.e., as that which was and thus is not
now—and yet, in the continuity of its time it is one and the
same, which is and was and has its future before it. The ego
which is present now, thus temporalized, has contact with its
past ego, even though the latter is precisely no longer present: it
can have a dialogue with it and criticize it, as it can others.
Now everything becomes complicated as soon as we consider
that subjectivity is what it is—an ego functioning constitutively
—only within intersubjectivity. From the "ego'* perspective this
means that there are new themes, those of the synthesis applying specifically to ego and other-ego (each taken purely as ego):
the I-you-synthesis and, also, the more complicated we-synthesis.
In a certain sense this is also a temporalization, namely, that of
the simultaneity of the ego-poles or, what amounts to the same
thing, that of the constitution of the personal horizon (pure
ego-horizon) in which every ego knows itself to be. It is universal
sociality (in this sense, "mankind"), the "space" of all ego-subjects. But the synthesis of intersubjectivity, of course, covers
everything else as well: the intersubjectively identical life«
world-for-all serves as an intentional "index" for the multiplicities of appearance, combined in intersubjective synthesis,
through which all ego-subjects (and not merely each through the
multiplicities which are peculiar to him individually) are oriented toward a common world and the things in it, the field of all
the activities united in the general "we," etc.

Part III A /

§51.

173

The task of an "ontology of the life-world"

BUT ALL THIS—and this is what makes scientific discipline, description, phenomenological-transcendental truth possible—is pervaded by a set of fixed types which, as we have said, is
one of essential types and can be methodically encompassed as a
pure a priori. Here it is remarkable, and philosophically very
important, that this also applies to the first of our topics, the
life-world, constituted throughout all its relative aspects as a
unity, the universe of life-world objects. Even without any transcendental interest—that is, within the "natural attitude" (in the
language of transcendental philosophy the naive attitude, prior
to the epoche)—the life-world could have become the subject
matter of a science of its own, an ontology of the life-world
purely as experiential world (i.e., as the world which is coherently, consistently, harmoniously intuitable in actual and possible experiencing intuition). For our part we, who up to now have
constantly carried out our systematic reflections within the reorientation of the transcendental epoche, can at any time restore
the natural attitude and, within it, inquire after the invariant
structures of the life-world.
The world of life, which as a matter of course takes up into
itself all practical structures (even those of the objective sciences as cultural facts, though we refrain from taking part in
their interests), is, to be sure, related to subjectivity throughout
the constant alteration of its relative aspects. But however it
changes and however it may be corrected, it holds to its essentially lawful set of types, to which all life, and thus all science, of
which it is the "ground," remain bound. Thus it also has an
ontology to be derived from pure self-evidence.
We have already spoken of the possibility and the significance of such an ontology of the life-world on the natural
ground, i.e., outside the transcendental horizon of interest, and
we shall have occasion to speak of it again in another connection. We must keep firmly in mind the fact that this ontology's
own sense of an a priori science contrasts sharply with that of
the tradition. We must never ignore the fact that modern philosophy, with its objective sciences, is guided by a constructive
concept of a world which is true in itself, one substructed in

174

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

mathematical form, at least in respect to nature. Modern philosophy's concept of an a priori science, which is ultimately a
universal mathematics (logic, logistic), cannot therefore have
the dignity of actual self-evidence, i.e., the dignity of essential
insight obtained from direct self-giving (experiencing intuition),
much as it would like to claim this for itself.
If we return again, after this reminder, to the transcendental
attitude, i.e., the epoche, the life-world transforms itself, within
our transcendental-philosophical framework, into the mere transcendental "phenomenon." It remains thereby in its own essence
what it was before, but now it proves to be a mere "component,"
so to speak, within concrete transcendental subjectivity; and
correspondingly its a priori shows itself to be a "stratum" within
the universal a priori of the transcendental [in general]. To be
sure, words taken from the sphere of the natural world, such as
"component" and "stratum," are dangerous, and the necessary
transformation of their sense must therefore be noticed. Within
the epoche we are free consistently to direct our gaze exclusively
at this life-world or at its a priori essential forms; on the other
hand, by correspondingly shifting our gaze we can direct it at the
correlates which constitute its "things" or thing-forms, i.e., at the
multiplicities of manners of givenness and their correlative essential forms. Further, we can also consider the subjects and
communities of subjects, which function in all this, with regard
to the essential ego-forms belonging to them. In the alteration of
these partial attitudes, which are founded upon one another—
whereby the attitude focused upon life-world phenomena serves
as point of departure, namely, as transcendental guideline for
correlative attitudes on higher levels—the universal task of inquiry, that of the transcendental reduction, is brought to realization.

§ 52.

The emergence of paradoxical enigmas.
The necessity of new radical reflections.

T H E FIRST SURVEY of the pure problems of correlation,
which opened up to us the reorientation from the life of natural
interest in the world into the attitude of the "disinterested"
spectator, has resulted, though with a certain nai'vete and thus

Part III A /

175

preliminarily, in an abundance of obviously very strange insights which, if they were perfectly secured methodically, would
imply a radical reshaping of our whole way of looking at the
world. For purposes of thus securing our method, a reflection is
required concerning the ground of ultimate presuppositions in
which all these problems are rooted and from which, then, their
theoretical decisions ultimately take their meaning. But immediately we become involved in great difficulties, in unexpected and
at first insoluble paradoxes, which place our whole undertaking
in question—and this in spite of the self-evidences which offered
themselves to us and which we cannot simply give up out of
hand. Perhaps only a new inquiry back into the ground of this
knowledge (as opposed to the inquiry back into the ground of
objective knowledge) will lead to the clarification and thus the
corresponding limitation of its true sense. In the study of correlation our constant theme was the world and mankind as the
subjectivity which, in community, intentionally brings about the
accomplishment of world-validity. Our epoche (the one determining our present investigation) denied us all natural worldlife and its worldly interests. It gave us a position above these.
Any interest in the being, actuality, or nonbeing of the world,
i.e., any interest theoretically oriented toward knowledge of the
world, and even any interest which is practical in the usual
sense, with its dependence on the presuppositions of its situational truths, is forbidden; this applies not only to the pursuit,
for ourselves, of our own interests (we who are philosophizing)
but also to any participation in the interests of our fellow men
—for in this case we would still be interested indirectly in
existing actuality. No objective truth, whether in the prescientific or the scientific sense, i.e., no claim about objective being,
ever enters our sphere of scientific discipline, whether as a
premise or as a conclusion. Here we could discover a first difficulty. Are not we also doing science? Are we not establishing
truths about true being? Are we not entering upon the dangerous
road of double truth? Can there be, next to objective truth, yet a
second truth, the subjective? The answer, of course, is as follows: it is precisely the result of inquiry within the epoche—a
strange but self-evident result, which can be ultimately clarified
only through our present reflection—that the natural, objective
world-life is only a particular mode of the transcendental life
which forever constitutes the world, [but] in such a way that
transcendental subjectivity, while living on in this mode, has not
become conscious of the constituting horizons and never can

I76

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

become aware of them. It lives in "infatuation," so to speak, with
the poles of unity without being aware of the constituting multiplicities belonging essentially to them—for this, precisely, would
require a complete reorientation and reflection. Objective truth
belongs exclusively within the attitude of natural human worldlife. It arises originally out of the needs of human praxis as the
intent to secure what is straightforwardly given as existing (the
object-pole anticipated in ontic certainty as persisting) against
the possible modalizations of certainty. In the reorientation of
the epoche nothing is lost, none of the interests and ends of
world-life, and thus also none of the ends of knowledge. But for
all these things their essential subjective correlates are exhibited, and thus the full and true ontic meaning of objective being,
and thus of all objective truth, is set forth. Philosophy as universal objective science—and this is what all philosophy of the
ancient tradition was—together with all the objective sciences,
is not universal science at all. It brings into its sphere of inquiry
only the constituted object-poles and remains blind to the full
concrete being and life that constitutes them transcendentally.
But, as we said, though we shall hold onto this as truth, we must
still carry out a final clarification of its meaning.
A second difficulty emerges. The epoche in respect to all
natural human life-interests appears to be a turning-away from
them (which is, by the way, one of the most common misunderstandings of the transcendental epoche). But if it were meant in
this way, there would be no transcendental inquiry. How could
we take perception and the perceived, memory and the remembered, the objective and every sort of verification of the objective, including art, science, and philosophy, as a transcendental
theme without living through these sorts of things as examples
and indeed with [their] full self-evidence? This is, in fact, quite
true. Thus in a certain sense the philosopher within the epoche
must also "naturally live through" the natural life; yet the epoche
effects an immense difference in that it changes the entire manner of investigation and, furthermore, reshapes the goal of
knowledge in the whole of its ontic meaning. In straightforward
natural life all purposes terminate in "the" world and all knowledge terminates in what actually exists as secured by verification. The world is the open universe, the horizon of "termini,"
the universal field of what exists which is presupposed by all
praxis and is continually enriched by its results. Thus the world
is the totality of what is taken for granted as verifiable; it is
"there" through an aiming [Abzielung] and is the ground for ever

Part III A /

177

new aimings at what is—what "actually" is. In the epoche, however, we go back to the subjectivity which ultimately aims, which
already has results, already has the world through previous aims
and their fulfillment; and [we go back] to the ways in which this
subjectivity has, "has brought about," and continues to shape the
world through its concealed internal "method/' The interest of
the phenomenologist is not aimed at the ready-made world or at
external, purposeful activity in it, which itself is something
"constituted." The phenomenologist carries out every sort of
praxis, either actually or in sympathetic understanding, but not
in such a way that its fulfilling "end" is his end, the one in which
he terminates. Rather, he takes being-an-end as such, this living
toward goals in world-life and terminating in them, as the subject of his own investigation in respect to the subjective aspects
pervading them; and thus the naive ontic meaning of the world
in general is transformed for him into the meaning "system of
poles for a transcendental subjectivity," which "has" a world and
real entities within it, just as it has these poles, by constituting
them. This is obviously something fundamentally different from
the transformation of "ends" into "means," into premises for new
worldly ends, a transformation which remains within the world
itself.
What has been said here presupposes that one is fully clear
about our way of explicating intentional life, through the
epoche, as accomplishing life, and that one has first achieved the
insight that even in the most straightforward perception, and
likewise in every consciousness of something having the simple,
straightforward validity of existence, there lies an aiming, one
that is realized in the harmoniousness of ever new ontic validities (those of the manners of givenness themselves) and,.in the
case of intuition, realizes the "thing itself." No matter what
variations we may find in intentionality as we proceed on from
its first exhibition in the ways of being actually directed toward
objects, they are all variational forms of accomplishments which
are ultimately those of the ego.
A third difficulty is that we cannot see how, in the epoche,
the "Heraclitean flux" of constituting life can be treated descriptively in its individual facticity. Here we are guided by the
distinction common in objective world-science between descriptive sciences—which, on the basis of experience, describe and
classify factual existence and sketch out inductive generalities
within intuitive experience so as to establish such existence for
everyone who has the same experience—and sciences of laws,

I78

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

the sciences of unconditional generalities. Still, whatever the
status of this objective difference, no real difficulty results for us,
since it would be illegitimate to make demands on the transcendental sphere which originate in the sphere of objectivity. It is,
however, correct that there can be no analogue to an empirical
science of fact, no "descriptive" science of transcendental being
and life understood as an inductive science based on experience
alone, in the sense of establishing individual transcendental
correlations as they factually occur and disappear. Not even the
single philosopher by himself, within the epoche, can hold fast to
anything in this elusively flowing life, repeat it with always the
same content, and become so certain of its this-ness and its
being-such that he could describe it, document it, so to speak
(even for his own person alone), in definitive statements. But
the full concrete facticity of universal transcendental subjectivity can nevertheless be scientifically grasped in another good
sense, precisely because, truly through an eidetic method, the
great task can and must be undertaken of investigating the
essential form of the transcendental accomplishments in all
their types of individual and inter subjective accomplishments,
that is, the total essential form of transcendentally accomplishing subjectivity in all its social forms. The fact is here, as
belonging to its essence, and it is determinable only through its
essence; there is no way of documenting it empirically in a sense
analogous to what is done in the objective sphere through inductive experience.

§ 53.

The paradox of human subjectivity:
being a subject for the world and at the
same time being an object in the world.

BUT NOW A TRULY serious difficulty arises which assails
our whole undertaking and the sense of its results and indeed
necessitates a reshaping of both. By virtue of our present method
of epoche, everything objective is transformed into something
subjective. Clearly this cannot be meant in such a way that
through this method the existing world and the human worldrepresentation are set over against each other and that, on the
ground of the world, taken for granted as actually existing, we

Part III A /

179

inquire into the subjective, i.e., into the psychic occurrences in
men through which they gain experience of the world, everyday
or scientific opinions about the world, their particular sensible
and conceptual "world-pictures." Scientific discipline for us is
not that of the psychologist. Through the radical epoche every
interest in the actuality or nonactuality of the world (in all
modalities, thus including possibility and conceivability, as well
as the decidability of this sort of thing) is put out of play. By the
same token, we are not concerned here with any scientific psychology and its problems. For the latter the world, presupposed
by it as unquestionably existing, is the ground; and it is precisely
this ground that the epoche has taken from us. And in the pure
attitude focused upon correlations, created by the epoche, the
world, the objective, becomes itself something subjective. In this
attitude, paradoxically, even the "subjective" is relativized,
namely, in the following way. The world (called "transcendental
phenomenon" in the transformed attitude) is from the start
taken only as a correlate of the subjective appearances, views,
subjective acts and capacities through which it constantly has,
and ever attains anew, its changeable [but] unitary sense. Now if
the inquiry gets underway, proceeding from the world (which
already has merely the manner of being of a unity of meaning)
back to the essential forms of these "appearances and views" of
it, the latter count as its "subjective manners of givenness." If,
then, through yet another reflection and regressive inquiry the
ego-poles and everything about them of a specifically ego-character become the subject of essential inquiry, they now become, in
a new and still higher sense, the subjective aspect of the world
and also of its manners of appearing. But within the epoche a
universal concept of the subjective encompasses everything:
ego-pole and universe of ego-poles, multiplicities of appearance
or object-poles and the universe of object-poles.
But precisely here lies the difficulty. Universal intersubjectivity, into which all objectivity, everything that exists at all, is
resolved, can obviously be nothing other than mankind; and the
latter is undeniably a component part of the world. How can a
component part of the world, its human subjectivity, constitute
the whole world, namely, constitute it as its intentional formation, one which has always already become what it is and continues to develop, formed by the universal interconnection of
intentionally accomplishing subjectivity, while the latter, the
subjects accomplishing in cooperation, are themselves only a
partial formation within the total accomplishment?

l80

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The subjective part of the world swallows up, so to speak, the
whole world and thus itself too. What an absurdity! Or is this a
paradox which can be sensibly resolved, even a necessary one,
arising necessarily out of the constant tension between the
power of what is taken for granted in the natural objective
attitude (the power of "common sense") 1 and the opposed attitude of the "disinterested spectator"? The latter is, to be sure,
extremely difficult to carry out in a radical way, since it is
constantly threatened by misunderstandings. Furthermore, by
carrying out the epoche the phenomenologist by no means
straightway commands a horizon of obviously possible new projects; a transcendental field of work does not immediately spread
before him, preformed in a set of obvious types. The world is the
sole universe of what is pregiven as obvious. From the beginning
the phenomenologist lives in the paradox of having to look upon
the obvious as questionable, as enigmatic, and of henceforth
being unable to have any other scientific theme than that of
transforming the universal obviousness of the being of the world
—for him the greatest of all enigmas—into something intelligible.2 If the paradox just developed were insoluble, it would mean
that an actually universal and radical epoche could not be carried out at all, that is, for the purposes of a science rigorously
bound to it. If the disinterestedness and the epoche were merely
those of the psychologist, to which no one objects since they
move on the ground of the world, then anything that is really
tenable about our insights would be reduced to objective-psychological essential insights, though of a new style. But can we be
content with this? Can we be satisfied simply with the notion
that human beings are subjects for the world (the world which
for consciousness is their world) and at the same time are
objects in this world? As scientists, can we content ourselves
with the view that God created the world and human beings
within it, that he endowed the latter with consciousness and
reason, that is, with the capacity for knowledge, the highest
instance of which is scientific knowledge? For the naivete that
belongs to the essence of positive religion this may be undoubted
truth and remain a truth forever, even though the philosophers
cannot be content with such naivete. The enigma of the creation
and thkt^pf God himself are essential component parts of positive religion. For the philosopher, however, this, and also the
i. Husserl uses the English term.
2. I.e., of transforming this Selbstverständlichkeit into a Verständlichkeit.

Part III A

/

181

juxtaposition "subjectivity in the world as object" and at the
same time "conscious subject for the world," contain a necessary
theoretical question, that of understanding how this is possible.
The epoche, in giving us the attitude above the subject-object
correlation which belongs to the world and thus the attitude of
focus upon the transcendental subject-object correlation, leads
us to recognize, in self-reflection, that the world that exists for
us, that is, our world in its being and being-such, takes its ontic
meaning entirely from our intentional life through a priori types
of accomplishments that can be exhibited rather than argumentatively constructed or conceived through mythical thinking.
One can make no headway with this, and with the profound
difficulties contained in it, if one hastily overlooks it and spares
oneself the trouble of making consistent regressive inquiries and
investigations or if one adduces arguments from the workshops
of past philosophers, say Aristotle or Thomas, and carries on a
game of logical argumentations and refutations. In the epoche
neither logic nor any a priori nor any philosophical demonstration in the venerable old style can provide us with artillery.
Rather, like all objective-scientific discipline, they are naive and
are themselves to be subjected to the epoche. On the other hand,
what is peculiarly proper to the essence of the incipient philosophy of this phenomenological-transcendental radicalism is that,
as we have said before, rather than having a ground of things
taken for granted and ready in advance, as does objective philosophy, it excludes in principle a ground of this or any other sort.
Thus it must begin without any underlying ground. But immediately it achieves the possibility of creating a ground for itself
through its own powers, namely, in mastering, through original
self-reflection, the naive world as transformed into a phenomenon or rather a universe of phenomena. Its beginning course,
like that carried out above in rough outlines, is necessarily one of
experiencing and thinking in naive self-evidence. It possesses no
formed logic and methodology in advance and can achieve its
method and even the genuine sense of its accomplishments only
through ever renewed self-reflections. Its fate (understood subsequently, to be sure, as an essentially necessary one) is to
become involved again and again in paradoxes, which, arising
out of uninvestigated and even unnoticed horizons, remain functional and announce themselves as incomprehensibilities.

182

§ 54.

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN

SCIENCES

The resolution of the paradox:

a. We as human beings, and we as ultimately
functioning-accomplishing subjects.
WHAT IS THE STATUS, now, of the paradox presently under
discussion—that of humanity as world-constituting subjectivity
and yet as incorporated in the world itself? In the naivete of our
first approach we were interested in the horizons of remarkable
discoveries which opened up again and again; and in the direction of our gaze which naturally came first, we held fast to the
correlation belonging to the first level of reflection: i.e., objectpole vs. manner of givenness (manner of appearance in the
broadest sense). The ego was mentioned as the subject matter of
the highest level of reflection; but in the careful analytic-descriptive procedure, which naturally favors the more detailed interconnections, it did not receive its full due. For the depths of its
functioning being make themselves felt only belatedly. In
connection with this, what was lacking was the phenomenon of
the change of signification of [the form] "I"—just as I am saying
"I" right now—into "other I's," into "all of us," we who are many
Ts," and among whom I am but one "I." What was lacking, then,
was the problem of the constitution of inter subjectivity—this
"all of us"—from my point of view, indeed "in" me. These are
problems which did not announce themselves on the pathway we
allowed ourselves to be drawn into, along which we allowed
ourselves to be propelled. Now they will compel our attention.
For the necessity of stopping here and entering into self-reflection makes itself felt most sharply through the question which at
last and unavoidably arises: who are we, as subjects performing
the meaning- and validity-accomplishment of universal constitution—as those who, in community, constitute the world as a
system of poles, as the intentional structure of community life?
Can "we" mean "we human beings," human beings in the natural-objective sense, i.e., as real entities in the world? But are
these real entities not themselves "phenomena" and as such
themselves object-poles and subject matter for inquiry back into
the correlative intentionalities of which they are the poles,
through whose function they have, and have attained, their ontic
meaning?

Part III A /

183

Naturally this question must be answered in the affirmative.
Indeed, as in the case of all regional categories of the world, of
all essential ontic types, we can actually exhibit the constitutive
formation of meaning provided we have proceeded far enough in
the method to ask the appropriate questions. Here it is a case of
inquiries proceeding from real human beings back to their "manners of givenness," their manners of "appearing," first of all in
perceptual appearance, i.e., in the mode of original self-givenness, of manners of harmonious verification and correction, of
identification through rerecognition as the same human person:
as the person previously known "personally" to us, the same one
of whom others speak, with whom they also have become acquainted, etc. In other words, the obviousness of: "There stands
a man, in this social group of persons well known to one another," must be resolved into its transcendental questions.
But are the transcendental subjects, i.e., those functioning in
the constitution of the world, human beings? After all, the
epoche has made them into "phenomena," so that the philosopher within the epoche has neither himself nor the others
naively and straightforwardly valid as human beings but precisely only as "phenomena," as poles for transcendental regressive inquiries. Clearly here, in the radical consistency of the
epoche, each "I" is considered purely as the ego-pole of his acts,
habitualities, and capacities and thence as being directed at
what appears in ontic certainty "through" the appearances, the
manners of givenness of the latter—i.e., as directed toward the
particular object-pole and its pole-horizon, the world. To all this,
then, belong further regressive inquiries in all these directions of
reflection. Concretely, each "I" is not merely an ego-pole but an
T with all its accomplishments and accomplished acquisitions,
including the world as existing and being-such. But in the
epoche and in the pure focus upon the functioning ego-pole, and
thence upon the concrete whole of life and of its intentional
intermediary and final structures, it follows eo ipso that nothing
human is to be found, neither soul nor psychic life nor real
psychophysical human beings; all this belongs to the "phenomenon," to the world as constituted pole.

184

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

b. As primal ego, I constitute my horizon of
transcendental others as cosubjects within
the transcendental intersubjectivity which
constitutes the world.
Nevertheless, we cannot be content; we are still caught in
the paradox. Indeed, our naive procedure was not quite correct,
and this is because we have forgotten ourselves, the philosophizers; or, to put it more distinctly: I am the one who performs
the epoche, and, even if there are others, and even if they
practice the epoche in direct community with me, [they and] all
other human beings with their entire act-life are included, for
me, within my epoche, in the world-phenomenon which, in my
epoche, is exclusively mine. The epoche creates a unique sort of
philosophical solitude which is the fundamental methodical requirement for a truly radical philosophy. In this solitude I am not
a single individual who has somehow willfully cut himself off
from the society of mankind, perhaps even for theoretical reasons, or who is cut off by accident, as in a shipwreck, but who
nevertheless knows that he still belongs to that society. I am not
an ego, who still has his you, his we, his total community of
cosubjects in natural validity. All of mankind, and the whole distinction and ordering of the personal pronouns, has become a
phenomenon within my epoche; and so has the privilege of I-theman among other men. The "I" that I attain in the epoche, which
would be the same as the "ego" within a critical reinterpretation
and correction of the Cartesian conception, is actually called T
only by equivocation—though it is an essential equivocation
since, when I name it in reflection, I can say nothing other than:
it is I who practice the epoche, I who interrogate, as phenomenon, the world which is now valid for me according to its being
and being-such, with all its human beings, of whom I am so fully
conscious; it is I who stand above all natural existence that has
meaning for me, who am the ego-pole of this transcendental life,
in which, at first, the world has meaning for me purely as world;
it is I who, taken in full concreteness, encompass all that. This
does not mean that our earlier insights, already expressed as
transcendental ones, were illusions and that it is not justifiable
to speak, in spite of the above, of a transcendental intersubjectivity constituting the world as "world for all," in which I again
appear, this time as "one" transcendental T among others,
whereby "we all" are taken as functioning transcendentally.

Part III A /

185

But it was wrong, methodically, to jump immediately into
transcendental inter subjectivity and to leap over the primal "I,"
the ego of my epoche, which can never lose its uniqueness and
personal indeclinability. It is only an apparent contradiction to
this that the ego—through a particular constitutive accomplishment of its own—makes itself declinable, for itself, transcendentally; that, starting from itself and in itself, it constitutes
transcendental intersubjectivity, to which it then adds itself as a
merely privileged member, namely, as "I" among the transcendental others. This is what philosophical self-exposition in the
epoche actually teaches us. It can show how the always singular
l,w in the original constituting life proceeding within it, constitutes a first sphere of objects, the "primordial" sphere; how it
then, starting from this, in a motivated fashion, performs a
constitutive accomplishment through which an intentional modification of itself and its primordiality achieves ontic validity
under the title of "alien-perception," perception of others, of
another "I" who is for himself an T as I am. This becomes
understandable by analogy if we already understand, through
the transcendental exposition of recollection, that to what is
recollected, what is past (which has the ontic meaning of a
present having passed) there belongs also a past "I" of that
present, whereas the actual, original "I" is that of immediate
presence; to this presence, recollection belongs as a present
experience, in addition to what appears as the present sphere of
facts. Thus the immediate "I" performs an accomplishment
through which it constitutes a variational mode of itself as
existing (in the mode of having passed). Starting from this we
can trace how the immediate "I," flowingly-statically present,
constitutes itself in self-temporalization as enduring through
Its" pasts. In the same way, the immediate "I," already enduring in the enduring primordial sphere, constitutes in itself
another as other. Self-temporalization through depresentation
[Ent-Gegenwärtigung], so to speak (through recollection), has
its analogue in my self-alienation [Ent-Fremdung] (empathy
as a depresentation of a higher level—depresentation of my
primal presence [Urpräsenz] into a merely presentified [vergegenwärtigte] primal presence). Thus, in me, "another I" achieves
ontic validity as copresent [kompräsent] with his own ways of
being self-evidently verified, which are obviously quite different
from those of a "sense"-perception.
Only by starting from the ego and the system of its transcendental functions and accomplishments can we methodically

186

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

exhibit transcendental intersubjectivity and its transcendental
communalization, through which, in the functioning system of
ego-poles, the "world for all,*" and for each subject as world for
all, is constituted. Only in this way, in an essential system of
forward steps, can we gain an ultimate comprehension of the
fact that each transcendental T ' within intersubjectivity (as
coconstituting the world in the way indicated) must necessarily
be constituted in the world as a human being; in other words,
that each human being "bears within himself a transcendental
T "—not as a real part or a stratum of his soul (which would be
absurd) but rather insofar as he is the self-objectification, as
exhibited through phenomenological self-reflection, of the corresponding transcendental "I." Nevertheless, every human being
who carried out the epoche could certainly recognize his ultimate
"I," which functions in all his human activity. The naivete of the
first epoche had the result, as we immediately saw, that I, the
philosophizing "ego," in taking myself as functioning "I," as
ego-pole of transcendental acts and accomplishments, proceeded
in one leap and without grounding, that is, illegitimately, to
attribute to the mankind in which I find myself the same transformation into functioning transcendental subjectivity which I
had carried out alone in myself. In spite of the methodical
illegitimacy, this contained a truth. At all events, however, we
must—for the most profound philosophical reasons, which we
cannot go into further, and which are not only methodical in
character—do justice to the absolute singularity of the ego and
its central position in all constitution.

§ 55.

The correction in principle of our first
application of the epoche by reducing it
to the absolutely unique, ultimately
functioning ego.

ACCORDINGLY, AS AGAINST the first application of the
epoche, a second is required, or rather a conscious reshaping of
the epoche through a reduction to the absolute ego as the
ultimately unique center of function in all constitution. This
determines henceforth the whole method of transcendental
phenomenology. In advance there is the world, ever pregiven and

Part III A /

187

undoubted in on tic certainty and self-verification. Even though I
have not [explicitly] "presupposed" it as a ground, it still has
validity for me, the "I" of the cogito, through constant self-verification, together with everything that it is for me, in particular
details sometimes objectively and legitimately so, sometimes not,
and together with all sciences and arts, together with all social
and personal configurations and institutions, insofar as it is just
the world that is actual for me. There can be no stronger realism
than this, if by this word nothing more is meant than: "I am
certain of being a human being who lives in this world, etc., and
I doubt it not in the least/' But the great problem is precisely to
understand what is here so "obvious.* The method now requires
that the ego, beginning with its concrete world-phenomenon,
systematically inquire back, and thereby become acquainted
with itself, the transcendental ego, in its concreteness, in the
system of its constitutive levels and its incredibly intricate
[patterns of] validity-founding.1 At the onset of the epoche the
ego is given apodictically, but as a "mute concreteness." It must
be brought to exposition, to expression, through systematic intentional "analysis" which inquires back from the world-phenomenon. In this systematic procedure one at first attains the
correlation between the world and transcendental subjectivity as
objectified in mankind.•.
But then new questions impose themselves in regard to this
mankind: are the insane also objectifications of the subjects
being discussed in connection with the accomplishment of
world-constitution? And what about children, even those who
already have a certain amount of world-consciousness? After all,
it is only from the mature and normal human beings who bring
them up that they first become acquainted with the world in the
full sense of the world-for-all, that is, the world of culture. And
what about animals? There arise problems of intentional modifications through which we can and must attribute to all these
conscious subjects—those that do not cofunction in respect to
the world understood in the hitherto accepted (and always fundamental) sense, that is, the world which has truth through
"reason"—their manner of transcendentality, precisely as "analogues" of ourselves. The meaning of this analogy will then itself
represent a transcendental problem. This naturally extends into
the realm of the transcendental problems which finally encom1. Geltungsfundierungen, i.e., the manner in which some validities are founded upon or presuppose others. For the notion of Fundierung see Ideen, Vol. I, §§ 116, 117.

188

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

pass all living beings insofar as they have, even indirectly but
still verifiably, something like "life," and even communal life in
the spiritual [geistige] sense. Also appearing thereby, in different
steps, first in respect to human beings and then universally, are
the problems of genesis [Generativität], the problems of transcendental historicity [Geschichtlichkeit], the problems of the
transcendental inquiry which starts from the essential forms of
human existence in society, in personalities of a higher order,*
and proceeds back to their transcendental and thus absolute
signification; further, there are the problems of birth and death
and of the transcendental constitution of their meaning as world
occurrences, and there is the problem of the sexes. And finally,
concerning the problem of the "unconscious" that is so much
discussed today—dreamless sleep, loss of consciousness, and
whatever else of the same or similar nature may be included
under this title—this is in any case a matter of occurrences in
the pregiven world, and they naturally come under the transcendental problem of constitution, as do birth and death. As
something existing in the world common to all, this sort of thing
has its manners of ontic verification, of "self-giving," which are
quite particular but which originally create the ontic meaning
for beings of such particularity. Accordingly, within the absolutely universal epoche, in respect to beings having this or any
other kind of meaning, the appropriate constitutional questions
have to be posed.
In accord with all this it is clear that there is no conceivable
meaningful problem in previous philosophy, and no conceivable
problem of being at all, that could not be arrived at by transcendental phenomenology at some point along its way. This includes
the problems that phenomenology itself poses, at a higher level
of reflection, to the phenomenologist: that is, not only problems
corresponding to the language, truth, science, and reason, in all
their forms, which are constituted within the natural world, but
problems of phenomenological language, truth, reason.
From this one also understands the sense of the demand for
apodicticity in regard to the ego and all transcendental knowledge gained upon this transcendental basis. Having arrived at
the ego, one becomes aware of standing within a sphere of
self-evidence of such a nature that any attempt to inquire behind
it would be absurd. By contrast, every ordinary appeal to self-evidence, insofar as it was supposed to cut off further regressive
2. I.e., communities, states, etc.

Part III A /

189

inquiry, was theoretically no better than an appeal to an oracle
through which a god reveals himself. All natural self-evidences,
those of all objective sciences (not excluding those of formal
logic and mathematics), belong to the realm of what is "obvious," what in truth has a background of incomprehensibility.
Every [kind of] self-evidence is the title of a problem, with the
sole exception of phenomenological self-evidence, after it has
reflectively clarified itself and shown itself to be ultimate self-evidence. It is naturally a ludicrous, though unfortunately common
misunderstanding, to seek to attack transcendental phenomenology as "Cartesianism," as if its ego cogito were a premise or set
of premises from which the rest of knowledge (whereby one
naively speaks only of objective knowledge) was to be deduced,
absolutely "secured." The point is not to secure objectivity but to
understand it. One must finally achieve the insight that no objective science, no matter how exact, explains or ever can explain
anything in a serious sense. To deduce is not to explain. To
predict, or to recognize the objective forms of the composition of
physical or chemical bodies and to predict accordingly—all this
explains nothing but is in need of explanation. The only true
way to explain is to make transcendentally understandable. Everything objective demands to be understood. Natural-scientific
knowing about nature thus gives us no truly explanatory, no
ultimate knowledge of nature because it does not investigate
nature at all in the absolute framework through which its actual
and genuine being reveals its ontic meaning; thus natural science never reaches this being thematically. This does not detract
in the least from the greatness of its creative geniuses or their
accomplishments, just as the being of the objective world in the
natural attitude, and this attitude itself, have lost nothing
through the fact that they are, so to speak, "understood back
into" [zurückverstanden] the absolute sphere of being in which
they ultimately and truly are. To be sure, the knowledge
[attained through] the constitutive "internal" method, through
which all objective-scientific method acquires its meaning and
possibility, cannot be without significance for the scientist of
nature or any other objective scientist. It is, after all, a matter of
the most radical and most profound self-reflection of accomplishing subjectivity; how could it not be of service in protecting
the naive, ordinary accomplishment from misunderstandings
such as are to be observed in abundance, for example, in the
influence of naturalistic epistemology and in the idolization of a
logic that does not understand itself?

B.
THE WAY INTO

PHENOMENOLOGICAL

TRANSCENDENTAL PHILOSOPHY FROM
PSYCHOLOGY

§ 56.

Characterization of the philosophical
development after Kant from the perspective
of the struggle between physicalistic
objectivism and the constantly reemerging
"transcendental motif"

I N THE COURSE of its development philosophy encounters theoretical situations in which momentous decisions have to
be made, situations in which philosophers must reconsider, must
place in question, and possibly redefine the whole sense of the
purpose of their project and must accordingly resolve to undertake a radical change of method. The authors of the theoretical
ideas that create these situations occupy, in the history of philosophy, a quite distinguished place. They are the representatives
of developments which have a unified meaning because of their
work, because of the new universal objectives outlined in their
developed theories. Every great philosopher continues to have
his effect in all subsequent historical periods; he exerts an influence. But not every one contributes a motif which gives unity to
a historical sequence and possibly concludes one line of development, a motif which works as a driving force and sets a task that
must be fulfilled, such that its fulfillment brings to an end [this
particular] historical period of development. Those who have

[191]

IQ2

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

become significant for us as representatives of the philosophy of
the modern period are Descartes, who marks a turning point in
respect to all previous philosophy; Hume (in all justice Berkeley
should actually also be mentioned); and—aroused by H u m e Kant, who in turn determines the line of development of the
German transcendental philosophies. (We see, by the way, that
the creators of the greatest, most intellectually massive systems
do not as such belong in this series; no one would equate Hume
and Berkeley in this respect with Kant or, among later philosophers, with Hegel.)
In the first series of lectures 1 we carried out a deeper analysis of the motifs of Cartesian philosophizing which continue to
determine the whole modern development: on the one hand,
those motifs which announce themselves in his first Meditations
and, on the other hand, those which stand in internal contrast
with these, i.e., the physicalistic (or mathematizing) idea of
philosophy according to which the world in its full concreteness
bears within itself an objectively true being in the form of the
ordo geometricus and according to which, as interwoven with
this (and this must be especially emphasized here), the metaphysical "in-itself" ascribed to the world involves a dualistic
world of bodies and spirits. This was characteristic of the philosophy of objectivistic rationalism in the Enlightenment. Then we
attempted the analysis of the Hume-Kant situation, and in the
end we could elucidate it only by penetrating into its presuppositions and by proceeding from there to pose questions of our own,
alien to the period itself, and by making clear to ourselves in a
preliminary sketch, through a systematic process of thinking,
the style of a truly scientific transcendental philosophy—"truly
scientific" in the sense that it works up from the bottom in
self-evident single steps and is thus in truth ultimately grounded
and ultimately grounding. We attempted thereby to awaken the
full insight that only such a philosophy, through such a regressive inquiry back to the last conceivable ground [Grund] in the
transcendental ego, can fulfill the meaning which is inborn in
philosophy from its primal establishment. Thus transcendental
i. I.e., Part II. It may seem strange that Husserl should continue
to refer to the Crisis as a series of lectures. Comparison with the original lecture shows that this is not a matter of fragments inadvertently
left over from Prague. But recall that the Cartesian Meditations,
which even in the published French edition was expanded far beyond
the scope of the original lectures, retained the references to the talks
at the Sorbonne.

Part III B /

193

philosophy in its first immature forms in the English and in
Kant, even though these philosophers hardly accomplished a
serious scientific grounding, and even though Hume withdrew
into an unhealthy academic skepticism, does not, on the whole,
represent a wrong path, nor "one" among other possible paths at
all, but the one path of the future which the development of
philosophy absolutely had to take in order to penetrate to the
fulfilled methodical form through which alone it could be truly
scientific, a philosophy working in the actual self-understanding
of the sense of its task, in the spirit of finality, working with an
apodictic self-evidence of its ground, its goals, its methods. This
fulfilled form could enter into historical actuality only as the
result of the most radical self-reflections, in the form of a first
beginning, a first attainment of the clarified task, of the apodictic
ground and the method of access to it, a first beginning of an
actual setting-to-work, the work of inquiring into the things
themselves. As phenomenological transcendental philosophy
(but exclusively in the sense prescribed here), this has become a
truly living beginning. I may go so far as to say that from now on
not only modern physicalistic naturalism but every objectivistic
philosophy, whether of earlier or of future times, must be characterized as "transcendental naivete."
Still, with this our task is not [yet] fulfilled. We ourselves,
and the ideas we necessarily had to construct in order to evoke a
genuine resonance from the ideas of the past, i.e., so that their
directedness, as seminal forms toward a final form, would become evident—we ourselves, I say, also belong to the same unity
of history. Thus we also have the task of meaningfully explicating the developments of philosophy up to our time and in our
present situation. Precisely this is indicated, as we shall soon
understand, by the mention of psychology in the title of these
lectures.2 The completion of our task does not require a detailed
investigation of the many philosophies and particular currents
of the subsequent period. Only a general characterization is
needed, and this will proceed from the understanding we have
attained of the history which has preceded us.
Philosophical objectivism of the modern sort, with its physicalistic tendency and its psychophysical dualism, does not die
out; that is, many feel quite comfortable here in their "dogmatic
slumbers." On the other side, those who have been aroused from
2. Again, a reference to the original title of the Prague lecture
series: "The Crisis of European Sciences and Psychology."

194

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

them have been first aroused primarily by Kant. Here, then,
originates the current of German transcendental idealisms, proceeding from Kant's transcendental philosophy. The great
momentum which earlier, from Descartes on, had animated objectivistic philosophy sustains itself in them and is even renewed
with a special force in the new form of the transcendental
approach to the world. To be sure, even German Idealism was
not fated to endure, in spite of the overwhelming impression
temporarily made by the Hegelian system, which seemed to
promise its total dominance for all time. The swelling reaction
which rapidly took effect soon assumed the sense of a reaction
against any sort of transcendental philosophy in this style; and
although the style did not completely die out, the subsequent
attempts at such philosophizing lost their original force and the
vitality of their development.
As for the momentum of objectivistic philosophy, in a certain way it sustained itself as the momentum in the development
of the positive sciences. But examined more closely, this is anything but a philosophical momentum. Recall the transformation
of meaning these sciences, along with their development as
special disciplines, had undergone, through which they finally
completely lost the important sense which was alive in them
earlier of being branches of philosophy. We have already spoken
of this, but for the clarification of the situation which arose in
the nineteenth century it is very important to go into it here in
somewhat more detail. What had been sciences in that other
sense, the only genuine one, had turned unnoticed into remarkable new arts, to be entered in the list of the other arts of higher
and lower dignity on the scale, such as the fine arts, architecture, and also the arts at lower levels. They could be taught and
learned in their institutes, their seminars, in collections of models, in museums. One could display skill, talent, even genius in
them—for example, in the art of inventing new formulae, new
exact theories, in order to predict the course of natural phenomena, in order to make inductions of a scope which would have
been unthinkable in earlier times; or, also, in the art of interpreting historical documents, grammatically analyzing languages,
constructing historical interconnections, etc. On all sides we find
great trail-blazing geniuses who gain the highest admiration of
their fellow men and abundantly deserve it. But art is not science, whose origin and intention, which can never be sacrificed,
is to attain, through a clarification of the ultimate sources of
meaning, a knowledge of what actually is and thus to under-

Part III B

/

195

stand it in its ultimate sense. Radically presuppositionless and
ultimately grounded science, or philosophy—this is simply another expression for the same thing. Of course, this art of
theory3 has the peculiar property that, since it has developed out
of philosophy (though out of an imperfect one), it has a meaning belonging to all its artful products, a meaning which comes
from that philosophy but is concealed, such that it cannot be
elicited by inquiring into mere methodical technique and its
history but can be aroused only by the true philosopher and can
be unfolded in its genuine depths only by the transcendental
philosopher. Thus there is actually scientific knowledge concealed within the art of theory, but access to it is difficult.
We have already spoken of this in our systematic discussions; we have shown what is necessary in order to attain knowledge ultimately grounded and have shown that the like can be
attained only in the universal framework, never as a naive "special science" and certainly not with the prejudice of modern
objectivism. The much lamented specialization [in the sciences]
is not in itself a lack, since it is a necessity within universal
philosophy, just as the development of an artlike method is
necessary in every special discipline. What certainly is portentous, however, is the separation of the art of theory from philosophy. However, though the specialized scholars dropped out, there
remained among them and alongside them philosophers who
continued to treat the positive sciences as branches of philosophy; thus the statement is still valid that objectivistic philosophy
did not die out after Hume and Kant. Alongside this runs the line
of development of transcendental philosophies, and not only
those derived from Kant. For there must be added to this a series
of transcendental philosophers who owe their motivation to a
continuation, or in the case of Germany a revival, of the
influence of Hume. In England J. S. Mill is especially to be mentioned, who in the period of great reaction against the systemphilosophies of German Idealism exercised a strong influence in
Germany itself. But in Germany there arose much more seriously intended attempts at a transcendental philosophy basically
determined by English empiricism (Schuppe, Avenarius),
though their supposed radicalism falls far short of the genuine
kind which alone can help. The renewal of positivistic empiricism is closely allied, though this is unnoticed, with the revivals
of earlier and especially transcendental philosophies due to the
3. die theoretische Kunst, the art of making theories, as above.

I96

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

growing urgency of transcendental motifs. By going back to
these philosophies and critically overhauling them along lines
prescribed by positivistic motifs, some hoped to arrive again at a
philosophy of their own. like Hume and Berkeley, Kant too is
revived—a multicolored Kant, through the multiplicity of attempted interpretations and the reconstructions of neo-Kantianism. Kant is reinterpreted even in empiricist fashion, as the
historical traditions are mixed and interwoven, creating for all
scientists a quasiphilosophical atmosphere involving a widely
discussed but by no means deeply or autonomously conceived
"theory of knowledge." Alongside Kant, particularly, all the other
idealists have had their renaissance; even a neo-Friesianism has
been able to appear as a school. Everywhere, when we also take
into account the rapid growth of bourgeois education, erudition,
and literature in the nineteenth century, we observe that the
confusion was becoming unbearable. More and more a skeptical
mood spread which crippled from the inside the philosophical
energy even of those who held fast to the idea of a scientific
philosophy. The history of philosophy is substituted for philosophy, or philosophy becomes a personal world-view, and finally
some even try to make out of a necessity a virtue: philosophy
can exercise no other function at all for humanity than that of
outlining a world-picture appropriate to one's individuality, as
the summation of one's personal education.
Although the genuine though never radically clarified idea of
philosophy has by no means been completely sacrificed, the
multiplicity of philosophies, which can hardly be comprehended
any more, nevertheless has the result that it is no longer divided
into scientific directions, such that they could still seriously work
together, carry on a scientific dialogue through criticism and
countercriticism, and still guide the common idea of one science
toward the path of realization, in the manner of the directions
within modern biology or mathematics and physics; rather, they
are contrasted as societies of aesthetic style, so to speak, analogous to the "directions" and "currents" in the fine arts. Indeed, in
the splintering of philosophies and their literature, is it still
possible at all to study them seriously as works of one science, to
make use of them critically and to uphold the unity of the work
done? The philosophies have their effects. But must one not
honestly say that they have their effects as impressions, that
they "inspire," that they move the feelings like poems, that they
arouse vague "intimations"? But is this not done in a similar
fashion (sometimes in a nobler style but even here, unfortu-

Part III B /

197

nately, all too often in one of a rather different kind) by the
many literary products of the day? We may credit the philosophers with the noblest intentions, we may even be firmly convinced of the teleological sense of history and accord even to
their constructs a significance—but is it the significance that
was historically entrusted to philosophy, given to it as a task?
When one withdraws into this kind of philosophizing, has not
something else, something of the highest value and necessity,
been sacrificed? Even what we have already dealt with by way of
criticism and the exhibiting of self-evidence gives us the right to
ask this question, not as a question of romantic moods—since
our aim is to turn all romanticism into responsible work—but as
a question of the scientific conscience that calls to us in universal and radical reflection, which, when carried out with the
greatest self-responsibility, must itself become the actual and
highest truth.
After what was set forth in the first series of lectures, we
hardly need to say what the [above] factual situation had to
mean for the existential plight of European humanity, which
sought—as the result of the Renaissance, determining the whole
meaning of the modern period—to create the universal science
as the instrument for giving itself a new rootedness and for
transforming itself into a humanity based on pure reason. But
our duty here is to make understandable the obvious failure of
the great intention to realize gradually the idea of a philosophia
perennis, a true and genuine universal science ultimately
grounded. At the same time we have to justify our boldness in
still daring to give a favorable prognosis (now and for our time)
—as can be foreseen in our systematic-critical presentations—
for the future development of a philosophy conceived as a science. The rationalism of the Age of Enlightenment is now out of
the question; we can no longer follow its great philosophers or
any other philosophers of the past. But their intention, seen in
its most general sense, must never die out in us. For, as I
emphasize once again, true and genuine philosophy or science
and true and genuine rationalism are one. Realizing this rationalism, rather than the rationalism of the Enlightenment, which
is laden with hidden absurdity, remains our own task if we are
not to let specialized science, science lowered to the status of art
or rtxyn o r the fashionable degenerations of philosophy into
irrationalistic busy-work be substituted for the inextinguishable
idea of philosophy as the ultimately grounding and universal
science.

198

§ 57.

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The fateful separation of transcendental
philosophy and psychology.

LET US GO BACK to the times in which modern man and
the modern philosopher still believed in themselves and in a
philosophy, when, in the context of the transcendental motivation, they struggled for a new philosophy with the responsible
seriousness of an inner, absolute calling that one senses in every
word of the genuine philosopher. Even after the so-called collapse of the Hegelian philosophy, in which the line of development determined by Kant culminated, this seriousness remained
intact for a time in the philosophies reacting against Hegel
(even though its original force was weakened). But why did
transcendental philosophy not achieve the unity of a development running through all its interruptions? Why did self-criticism and reciprocal criticism among those still animated by the
old spirit not lead to the integration of compelling cognitive
accomplishments into the unity of an edifice of knowledge which
grew from generation to generation, which merely needed perfecting through constantly renewed criticism, correction, and
methodical refinement? In this regard the following general
remark must first be made: an absolutely novel procedure like
that of transcendental science, which was lacking any sort of
guidance by analogy, could be before the mind at first only as a
sort of instinctive anticipation. An obscure dissatisfaction with
the previous way of grounding in all science leads to the setting
of new problems and to theories which exhibit a certain self-evidence of success in solving them in spite of many difficulties that
are unnoticed or, so to speak, drowned out. This first self-evidence can still conceal within itself more than enough obscurities which lie deeper, especially in the form of unquestioned,
supposedly quite obvious presuppositions. Yet such first theories
continue to be helpful historically; the obscurities become more
troublesome, what is supposedly obvious is questioned, the theories are criticized for this, and this creates the stimulus for new
attempts. Furthermore, transcendental philosophy, for essential
reasons (which are perfectly clear from our systematic presentations), can never undergo the unnoticed transformation into a

Part III B

/

199

mere rexyn and thus into a process of depletion whereby what
has become a technique retains only a hidden meaning—one
whose full depths, indeed, can be revealed only transcendentally.
We can understand, accordingly, that the history of transcendental philosophy first had to be a history of renewed attempts
just to bring transcendental philosophy to its starting point and,
above all, to a clear and proper self-understanding of what it
actually could and must undertake. Its origin is a "Copernican
turn," that is, a turning-away in principle from the manner of
grounding in naive-objective science. As we know, transcendental philosophy appears in its primal form, as a seed, in the first
Cartesian Meditations as an attempt at an absolutely subjectivistic grounding of philosophy through the apodictic ego; but here
it is unclear and ambiguous, and it immediately subverts its
genuine sense. Neither the new stage, the reaction of Berkeley
and Hume against the philosophical naivete of mathematical,
natural-scientific exactness, nor even Kant's new beginning led
to the genuine sense of the required Copernican turn—the
sense, that is, of grounding once and for all a systematic transcendental philosophy in the rigorous scientific spirit. A true
beginning, achieved by means of a radical liberation from all
scientific and prescientific traditions, was not attained by Kant.
He does not penetrate to the absolute subjectivity which constitutes everything that is, in its meaning and validity, nor to the
method of attaining it in its apodicticity, of interrogating it and
of explicating it apodictically. From then on, the history of this
philosophy was necessarily a continued struggle precisely for the
clear and genuine sense of the transcendental turn to be carried
out and of its method of work; to put it in another way, it was a
struggle for the genuine "transcendental reduction/' Our critical
reflections on Kant have already made clear to us the danger of
impressive and yet still unclear insights or, if you will, the
illumination of pure insights in the form of vague anticipations
while one is still working with questions posed on an unclarified
ground (that of what is "obvious"); and this also made comprehensible how he was forced into a mythical concept-construction
and into a metaphysics in the dangerous sense inimical to all
genuine science. All the transcendental concepts of Kant—those
of the T ' of transcendental apperception, of the different transcendental faculties, that of the "thing in itself" (which underlies souls as well as bodies)—are constructive concepts which
resist in principle an ultimate clarification. This is even more
true in the later idealistic systems. This is the reason for the

200

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

reactions, which were in fact necessary, against those systems,
against their whole manner of philosophizing. To be sure, if one
became willingly engrossed in such a system, one could not deny
the force and moment of its thought-constructions. Yet their
ultimate incomprehensibility gave rise to profound dissatisfaction among all those who had educated themselves in the great
new sciences. Even though these sciences, according to our clarification and manner of speaking, furnish a merely "technical*
self-evidence, and even though transcendental philosophy can
never become such a rkxvrjy this rexvn is still an intellectual
accomplishment which must be clear and understandable at
every step, must possess the self-evidence of the step made and
of the ground upon which it rests; and to this extent (taken thus
formally) the same thing holds for it that holds for every technically self-evident science practiced artfully, such as mathematics, for example. It helps not at all to try to explain the
incomprehensibility of the transcendental constructions by outlining, in the same spirit, a constructive theory of the necessity
of such incomprehensible things; nor does it help to try to suggest
that the overwhelming profundity of the transcendental theories
implies corresponding difficulties of understanding and that people are too lazy to overcome them. So much is correct, that any
transcendental philosophy must, and with essential necessity,
create extraordinary difficulties for the natural man's understanding—for "common sense" 1 —and thus for all of us, since
we cannot avoid having to rise from the natural ground to the
transcendental region. The complete inversion of the natural
stance of life, thus into an "unnatural" one, places the greatest
conceivable demands upon philosophical resolve and consistency. Natural human understanding and the objectivism rooted
in it will view every transcendental philosophy as a flighty eccentricity, its wisdom as useless foolishness; or it will interpret it as
a psychology which seeks to convince itself that it is not psychology. No one who is truly receptive to philosophy is ever frightened off by difficulties. But modern man, as man shaped by
science, demands insight; and thus, as the image of sight correctly suggest, he demands the self-evidence of "seeing" the goals
and the ways to them and every step along the way. The way
may be long, and many years of toilsome study may be necessary; this is true in mathematics, but it does not frighten him
whose life-interest is mathematics. The great transcendental
i. Husserl uses the English term.

Part III B

/

201

philosophies did not satisfy the scientific need for such selfevidence, and for this reason their ways of thinking were abandoned.
Turning back to our subject, we shall now be able to say,
without being misunderstood: just as the emerging incomprehensibility of the rationalistic philosophy of the Enlightenment,
understood as "objective" science, called forth the reaction of
transcendental philosophy, so the reaction against the incomprehensibility of the attempted transcendental philosophies had to
lead beyond them.
But now we are faced with the question: How is it to be
understood that such an [unscientific] style could be developed
and propagated at all, in great philosophers and their philosophies, when the development of modern philosophy was so animated by the will to science? These philosophers were by no
means mere poets of ideas. They were not at all lacking in the
serious will to create philosophy as an ultimately grounding
science, however one may wish to transform the sense of ultimate grounding. (Consider, for example, the emphatic declarations of Fichte in the drafts of his Wissenschaftslehre or those of
Hegel in the "Preface" to his Phänomenologie des Geistes.) How
is it that they remained bound to their style of mythical conceptconstructions and of world-interpretations based on obscure metaphysical anticipations and were not able to penetrate to a
scientifically rigorous type of concepts and method and that
every successor in the Kantian series conceived one more philosophy in the same style? Part of transcendental philosophy's
own meaning was that it arose out of reflections on conscious
subjectivity through which the world, the scientific as well as the
everyday intuitive world, comes to be known or achieves its ontic
validity for us; thus transcendental philosophy recognized the
necessity of developing a purely mental [geistige] approach to
the world. But if it had to deal with the mental, why did it not
turn to the psychology that had been practiced so diligently for
centuries? Or, if this no longer sufficed, why did it not work out
a better psychology? One will naturally answer that the empirical man, the psychophysical being, himself belongs, in soul as
well as body, to the constituted world. Thus human subjectivity
is not transcendental subjectivity, and the psychological theories
of knowledge of Locke and his successors serve as continued
admonitions against "psychologism," against any use of psychology for transcendental purposes. But in exchange, transcendental
philosophy always had to bear its cross of incomprehensibility.

202

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The difference between empirical and transcendental subjectivity remained unavoidable; yet just as unavoidable, but also incomprehensible, was their identity. I myself, as transcendental
ego, "constitute" the world, and at the same time, as soul, I am a
human ego in the world. The understanding which prescribes its
law to the world is my transcendental understanding, and it
forms me, too, according to these laws; yet it is my—the philosopher's—psychic faculty. Can the ego which posits itself, of
which Fichte speaks, be anything other than Fichte's own? If
this is supposed to be not an actual absurdity but a paradox that
can be resolved, what other method could help us achieve clarity
than the interrogation of our inner experience and an analysis
carried out within its framework? If one is to speak of a transcendental "consciousness in general," if I, this singular, individual ego, cannot be the bearer of the nature-constituting
understanding, must I not ask how I can have, beyond my individual self-consciousness, a general, a transcendental-intersubjective
consciousness? The consciousness of intersubjectivity, then,
must become a transcendental problem; but again, it is not
apparent how it can become that except through an interrogation of myself, [one that appeals to] inner experience, i.e., in
order to discover the manners of consciousness through which I
attain and have others and a fellow mankind in general, and in
order to understand the fact that I can distinguish, in myself,
between myself and others and can confer upon them the sense
of being "of my kind." Can psychology be indifferent here? Must
it not deal with all this? The same or similar questions address
themselves, as they do to Kant, to all his successors who became
so lost in obscure metaphysics or "mythology." One would think,
after all, that we could attain a scientific concept even of an
absolute reason and its accomplishments only after working out
a scientific concept of our human reason and of human, or of
humanity's, accomplishments—that is, only through a genuine
psychology.
The first answer to this question is that transcendental philosophy (and also philosophy of any other attempted style), quite
apart from concern about psychologism, had reason enough not
to hope for any counsel from psychology. This was due to psychology itself and to the fateful, erroneous path forced upon it
by the peculiarity of the modern idea of an objectivistic universal
science more geometrico, with its psychophysical dualism. In
the following I shall try to show (paradoxical as this thesis must
appear here) that it is precisely this restriction placed upon

Part III B /

203

psychology, which falsifies its meaning and to the present day
has kept it from grasping its peculiar task, that bears the primary responsibility for the fact that transcendental philosophy
found no way out of its uncomfortable situation and was thus
caught in the concepts and construction it used to interpret
its—in themselves valuable—empirical observations, concepts,
and constructions, which are completely devoid of any legitimation from original self-evidence. If psychology had not failed, it
would have performed a necessary mediating work for a concrete, working transcendental philosophy, freed from all paradoxes. Psychology failed, however, because, even in its primal
establishment as a new kind of [science] alongside the new
natural science, it failed to inquire after what was essentially the
only genuine sense of its task as the universal science of psychic
being. Rather, it let its task and method be set according to the
model of natural science or according to the guiding idea of
modern philosophy as objective and thus concrete universal science—a task which, of course, considering the given historical
motivation, appeared to be quite obvious. So remote was any sort
of doubt in this matter that it was not until the end of the
nineteenth century that it became a philosophical motif of
thought at all. Thus the history of psychology is actually only a
history of crises. And for this reason psychology could also not
aid in the development of a genuine transcendental philosophy,
since this was possible only after a radical reform through which
psychology's essentially proper task and method were clarified
through the deepest sort of reflection upon itself. The reason for
this is that the consistent and pure execution of this task had to
lead, of itself and of necessity, to a science of transcendental
subjectivity and thus to its transformation into a universal transcendental philosophy.

§58.

The alliance and the difference between
psychology and transcendental philosophy.
Psychology as the decisive field,

ALL THIS WILL BECOME understandable if, in order to
elucidate the difficult, even paradoxical, relation between psychology and transcendental philosophy, we make use of the

204

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

systematic considerations through which we made clear to ourselves the sense and the method of a radical and genuine transcendental philosophy. By now we are without doubt that a
scientific psychology of the modern style—no matter which of the
many attempts since Hobbes and Locke we may consider—can
never take part in the theoretical accomplishments, can never
provide any premises for those accomplishments, which are the
task of transcendental philosophy. The task set for modern psychology, and taken over by it, was to be a science of psychophysical realities, of men and animals as unitary beings, though
divided into two real strata. Here all theoretical thinking moves
on the ground of the taken-for-granted, pregiven world of experience, the world of natural life; and theoretical interest is simply
directed as a special case to one of the real aspects of it, the
souls, while the other aspect is supposed to be already known, or
is yet to be known, by the exact natural sciences according to its
objective, true being-in-itself. For the transcendental philosopher, however, the totality of real objectivity—not only the scientific objectivity of all actual and possible sciences but also the
prescientific objectivity of the life-world, with its "situational
truths" and the relativity of its existing objects—has become a
problem, the enigma of all enigmas. The enigma is precisely the
taken-for-grantedness in virtue of which the "world" constantly
and prescientifically exists for us, "world'' being a title for an
infinity of what is taken for granted, what is indispensable for
all objective sciences. As I, philosophizing, reflect in pure consistency upon myself as the constantly functioning ego throughout the alteration of experiences and the opinions arising out of
them, as the ego having consciousness of the world and dealing
with the world consciously through these experiences, as I inquire consistently on all sides into the what and the how of the
manners of givenness and the modes of validity, and the manner
of ego-centeredness, I become aware that this conscious life is
through and through an intentionally accomplishing life
through which the life-world, with all its changing representational contents [Vorstellungsgehalten], in part attains anew and
in part has already attained its meaning and validity. All real
mundane objectivity is constituted accomplishment in this
sense, including that of men and animals and thus also that of
the "souls." Psychic being, accordingly, and objective spirit of
every sort (such as human societies, cultures), and in the same
manner psychology itself, are among the transcendental problems. It would be absurdly circular to want to deal with such

Part III B

/

205

problems on a naive, objective basis through the method of the
objective sciences.
Nevertheless, psychology and transcendental philosophy are
allied with each other in a peculiar and inseparable way, namely,
in virtue of the alliance of difference and identity—which is no
longer an enigma for us, but has been clarified—between the
psychological ego (the human ego, that is, made worldly in the
spatiotemporal world) and the transcendental ego, its ego-life,
and its accomplishment. According to our clarifications, the ultimate self-understanding here allows us to say: in my naive
self-consciousness as a human being knowing himself to be
living in the world, for whom the world is the totality of what for
him is valid as existing, I am blind to the immense transcendental dimension of problems. This dimension is in a hidden
[realm of] anonymity. In truth, of course, I am a transcendental
ego, but I am not conscious of this; being in a particular attitude,
the natural attitude, I am completely given over to the objectpoles, completely bound by interests and tasks which are exclusively directed toward them. I can, however, carry out the
transcendental reorientation—in which transcendental universality opens itself up—and then I understand the one-sided, closed,
natural attitude as a particular transcendental attitude, as one of
a certain habitual one-sidedness of the whole life of interest. I
now have, as a new horizon of interest, the whole of constituting
life and accomplishment with all its correlations—a new, infinite scientific realm—if I engage in the appropriate systematic
work. In this reorientation our tasks are exclusively transcendental; all natural data and accomplishments acquire a transcendental meaning, and within the transcendental horizon they
impose completely new sorts of transcendental tasks. Thus, as a
human being and a human soul, I first become a theme for
psychophysics and psychology; but then in a new and higher
dimension I become a transcendental theme. Indeed, I soon
become aware that all the opinions I have about myself arise out
of self-apperceptions, out of experiences and judgments which I
—reflexively directed toward myself—have arrived at and have
synthetically combined with other apperceptions of my being
taken over from other subjects through my contact with them.
My ever new self-apperceptions are thus continuing acquisitions
of my accomplishments in the unity of my self-objectification;
proceeding on in this unity, they have become habitual acquisitions, or they become such ever anew. I can investigate transcendentally this total accomplishment of which I myself, as the

206

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

"ego," am the ultimate ego-pole, and I can pursue its intentional
structure of meaning and validity.
By contrast, as a psychologist I set myself the task of knowing myself as the ego already made part of the world, objectified
with a particular real meaning, mundanized, so to speak—concretely speaking, the soul—the task of knowing myself precisely
in the manner of objective, naturally mundane knowledge (in
the broadest sense), myself as a human being among things,
among other human beings, animals, etc. Thus we understand
that in fact an indissoluble inner alliance obtains between psychology and transcendental philosophy. But from this perspective we can also foresee that there must be a way whereby a
concretely executed psychology could lead to a transcendental
philosophy. By anticipation, one can say: If I myself effect the
transcendental attitude as a way of lifting myself above all
world-apperceptions and my human self-apperception, purely for
the purpose of studying the transcendental accomplishment in
and through which I "have" the world, then I must also find this
accomplishment again, later, in a psychological internal analysis
—though in this case it would have passed again into an apperception, i.e., it would be apperceived as something belonging to
the real soul [als Realseelisches] as related in reality to the real
living body.*
And, conversely: a radical, psychological unfolding of my
apperceptive life and of the particular world appearing in it, in
respect to the how of the particular appearances (thus of the
human "world-picture")—this, in the transition to the transcendental attitude, would immediately have to take on transcendental significance as soon as I now, at the higher level,
constantly take into account the
meaning-conferring
accomplishment* which is responsible for the objective apperception, i.e., the accomplishment through which the world-representation has the sense of something really existing, something
* If I learn to clarify, to understand from my own point of view
as an ego, how other human beings are simply human beings for
themselves, how the world is constantly valid for them as existing,
the world in which they live together with others and with me, and
how they, too, are ultimately transcendental subjects through their
accomplishments of world- and self-objectification, then once again
I must say to myself: I must take the results of my transcendental
clarification in respect to the transcendental self-objectification of
others and apply them to their human existence, which is to be judged
psycholo gic ally.
i. Reading stets auch die für die for stets auch für die.

Part III B

/

207

human and psychic, the sense of being my psychic life and that
of other human beings—the life in which everyone has his
world-representations, finds himself as existing, representing,
acting according to purposes in the world.
This to us rather obvious consideration, which is nevertheless still in need of a deeper grounding, could of course not be
accessible prior to the transcendental reduction; but was not the
alliance between psychology and transcendental philosophy always strongly noticeable, in spite of all obscurity? Indeed, this
alliance was, in fact, a motif which constantly codetermined the
[historical] development. Thus it must at first appear curious
that transcendental philosophy since Kant found no real usefulness at all in the psychology which, since the time of Locke, after
all, wanted to be psychology grounded in inner experience. On
the contrary, every transcendental philosophy which was not
erring in the direction of empiricism and skepticism saw the
slightest admixture of psychology as a betrayal of its true undertaking, and waged a constant battle against psychologism—a
battle that was meant to have, and did have, the effect that the
philosopher was not permitted to concern himself at all with
objective psychology.
To be sure, even after Hume and Kant it remained a great
temptation, for all those who were not to be aroused from their
dogmatic slumbers, to want to deal psychologically with epistemological problems. In spite of Kant, Hume was still not understood; the very fundamental systematic work of his skepticism,
the Treatise, was little studied; English empiricism, i.e., the
psychological theory of knowledge in the Lockean style,
continued to spread, even flourished. Thus it is true that transcendental philosophy, posing completely new kinds of questions, naturally had to struggle against this psychologism. But our present
question is no longer concerned with this, for it is directed not at
the philosophical naturalists but at the true transcendental
philosophers, including the creators of the great systems themselves. Why did they not concern themselves at all with psychology, not even with analytic psychology based on inner
experience? The answer already indicated, which still demands
further exposition and grounding, is: psychology since Locke in
all its forms, even when it sought to be analytic psychology
based on "inner experience," mistook its peculiar task.
All of modern philosophy, in the original sense of a universal
ultimately grounding science, is, according to our presentation,
at least since Kant and Hume, a single struggle between two

208

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

ideas of science: the idea of an objectivistic philosophy on the
ground of the pregiven world and the idea of a philosophy on
the ground of absolute, transcendental subjectivity—the latter
being something completely new and strange historically, breaking through in Berkeley, Hume, and Kant.
Psychology is constantly involved in this great process of
development, involved, as we have seen, in different ways; indeed, psychology is the truly decisive field.2 It is this precisely
because, though it has a different attitude and is under the
guidance of a different task, its subject matter is universal subjectivity, which in its actualities and possibilities is one.

§ 59.

Analysis of the reorientation from
the psychological attitude into the
transcendental attitude. Psychology
"before9'and "after9'the
phenomenological reduction.
(The problem of "flowing in.99)

HERE WE AGAIN take up the notion which we previously
anticipated from the transcendental-philosophical point of view,
the notion which already suggested to us the idea of a possible
way from psychology into transcendental philosophy. In psychology the natural, naive attitude has the result that the human
self-objectifications of transcendental inter subjectivity, which
belong with essential necessity to the makeup of the constituted
world pregiven to me and to us, inevitably have a horizon of
transcendentally functioning intentionalities which are not accessible to reflection, not even psychological-scientific reflection.
"I, this man," and likewise "other men"—these signify, respectively, a self-apperception and an apperception of others which
are transcendental acquisitions involving everything psychic
that belongs to them, acquisitions which flowingly change in
their particularity through transcendental functions which are

2. I.e., decisive for the struggle between subjectivism and objectivism. For by beginning as objective science and then becoming
transcendental, it bridges the gap.

Part III B /

209

hidden from the naive attitude. We can inquire back into the
transcendental historical dimension, from which the meaningand validity-accomplishment of these apperceptions ultimately
stems, only by breaking with naivet6 through the method of
transcendental reduction. In the unbroken naivete in which all
psychology, all humanistic disciplines, all human history persists,
I, the psychologist, like everyone else, am constantly involved
in the performance of self-apperceptions and apperceptions
of others. I can, of course, in the process thematically reflect upon myself, upon my psychic life and that of others,
upon my and others' changing apperceptions; I can also carry
out recollections;1 observingly, with theoretical interest, I can
carry out self-perceptions and self-recollections, and through the
medium of empathy I can make use of the self-apperceptions of
others. I can inquire into my development and that of others; I
can thematically pursue history, society's memory, so to speak
—but all such reflection remains within transcendental naivete;
it is the performance of the transcendental world-apperception
which is, so to speak, ready-made, while the transcendental
correlate—i.e., the (immediately active or sedimented) functioning intentionality, which is the universal apperception, constitutive of all particular apperceptions, giving them the ontic
sense of "psychic experiences [Erlebnisse] of this and that
human being"—remains completely hidden. In the naive attitude of world-life, everything is precisely worldly: that is, [there
is nothing but] the constituted object-poles—though they are not
understood as that. Psychology, like every objective science, is
bound to the realm of what is prescientifically pregiven, i.e.,
bound to what can be named, asserted, described in common
language—in this case, bound to the psychic, as it can be expressed in the language of our linguistic community (construed
most broadly, the European community). For the life-world—
the "world for us air—is identical with the world that can be
commonly talked about. Every new apperception leads essentially, through apperceptive transference, to a new typification
of the surrounding world and in social intercourse to a naming
which immediately flows into the common language. Thus the
1. After consulting the MS I have deleted the following clause
occurring at this point in Biemel's edition: "kann als Geisteswissenschaftler Geschichte sozusagen als Gemeinschafteserinnerung in thematischen Gang bringen." This clause is repeated almost exactly in
the next sentence. The MS makes it clear that thefirstoccurrence was
to be deleted.

210

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

world is always such that it can be empirically, generally (intersubjectively) explicated and, at the same time, linguistically
explicated.
But with the break with naivete brought about by the transcendental-phenomenological reorientation there occurs a significant transformation, significant for psychology itself. As a
phenomenologist I can, of course, at any time go back into the
natural attitude, back to the straightforward pursuit of my theoretical or other life-interests; I can, as before, be active as a
father, a citizen, an official, as a "good European," etc., that is, as
a human being in my human community, in my world. As before
—and yet not quite as before. For I can never again achieve the
old naivete; I can only understand it. My transcendental insights
and purposes have become merely inactive, but they continue to
be my own. More than this: my earlier naive self-objectification
as the empirical human ego of my psychic life has become
involved in a new movement. All the new sorts of apperceptions
which are exclusively tied to the phenomenological reduction,
together with the new sort of language (new even if I use
ordinary language, as is unavoidable, though its meanings are
also unavoidably transformed)—all this, which before was completely hidden and inexpressible, now flows into the self-objectification, into my psychic life, and becomes apperceived as its
newly revealed intentional background of constitutive accomplishments. I know through my phenomenological studies that I,
the previously naive ego, was none other than the transcendental
ego in the mode of naive hiddenness; I know that to me, as the
ego again straightforwardly perceived as a human being, there
belongs inseparably a reverse side which constitutes and thus
really first produces my full concreteness; I know of this whole
dimension of transcendental functions, interwoven with one another throughout and extending into the infinite. As was the case
previously with the psychic, everything that has newlyflowedin
is now concretely localized in the world through the living body,
which is essentially always constituted along with it. I-the-man,
together with the transcendental dimension now ascribed to me,
am somewhere in space at some time in the world's time. Thus
every new transcendental discovery, by going back into the natural attitude, enriches my psychic life and (apperceptively as a
matter of course) that of every other.

Part III B

§ 60.

/

211

The reason for the failure of psychology:
dualistic and physicalistic presuppositions.

THIS IMPORTANT SUPPLEMENT to our systematic expositions clarifies the essential difference between the essentially
limited thematic horizon, beyond which a psychology on the
basis of the naive having of the world [Welthabe] (i.e., any
psychology of the past prior to transcendental phenomenology)
cannot think in principle—it would have not the least conception of a plus ultra—and, on the other hand, the new thematic
horizon which a psychology receives only when the transcendental, coming from transcendental phenomenology, flows into
psychic being and life, i.e., only when naivete is overcome.
With this the alliance between psychology and transcendental philosophy is illuminated and understood in a new way;
and at the same time we are provided with a new guideline for
understanding the failure of psychology throughout its whole
modern history, over and above everything we have attained in
our earlier systematic considerations by way of motives for evaluating it.
Psychology had to fail because it could fulfill its task, the
investigation of concrete, full subjectivity, only through a radical, completely unprejudiced reflection, which would then necessarily open up the transcendental-subjective dimension. For this
it would obviously have required considerations and analyses in
the pregiven world similar to those we carried out in an earlier
lecture in connection with Kant [§§ 28 ff., above]. There our gaze
was guided at first by bodies, in their manners of pregivenness in
the life-world; whereas, in the analyses required here, we would
have to take our point of departure from the manners in which
souls are pregiven in the life-world. An original reflective question is now directed toward what and how souls—first of all
human souls—are in the world, the life-world, i.e., how they
"animate" physical living bodies, how they are localized in
space-time, how each one 'lives" psychically in having "consciousness" of the world in which it lives and is conscious of
living; how each one experiences "its" physical body, not merely
in general, as a particular physical body, but in a quite peculiar

212

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

way as "living body," as a system of its "organs" which it moves
as an ego (in holding sway over them); how it thus "takes a
hand" in its consciously given surrounding world as "I strike," "I
push," "I lift" this and that, etc. The soul "is," of course, "in" the
world. But does this mean that it is in the world in the way that
the physical body is and that, when men with living bodies and
souls are experienced in the world as real, their reality, as well as
that of their living bodies and souls, could have the same or even
a similar sense to that of the mere physical bodies? Even though
the human living body is counted among the physical bodies, it
is still "living"—"my physical body," which I "move," in and
through which I "hold sway," which I "animate." If one fails to
consider these matters—which soon become quite extensive—
thoroughly, and actually without prejudice, one has not grasped
at all what is of a soul's own essence as such (the word "soul*
being understood here not at all metaphysically but rather in the
sense of the original givenness of the psychic in the life-world);
and thus one has also failed to grasp the genuine ultimate
substrate for a science of "souls." Rather than beginning with
the latter, psychology began with a concept of soul which was
not at all formulated in an original way but which stemmed
from Cartesian dualism, a concept furnished by a prior constructive idea of a corporeal nature and of a mathematical natural
science. Thus psychology was burdened in advance with the task
of being a science parallel [to physics] and with the conception
that the soul—its subject matter—was something real in a sense
similar to corporeal nature, the subject matter of natural science. As long as the absurdity of this century-old prejudice is not
revealed, there can be no psychology which is the science of the
truly psychic, i.e., of what has its meaning originally from the
life-world; for it is to such a meaning that psychology, like any
objective science, is inevitably bound. It is no wonder, then, that
psychology was denied that constant, advancing development
displayed by its admired model, natural science, and that no
inventive spirit and no methodical art could prevent its repeated
involvement in crisis. Thus we have just witnessed a crisis in the
psychology which only a few years ago, as an international
institute-psychology, was filled with the inspiring certainty that
it could finally be placed on a level with natural science. Not that
its work has been completely fruitless. Through scientific objectivity many remarkable facts relating to the life of the human
soul have been discovered. But did this make it seriously a

Part III B /

213

psychology, a science in which one learned something about the
mind's [Geist] own essence? (I emphasize once again that this
refers not to a mystical "metaphysical" essence but to one's own
being-in-oneself and for-oneself which, after all, is accessible to
the inquiring, reflecting ego through so-called "inner" or "selfperception/')

§61.

Psychology in the tension between the
(objectivistic-philosophical) idea of
science and empirical procedure: the
incompatibility of the two directions
of psychological inquiry (the psychophysical and that of "psychology based
on inner experience'9).

ALL SCIENTIFIC empirical inquiry [Empirie] has its original legitimacy and also its dignity. But considered by itself, not
all such inquiry is science in that most original and indispensable sense whose first name was philosophy, and thus also in the
sense of the new establishment of a philosophy or science since
the Renaissance. Not all scientific empirical inquiry grew up as a
partial function within such a science. Yet only when it does
justice to this sense can it truly be called scientific. But we can
speak of science as such only where, within the indestructible
whole of universal philosophy, a branch of the universal task
causes a particular science, unitary in itself, to grow up, in
whose particular task, as a branch, the universal task works
itself out in an originally vital grounding of the system. Not
every empirical inquiry that can be pursued freely by itself is in
this sense already a science, no matter how much practical
utility it may have, no matter how much confirmed, methodical
technique may reign in it. Now this applies to psychology insofar
as, historically, in the constant drive to fulfill its determination
as a philosophical, i.e., a genuine, science, it remains entangled
in obscurities about its legitimate sense, finally succumbs to
temptations to develop a rigorously methodical psychophysical

214

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

—or better, a psychophysicist's *—empirical inquiry, and then
thinks that it has fulfilled its sense as a science because of the
confirmed reliability of its methods. By contrast to the specialists' psychology of the present, our concern—the philosopher's
concern—is to move this "sense as a science" to the central point
of interest—especially in relation to psychology as the "place of
decisions" for a proper development of a philosophy in general
—and to clarify its whole motivation and scope.
In this direction of the original aim toward—as we say—
"philosophical" scientific discipline, motifs of dissatisfaction
arose again and again, setting in soon after the Cartesian beginnings. There were troublesome tensions between the [different]
tasks which descended historically from Descartes: on the one
hand, that of methodically treating souls in exactly the same
way as bodies and as being connected with bodies as spatiotemporal realities, i.e., the task of investigating in a physicalistic
way the whole life-world as "nature" in a broadened sense; and,
on the other hand, the task of investigating souls in their being
in-themselves and for-themselves by way of "inner experience"
—the psychologist's primordial inner experience of the subjectivity of his own self—or else by way of the intentional mediation of likewise internally directed empathy (i.e., directed toward
what is internal to other persons taken thematically). The
two tasks seemed obviously connected in respect to both method
and subject matter, and yet they refused to harmonize. Modern
philosophy had prescribed to itself from the very beginning the
dualism of substances and the parallelism of the methods of mos
geometricus—or, one can also say, the methodical ideal of physicalism. Even though this became vague and faded as it was
transmitted, and failed to attain even the serious beginnings of
an explicit execution, it was still decisive for the basic conception of man as a psychophysical reality and for all the ways of
putting psychology to work in order to bring about methodical
knowledge of the psychic. From the start, then, the world was
seen "naturaüstically" as a world with two strata of real facts
regulated by causal laws. Accordingly, souls too were seen as
real annexes of their physical living bodies (these being conceived in terms of exact natural science); the souls, of course,
have a different structure from the bodies; they are not res
i. psychophysikalisch as opposed to psychophysisch. The former
perhaps refers to the "physical" treated in the strict sense of physics
proper.

Part III B /

215

extensae, but they are still real in a sense similar to bodies, and
because of this relatedness they must also be investigated in a
similar sense in terms of "causal laws," i.e., through theories
which axe of the same sort in principle as those of physics,
which is taken as a model and at the same time as an underlying
foundation.

§62. Preliminary discussion of the absurdity of
giving equal status in principle to souls
and bodies as realities; indication of
the difference in principle between the
temporality, the causality, and the
individuation of natural things and
those of souls.
T H I S EQUALIZATION in principle of bodies and souls in
the naturalistic method obviously presupposes their more original equalization in principle in respect to their prescientific,
experiential givenness in the life-world. Body and soul thus signified two real strata in this experiential world which are integrally and really 1 connected similarly to, and in the same sense
as, two pieces of a body. Thus, concretely, one is external to the
other, is distinct from it, and is merely related to it in a regulated
way. But even this formal equalization is absurd; it is contrary to
what is essentially proper to bodies and souls as actually given in
life-world experience, which is what determines the genuine
sense of all scientific concepts. Let us first of all pick out several
concepts which are common to natural science and psychology
and which supposedly have the same sense in both instances,
and let us test this sameness of sense against what actual experience, as determining sense quite originally, shows, prior to the
theoretical superstructures which are the concern of procuring
exact science; that is, let us test it against what is given as
physical and as psychic in straightforward life-world experience.

1. reell und real. Reell refers to the part-whole relation, real to the
ontological status. Cf. Ideen, Vol. I, § 88.

2l6

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

What we must do now is something that has never been done
seriously on either side and has never been done radically and
consistently: we must go from the scientific fundamental concepts back to the contents of "pure experience," we must radically set aside all presumptions of exact science, all its peculiar
conceptual superstructures—in other words, we must consider
the world as if these sciences did not yet exist, the world precisely as life-world, just as it maintains its coherent existence in
life throughout all its relativity, as it is constantly outlined in life
in terms of validity.
Let us first reduce spatiotemporality (temporality as simultaneity and successivity) to the spatiotemporality of this pure
life-world, the real world in the prescientific sense. Taken in this
way it is the universal form of the real world in and through
which everything real in the life-world is formally determined.
But do souls have spatiotemporality in the true sense,
inexistence 2 in this form, as do bodies? It has always been noted
that psychic being in and for itself has no spatial extension and
no location. This denial of the spatiality of the psychic was
obviously oriented around the actual content of experience,
[though] without a radical distinction between life-world and
scientifically thought world.3 But can world-time (the form of
successivity) be separated from spatiality? Is it not, as full
space-time, the proper essential form of mere bodies, in which
form the souls take part only indirectly? All objects in the world
are in essence "embodied," and for that very reason all "take
part" in the space-time of bodies—"indirectly," then, in respect
to what is not bodily about them. This applies to spiritual objects
of every sort, primarily to souls, but also to spiritual objects of
every other sort (such as art works, technical constructions,
etc.). According to what gives them spiritual signification, they
are "em-bodied" through the way in which they "have" bodily
character. In an inauthentic [uneigentliche] way they are here or
there and are coextended with their bodies. Equally indirectly
they have past being and future being in the space-time of
2. Inexistenz, simply meaning "existence (essentially) in." The
term harks back to Brentano's concept of the "intentionale Inexistenz"
of objects in consciousness, the forerunner of Husserl's own concept
of intentionality. Here the term is used in a strange context.
3. A stenographic marginal note, without a clear indication of
where it should be inserted. In Biemel's version it is inserted after the
sentence below, ending "take part only indirectly." But clearly it belongs in this position.

Part III B /

217

bodies. Everyone experiences the embodiment of souls in original fashion only in his own case. What properly and essentially
makes up the character of a living body I experience only in my
own living body, namely, in my constant and immediate holding-sway [over my surroundings] through this physical body
alone. Only it is given to me originally and meaningfully as
"organ" and as articulated into particular organs; each of its
bodily members has its own features, such that I can hold sway
immediately through it in a particular way—seeing with the
eyes, touching with the fingers, etc.—that is, such that I can
hold sway in a particular perception in just the ways peculiar to
these functions. Obviously it is only in this way that I have
perceptions and, beyond this, other experiences of objects in the
world. All other types of holding-sway, and in general all relatedness of the ego to the world, are mediated through this. Through
bodily "holding-sway" in the form of striking, lifting, resisting,
and the like, I act as ego across distances, primarily on the
corporeal aspects of objects in the world. It is only my being-asego, as holding sway, that I actually experience as itself, in its
own essence; and each person experiences only his own. All such
holding-sway occurs in modes of "movement/' but the "I move"
in holding-sway (I move my hands, touching or pushing something) is not in itself [merely] the spatial movement of a physical body, which as such could be perceived by everyone. My body
—in particular, say, the bodily part "hand"—moves in space;
[but] the activity of holding sway, "kinesthesis," which is embodied together with the body's movement, is not itself in space as a
spatial movement but is only indirectly colocalized in that movement. Only through my own originally experienced holdingsway, which is the sole original experience of living-bodiliness as
such, can I understand another physical body as a living body in
which another "I" is embodied and holds sway; this again, then,
is a mediation, but one of a quite different sort from the mediation of inauthentic localization upon which it is founded.4 Only
in this way do other ego-subjects firmly belong to "their" bodies
for me and are localized here or there in space-time; that is, they
are inauthentically inexistent in this form of bodies, whereas
they themselves, and thus souls in general, considered purely in
4. A difficult stenographic insert. My recognition of another is
mediated in two ways: (1) through my recognition of the localized
Körper and (2) through my "analogizing apperception" from my own
case. The second is "founded upon" the first, because I must first perceive a body (Körper) in order to make the analogy.

2l8

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

terms of their own essence, have no existence at all in this form.
Furthermore, causality too—if we remain within the lifeworld, which originally grounds ontic meaning—has in principle
quite a different meaning depending on whether we axe speaking
of natural causality or of "causality" among psychic events or
between the corporeal and the psychic. A body is what it is as
this determined body, as a substrate of "causal" properties which
is, in its own essence, spatiotemporally localized.* Thus if one
takes away causality, the body loses its ontic meaning as body,
its identifiability and distinguishability as a physical individual.
The ego, however, is "this one" and has individuality in and
through itself; it does not have individuality through causality.
To be sure, because of the character of the physical living body,
the ego can become distinguishable by any other ego and thus by
everyone in respect to its position in the space of physical bodies,
a position which is inauthentic and which it owes to its physical,
living body. But its distinguishability and identifiability in space
for everyone, with all the psychophysically conditioned factors
that enter in here, make not the slightest contribution to its
being as ens per se. As such it already has, in itself, its uniqueness. For the ego, space and time are not principles of individuation; it knows no natural causality, the latter being, in accord
with its meaning, inseparable from spatiotemporality. Its effectiveness is its holding-sway-as-ego; this occurs immediately
* In terms of the life-world, this means nothing other than that
a body, which as such can already be explicated with its experiential
meaning through its own essential properties, is always at the same
time a body, in its being-such, under particular "circumstances," First
of all, it belongs to the most general structure of the life-world that
the body has, so to speak, its habits of being in its being-such, that it
belongs within a type which is either known or, if it is "new" to us, is
still to be discovered, a type within which the explicable properties
belong together in typical ways. But it is also part of the life-world's
formal typology that bodies have typical ways of being together, in
coexistence (above all in a given perceptual field) and in succession
—i.e., a constant universal spatiotemporal set of types. It is due to the
latter that each particular experienced body is not only necessarily
there together with other bodies in general but is there as being of
this type, among other bodies typically belonging to it, in a typical
form of belonging together which runs its course within a typical
pattern of succession. Accordingly each body "is," in the way that it
is, under "circumstances"; a change of properties in one body indicates changes of properties in another—though this must be understood roughly and relatively, just as it is, essentially, in the life-world;
there can be no question of "exact" causality, which pertains to the
idealizing substructions of science.

Part III B

/

219

through its kinestheses, as holding-sway in its living body, and
only mediately (since the latter is also a physical body) extends
to other physical bodies.

563.

The questionable character of the concepts
of "outer" and "inner" experience. Why has
the experience of the bodily thing in the
life-world, as the experience of something
"merely subjective" not previously been
included in the subject matter of psychology?

T H E FUNDAMENTAL MISTAKE of wanting to view men
and animals seriously as double realities, as combinations of two
different sorts of realities which are to be equated in the sense of
their reality, and accordingly the desire to investigate souls also
through the method of the science of bodies, i.e., souls as existing within natural causality, in space-time, like bodies—this
gave rise to the supposed obviousness of a method to be formed
as an analogue to natural science. The understandable result of
both [natural-scientific method and the new psychological
method] was the false parallelism of "inner" and "outer" experience. Both concepts remained unclear in respect to sense and
function (their scientific function for physics, psychology, psychophysics).
On both sides, experiences are conceived as being performed
in theoretical function; natural science is supposed to be based
on outer, psychology on inner, experience. In the former, physical nature is given; and in the latter, psychic being, that of the
soul. In accord with this, "psychological experience" becomes an
equivalent expression for "inner experience." To put it more
precisely: what is actually experienced is the world as simply
existing, prior to all philosophy and theory—existing things,
stones, animals, men. In natural, direct life, this is experienced
as simply, perceptually "there" (as simply existing, ontically
certain presence) or, just as simply, in terms of memory, as
"having been there," etc. Even to this natural life, possible and
occasionally necessary straightforward reflection belongs. Then

220

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

relativity comes into view, and what is valid as simply being
there, in the particularity of its manners of givenness in life
itself, is transformed into a "merely subjective appearance"; and
specifically it is called an appearance in relation to the one thing,
the "entity itself," which emerges—though again only relatively
—through corrections when the gaze is directed upon the alteration of such "appearances." And the same thing is true in respect
to the other modalities of experience or their correlative temporal modalities.
This has already been carefully thought through in another
connection, and if we bring it to mind here with renewed, lively
clarity, there results the question: Why does the whole flowing
life-world not figure at the very beginning of a psychology as
something "psychic," indeed as the psychic realm which is primarily accessible, the first field in which immediately given
psychic phenomena can be explicated according to types? And
correlatively: why is the experience which actually, as experience, brings this life-world to givenness and, within it, especially
in the primal mode of perception, presents mere bodily thingswhy is this experience not called psychological experience rather
than "outer experience," supposedly by contrast to psychological
experience? Naturally there are differences in the manner of
life-world experience, depending on whether one experiences
stones, rivers, mountains or, on the other hand, reflectively experiences one's experiencing of them or other ego-activity, one's
own or that of others, such as holding sway through the living
body. This may be a significant difference for psychology and
may lead to difficult problems. But does this change the fact that
everything about the life-world is obviously "subjective"? Can
psychology, as a universal science, have any other theme than
the totality of the subjective? Is it not the lesson of a deeper and
not naturaUstically blinded reflection that everything subjective
is part of an indivisible totality?

Part III B

§ 64«

/

221

Cartesian dualism as the reason for
the parallelization. Only the formal
and most general features of the schema
''descriptive vs. explanatory science"
are justified.

FOR GALILEAN natural science, mathematical-physical
nature is objective-true nature; it is this nature that is supposed
to manifest itself in the merely subjective appearances. It is thus
clear—and we have already pointed this out—that nature, in
exact natural science, is not the actually experienced nature,
that of the life-world. It is an idea that has arisen out of idealization and has been hypothetically substituted for actually intuited
nature. [Cf. § 36.] The conceptual method of idealization is the
fundament of the whole method of natural science (i.e., of the
pure science of bodies), the latter being the method of inventing
"exact" theories and formulae and also of reapplying them
within the praxis which takes place in the world of actual experience.
Here, then, lies the answer—sufficient for our present train
of thought—to the question posed, as to how it happens that
nature, as given in the life-world, this merely subjective aspect
of "outer experience," is not included under psychological experience in traditional psychology and that psychological experience
is instead opposed to outer experience. Cartesian dualism requires the parallelization of mens and corpus, together with the
naturalization of psychic being implied in this parallelization,
and hence also requires the parallelization of the required methods. To be sure, because of the way in which the ready-made
geometry of the ancients was taken over, the idealization which
thoroughly determines its sense was almost forgotten; and on
the psychic side x [such an] idealization, as an actually executed
and original accomplishment in a manner appropriate to the
nature of the psychic, was not required, or rather not missed. Of
course it should have been evident that idealization in fact has

1. Better: the psychological side.

222

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

no place on this side, since there could be no question here of
anything like perspectivization and kinestheses, of measurement
or of anything analogous to measurement.
The prejudice of the [appropriateness of the] same method
produced the expectation that, by practicing this method in its
appropriate version, one could arrive, without any deeper subjective-methodical considerations, at stable theorizing and a methodical technique. But it was a vain hope. Psychology never
became exact; the parallelization could not actually be carried
out, and—as we understand—for essential reasons. This much
we can say even here, though much still needs to be done for the
sake of the much needed ultimate clarity on all sides, so that we
can also understand the survival of those various forms in which
modern dualistic and psychophysiological (or psychophysical)
psychology for long periods could have the appearance of a
properly aimed methodical execution and the conviction of continued success as truly a fundamental science of the psychic;
also, so that we can understand why psychophysical empirical
inquiry, which is thoroughly legitimate and quite indispensable,
could not count as the pathway to or the execution of a genuine
psychology which would do justice to the proper essence of the
psychic itself. In any case, we can already say in advance, on the
basis of insight, that the psychic, considered purely in terms of
its own essence, has no [physical] nature, has no conceivable
in-itself in the natural sense, no spatiotemporally causal, no
idealizable and mathematizable in-itself, no laws after the fashion of natural laws; here there are no theories with the same
relatedness back to the intuitive life-world, no observations or
experiments with a function for theorizing similar to natural
science—in spite of all the self-misunderstandings of empirical,
experimental psychology. But because the fundamental insight
has been lacking, the historical inheritance of dualism, with its
naturalization of the psychic, retains its force; but it is so vague
and unclear that the need is not even felt for a genuine execution of the dualism of the exact sciences on both sides, such as is
required by the sense of this dualism.
Thus the schema of descriptive vs. theoretically explanatory
science, too, was kept in readiness as being obvious; we find it
sharply emphasized in respect to psychology in Brentano and
Dilthey, and in general in the nineteenth century—the time of
passionate efforts finally to bring about a rigorously scientific
psychology which could show its face alongside natural science.
By no means do we wish to imply by this that the concept of a

Part III B /

223

pure description and of a descriptive science, or beyond that
even the difference between descriptive and explanatory method,
can find no application at all in psychology, any more than we
deny that the pure experience of bodies must be distinguished
from the experience of the psychic or the spiritual. Our task is
critically to make transparent, down to its ultimate roots, the
naturalistic—or, more exactly, the physicalistic—prejudice of
the whole of modern psychology, on the one hand in respect to
the never clarified concepts of experience which guide the descriptions and on the other hand in respect to the way in which
the contrast between descriptive and explanatory disciplines is
interpreted as parallel and similar [to the same contrast in natural science].2
It has already become clear to us that an "exact" psychology,
as an analogue to physics (i.e., the dualistic parallelism of realities, of methods, and of sciences), is an absurdity. Accordingly
there can no longer be a descriptive psychology which is the
analogue of a descriptive natural science. In no way, not even in
the schema of description vs. explanation, can a science of souls
be modeled on natural science or seek methodical counsel from it.
It can only model itself on its own subject matter, as soon as it
has achieved clarity on this subject matter's own essence. There
remains only the formal and most general notion that one must
not operate with empty word-concepts, must not move in the
sphere of vagueness, but must derive everything from clarity,
from actually self-giving intuition, or, what is the same thing,
from self-evidence—in this case from the original life-world
experience of, or from what is essentially proper to, the psychic
and nothing else. This results, as it does everywhere, in an
applicable and indispensable sense of description and of descriptive science and also, at a higher level, of "explanation" and
explanatory science. Explanation, as a higher-level accomplishment, signifies in this case nothing but a method which surpasses the descriptive realm, a realm which is realizable through
actually experiencing intuition. This surpassing occurs on the
basis of the "descriptive" knowledge, and, as a scientific method,
it occurs through a procedure of insight which ultimately verifies
itself by means of the descriptive data. In this formal and general sense there is in all sciences the necessary fundamental
level of description and the elevated level of explanation. But
2. Literally: "in respect to the manner of the parallelizing and
similar interpretation of the contrast between descriptive and explanatory disciplines."

224

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

this must be taken only as a formal parallel and must find its
meaning-fulfillment in each science through its own essential
sources; and the concept of ultimate verification must not be
falsified in advance by assuming, as in physics,3 that certain
propositions in the specifically physical (that is, the mathematically idealized) sphere are the ultimately verifying propositions.

§ 65.

Testing the legitimacy of an empirically
grounded dualism by familiarizing oneself
with the factual procedure of the
psychologist and the physiologist.

W H E N DESCRIPTION is understood in this way, then, it
must characterize the beginning of the only psychology which is
true to its origins, the only possible psychology. But it soon
becomes manifest that clarity, genuine self-evidence, in general
but especially here, is not to be bought cheaply. Above all, as we
have already indicated, the arguments of principle against dualism, against the double stratification which already falsifies the
sense of experience purely within the life-world, against the
supposed likeness of the reality (in the life-world) of physical
and psychic being in respect to the innermost sense of reality,
against the likeness of temporality and individuality [in the two
cases]—these arguments are too philosophically oriented, too
oriented toward principle, to be able to make any sort of lasting
impression on the psychologists and scientists of our time or
even on the "philosophers." One is tired of arguments of principle, which, after all, lead to no agreement; from the start one
listens with only half an ear, prefers to trust in the power of the
indubitable accomplishments performed in the great experiential sciences, to trust in their actual methods, their actual work
of experiencing—experiencing which is, naturally, in each case
peculiar to the area in question: experience of the physical for
the physicists, of the biological for the biologists, of the human 1
for the humanists. Certainly it is quite proper that they are

3. Literally: "must not, as in physics, be falsified."
1. die geisteswissenschaftliche Erfahrung.

Part III B /

225

called experiential sciences. If we pay attention not to the reflections in which scientists speak about their method and their
work, i.e., philosophize (as in the usual academic orations for
special occasions), but rather to the actual method and work
itself, it is certain that the scientists here constantly have recourse in the end to experience. But 2 if we place ourselves
within this experience, the experience itself shows—it will be
argued against us—that, in respect to the corporeal and the
spiritual, the mistaken dualistic interpretation is taken up into
the supposed experiential meaning and gives researchers the
right to do justice to dualism, which is actually purely empirically grounded, and to operate just as they do with inner and
outer experience, with temporality, reality, and causality. The
philosopher can speak as insistently as he wants about absurdity
in principle, but he cannot prevail against the power of tradition.
Now we too, of course, are by no means ready to sacrifice our
objections, precisely because they are radically different from
argumentations using concepts which are historically inherited
and not newly interrogated in respect to their original sense, and
because our objections themselves where derived from precisely
the most original sources, as anyone can convince himself who
tests our presentation. 3 This does not mean, however, that the
procedure of the working experiential sciences, the sense and
the limitation of their legitimacy, is explicitly made clear; and as
for psychology in particular, our present subject, its procedure,
always psychophysiological, is not made clear—neither its legitimacy nor the temptations it offers. This is true not only of all the
primitive methodical forms of former times but also of the most
highly developed forms [that have appeared] since the second
half of the nineteenth century. The necessity of separating the
experience of bodies from the experience of the spirit has not
been clearly established; nor has the legitimacy, claimed in advance, of taking the experience of bodies, with the constant
signification it has for the psychologist as for everyone else, and
including it in the psychic, thus making its universality an allencompassing one. This, of course, involves [us] in paradoxical
difficulties. But difficulties that can be pushed to one side by
good, successfully functioning work cannot be pushed to one
side by a universal philosophy; rather, they must be overcome,
2. Various marginal notes indicate HusserFs extreme dissatisfaction with the text from here to the end of this section.
3. From "can speak as insistently" to this point crossed out, but
not replaced by anything.

226

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

since philosophy exists precisely in order to remove all the blinders of praxis, especially scientific praxis, and to reawaken, indeed to rescue, the true and actual, the full purpose, that science
(here psychology) should fulfill as its inborn meaning. Thus we
cannot be spared from inquiring back into the most general
ground from which the possible tasks of psychology, as of every
objective science, arise, namely, the ground of the common
experience within which the experiential sciences work, to
which, then, they appeal, if—denying all "metaphysics"—they
claim to satisfy the inviolable demands of experience.

§ 66.

The world of common experience: its set of
regional types and the possible universal
abstractions within it: "nature" as correlate
of a universal abstraction; the problem of
' 'complementary abstract ions.''

W E SHALL BEGIN with a general consideration in which
we simply repeat what has been said earlier, though deepening
it, in order to be able to say something decisive, with original and
vital clarity, about the questions raised. We already know that all
theoretical accomplishment in objective science has its place on
the ground of the pregiven world, the life-world—that it presupposes prescientific knowing and the purposive reshaping of the
latter. Straightforward experience, in which the life-world is
given, is the ultimate foundation of all objective knowledge.
Correlatively, this world itself, as existing prescientifically for us
(originally) purely through experience, furnishes us in advance,
through its invariant set of essential types, with all possible
scientific topics.
First we consider what is most general here: that the universe is pregiven as a universe of "things." In this broadest sense
"thing" is an expression for what ultimately exists and what
"has" ultimate properties, relations, interconnections (through
which its being is explicated); the thing itself is not what is
"had" in this manner but precisely what ultimately "has"—in
short (but understood quite unmetaphysically), it is the ultimate substrate. Things have their concrete set of types, finding

Part III B /

227

their expression in the "substantives" of a given language. But all
particular sets of types come under the most general of all, the
set of "regional" types. In life it is the latter that determines
praxis, in constant factual generality; and it first becomes explicit with essential necessity through a method of inquiry into
essences. Here I mention distinctions such as living vs. lifeless
things [and,] within the sphere of living things, the animals, i.e.,
those living not merely according to drives but also constantly
through ego-acts, as opposed to those living only according to
drives (such as plants). Among animals, human beings stand
out, so much so, in fact, that mere animals have ontic meaning
[as such] only by comparison to them [erst von ihnen her], as
variations of them. Among lifeless things, humanized things are
distinguished, things that have signification (e.g., cultural
meaning) through human beings. Further, as a variation on
this, there are things which refer meaningfully in a similar way
to animal existence, as opposed to things that are without signification in this sense. It is clear that these very general separations and groupings derived from the life-world, or the world of
original experience, determine the separation of scientific areas,
just as they also determine the internal interconnections between the sciences in virtue of the internal interconnection and
overlapping of the regions. On the other hand, universal abstractions, which encompass all concretions,1 at the same time also
determine subjects for possible sciences. It is only in the modern
period that this latter path has been followed; and it is precisely
this path that is relevant for us here. The natural science of the
modern period, establishing itself as physics, has its roots in
the consistent abstraction through which it wants to see, in the
life-world, only corporeity. Each "thing" "has" corporeity even
though, if it is (say) a human being or a work of art, it is not
merely bodily but is only "embodied," like everything real.
Through such an abstraction, carried out with universal consistency, the world is reduced to abstract-universal nature, the
subject matter of pure natural science. It is here alone that geometrical idealization, first of all, and then all further mathematizing theorization, has found its possible meaning. It is based on
the self-evidence of "outer experience," which is thus in fact an
abstracting type of experience. But within the abstraction it has
its essential forms of explication, it relativities, its ways of motivating idealizations, etc.
1. I.e., encompass the concrete members of all regions.

228

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Now what about human souls? It is human beings that are
concretely experienced. Only after their corporeity has been abstracted—within the universal abstraction which reduces the
world to a world of abstract bodies—does the question arise,
presenting itself now as so obvious, as to the "other side/* that is,
the complementary abstraction. Once the bodily "side" has become part of the general task of natural science and has found
its theoretically idealizing treatment there, the task of psychology is characterized as the "complementary" task, i.e., that of
subjecting the psychic side to a corresponding theoretical treatment with a corresponding universality. Does this ground the
dualistic science of man and assign to psychology its original
sense, as it almost seems to do, in an unassailable manner, i.e.,
truly purely on the basis of life-world experience, without any
metaphysical admixture? Thus it applies first to the realm of
human beings and then, obviously in the same manner, to the
realm of animals. This would also, then—or so it seems—give
order in advance to the procedure of the sciences of social and
objectified spirit [versachlichte Geistigkeit] (the humanistic disciplines). As the correlative abstraction teaches us, man (and
everything else that is real in animal form) is, after all, something real having two strata and is given as such in pure experience, purely in the life-world; what is required for the regional
science of man, then, is obviously first of all what is sometimes
called (by contrast to social psychology) individual psychology.
Human beings, concretely, in the space-time of the world, have
their abstractly distinguished souls distributed among bodies,
which make up, when we adopt the purely naturalistic consideration of bodies, a universe to be considered in itself as a totality.
The souls themselves are external to one another [ein Aussereinander] [only] in virtue of their embodiment; that is, in their own
abstract stratum they do not make up a parallel total universe.
Thus psychology can be the science of the general features of
individual souls only; this follows from the way in which they
are determined in their own essence by the psychophysical
framework, by their being integrated into nature as a whole.
This individual psychology must, then, be the foundation for a
sociology and likewise for a science of objectified spirit (of
cultural things), which after all refers, in its own way, to the
human being as person, i.e., to the life of the soul. And all this
can be applied by analogy—just as far as the analogy reaches—
to animals, to animal society, to the surrounding world with its
specifically animal signification.

Part III B

/

229

Do these considerations, which have led us back to the
ground of life-world experience—that is, to the source of self-evidence, to which we must ultimately appeal here—not justify the
traditional dualism of body and psychic spirit or the dualistic
interrelation between physiology, as the science of the human
(and also animal) body, on the one hand, and psychology, as the
science of the psychic side of man, on the other? Even more
than this: is this not indeed an improvement upon dualism as
compared with the rationalistic tradition instituted by Descartes,
who also influenced empiricism? Namely, is dualism not freed
from all metaphysical substruction by the fact that it wants to be
nothing more than a faithful expression of what experience
itself teaches? To be sure, this is not quite the case,2 according to
the way in which psychologists, physiologists, and physicists
understand "experience"; and we have indicated the sense of
experience which is decisive for [the scientists'] work, correcting
their usual self-interpretation.3 A metaphysical residuum is to be
found in the fact that natural scientists consider nature to be
concrete and overlook the abstraction through which their nature has been shaped into a subject matter for science. Because
of this, the souls, too, retain something of a substantiality of
their own, though it is not a self-sufficient substantiality, since,
as experience teaches us, 4 the psychic can be found in the world
only in connection with bodies. But before we could pose further
and now important questions, we had to take this step.5 We had
first to help empirical inquiry toward an understanding of itself;
we had to make visible, through reflection, its anonymous accomplishment, namely, the "abstraction" we described. In doing
this, we are thus more faithful to empirical inquiry than the
psychologists and the natural scientists; the last residuum of the
Cartesian theory of two substances is defeated simply because
abstracto, are not "substances."
2. I.e., not quite the case that it is a faithful expression, etc.
3. Literally: "and we have corrected its decisive sense for work,
as opposed to a very usual self-interpretation."
4. According to this view.
5. I.e., the step of presenting this still inadequate view.

230

§ 67.

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

The dualism of the abstractions grounded
in experience. The continuing historical
influence of the empiricist approach
(from Hobbes to Wundt). Critique of
data-empiricism

BUT NOW WE MUST ASK what there is in dualism and in
the "stratification" of man and of the sciences, after the new
legitimacy of the latter has been shown through [the above
theory of] abstraction, that is and remains truly meaningful. We
have deliberately made no use of our first critique of this dualism, of our indication of the way in which the spatiotemporal
localization and individuation of psychic being are secondary in
principle; our intention was to familiarize ourselves completely
with the psychophysical dualistic empiricism of the scientists in
order to arrive at our decisions within the universal framework
of the total world of experience as the primal ground. In addition
to new insights, which are fundamentally essential, as we shall
see, for the understanding of the genuine task of psychology, we
shall also find again those earlier insights mentioned above.
Let us take up the abstraction we discussed; it will reveal its
hidden difficulties all too soon. Let us take it quite straightforwardly and naturally as a differentiated direction of gaze and
interest on the basis of the concrete experience of man. Obviously we can pay attention to his mere corporeity and be
one-sidedly and consistently interested [only] in it; and likewise
we can pay attention to the other side, being interested purely in
what is psychic about him. In this way the distinction between
"outer" and "inner" experience (and first of all perception) also
seems to be automatically clear, to have an inviolable legitimacy,
together with the division of man himself into two real sides or
strata. To the question of what belongs to the psychic side and
what of this is given purely in inner perception, one answers in
the familiar way: it is a person, substrate of personal properties,
of original or acquired psychic dispositions (faculties, habits).
This, however, [supposedly] refers back to a flowing "life of
consciousness," a temporal process in which the first and espe-

Part III B

/

231

daily noticeable feature is that of the ego-acts, though these are
on a background of passive states [Zuständlichkeiten], It is
[supposedly] this current of "psychic experiences" [Erlebnisse]
that is experienced [erfahren] in that abstractive attitude of
focus upon the psychic. What is directly and actually perceived
(and it is even thought to be perceived with a particular sort of
apodictic self-evidence) is the presence-sphere of the psychic
experiences of one man, and only by that man himself, as his
"inner perception"; the experiences of others are given only
through the mediated type of experience called "empathy"—unless this latter type of experience is reinterpreted as an inference, as it generally used to be.
However, all this is by no means so simple and so obvious as
it was taken to be, without any closer consideration, for centuries. A psychology derived from an abstraction which is parallel
[to the physicist's abstraction], on the basis of an "inner perception" and other types of psychological experience which are
parallel to outer perception, must be seriously questioned; indeed, taken in this way, it is impossible in principle. This obviously applies to every dualism of the two real sides or strata of
man, and every dualism of the sciences of man, which appeals
purely to experiencing intuition.
From the historical point of view we must consider the empiricist psychology and the sensationalism that have become dominant since the time of Hobbes and Locke and have corrupted
psychology up to our own day. In this first form of naturalism,
supposedly on the basis of experience, the soul is set off by itself
in the closed unity of a space of consciousness as its own real
sphere of psychic data. The naive equation of these data of
psychological data-experience with those of the experience of
bodies leads to a relocation [Verdinglichung] of the former; the
constant view to the exemplary character of natural science
misleads one into taking these data as psychic atoms or atomcomplexes and into considering the tasks of the two sides to be
parallel. Psychic faculties—or, as they later come to be called,
psychic dispositions—become analogues of physical forces, titles
for merely causal properties of the soul, either belonging to its
own essence or arising from its causal relationship with the
living body, but in any case in such a way that reality and
causality are understood in the same way on both sides. Of
course, right away, in Berkeley and Hume, the enigmatic difficulties of such an interpretation of the soul announce themselves and press toward an immanent idealism which swallows

232

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

up one of the two "parallels." Yet up through the nineteenth
century this changes nothing about the way in which psychology
and physiology, which supposedly follow experience, in fact do
their work. It was easy to carry the "idealistic" naturalism of the
immanent philosophy of those successors of Locke over into the
dualistic psychology. The epistemological difficulties made so
noticeable by Hume's fictionalism were overcome—precisely
through "epistemology." Reflections which were appealing, but
which unfortunately evaded genuine radicalism, were undertaken in order to justify ex post facto what one does in any case
in the natural striving to follow the evidence of experience. Thus
the growing acquisition of obviously valuable empirical facts
took on the appearance of having a meaning which could be
understood philosophically. We have a perfect example of the
sort of epistemological-metaphysical interpretations which follow in the footsteps of science in the reflections of Wundt and
his school, in the doctrine of the "two points of view/' of the
theoretical utilization of the one common experience through a
twofold "abstraction." This doctrine appears to be on the way
toward overcoming all traditional metaphysics and to lead to a
self-understanding of psychology and natural science; but in fact
it merely changes empirical dualistic naturalism into a monistic
naturalism with two parallel faces—i.e., a variation of Spinozistic parallelism. In addition, this Wundtian way, as well as the
other ways of justifying the psychology which is bound to empirical dualism, retains the naturalistic data-interpretation of consciousness in accord with the Lockean tradition; though this
does not keep them from speaking of representation and will, of
value and the setting of goals as data in consciousness, without
radically posing the question of how, through such data and
their psychic causality, one is supposed to understand the rational activity presupposed by all psychological theories, which
are reason's accomplishments—whereas here, in the theories
themselves, this activity is supposed to appear as one result
among the others.

Part III B /

233

§ 68. The task of a pure explication of
consciousness as such: the universal
problem of intentionality. {Brentano9 s
attempt at a reform of psychology.)
T H E FIRST THING we must do here is overcome the
naivete which makes the conscious life, in and through which
the world is what it is for us—as the universe of actual and
possible experience—into a real property of man, real in the
same sense as his corporeity, i.e., according to the [following]
schema. In the world we have things with different peculiarities,
and among these there are also some that experience, rationally
know, etc., what is outside them. Or, what is the same thing:
The first thing we must do, and first of all in immediate reflective self-experience, is to take the conscious Ufe, completely
without prejudice, just as what it quite immediately gives itself,
as itself, to be.1 Here, in immediate givenness, one finds anything but color data, tone data, other "sense" data or data of
feeling, will, etc.; that is, one finds none of those things which
appear in traditional psychology, taken for granted to be immediately given from the start. Instead, one finds, as even Descartes did (naturally we ignore his other purposes), the cogito,
intentionality, in those familiar forms which, like everything
actual in the surrounding world, find their expression in language: "I see a tree which is green; I hear the rustling of its
leaves, I smell its blossoms," etc.; or, "I remember my schooldays," "I am saddened by the sickness of a friend," etc. Here we
find nothing other than "consciousness of . . ."—consciousness
in the broadest sense, which is still to be investigated in its whole
scope and its modes.
This is the place to recall the extraordinary debt we owe to
Brentano for the fact that he began his attempt to reform psychology with an investigation of the peculiar characteristics of
the psychic (in contrast to the physical) and showed intentionality to be one of these characteristics; the science of "psychic

1. als was es sich da als es selbst ganz unmittelbar gibt

234

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

phenomena," then, has to do everywhere with conscious experiences [Bewusstseinserlebnisse]. Unfortunately, in the most essential matters he remained bound to the prejudices of the
naturalistic tradition; these prejudices have not yet been overcome if the data of the soul, rather than being understood as
sensible (whether of outer or inner "sense"), are [simply] understood as data having the remarkable character of intentionality;
in other words, if dualism, psychophysical causality, is still accepted as valid. This also applies to his idea of a descriptive
natural science, as is shown by [his conception of their] parallel
procedure—setting the task of classifying and descriptively analyzing psychic phenomena completely in the spirit of the old
traditional interpretation of the relation between descriptive and
explanatory natural sciences. None of this would have been
possible if Brentano had penetrated to the true sense of the task
of investigating conscious life as intentional—and investigating
it first of all on the basis of the pregiven world, since it was a
question of grounding psychology as an objective science. Thus
Brentano set up a psychology of intentionality as a task only
formally, but had no way of attacking it. The same is true of his
whole school, which also, like Brentano himself, consistently
refused to accept what was decisively new in my Logical Investigations (even though his demand for a psychology of intentional
phenomena was put into effect here). What is new in the Logical
Investigations is found not at all in the merely ontological investigations, which had a one-sided influence contrary to the innermost sense of the work, but rather in the subjectively directed
investigations (above all the fifth and sixth, in the second volume of 1901) in which, for the first time, the cogitata qua
cogitata, as essential moments of each conscious experience as it
is given in genuine inner experience, come into their own and
immediately come to dominate the whole method of intentional
analysis. Thus "self-evidence" (that petrified logical idol) is
made a problem there for the first time, freed from the privilege
given to scientific evidence and broadened to mean original
self-giving in general. The genuine intentional synthesis is discovered in the synthesis of several acts into one act, such that, in
a unique manner of binding one meaning to another, there
emerges not merely a whole, an amalgam whose parts are meanings, but rather a single meaning in which these meanings
themselves are contained, but in a meaningful way. With this
the problems of correlation, too, already announce themselves;

Part III B /

235

and thus, in fact, this work contains the first, though of course
very imperfect, beginnings of "phenomenology.**

§ 69.

The basic psychological method of
''phenomenological-psychological reduction''
(first characterization: [1] intentional
relatedness and the epoche; [2] levels of
descriptive psychology; [3] establishing
the "disinterested spectator9').

YET THIS CRITIQUE of data-psychology, and also of the
psychology which, in the manner of Brentano, takes intentionality into account, now needs systematic justification. Let us
consider somewhat more closely what is taken for granted, as
presented earlier, as the supposed straightforward experiential
grounding of dualism, of the parallel abstractions, of the separation of outer and inner experience, these being understood as the
types of abstractive experience pertaining to natural science and
psychology, respectively. If we direct our attention in particular
to "inner*' or psychic experience, it is not as if we immediately
obtained, in the straightforward experience of a human being,
by abstracting from everything belonging to [physical] nature,
his pure psychic life as a stratum of intentional experiences
[Erlebnisse] belonging to him as an integral part [ihm reell
eigen]; that is, this is not simply the reverse side of the abstraction which gives us his pure corporeity as subject matter. In
straightforward world-experience we find human beings intentionally related to certain things—animals, houses, fields, etc.
—that is, as consciously affected by these things, actively attending to them or in general perceiving them, actively remembering
them, thinking about them, planning and acting in respect to
them.
If, as psychologists, we abstract from a man's physical living
body (as belonging to the subject matter of natural science),
this changes nothing about these intentional relations to what is
real in the world. The man who effects these relations is thereby

236

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

certain of the actuality of the real things he deals with; and even
the psychologist who has some man as his subject and who empathetically understands [nachversteht] what this man perceives,
what he thinks, deals with, etc., also has his own certainties
about those things. Here it must be noted that the straightforwardly, naturally experienced and expressed intentionalities
of a person (the person being understood already under the
abstraction from the living body) have the sense of real relations
between the person and other realities. These realities are naturally not component parts of the psychic essence of the person
who relates himself to these realities; whereas we must ascribe
to his own essence his perceiving, his thinking, his valuing, etc.
Thus, in order to attain the pure and actual subject matter of the
required "descriptive psychology," a fully consciously practiced
method is required which I call the phenomenological-psychological reduction—taken in this context as a method for psychology. (We shall leave open the question of how this reduction
stands in relation to the transcendental reduction.)
As a psychologist I stand naively on the ground of the intuitively pregiven world. Distributed throughout it are things, and
men and animals with their souls. Now I wish to explicate,
through an example and then in generality, what is concretely
and essentially proper to a man purely in his spiritual or psychic
being. What is essentially proper to the soul includes all intentionalities, the experiences of the type called "perception," for
example, considered precisely as those performed by the person
serving as an example and exactly in the way he accomplishes
them; and always [one must take care] that nothing is brought in
which goes beyond the person's or the "sours" own essence. In
perceiving, the person is conscious of the perceived. But whether
the perception has the mode of an observing and explicating act
or the mode of passively being conscious of the unnoticed background of what is directly observed, one thing is clear: whether
the perceived [object] exists or not, whether the perceiving person is mistaken about this or not, and also whether I, the psychologist, who in my empathetic understanding of the person
unhesitatingly concur in the belief in the perceived [object], am
mistaken about it or not—this must remain irrelevant for me as
a psychologist. None of this may enter into the psychological
description of the perception. Whether it is a case of being or of
illusion, it does not affect at all the fact that the subject in
question does, in fact, carry out a perception (for example), that
he does in fact have the consciousness: 'This tree here," that he

Part III B /

237

thereby effects the straightforward certainty that belongs to the
essence of perceiving, i.e., the certainty of straightforward existence. Thus all actually, immediately descriptive statements
about persons, about ego-subjects, as they are straightforwardly
given in experience, necessarily go beyond what is purely essentially proper to these subjects. The latter can be attained purely
only through the peculiar method of the epoche. This is an
epoche of validity: we abstain, in the case of perception, from
the coperformance of the validity that the perceiving person
performs. This is within our freedom. One cannot arbitrarily and
unhesitatingly modalize a validity: one cannot transform certainty into doubt or negation, or pleasure into displeasure, love
into hate, desire into abhorrence. But one can unhesitatingly
abstain from any validity, that is, one can put its performance
out of play for certain particular purposes. But we must reflect
further on this. Every act is, for the acting person, a being
certain or a modality of being certain ([considering something
as] being doubtful, being presumable, being null and void) with
a particular content. But at the same time this being certain—
or, as we also say, having-in-validity—involves essential differentiations; for example, certainty of being is different from certainty of value, both are different from practical certainty (for
example, that of a project), and each has its modalities. In
addition, we have differences among act-validities through their
implication of other acts and their own implied validities, for
example, through the horizon-consciousness surrounding every
act.
Let us not consider the fact that even the concept of "horizons-consciousness [or of] horizon-intentionality contains very
diverse modes of an intentionality which is "unconscious" in the
usual narrower sense of the word but which can be shown to be
vitally involved and cofunctioning in different ways; these
modes of intentionality have their own modalities of validity and
their own ways of changing them. Yet there are still, over and
above these, "unconscious" intentionalities, as can be shown by a
more detailed analysis. This would be the place for those repressed emotions of love, of humiliation, of ressentiments, and
the kinds of behavior unconsciously motivated by them which
have been disclosed by recent "depth psychology" (although this
does not mean that we identify ourselves with their theories).
These too have their modes of validity (certainties of being,
certainties of value, volitional certainties and their modal variations). And thus what we made clear to ourselves in connection

238

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

with the example of perception applies to them all in advance. In
pursuit of a pure psychology the psychologist must never allow
the validities, no matter how diverse, of the persons who make
up his subject matter to be valid for himself; during his research
he must have and take up no position of his own in regard to
them; and this must hold universally and in advance in regard to
all the intentionalities of these persons which are as yet unknown, which lie in the depths of their lives and are still hidden
from the psychologist, regardless, of course, of whether they axe
conscious or unconscious intentionalities in the special sense for
the person himself. This encompasses all habitualities, all interests, those which endure for a short time and those which govern
a whole life. In advance, once and for all, the psychologist in his
vocational life, and in the periods of the exercise of his vocation,
denies himself every manner of being "cointerested" in the interests of the persons who make up his subject matter. If he
repudiated this precept, he would immediately depart from his
subject. Immediately, the intentionalities through which persons
(purely psychically) are what they are in themselves and for
themselves, their own immanent "relating of themselves" and
being related, would become real relations between these persons and some objects in the world which are external to them
and in whose real relations they are involved.
But the specific subject matter of descriptive psychology is
what is purely, essentially proper to persons as such, as subjects
of a life which is in itself exclusively intentional and which, in
particular, as individual soul, is to be regarded as a purely
intentional nexus of its own. But each soul also stands in community with others which are intentionally interrelated, that is,
in a purely intentional, internally and essentially closed nexus,
that of inter subjectivity. This will concern us later. But what
confronts us here as extremely remarkable is this twofold manner in which subjects can become thematic, in which they can,
through two different attitudes toward them, display [sets of]
properties which, though they are very different, yet essentially
correspond to each other: on the one hand, a purely internal
relating of the persons to things of which they are conscious,
which are intentionally valid for them within the world which is
intentionally valid for them; and, on the other hand, persons'
real being-in-relation, as realities in the real world, to the things
of this world. Purely descriptive psychology thematizes persons
in the pure internal attitude of the epoche, and this gives it its
subject matter, the soul.

Part III B /

239

Here we construe the concept of a descriptive psychology
just as broadly as that of the other descriptive sciences, which
after all are not bound to the mere data of direct intuition but
make their inferences to those things which cannot be made
present as actually existing through any actually experiencing
intuition but which must be representable through analogous
variations of intuition. Thus geology and paleontology are "descriptive sciences" even though they reach into climatic periods
of the earth in which the analogous intuitions of inductively
inferred living beings cannot in principle represent possible experience. Something similar is naturally true of a descriptive
psychology. It too has its realm of manifold psychic phenomena
which can be disclosed only in a very mediate way. What is
immediately experienceable, however, takes precedence. But
psychology attains its subject matter in general, as we said, only
thanks to a universal epoche of validity. Its first points of attack
are probably those real intentionalities which are distinguishable
within the natural attitude, i.e., human beings' ways of behaving
in what they do and refrain from doing. In these first of all, then,
it grasps something "internal" by declining to take part in their
validity. But this does not yet make it a truly descriptive psychology; it has not yet arrived at its pure and self-enclosed field of
work, has not yet arrived at a "pure soul" or the self-enclosed
universe of pure souls in its own essential and thoroughly intentional exclusiveness. For this a psychologist's universal epoche is
required, and that in advance. "With one blow" he must put out
of effect the totality of his participation in the validities explicitly or implicitly effected by the persons who are his subjects;
and this means all persons. For psychology is, after all, supposed
to be the universal science of souls, the parallel to the universal
science of bodies; and just as the latter is from the start a
science through a universal "epoche," through a habitual vocational attitude established in advance in order to investigate
abstractively only the corporeal in its own essential interrelations, so also for psychology. Accordingly, it, too, requires its
habitual "abstractive" attitude. Its epoche applies to all souls and
thus also to the psychologist's own: this involves refraining—
qua psychologist—from the concurrent performance of his own
validities as exercised in the manner of natural everyday life in
relation to real things in the objective world. The psychologist
establishes in himself the "disinterested spectator" and investigator of himself as well as of all others, and that once and for all,
i.e., for all "vocational periods" of his psychological work. But

240

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

the epoche must be actually universally carried out, and in a
radical way. It must not be meant, for example, as a critical
epoche, serving the purposes of self-criticism or criticism of
others, of a theoretical or a practical criticism. Also, it must not
be meant, in the sense of a generally philosophical undertaking,
as a universal critique of experience, of the possibility of knowledge of truths-in-themselves for an objectively existing world;
and naturally it must also not be meant as a skeptical, agnostic
epoche. All these involve the taking-up of positions. But the
psychologist as such in his inquiry must, we repeat, take and
have no position: he must neither concur nor refuse, nor remain
in problematic suspense, as if he had some say in the validities
of the persons who are his subjects. So long as he has not
acquired this posture as a serious and consciously established
one, he has not arrived at his true subject matter; and as soon as
he violates it, he has lost his subject matter. Only through this
posture does he have the essentially unitary, absolutely self-enclosed "internal" world of the [conscious] subjects; only in this
way does he have the universal, total unity of the intentional life
as his horizon of work: his own life, in primal originality, but
also, proceeding from his own life, those others who also live,
and their life, whereby each life with its own intentionality
reaches intentionally into the life of every other, and all are
interwoven in different, closer, or more distant ways in an association of life. To the psychologist, in the midst of this, but with
his attitude of "disinterested observer," every intentional life as it
is lived by each subject and each particular community of subjects, the performance of acts, the perceptual and other sorts of
experiencing activity, the changing acts of meaning in respect to
being, will, etc.—to the psychologist, all this is accessible thematically. Thus in general, as his first and most fundamental subject
matter, he has the pure act-life of the persons, i.e., primarily the
conscious life in the narrower sense. This is, so to speak, the
outer surface of the spiritual world, which first becomes visible
to him, and only gradually do the intentional depths open themselves up; also, only through groping experiential work do the
method and the systematic interconnection of things reveal
themselves. To be sure, the whole long history of philosophy and
its sciences was needed before the consciousness of the necessity
for this radical reorientation, and the resolve to observe it with
conscious consistency, could be motivated, together with the
insight that only through such a descriptive psychology could a
psychology in general fulfill its peculiar sense as a science and

Part III B /

241

do justice to the legitimate sense of psychophysical thematics
through an appropriate limitation of its own [i.e. psychology's]
legitimate sense.

§ 70.

The difficulties of psychological "abstraction."
(The paradox of the "intentional object39; the
intentional primal phenomenon of "sense.")

IT IS NOT SO SIMPLE for psychology, as it is for natural
science through its straightforwardly performed universal abstraction of everything mental, to arrive at its subject matter
through a straightforwardly performed complementary abstraction of everything that is merely bodily. Even after the phenomenological epoche is recognized as necessary, the pathway to
psychology's self-understanding is obstructed by extraordinary
difficulties, indeed by puzzling paradoxes, which must be clarified and overcome in their proper order. This will concern us
now. In first place stands the paradoxical difficulty of the intentional objects as such. Let us take up the question: What has
become of all those objects which, in the "consciousness" of the
subjects, were objects of consciousness in various modes of
validity, objects which, prior to the epoche, were posited as really
existing (or possibly existing, or even as not existing) objects?
What has become of them if now, in the psychologist's epoche,
the taking of a position on any such positing is to be excluded?
We answer: The very epoche itself frees our gaze not only for
the intentions running their course within the purely intentional
life (i.e., the "intentional experiences" [Erlebnisse]) but also for
that which these intentions in themselves, with their own
"what"-content, posit as valid in each case as their object; and it
also frees our gaze for the way in which they do this, i.e., in what
modalities of validity or of being, in what subjective modalities
of time, such as perceptually present, past in memory (i.e.,
having been present, etc.), with what meaning-content, or as
what type of object, etc. The intention and the intentional object
[Gegenständlichkeit) as such, and then the latter in the "how of
its manners of givenness," provide at first an overabundant
theme in the sphere of acts. Soon enough, one is driven to a
careful broadening of the concepts and problems of correlation.

242

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

Thus the sentence in my Ideas toward a Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy [§ 89], which was able to
give rise to objections when it was torn from the context of the
presentation there of the phenomenological epoche, was completely correct: one can say of a simple tree that it burns up, but
a perceived tree "as such" cannot burn up; that is, it is absurd to
say this of it, for one is expecting a component of a pure perception, thinkable only as a moment belonging to an ego-subject's
own essence, to do something which can have meaning only for
a wooden body: to burn up. For the psychologist, as long as he
limits himself to pure description, the only simple objects are
ego-subjects and what can be experienced "in" these ego-subjects
themselves (and then only through the epoche) as what is immanently their own, in order to make this the subject matter of
further scientific work. But everywhere he finds not only intentions but also, contained in them as correlates, the "intentional
objects"—in an essential and completely peculiar way of "being
contained." They are not integral [reelle] parts of the intention
but are something meant in it, its particular meaning, and this
in modalities which only have meaning precisely for something
like "meaning." One must not merely talk about acts of meaning
and what is meant, about conscious experiences and what they
are conscious of, about intentions and what is intended—words
which, in a phenomenological psychology, must unavoidably be
used with an extremely broadened signification; rather, all this
must methodically become a subject for psychological work. The
other [i.e., merely talking about it] is the manner of data-psychology. Even Hume says (and how could he avoid i t ? ) : impressions
of, perceptions of, trees, stones, etc.; and so does psychology to
the present day. But precisely through its blindness for intentional being-in [Darinnensein] or "having something in mind*
[etwas-im-Sinne-haben], as it is called, in language, by contrast,
psychology denied itself the possibility of truly intentional analysis and, in the other direction, of the thematics of intentional
synthesis—and that means nothing less than the whole subject
matter of research which has to do with the psychic in its own
essence, that is, descriptive-psychological research. In extrapsychological life it is not unusual to pay attention sometimes to
personal deeds and sufferings, sometimes to their "sense" (to
what one "has in mind"); and even in the sphere of the sciences
we sometimes have, within certain limitations of interest, the
thematics of explicating sense, as, for example, in philology,
with its constant reflection and inquiry back into what the per-

Part III B /

243

son who used the words had in view in his speech, what his
experiential, conceptual, practical meaning was, what he had in
mind. But only when one with universal consistency wants to
see nothing else, wants to pursue nothing other [than this meaning] in all its subjective modes and in the universal concreteness
of the meaning-bestowing and meaning-having life and its all-encompassing synthesis of all meaning-bestowals and meanings—
only then does one have purely psychological problems; one
never has them in isolation. In other words, only he who lives
within the universal epoche and through it has before him the
universal horizon of the pure "internal life," the intentional life
as accomplishing meaning and validity, only he has also before
him the actual, genuine, and—I emphasize once again—absolutely self-enclosed problematics of intentionality, i.e., the problematics of pure psychology, which belong, then, to all sciences
dealing with the psychic (the psychophysical, the biological sciences).
The psychologist has the problematics of intentionality
through his own original sphere, 1 but this is never isolable for
him. Through the empathy of his original sphere of consciousness, through what arises out of it, as a component which is
never lacking, he also already has a universal inter subjective
horizon, even though he may not notice it at first.
Of course, the epoche, as an explicit methodical basic requirement, could be a matter of the subsequent reflection only of
one who, with a certain naivete and through a historical situation, was already pulled into the epoche, so to speak, who had
already taken possession of a piece of this new "internal world,"
in a certain sense a proximal field within it, with an obscurely
prefigured distant horizon. Thus it was not until four years after
concluding the Logical Investigations that he arrived at an explicit but even then imperfect self-consciousness of its method.
But along with this also arose the extraordinarily difficult problems connected with the method itself, with the epoche and the
reduction and their own phenomenological understanding and
their extraordinary philosophical significance.
Before proceeding to the treatment of these difficulties and
thus to the full unfolding of the sense of the psychological
epoche and reduction, let us deal explicitly with the differentiation in the use of these two words which is obvious according to
the whole presentation up to this point. In pure psychology, that
1. Originalsphäre, i.e., the sphere of his own subjective life.

244

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

is, in the true sense, descriptive psychology, the epoche is the
means for making experienceable and thematizable, in their own
essential purity, the [conscious] subjects which in natural worldlife are experienced and experience themselves as standing in
intentional-real relations to objects that are [also] real in the
mundane sense. Thus, for the absolutely disinterested psychological observer, the subjects become "phenomena" in a peculiarly new sense—and this reorientation is called, here, the
phenomenological-psychological reduction.

§71.

The danger of misunderstanding the
"universality" of the phenomenologicalpsychological epoche. The decisive
signifiance of the correct understanding.

W E SHALL NOW UNDERTAKE to discuss several fundamentally essential points in order to bring to light from different
sides the deeper sense of the epoche and reduction, and then of
psychology itself. And indeed it does have depths, and it does
force paradoxes upon us, which a psychologist who has no other
interest than an objective science of souls could not anticipate.
But our presentation will perhaps cause him to put the naturalistic sensationalism of his psychology of consciousness to the test
and to recognize that a true psychology requires a universal
epoche. At first he will probably think that without proclaiming
it expressly as a method he has already been quietly practicing
the epoche and, focusing upon what is immanent and proper to
persons, has excluded realities external to these persons in respect to their true being or nonbeing, under the rubric of descriptions through inner perception, inner experience, or else through
empathy. But he will perhaps admit that this natural and naive
manner of being directed toward the "inwardness" of men,
which is by no means unknown even to prescientific life, does
not suffice and that the pure being-in-himself and for-himself of
a subject in his full concreteness can become a thematic field
only through the conscious method of the universal epoche. He
must see, and say to himself: Only after I have excluded everything that is extrapsychic, the world which is valid in psychic
life, so that the purely psychic universe has become a closed

Part III B /

245

world for me—only then does it become self-evident to me, or
only then does the self-evidence become compelling, that the
proper essence of the psychic itself includes the fact that it has
the character of meaning objects, etc.
Universally, then, I have before me a flowing manifold intentionality and within it a flowingly valid world as such, but not in
such a way that thereby something nonpsychic is actually posited as world. Perhaps the psychologist will also be in agreement
when we add, here, that it is the psychophysiological attitude,
the prevalent orientation toward discoveries of psychophysical
causations or conditionings, which for so long has caused the
psychologist to give privileged status to sense-data and has kept
him from inquiring into the descriptive place of those data in the
intentional framework, and into their meaning, which can only
be determined in this context. This, he may finally admit, is
indeed something of importance: the thematics of intentionally, understood as a title for correlations [als ein korrelativer
Titel], And indeed this is, in accord with our whole presentation,
the main point, about which one must be perfectly certain before
one can even begin. It is only through the universal epoche that
one sees, as a thematic field of its own, what pure ego-life
actually is: as an intentional life, as being affected in this intentionality by intentional objects which are valid as appearing in
this intentional life, as being directed toward them in many
different ways, as dealing with them. Everything "with which"
one deals in this way itself belongs to pure immanence and must
be descriptively grasped in its purely subjective modes, in its
implications, together with all the intentional mediations contained in these implications.
But the habits of thought of a centuries-old tradition are not
so easy to overcome, and they make themselves felt even when
one expressly renounces them. Inwardly, the psychologist will
persist in regarding this whole descriptive psychology as a discipline which is not self-sufficient, which presupposes natural science as the science of bodies, and which is at the same time a
preliminary step toward a psychophysiologically or possibly psychophysically explanatory natural science. And even if it were
accorded an autonomous existence as a purely descriptive psychology, it would still require an "explanatory" psychology alongside it (this was still the standpoint of Brentano and Dilthey at
the end of the past century). The beginner (and every institutepsychologist is, in terms of his education, a beginner here) will
think at first that [what we have described as] pure psychology is

246

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

simply a matter of a limited set of tasks, a useful but secondary,
auxiliary discipline. This opinion is based in part on the necessity of beginning with the ways in which human beings behave
and on the consideration that these ways of behaving, as real
relations, are in need of the reduction to what in them is internal
to the soul. Thus it appears obvious that a necessary universal
reduction has in advance the significance of a resolve henceforth
to reduce all of men's ways of behaving, one by one, so as to
describe scientifically, perhaps with the help of experimentation,
the psychic as it already finds its expression in common language, i.e., human activity and suffering or, to put it crudely, the
psychic sphere of acts according to its empirical types—and
these always involve, in their meaning, psychophysical causality.
But all this is done for the purpose of enabling oneself subsequently, quite in the manner of natural science, to draw inductive conclusions and thus to penetrate into the obscure realm of
the unconscious, forging new concepts which are expressions for
analogues and modifications of actually experienceable acts.
This on the psychic side. With respect to the complementary
side, that of the physis, the psychophysical problems arise, interwoven with the purely psychological. Is there anything to object
to in this? Will anyone become somehow dubious if we remark,
here, that the notion of "ways of behavior" must finally include
not only all representations, perceptions, memories, expectations, but also all acts of empathy and, further, all associations
and also the variations of acts, which can indeed be followed
descriptively in their obscured forms, sedimentations—and also
all instincts and drives, not to mention the "horizons"?
In any case, universal reduction, in spite of the resolve to
carry out immanent description, will be understood [in the above
view] as universality of individual reduction. 1 And here something else very important must be noted. The path of the psychologist goes from external observation to internal observation,
that is, from the mutual externality of men and animals to the
consideration of their inner being and life.2 The first thing one
must do, then—precisely in order to give to psychological universality a sense parallel to the natural-scientific world-universality
—is to conceive of performing the universal reduction in such a
1. That is (as HusserFs marginal note here indicates), reduction
applied "to each [individual] act—and then to each [other] person and
to each of his acts/'
2. Husserl's marginal note on the first three sentences of this
paragraph: "everything unclear."

Part III B /

247

way that it is exercised individually upon all individual subjects
accessible through experience and induction and in each case,
then, in regard to individual experiences. How could it be possible otherwise? Human beings are external to one another, they
are separated realities, and so their psychic interiors are also
separated. Internal psychology can thus be only individual psychology of individual souls, and everything else is a matter for
psychophysical research; the same thing is true for the animal
kingdom and finally for the whole series of organic beings, if
there are grounds for saying that every organic being has its
psychic side. All this appears to be perfectly obvious. Thus one
will take it in part as a gross exaggeration, in part as an absurdity, if I say in advance that the properly understood epoche, with
its properly understood universality, totally changes all the notions that one could ever have of the task of psychology, and it
reveals everything that was just put forward as obvious to be a
naivete which necessarily and forever becomes impossible as
soon as the epoche and the reduction are actually, and in their
full sense, understood and carried out.
Phenomenological psychology reveals itself, in accord with
its sense, in various steps, because the phenomenological reduction itself—and this is part of its essence—could reveal its
sense, its inner, necessary requirements, and its scope only in
steps. Each step required new reflections, new considerations,
which in turn were possible only through the self-understanding
and the practiced accomplishment of the other steps. Or, as I
also used to put it: In order to attain its total horizon, the
phenomenological reduction would require a "phenomenology of
the phenomenological reduction/' 3 But even at the first step,
where one focuses upon individual subjects and must leave the
accomplishment of psychophysical or biological science an open
question, one must still painstakingly extract for oneself the
meaning of these subjects; one does not obtain this meaning
simply by carrying out the behavioristic 4 reductions with which
one necessarily began. *
* Naturally I am ignoring here the exaggerations of the behaviorists, who operate only with the external side of modes of behavior,
as if behavior would not then lose its sense, i.e., the sense given to it
by empathy, the understanding of the "expression."
3. Cf. p. 188, above.
4. The term "behavioristic" (behavioristisch) is crossed out in
the MS but is not replaced by anything. Husserl seems to refer to reducing concrete persons to their "ways of behaving" in the psychic

248

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

With this first reduction, one has not yet arrived at what is
essentially proper to the soul. Thus one can say: the genuine
phenomenological-psychological epoche is an attitude which is
completely strange and artificial not only to the whole of natural
life but also to the psychologist of the past. Hence, in regard to
what is essentially proper to the ego-subjects, in regard to their
psychic aspect in general, the experiential field which is necessary for scientific description, as well as the familiar set of types
that can arise only out of repetition, was lacking. "Inner perception" in the sense of genuine psychology, and psychological
experience in general, understood as the experience of souls
according to their own pure being, is so far from being an
immediate and everyday affair, something gained through a simple "epoche" at the very beginnings, that it was not possible at all
prior to the introduction of the peculiar method of the phenomenological epoche. Accordingly, anyone taking the phenomenological attitude first had to learn to see, gain practice, and then
in practice acquire at first a rough and shaky, then a more and
more precise, conception of what is essentially proper to himself
and others. In this way, a true'infinity of descriptive phenomena
gradually becomes visible, and does so with the strongest and
most unconditioned of all self-evidence, the self-evidence of this
sole genuine "inner experience."
To be sure, this looks like a bad exaggeration, but only to the
beginner who is bound to the tradition, who, starting with the
experiences of the external attitude (the natural, anthropological subject-object attitude, the psychomundane attitude), at first
thinks that this is a matter of an obvious, simple "purification" of
oneself from one's load of realistic [realen] presuppositions,
whereas the psychic experiential content is essentially already
known and even expressible in ordinary language. But this is a
fundamental error. If this were correct, one would need only to
explicate analytically the experiential concept, derived from
common experience, of man as a thinking, feeling, acting subject, a subject experiencing pleasure and pain and the like; but
that is only the outside, so to speak, the surface of the psychic,
that part of it which has objectified itself in the external world. It
is similar to the case of the child, who certainly has experiences
of things but has no idea yet of inner structures, which are still
quite lacking in his apperceptions of things. Likewise, for the
sense (cf. above, p. 246), then distinguishes this in the footnote from
"behaviorism," which he thinks is quite different. This consideration
probably led him to strike out "behavioristic" as a misleading term.

Part III B /

249

psychologist who has not learned, in the phenomenological sense
which makes the true epoche possible, to understand the superficial as such and to inquire into its immense depth-dimensions,
all the genuinely psychological apperceptions are lacking and
thus also all possibilities of asking genuinely psychological questions, i.e., working questions, which must already have a prefigured horizon of meaning.
Thus the alleged "purification" or, as it is often called, "clarification of psychological concepts," makes the psychic accessible
for the first time, brings its own being and everything "involved"
in it into view for the first time, only if one penetrates from the
externalized intentionalities into the internal ones which constitute the others intentionally. Only in this way does one come to
understand what psychological analysis actually means, and
conversely what psychological synthesis actually means, and to
understand the gulf of meaning which separates these from
what one was able to understand by analysis and synthesis
through the sciences of the external attitude.
The first epoche is, to be sure, the necessary beginning for a
purely psychic experience. But now it is necessary to spend some
time surveying and penetrating the purely psychic and seizing
upon its own essence with stubborn consistency. If empiricism
had done more honor to its name by being thus [tied to pure
experience]5 it could never have missed the phenomenological
reduction, its descriptions would never have led it to data and
complexes of data, and the spiritual world, in its own specificity
and infinite totality, would not have remained closed. Is it not
paradoxical that no traditional psychology up to the present day
has been able to give even a true exposition of perception, or
even of the special type, the perception of bodies, or of memory,
of expectation, of "empathy," or of any other manner of presentification; or an intentional, essential description of judgment, or
of any other class-type of acts, or an intentional clarification of
the syntheses of agreement and discrepancy (in their different
modalizations)? Is it not paradoxical that no one had any idea of
the diverse and difficult working problems contained under each
of these headings? One did not have the experiential field, had
not carved out the special psychological sphere of facts, the field
of the descriptions to be accomplished; one was not at all situated within actually psychological experience, which offers the
5. Biemel's interpolation. There is simply a blank space in the
MS.

250

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

psychic, first of all as unanalyzed, and predelineates in an indistinct way, through the inner and outer experiential horizons of
the psychic, what is to be exhibited intentionally. What good,
then, was the demand for a descriptive psychology, made so
frequently and so emphatically, as long as one had not recognized the necessity of the universal epoche and reduction,
through which alone one first becomes capable of arriving at
substrates of descriptions and intentional analyses and thus at a
field of work? I cannot do otherwise than deny that hitherto
existing psychology has actually set foot on the soil of a genuine
psychology. Only when such a psychology exists will it be possible to make use, according to their actual psychological content,
of the doubtless very valuable facts [collected by] psychophysics
and the psychology which relies on it; only then will one be able
to be clear on what, on both sides [i.e., the psychic and the
physiological sides] the related terms are which are involved in
the empirical regularities.
So great is the power of prejudices that, although for decades
now the transcendental epoche and reduction have been presented in various stages of their development, nothing more has
been achieved than sense-distorting applications of the first results of the genuine intentional description to the old psychology. Our subsequent considerations will show how seriously this
remark about the sense-distorting character of such applications
must be taken. These considerations, arising as they do out of
the most mature self-reflection, will make possible—or so I hope
—a correspondingly deeper transparency and clarity. In addition, the difficulty will be cleared away which attaches to a
discours de la methode such as the one sketched out here,
namely, that the concrete investigations which are behind it,
carried out for decadog, cannot concurrently serve as supports,
especially since even the published writings can have their
proper effect only through an actual and of course always very
difficult understanding of the reduction. It will become clear
very soon in the sequel why this is stated here, even though the
reduction in those writings is introduced as a transcendental
philosophical reduction.
Our next task, one which is very pressing for the clarification
of the genuine sense of the epoche, is to make evident the fact
that what was taken for granted in the first interpretation of the
universality in which the epoche must be accomplished was in
fact a self-misunderstanding. It is basically wrong, in taking

Part III B /

251

one's point of departure from men's ways of behaving toward the
real surrounding world and from the reduction of them one by
one to the psychic, to think that universal reduction consists in
the attitude of universally purifying reductively all occurring
individual intentionalities and then dealing with these individuals. To be sure, reflecting upon myself in my self-consciousness,
Ifindmyself to be living in the world in such a way that I am
affected by and deal with individual things; and so the reduction
continually yields individual representations, individual feelings,
individual acts. But I must not overlook, as does the psychology
of "data on a tablet of consciousness," that this "tablet" has consciousness of itself as a tablet, is in the world, and has consciousness of the world: I am continually conscious of individual
things in the world, as things that interest me, move me, disturb
me, etc., but in doing this I always have consciousness of the
world itself, as that in which I myself am, although it is not
there as is a thing, does not affect me as things do, is not, in a
sense similar to things, an object of my dealings. If I were not
conscious of the world as world, without its being capable of
becoming objective in the manner of an [individual] object, how
could I survey the world reflectively and put knowledge of the
world into play, thus lifting myself above the simple, straightforwardly directed life that always has to do with things? How is it
that I, or all of us, constantly have world-consciousness? Each
thing that we experience, that we have to do with in any way
whatever—and this includes ourselves when we reflect upon
ourselves—gives itself, whether we notice it or not, as a thing in
the world, as a thing in the given field of perception, the latter
being merely a perceptual sector of the world. We can take
notice of this and inquire into this constant world-horizon; indeed we do this continually.
The psychological reduction thus has to reduce at once the
consciousness of the individual thing and also its world-horizon;
thus all reduction is world-universal.8
This is an a priori for psychology: It is unthinkable that a
psychologist, in inquiring into psychological matters, should not
have his world-consciousness or should not be dealing in a wakeful manner with objects which necessarily bear their world-horizon with them or that, in representing others, he could represent
6. Welt-universal: i.e., it takes in not only the totality ("universe") of consciousness but also the totality of the world.

252

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

them in any other way than as being like himself—as men with
world-consciousness, which is at the same time self-consciousness : consciousness of oneself as being in the world.
This, then, and perhaps much more of a similar nature,
belongs to the beginning, to the first establishment, of a
psychology; 7 and it would be just as absurd to overlook it as if
the physicist, in beginning a theory of bodies, were to overlook
the fact that extension belongs to the essence of a body. To be
sure, what went off smoothly in the founding of a method in
physics—taking note of the a priori structures, letting oneself be
guided by them, even making them into a methodical fundament
as a scientific system of norms in its own right, as mathematics
—all this involved extraordinary and strange difficulties in the
development of psychology, in spite of all the apparent analogies
with physics. What is relatively easy in the method of physics,
i.e., carrying out the universal abstraction of nature and mathematically mastering nature through idealization, for the most
profound reasons entangles us here, where the complementary
abstraction is supposed to be undertaken, where world- and
self-consciousness are to become a universal subject matter, in
difficult preliminary reflections on method. 8
Psychology, the universal science of pure souls in general—
therein consists its abstraction—requires the epoche, and it
must in advance reduce the world-consciousness of all souls,
each in its particularity, in its particular contents and modalities. To this belongs the self-apperception of each one, together
with the sense of the validities, the habitualities, the interests,
the ways of thinking that each attributes to himself, the particular experiences, judgments that he performs, etc., each in the
manner in which he appears to himself, is meant [by himself],
but at the same time is meant as being in the world; [all this] * is
to be reduced.
But we must not omit the question: How, more precisely,
does each [subject] have world-consciousness while he has self7. Marginal note: "This concerns the life-world! That must be
said!" Other notes express considerable dissatisfaction with the paragraphs leading up to this point, perhaps because they repeat much of
the discussion of the life-world in Part IIIA (as one note explicitly
points out) but do not show the connection.
8. Marginal notet>n the last sentence: "The life-world typology is
a priori. But it does not thereby have to be formulated or to guide [the
scientist] in a formulated way."
9. Biemel's interpolation.

Part III B /

253

apperception [of himself] as this human being? Here we soon
see, as another a priori, that self-consciousness and consciousness of others are inseparable; it is unthinkable, and not merely
[contrary to] fact,10 that I be man in a world without being a
man. There need be no one in my perceptual field, but fellow
men are necessary as actual, as known, and as an open horizon
of those I might possibly meet. Factually I am within an interhuman present and within an open horizon of mankind; I know
myself to be factually within a generative framework, in the
unitary flow of a historical development in which this present is
mankind's present and the world of which it is conscious is a
historical present with a historical past and a historical future.
Of course I am free here to transform Actively [the factual
details]; u but this form of generativity and historicity is unbreakable, as is the form, belonging to me as an individual ego,
of my original perceptual present as a present with a remembered past and an expectable future. To be sure, it is a large and
open question as to how far this a priori reaches in terms of
content and how it is to be formulated in rigorous and stable
laws, so to speak as an ontology of world- and self-consciousness; but in any case it is a question which concerns the sense of
the universal epoche and applies to what can be attained within
it as the reduced phenomenon of internal psychology, i.e., what
one is to have in view from the start as the subject matter of
psychology. But we must be more precise here. The psychologist
will naturally have to carry out the epoche and reduction from
his own vantage point and first of all upon himself; he must
begin with his original self-experience and his own original
world-consciousness, i.e., the self-apperception of himself as the
man to whom he accords whatever he does accord—being this
good man or this sinner, along with everything else he supposedly is; when the psychologist becomes a disinterested observer
of himself, all this loses all its cofunctioning validity, whereas
such validity itself, together with the act of according validity
and that which has validity as such, becomes a phenomenon, in
such a way that nothing at all can be lost. But he has original
consciousness of all this, consciousness which, as reduced, is
10. Literally: "it is unthinkable, and not just a mere fact."
11. Here it is necessary to differ with Biemel, who interpolates
"Weltbewusstsein." His version is: "Of course I am free to transform
[world-consciousness] Actively." But world-consciousness, as the general structure or form of experience, is precisely what cannot be transformed.

254

/

THE

CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

primary; and it includes his world-consciousness in its flowing
particularity and its historicity, with everything that he attributes to the world by way of spatiotemporality and content
through his acts of meaning. Through the reduction, this world
—and he has no other one which is valid for him (another one
would have no meaning at all for him)—becomes a mere phenomenon for him.
But he has to have performed the epoche in his experience of
others as he has in his self-experience, and this must apply in
advance to every possible experience of others; all human beings
become pure souls, ego-subjects of self- and world-apperceptions,
which can become thematic purely in respect to the correlation
between according validity and that-which-has-validity. But now
let us consider the fact that everyone, in his commerce with
others within his world-consciousness, at the same time has
consciousness of others in the form of particular others; that in
an amazing fashion his intentionality reaches into that of the
other and vice versa; that thereby one's own and others' ontic
validities combine in modes of agreement and discrepancy; and
that always and necessarily, through reciprocal correction,
agreeing consciousness of the same common world with the
same things finally achieves validity 12 —the same things that are
viewed in one way by one and another way by the other. The
world-consciousness of any individual is always in advance—
and indeed in the mode of ontic certainty—the consciousness of
one and the same world for all, all those who are known and not
known, all subjects that could ever possibly be met, who all, in
advance, must themselves be subjects in the world. I from my
vantage point and every other from his vantage point has his
oriented world, a world which presupposes others who from their
respective vantage points have others, who in turn have others;
and thus these others are presupposed, through mediations of
the intentional complex, as subjects for a common world-apperception, while each individual has his own world-apperception in
his self-apperception. And [all] this is a process of unceasingly
flowing change, which is also always a process of reciprocal
correction. In other words, each of us has his life-world, meant
as the world for all. Each has it with the sense of a polar unity of
subjectively, relatively meant worlds which, in the course of
12. zur Geltung kommt, here used in a strange sense, since in
Husserl's usual terminology it is the world, not consciousness, that
"achieves validity."

Part III B /

255

correction, are transformed into mere appearances of the world,
the life-world for all, the intentional unity which always persists,
which in turn is itself a universe of particulars, of things. This is
the world; another world would have no meaning at all for us.
And in the epoche it becomes a phenomenon. What remains,
now, is not a multiplicity of separated souls, each reduced to its
pure interiority, but rather: just as there is a sole universal
nature as a self-enclosed framework of unity, so there is a sole
psychic framework, a total framework of all souls, which axe
united not externally but internally, namely, through the intentional interpenetration [Ineinander] which is the communalization of their lives. Each soul, reduced to its pure interiority, has
its being-for-itself and its being-in-itself, has its life which is originally its own. And yet it belongs to each soul that it have its
particular world-consciousness in a way which is originally its
own, namely, through the fact that it has empathy experiences,
experiencing consciousness of others as [also] having a world,
the same world, that is, each apperceiving it in his own apperceptions.
Just as every ego-subject has an original perceptual field
within a horizon that can be opened up through free activity,
which leads to ever new perceptual fields, repeatedly preindicated through a combination of the determinate and the indeterminate : so every ego-subject has his horizon of empathy, that
of his cosubjects, which can be opened up through direct and
indirect commerce with the chain of others, who are all others
for one another, for whom there can be still others, etc. But this
means that each has an oriented world in such a way that he has
a nucleus of relatively original data; and this is the nucleus of a
horizon, "horizon" being here a title for a complicated intentionality which, in spite of its indeterminacy, is covalid and anticipated. But this means at the same time that within the vitally
flowing intentionality in which the life of an ego-subject consists, every other ego is already intentionally implied in advance
by way of empathy and the empathy-horizon. Within the universal epoche which actually understands itself, it becomes evident
that there is no separation of mutual externality at all for souls
in their own essential nature. What is a mutual externality for
the natural-mundane attitude of world-life prior to the epoche,
because of the localization of souls in living bodies, is transformed in the epoche into a pure, intentional, mutual internaljty. With this the world—the straightforwardly existing world
and, within it, existing nature—is transformed into the all-corn-

256

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

munal phenomenon "world," "world for all actual and possible
subjects," none of whom can escape the intentional implication
according to which he belongs in advance within the horizon of
every other subject.
Thus we see with surprise, I think, that in the pure development of the idea of a descriptive psychology, which seeks to
bring to expression what is essentially proper to souls, there
necessarily occurs a transformation of the phenomenologicalpsychological epoche and reduction into the transcendental; and
we see that we have done and could do nothing else here but
repeat in basic outlines the considerations that we had to carry
out earlier in quite another interest, i.e., in the interest not of a
psychology as a positive science but of a universal and then
transcendental philosophy.
But with this there also returns the necessity of thinking
through to the end this correction of that first and most obvious
[i.e., psychological] type of epoche and reduction. Striving for
objective scientific discipline in psychology as elsewhere, we
consider human beings just as we do other things in the world;
for psychology, too, objectivity signifies the exclusion of everything that is merely subjective and thus also ourselves as the
functioning subjectivity in whose function the ontic meaning
"world" arises. As a psychologist I put up with the fact that even
in such considerations, directed at the intentional construction
of the world, I have others through the experiential mode of
empathy as existing actualities with whom I know myself to be
merely in community. But when I practice the reducing epoche
on myself and my world-consciousness, the other human beings,
like the world itself, fall before the epoche; that is, they are
merely intentional phenomena for me. Thus the radical and
perfect reduction leads to the absolutely single ego of the pure
psychologist, who thus at first absolutely isolates himself and as
such no longer has validity for himself as a human being or as
really existing in the world but is instead the pure subject of his
intentionality, which through the radical reduction is universal
and pure, with all its intentional implications. This is the apodictic ego, existing apodictically in its intentionalities, which are
apodictically contained within itself and can be opened up. And
if the coexistence of other subjects, but as implied other egos,
and thus the primal division between T ' and "other," can be
established [as being] in these intentionalities—and essentially
s o —then one of the main tasks of pure intentional psychology is
to make understandable, by way of the progressive reduction of

Part III B /

257

world-validity, the subjective and pure function through which
the world as the "world for us aU" is a world for all from
my—the ego's—vantage point, with whatever particular content
it may have. The empty generality of the epoche does not of
itself clarify anything; it is only the gate of entry through which
one must pass in order to be able to discover the new world of
pure subjectivity. The actual discovery is a matter of concrete,
extremely subtle and differentiated work.
One main result must still be emphasized with a remark. Our
considerations show that the epoche would be mistaken, not only
[if conceived] as an individual reduction within the individual
soul, but also [if conceived] as [such] an individual reduction
proceeding from soul to soul.13 All souls make up a single unity
of intentionality with the reciprocal implication of the life-fluxes
of the individual subjects, a unity that can be unfolded systematically through phenomenology; what is a mutual externality
from the point of view of na'ive positivity or objectivity is, when
seen from the inside, an intentional mutual internality.

§ 72.

The relation of transcendental psychology
to transcendental phenomenology as the
proper access to pure self-knowledge.
Definitive removal of the objectivistic
ideal from the science of the soul.

T H E SURPRISING RESULT of our investigation can also, it
seems, be expressed as follows: a pure psychology as positive
science, a psychology which would investigate universally the
human beings living in the world as real facts in the world,
similarly to other positive sciences (both sciences of nature and
humanistic disciplines), does not exist. There is only a transcendental psychology, which is identical with transcendental
philosophy. We must now consider in what sense this needs to
be corrected. It would naturally be wrong to say that there can be
no psychology as a science on the ground of the pregiven world,

13. This sentence as it stands in the text, involving two corrections by Fink, is counter to Husserl's meaning. The problem is solved
by removing the second nicht.

258

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

i.e., a science dealing straightforwardly with human beings (and
also animals) in the world. It is certain that no psychology in
this sense is possible without an inquiry into what is purely
essentially proper to psychic being; and it is equally certain that
the latter is not something to be had gratis, so to speak, as
something one need only look at, something that is already there
but simply unnoticed. Everything that is "there" in this way
belongs to the world as what is apperceived by him who sees it in
this way x and falls along with everything else within the domain
of what is to be reduced. But if the universal epoche, which
encompasses all having-consciousness-of-the-world, is necessary,
then the psychologist loses, during this epoche, the ground of the
objective world. Thus pure psychology in itself is identical with
transcendental philosophy as the science of transcendental subjectivity. This is unassailable. But now let us remember what we
learned before about the phenomenological reduction as a reorientation of the natural mundane attitude. We can return from
the reorientation into the natural attitude; as we said in advance,
psychology, like every other science and every life-vocation, has
its vocational times and the epoche belonging to these vocational
times. During the time in which I am a transcendental or pure
phenomenologist, I am exclusively within transcendental selfconsciousness, and I am my own subject matter exclusively as
transcendental ego in terms of everything intentionally implied
therein. Here there is no objectivity as such at all; here there are
objectivity, things, world, and world-science (including, then, all
positive sciences and philosophies), only as my—the transcendental ego's—phenomena. AH the ontic validities that I may perform and wish to perform as a transcendental investigator are
related to myself; but this also includes the actual and possible
"empathies," perceptions of others, that appear among my original intentions. Through the reduction [others] 2 are transformed
from human beings existing for me into alter egos existing for
me, having the ontic meaning of implicata of my original intentional life. And the reverse also holds: I, with my whole original
life, am implied in them; and they are all likewise implied in one
another. What I say here scientifically, I say about myself and to
myself; but at the same time, paradoxically, I say it to all the
others as being transcendentally implied in me and in one another.
1. Reading als dessen, der es for als dem, der es.
2. Biemel's interpolation.

Part III B /

259

Pure psychology simply knows nothing other than the
subjective; to admit into it something objective as existing is
already to abandon pure psychology. Infinite psychological inquiry, as transcendentally pure inquiry, applies to this intentional mutual internality of subjects and their transcendental
life and is necessarily carried out in the form of being oriented
around me. But this is done in such a way that, in egological
self-reflection, I delimit my original sphere (the sphere of "primordiality") and reveal within its network intentional syntheses
and implications in their strata of intentional modification; withholding validity from all my empathies in a methodical way,
through a sort of epoche within the epoche, and maintaining
them only as my experiences [Erlebnisse], I attain the essential
structures of an original life. If I accord validity to empathy
(together with its intentional validity-correlates [revealed
through my] "coperformance"), 3 these essential structures become those of any alter ego I can conceive of; and then there
arise the problems of the universal community produced
through empathy and of its essential particular forms, the very
same forms that turn up in objectivized manner in the natural
world-view, namely, as family, people, community of peoples,
and then as essential structures of human historicity; here, however, in reduced form, they give rise to the essential structures of
absolute historicity, namely, those of a transcendental community of subjects as one which, living in community through
intentionality in these most general and also in particularized a
priori forms, has in itself and continues ever to create the world
as intentional validity-correlate, in ever new forms and strata of
a cultural world. This, systematically developed through the
most rigorous of all conceivable methods—that is, the method of
transcendental subjectivity reflecting apodictically upon itself
and apodictically explicating itself—is precisely transcendental
philosophy; thus pure psychology is and can be nothing other
than what was sought earlier from the philosophical point of
view as absolutely grounded philosophy, which can fulfill itself
only as phenomenological transcendental philosophy. But I as a
pure psychologist or transcendental philosopher have not
thereby ceased being a human being; no more has the actual
being of the world and of all men and other beings in the world
3. I.e., I am aware, through empathy, not only of the acts of
others, but also, by "coaccompüshing" these acts, of their correlates,
valid objects.

2Ö0

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

changed in the least. And I have also not ceased having this
particular worldly interest which bears the title: universal science of human beings in respect to their psychic being, both
individual-psychic and social; I thus return to the natural attitude, changing my vocation: I take up my work as a psychologist
on the ground of the world. It was precisely as a psychologist
that I was compelled to decide upon developing a pure psychology. This is obviously similar, then, to the way in which the
interest of the natural scientist demands the development of a
pure mathematics and would have demanded it even if mathematics had not grown up earlier as the result of a theoretical
interest of its own. In fact, for a genuine psychology, and for the
exactness which belongs essentially to it, transcendental philosophy plays the role of the a priori science to which it must have
recourse in all its actually psychological knowledge, the science
whose a priori structural concepts it must utilize in its mundane
inquiry. Of course, in this exhibition of the genuine parallel
between psychology and natural science,4 indeed between psychology and every other positive science, an enormous difference
becomes evident. The psychologist, in search of the purely
psychic, in the absolutely unavoidable necessity of placing out of
action all real covalidities,5 effects the epochg; then, carrying it
out methodically, and again unavoidably, through difficult reflection, he frees himself from the naivete which is unconsciously
inherent in all world-life and all objective world-sciences.
In the subscientific everydayness of natural life everyone believes that he has knowledge of himself and of human beings;
he may be ever so humble in judging the perfection of this
knowledge, certain that he often errs, but he knows that this
knowledge can be improved; and everyone believes in a similar
fashion that he has knowledge of the world, or at least of his
proximate surroundings. Positive science says that this is naive
and that it, positive science, achieves true knowledge of the
world through its scientific methods. The psychologist wants
only the same thing that the other positive sciences want whose
efforts have been successful; he is in search of nothing other
than a method of positive scientific character for passing beyond
everyday self-knowledge and knowledge of human beings. But
4. I.e., that each has a pure and an empirical part. Husserl often
says that phenomenology stands in the same relation to psychology as
mathematics to physics.
5. reale Mitgeltungen, i.e., the validity of anything real which
would count outside his psychological interest.

Part III B

/

261

in finding himself compelled to develop the method of phenomenological reduction, he makes the discovery that in fact no
one actually arrives in his [ordinary] self-knowledge at his true
and actual self, the being which is his own as ego-subject and as
the subject of all his world-knowledge and mundane accomplishments, that all this shows itself only through the reduction, and
that pure psychology is nothing other than the infinitely toilsome
way of genuine and pure self-knowledge; but the latter also
includes knowledge of human beings, as knowledge of their true
being and life as egos or as souls; and then [it includes also the
knowledge of] the true being of the world, which in principle no
positive science, no matter how successful, can ever attain.
What positive science calls knowledge of the world is knowledge
of the things of the world, their genera and species, their interconnections and separations, their changes and lack of change,
their laws of persistent being throughout the course of change,
their all-encompassing structure, forms, and the lawfulness of
these forms to which all being of things is bound. But all the
knowledge belonging to positive science, all its questions and
answers, all its hypotheses and confirmations, stand or move
upon the ground of the pregiven world; the world is the constant
presupposition; the question concerns only what the world is,
what is found to belong to it in the movement of induction from
the known into the unknown. The world is not a hypothesis in
that sole sense in which hypotheses have meaning for positive
science—for example, hypotheses about the structure of the
galaxies of the Milky Way; all hypotheses in the positive sphere
are hypotheses upon the ground of the "hypothesis" of the world,
and to seek a grounding for this "hypothesis" in the same sense,
in the positive scientific way, would be absurd. Indeed, it is only
from the vantage point of transcendental psychology or philosophy that we can see and understand what is lacking here by way
of a questioning of the "hypothesis" of the world, what it is and
what is required to put it in question. As the functioning subjects
in and through whose function the world is for us, we are all
completely extrathematic [in the natural attitude], forgotten, as
it were, apart from the validity [we have,] with particular content which attains and bestows meaning within us. One cannot
say that functioning subjectivity has long since been discovered
through the empiricist theory of knowledge since Locke. For
either this was psychology in the positive sphere and spoke of
human beings as the functioning subjects, in which case it presupposed the ground of the world and moved in a circle; or it

262

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

actually put this ground in question, as did Hume—who in this
respect was much more radical than Kant—in which case it
plunges us into a paradoxical solipsism and skepticism and, in
any case, into a horrid situation where the being of the world is
incomprehensible. The reason for this has become evident to us.
The problem of the world's validity-as-ground [Bodengeltung], as
the world that is what it is through actual and possible knowledge, or in general through actual and possible functioning subjectivity, had announced itself. But great difficulties had to be
overcome in order not only to begin the method of epoche and
reduction but also to bring it to its full understanding of itself
and thus for the first time to discover the absolutely functioning
subjectivity, not as human subjectivity, but as the subjectivity
which objectifies itself, [at least] at first, in human subjectivity.
With this we recognize that it is naive to stop at the subjectobject correlation conceived in the anthropological, mundane
manner and to misinterpret what was shown phenomenologically in my first writings as belonging to this correlation. To do
this is to be blind precisely to the great problems of this paradox,
namely, that man, and in communalization mankind, is subjectivity for the world and at the same time is supposed to be in it in
an objective and worldly manner. The world which is for us is
the world which has meaning in our human life and gains ever
new meaning for us—meaning and also validity. This is true,
and it is also true that in respect to knowledge, for us men, our
own being goes before that of the world; but this does not mean
that this same thing holds in respect to the actuality of being.8
But the transcendental correlation between the world in the
transcendental life of constituting subjectivity and the world
itself, as it constantly outlines and confirms itself in the lifecommunity of transcendental inter subjectivity as a pole-idea, is
not the puzzling correlation which occurs in the world itself. In
the concreteness of transcendental inter subjectivity, in the universal interconnection of life, the pole, or rather the system of
individual poles which is called the world, is contained as intentional object in exactly the same way that any intention contains
its intentional object, [the latter being] strictly inseparable from
its relative concreteness.7 All previous discussions of idealism
6. der Wirklichkeit des Seins nach, i.e., man's objective being (as
subject in the world) comes first in the order of knowing but not in
the order of being.
7. I.e., the relativity of its concrete givenness (in perspective,
etc.).

Part III B /

263

and realism have failed to penetrate to the consciousness of the
genuine problem which lies, sought for but undiscovered, behind
all theories of knowledge; much less have they grasped the
transcendental reduction in its difficult sense as the gate of entry
to genuine knowledge of self and of the world.
Yet the question will still be put to us now as to how pure
psychology, which with transcendental subjectivity has taken
leave of the ground of the world, can serve the psychologist in
his positive work upon this very ground. What interests him is
not transcendental interiority but the interiority which exists in
the world—human beings and human communities found in the
world; and when he speaks of the life of the soul and of the
properties of a person, and poses or would pose similar questions
in regard to communities, he refers merely to what really occurs
in the world; he refers to what takes place in real human beings,
what is experienceable in their human self-consciousness
through unprejudiced self-experience or, in the case of others,
through experience of others. For this the first stage of the
epoche and reduction suffices, the stage that we did not yet
acknowledge as being genuinely transcendental or as being primary within a higher self-reflection. In their human commissions and omissions, human beings are related to realities which
are valid for them; the psychologist must not allow what they
take to be real to be valid for himself, etc. And is it not the case,
after all, that psychophysical or psychophysiological dualism has
its experiential legitimacy for the world, whatever the world may
signify transcendentally, and that it sets a task for the psychology of human beings and animals which is analogous to the task
of natural science?
The old temptations return; and what must be said here
above all, apart from the objections of principle that we have
already begun to make in respect to localization and causality
[cf. § 62, above], is that it is only absolute freedom from prejudice, [freedom] gained through the unsurpassable radicalism of
the full transcendental epoche, that makes possible a true liberation from the traditional temptations; and this is to say that it is
only by being in possession of the totality of the subjective
sphere, in which man, the communities of men intentionally
and internally bound together, and the world in which they live,
are themselves included as intentional objects—it is only by
being in possession of this totality that one becomes capable of
seeing and systematically investigating what we characterized as
the "how of manners of givenness." It was in just this way that

264

/

THE CRISIS OF EUROPEAN SCIENCES

one could first discover that every worldly datum is a datum
within the how of a horizon, that, in horizons, further horizons
are implied, and, finally, that anything at all that is given in a
worldly manner brings the world-horizon with it and becomes an
object of world-consciousness in this way alone. W. James was
alone, as far as I know, in becoming aware of the phenomena of
horizon—under the title of "fringes" 8 —but how could he inquire
into it without the phenomenologically acquired understanding
of intentional objectivity and of implication? But if this happens, if world-consciousness is freed from its anonymity, then
the breakthrough into the transcendental is accomplished. Once
this has happened, however, and the transcendental field of
work, as that of total and universal subjectivity, has been
reached, then the return to the natural—though now no longer
naive—attitude has the remarkable result that the souls of men
have entered, with the advance of phenomenological inquiry,
into a remarkable movement of their own psychic content. For
every new piece of transcendental knowledge is transformed, by
essential necessity, into an enrichment of the content of the
human soul. As transcendental ego, after all, I am the same ego
that in the worldly sphere is a human ego. What was concealed
from me in the human sphere I reveal through transcendental
inquiry. Transcendental inquiry is itself a world-historical process insofar as it enlarges the history of the constitution of the
world, not only by adding a new science to it but also by enlarging the content of the world in every respect; everything mundane has its transcendental correlates, and every new revelation
of the latter adds, for the investigator of man, the psychologist,
new determinations to man in the world. No positive psychology
that does not have a transcendental psychology already at work
at its disposal is ever able to discover such determinations of
man and of the world. All this is self-evident and yet paradoxical
for all of us who have been raised in centuries-old—and in part
millennia-old—habits of thought. This exhibits in a new way
the profound difference between mathematics, between every a
priori science of the world, and phenomenology as a priori psychology, that is, as the theory of the essence of transcendental
subjectivity. The a priori of nature "precedes the being of the
world" but not in such a way that advances in the knowledge of
the mathematical a priori could influence the being of nature
itself. Nature is in itself what it is, and is in itself mathematical,
8. Husserl uses the English term.

Part III B /

265

no matter how much we know or do not know of mathematics;
everything is decided in advance as pure mathematics and as
nature itself. Such is the dominant hypothesis which has guided
natural science through the centuries. But for the world as a
world which also contains spiritual beings, this "being-in-advance" is an absurdity; here a Laplacean spirit is unthinkable.
The idea of an ontology of the world, the idea of an objective,
universal science of the world, having behind it a universal a
priori according to which every possible factual world is knowable more geometrico—this idea which led even Leibniz astray—
is a nonsens. For the realm of souls there is in principle no
such ontology, no science corresponding to the physicalisticmathematical ideal, although psychic being is investigatable in
transcendental universality, in a fully systematic way, and in
principle in essential generality in the form of an a priori science.
Phenomenology frees us from the old objectivistic ideal of the
scientific system, the theoretical form of mathematical natural
science, and frees us accordingly from the idea of an ontology of
the soul which could be analogous to physics. Only blindness to
the transcendental, as it is experienceable and knowable only
through phenomenological reduction, makes the revival of physicalism in our time possible—in the modified form of a logicist
mathematicism which abandons the task, put to us by history, of
a philosophy based on ultimate insight and on an absolute universality within which there must be no unasked questions,
nothing taken for granted that is not understood. To call physicalism philosophy is only to pass off an equivocation as a realization of the perplexities concerning our knowledge in which we
have found ourselves since Hume. Nature can be thought as a
definite manifold, and we can take this idea as a basis hypothetically. But insofar as the world is a world of knowledge, a world
of consciousness, a world with human beings, such an idea is
absurd for it to unsurpassable degree.9
9. The text of the Crisis breaks off here. For the manuscript
appended to the text at this point in the German edition see Appendix
IV, pp. 335-41.

Appendixes

A.
THE VIENNA LECTURE

Appendix I:
Philosophy and the Crisis
of European Humanity1
I
IN THIS LECTURE I shall venture the attempt to find new
interest in the frequently treated theme of the European crisis by
developing the philosophical-historical idea (or the teleological
sense) of European humanity. As I exhibit, in the process, the
essential function that philosophy and its branches, our sciences, have to exercise within that sense, the European crisis
will also receive a new elucidation.
Let us begin with something that is familiar to all, the
difference between scientific medicine and the lore of the socalled nature cure. While the latter arises in the common life of
the people out of native experience and tradition, scientific medicine arises from the application of the insights of purely theoretical sciences, those of the human body, primarily anatomy and
physiology. But these, in turn, are themselves based on the
universally explanatory, fundamental sciences of nature as
such, physics and chemistry.

i. A lecture presented before the Vienna Cultural Society on May
7 and May 10, 1935 (i.e., six months before the Prague lecture, on
which the Crisis is based) with the original title "Philosophy in the
Crisis of European Mankind." It appears in the German edition as
the third "Abhandlung," pp. 314-48[269]

270

/

APPENDIX I

Let us now turn our attention from the human body to the
human spirit, the subject matter of the so-called humanist disciplines. Here theoretical interest is directed at human beings
exclusively as persons, at their personal life and accomplishments, and correlatively at the products of such accomplishments. Personal life means living communalized as T and "we"
within a community-horizon, and this in communities of various
simple or stratified forms such as family, nation, supranational
community. The word life here does not have a physiological
sense; it signifies purposeful life accomplishing spiritual products: in the broadest sense, creating culture in the unity of a
historical development.2 All this is the subject matter of numerous humanistic disciplines. Now clearly there exists the distinction between energetic thriving and atrophy, that is, one can also
say, between health and sickness, even in communities, peoples,
states. Accordingly the question is not far removed: How does it
happen that no scientific medicine has ever developed in this
sphere, a medicine for nations and supranational communities?
The European nations are sick; Europe itself, it is said, is in
crisis. We are by no means lacking something like nature doctors. Indeed, we are practically inundated by a flood of naive and
excessive suggestions for reform. But why do the so richly developed humanistic disciplines fail to perform the service here that
is so admirably performed by the natural sciences in their
sphere?
Those familiar with the spirit of the modern sciences will not
be at a loss for an answer. The greatness of the natural sciences
consists in the fact that they are not content with an intuitive,
empirical procedure, since for them all description of nature is
meant to be only a methodical passage to exact—ultimately
physical-chemical—explanation. They say: "merely descriptive"
sciences confine us to the finitudes of our earthly surrounding
world. But mathematical-exact natural science, through its
method, encompasses the infinities in their actualities and real
possibilities. It understands what is intuitively given as merely
subjectively relative appearance and teaches us how to investigate suprasubjective ("objective") nature itself, by systematic
approximations, in terms of its unconditionally universal elements and laws. At the same time it teaches us to explain all
intuitively pregiven concrete entities, whether men, animals, or
2. Geschichtlichkeit. Here, as is often the case, Husserl uses this
term to mean, not "historicity," but a particular historical process or
development. Cf. above, § 6, note 2.

The Vienna Lecture /

271

heavenly bodies, in terms of what ultimately is; namely, beginning with particular, factually given appearances, to induce
future possibilities and probabilities with a scope and an exactness which surpasses all intuitively limited empirical procedure.
The result of the consistent development of the exact sciences in
the modern period was a true revolution in the technical control
of nature.
Quite different, unfortunately (in the sense of the point of
view we have already come to understand well) is the methodical
situation in the humanistic disciplines, and this for internal
reasons. The human spirit, after all, is grounded on the human
physis; each individual human psychic life is founded upon
corporeity, and thus each community upon the bodies of the
individual human beings who are members of it. So if a truly
exact explanation of the phenomena of the humanistic disciplines is to be possible, and accordingly a far-reaching scientific
praxis similar to that in the natural sphere, the humanists must
not only consider the spirit as spirit but must also go back to the
corporeal basis and carry out their explanations by means of
exact physics and chemistry. But this fails (and this cannot
change in the foreseeable future) because of the complexity of
the required exact psychophysical research even in the case of
the individual human being, not to mention that of the great
historical communities. If the world were built up of two spheres
of realities with equal rights, so to speak, nature and spirit,
neither of which was prior methodically or materially, then the
situation would be different. But only nature can be treated by
itself as a closed world; only natural science can abstract with
unbroken consistency from everything spiritual and investigate
nature purely as nature. On the other hand, vice versa, such a
consistent abstraction from nature does not lead the humanist,
interested solely in what is spiritual, to a self-enclosed, purely
spiritually coherent "world" which could become the subject matter of a pure and universal humanistic science as a parallel to
pure natural science. For animal spirituality, that of human and
animal "souls," to which all other spirituality must be traced
back, is individually, causally founded in corporeity. Thus it is
understandable that the humanist, interested solely in the spiritual as such, does not get beyond the descriptive level, beyond a
spiritual history,3 and thus remains limited to intuitive finitudes.
3. Geisteshistorie. Husserl is thinking of something parallel to
"natural history."

272

/

APPENDIX I

Every example shows this. A historian, for example, cannot treat
of ancient Greek history without bringing in the physical geography of ancient Greece, or of its architecture without bringing in
the corporeity of its buildings, etc., etc. That seems quite obvious.
But what if the whole way of thinking that manifests itself in
the foregoing presentation rested on portentous prejudices and,
in its effects, itself shared in the responsibility for the European
sickness? This is, indeed, my conviction; and I hope also to make
it understandable that this is also a fundamental source of the
unhesitating way in which the modern scientist holds the possibility of grounding a purely self-enclosed and general science of
the spirit to be not even worth considering and thus flatly denies
it.
It is in the interest of our Europe-problem to go into this a bit
further and to uproot the above argument, which seemed so
obvious at first glance. The historian, the investigator of the
spirit or of culture in every sphere, certainly has physical nature
constantly among his phenomena—nature in ancient Greece,
in our example above. But this nature is not nature in the sense
of natural science but rather that which for the ancient Greeks
counted as nature, that which confronted them as natural reality
in their surrounding world. To express it more fully: the historical surrounding world of the Greeks is not the objective world in
our sense but rather their "world-representation/' i.e., their own
subjective validity with all the actualities which are valid for
them within it, including, for example, gods, demons, etc.
"Surrounding world" is a concept that has its place exclusively in the spiritual sphere. That we live in our particular
surrounding world, which is the locus of all our cares and endeavors—this refers to a fact that occurs purely within the
spiritual realm. Our surrounding world is a spiritual structure in
us and in our historical life. Thus there is no reason for him who
makes spirit as spirit his subject matter to demand anything
other than a purely spiritual explanation for it. And so generally:
to look upon the nature of the surrounding world as something
alien to the spirit, and consequently to want to buttress humanistic science with natural science so as to make it supposedly
exact, is absurd.
What is obviously also completely forgotten is that natural
science (like all science generally) is a title for spiritual accomplishments, namely, those of the natural scientists working
together; as such they belong, after all, like all spiritual occur-

The Vienna Lecture /

273

rences, to the region of what is to be explained by humanistic
disciplines. Now is it not absurd and circular to want to explain
the historical event "natural science" in a natural-scientific way,
to explain it by bringing in natural science and its natural laws,
which, as spiritual accomplishment, themselves belong to the
problem?
Blinded by naturalism (no matter how much they attack it
verbally), the humanists have totally failed even to pose the
problem of a universal and pure humanistic science and to
inquire after a theory of the essence of spirit purely as spirit
which would pursue what is unconditionally universal, by way of
elements and laws, in the spiritual sphere, with the purpose of
proceeding from there to scientific explanations in an absolutely
final sense.
The foregoing considerations on the philosophy of the spirit
provide us with the proper attitude for grasping and dealing with
our subject of spiritual Europe as a problem purely within the
humanistic disciplines, and first of all in the manner of spiritual
history. As already indicated in our introductory statements, a
remarkable teleology, inborn, as it were, only in our Europe, will
become visible in this way, one which is quite intimately involved with the outbreak or irruption of philosophy and its
branches, the sciences, in the ancient Greek spirit. We can foresee that this will involve a clarification of the deepest reasons
for the origin of the portentous naturalism, or, what will prove to
be equivalent, of modern dualism in the interpretation of the
world. Finally this will bring to light the actual sense of the crisis
of European humanity.
We pose the question; How is the spiritual shape of Europe
to be characterized? Thus we refer to Europe not as it is understood geographically, as on a map, as if thereby the group of
people who live together in this territory would define European
humanity. In the spiritual sense the English Dominions, the
United States, etc., clearly belong to Europe, whereas the Eskimos or Indians presented as curiosities at fairs, or the Gypsies,
who constantly wander about Europe, do not. Here the title "Europe" clearly refers to the unity of a spiritual life, activity, creation, with all its ends, interests, cares, and endeavors, with its
products of purposeful activity, institutions, organizations. Here
individual men act in many societies of different levels: in families, in tribes, in nations, all being internally, spiritually bound
together, and, as I said, in the unity of a spiritual shape. In this
way a character is given to the persons, associations of persons,

274

/

APPENDIX I

and all their cultural accomplishments which binds them all
together.
'The spiritual shape of Europe"—what is it? [We must] exhibit the philosophical idea which is immanent in the history of
Europe (spiritual Europe) or, what is the same, the teleology
which is immanent in it, which makes itself known, from the
standpoint of universal mankind as such, as the breakthrough
and the developmental beginning of a new human epoch—the
epoch of mankind which now seeks to live, and only can live, in
the free shaping of its existence, its historical life, through ideas
of reason, through infinite tasks.
Every spiritual shape exists essentially within a universal
historical space or in a particular unity of historical time in
terms of coexistence and succession; it has its history. So if we
pursue the historical interconnections, beginning, as is necessary, with ourselves and our nation, the historical continuity
leads us further and further from our nation to neighboring
nations, and thus from nation to nation, from one time to the
next. In antiquity ultimately, we are led from the Romans to the
Greeks, the Egyptians, the Persians, etc.; clearly, there is no end.
We move back into prehistoric time, and we cannot avoid turning to that significant and conceptually rich work of Menghin,
the World History of the Stone Age.4 Through such a procedure
mankind appears as a single life of men and peoples bound
together by only spiritual relations, with a plenitude of human
and cultural types which nevertheless flowingly interpenetrate
one another. It is like a sea, in which men and peoples are the
fleetingly formed, changing, and then disappearing waves, some
with richer, more complicated ripples, others with more primitive.
However, upon more consistent and internally directed observation we notice new, peculiar interrelations and differences.
No matter how hostile they may be toward one another, the
European nations nevertheless have a particular inner kinship of
spirit which runs through them all, transcending national differences. There is something like a sibling relationship which gives
all of us in this sphere the consciousness of homeland. This
comes immediately to the fore as soon as we think ourselves into
the Indian historical sphere [die indische Geschichtlichkeit], for
4. Oswald Menghin, Weltgeschichte der Steinzeit (Vienna: A.
Schroll& Co., 1931).

The Vienna Lecture /

275

example, with its many peoples and cultural products. In this
sphere, too, there exists the unity of a family-like kinship, but
one which is alien to us. Indian people, on the other hand,
experience us as aliens and only one another as confreres. Yet
this essential difference between familiarity and strangeness, a
fundamental category of all historicity which relativizes itself in
many strata, cannot suffice. Historical mankind does not always
divide itself up in the same way in accord with this category. We
feel this precisely in our own Europe. There is something unique
here that is recognized in us by all other human groups, too,
something that, quite apart from all considerations of utility,
becomes a motive for them to Europeanize themselves even in
their unbroken will to spiritual self-preservation; whereas we, if
we understand ourselves properly, would never Indianize ourselves, for example. I mean that we feel (and in spite bf all
obscurity this feeling is probably legitimate) that an entelechy is
inborn in our European civilization which holds sway throughout all the changing shapes of Europe and accords to them the
sense of a development toward an ideal shape of life and being
as an eternal pole. Not that this is a case of one of those
well-known types of purposeful striving which give the organic
beings their character in the physical realm; thus it is not something like a biological development from a seminal form through
stages to maturity with succeeding ages and dying-out. There is,
for essential reasons, no zoology of peoples. They are spiritual
unities; they do not have, and in particular the supranational
unity of Europe does not have, a mature shape that has ever
been reached or could be reached as a shape that is regularly
repeated. Psychic humanity has never been complete and never
will be, and can never repeat itself. The spiritual telos of European humanity, in which the particular telos of particular nations and of individual men is contained, lies in the infinite, is an
infinite idea toward which, in concealment, the whole spiritual
becoming aims, so to speak. As soon as it becomes consciously
recognized in the development as telos, it necessarily also becomes practical as a goal of the will; and thereby a new, higher
stage of development is introduced which is under the guidance
of norms, normative ideas.
Now all this is not intended as a speculative interpretation
of our historical development but as the expression of a vital
presentiment which arises through unprejudiced reflection. But
this presentiment gives us an intentional guide for seeing in

276

/

APPENDIX I

European history highly significant interconnections in the pursuit of which the presentiment becomes a confirmed certainty
for us. Presentiment is the felt signpost for all discoveries.
Let us proceed to the exposition. Spiritual Europe has a
birthplace. By this I mean not a geographical birthplace, in one
land, though this is also true, but rather a spiritual birthplace in
a nation or in individual men and human groups of this nation.
It is the ancient Greek nation in the seventh and sixth centuries
B.C. Here there arises a new sort of attitude of individuals toward their surrounding world. And its consequence is the breakthrough of a completely new sort of spiritual structure, rapidly
growing into a systematically self-enclosed cultural form; the
Greeks called it philosophy. Correctly translated, in the original
sense, that means nothing other than universal science, science
of the universe, of the all-encompassing unity of all that is. Soon
the interest in the All, and thus the question of the all-encompassing becoming and being in becoming, begins to particularize
itself according to the general forms and regions of being, and
thus philosophy, the one science, branches out into many particular sciences.
In the breakthrough of philosophy in this sense, in which all
sciences are thus contained, I see, paradoxical as it may sound,
the primal phenomenon of spiritual Europe. Through more detailed considerations, short as they may be, the apparent paradox will soon disappear.
Philosophy, science, is the title for a special class of cultural
structures. The historical movement that has been taken on by
the style-form of European supranationality aims at an infinitely
distant normative shape, but not one that could simply be read
off the changing succession of shapes by a morphological observation from the outside. The constant directedness toward a norm
inhabits the intentional life of individual persons, and thence
the nations with their particular social units, and finally the
organism of the nations bound together as Europe. Of course it
does not inhabit all persons, it is not fully developed in the
personalities of a higher level that are constituted by intersubjective acts; nevertheless, it inhabits them in the form of a necessary course of development and spreading of the spirit of norms
that are valid for all. But this has at the same time the significance of an advancing transformation of all humanity through
the formations of ideas that become effective in the smallest of
circles. Ideas, meaning-structures that are produced in individual persons and have the miraculous new way of containing

The Vienna Lecture /

277

intentional infinities within themselves, are not like real things
in space; the latter, though they enter into the field of human
experience, do not yet thereby have any significance for human
beings as persons. With the first conception of ideas, man gradually becomes a new man. His spiritual being enters into the
movement of an advancing reconstruction. This movement proceeds from the beginning in a communicative way, awakens a
new style of personal existence in one's sphere of life, a correspondingly new becoming through communicative understanding. Within this movement at first (and then later even beyond
it) there grows a new sort of humanity, one which, living in
finitude, lives toward poles of infinity. Precisely in this way there
arises a new type of communalization and a new form of enduring community whose spiritual life, communalized through the
love of ideas, the production of ideas, and through ideal lifenorms, bears within itself the future-horizon of infinity: that of
an infinity of generations being renewed in the spirit of ideas.
This, then, is accomplished at first within the spiritual space of a
single nation, the Greek nation, as the development of philosophy and of philosophical communities. Together with this there
arises, first in this nation, a common cultural spirit [which,]
drawing all of humanity under its spell, is thus an advancing
transformation in the form of a new [type of] historical development.5
This rough sketch will be filled in and better understood if we
pursue the historical origin of philosophical and scientific humanity and, proceeding from there, clarify the sense of Europe
and its new sort of historicity which distinguishes itself through
[the above-mentioned] type of development from history in general.
Let us illuminate first of all the remarkable, peculiar character of philosophy, unfolding in ever new special sciences. Let us
contrast it with other cultural forms already present in prescientific mankind: artifacts, agriculture, domestic arts, etc. All these
signify classes of cultural products with their own methods for
assuring successful production. Otherwise 6 they have a passing
existence in the surrounding world. Scientific acquisitions, on
the other hand, after their method of assured successful production has been attained, have quite another manner of being,
5. Historizität, used in the same sense as Geschichtlichkeit,
above.
6. I.e., apart from the methods, which persist through time.

278

/

APPENDIX I

quite another temporality. They are not used up; they are imperishable; repeated production creates not something similar, at
best equally useful; it produces in any number of acts of production by one person or any number of persons something identically the same, identical in sense and validity. Persons bound
together in direct mutual understanding cannot help experiencing what has been produced by their fellows in similar acts of
production as being identically the same as what they themselves produce. In a word, what is acquired through scientific
activity is not something real but something ideal.
But what is more, that which is so acquired as valid, as truth,
is serviceable as material for the possible production of idealities
on a higher level, and so on again and again. For the developed
theoretical interest each goal acquires in advance the sense of a
merely relative goal; it becomes the pathway to ever newer, ever
higher goals within an infinity marked off as a universal field of
work, as the "domain" of the science. Science, then, signifies the
idea of an infinity of tasks, of which at any time a finite number
have been disposed of and are retained as persisting validities.
These make up at the same time the fund of premises for an
infinite horizon of tasks as the unity of one all-encompassing
task.
But something important must be added here to fill out our
remarks. In science the ideality of the individual products of
work, the truths, does not merely denote repeatability, such that
sense is identified [with what was produced before] and confirmed: the idea of truth in the sense of science is set apart (and
of this we shall say more later) from the truth of the prescientific life. It wants to be unconditioned truth. This involves an
infinity which gives to each factual confirmation and truth the
character of being merely relative, of being a mere approach in
relation precisely to that infinite horizon in which the truth-in-itself counts, so to speak, as an infinitely distant point. Correlatively, this infinity lies also in what "actually is" in the scientific
sense, as well as, again, in "universal" validity, validity for "everyone," the latter being understood as the subject of all groundings ever to be accomplished; and this "everyone" is no longer
everyone in the finite sense of prescientific life.
After this characterization of science's own peculiar sort of
ideality, with the ideal infinities variously implied in its sense,
we are confronted from a historical perspective with the contrast
which can be expressed as follows: no other cultural shape on
the historical horizon prior to philosophy is in the same sense a

The Vienna Lecture /

279

culture of ideas knowing infinite tasks, knowing such universes
of idealities which as a whole and in all their details, and in their
methods of production, bear infinity within themselves in keeping with their sense.
Extrascientific culture, culture not yet touched by science,
consists in tasks and accomplishments of man in finitude. The
openly endless horizon in which he lives is not disclosed; his
ends, his activity, his trade and traffic, his personal, social,
national, and mythical motivation—all this moves within the
sphere of his finitely surveyable surrounding world. Here there
are no infinite tasks, no ideal acquisitions whose infinity is itself
the field of work, and specifically in such a way that it consciously has, for those who work in it, the manner of being of
such an infinite field of tasks.
But with the appearance of Greek philosophy and its first
formulation, through consistent idealization, of the new sense of
infinity, there is accomplished in this respect a thoroughgoing
transformation which finally draws all finite ideas and with
them all spiritual culture and its [concept of] mankind into its
sphere. Hence there are, for us Europeans, many infinite ideas
(if we may use this expression) which lie outside the philosophical-scientific sphere (infinite tasks, goals, confirmations, truths,
"true values," "genuine goods," "absolutely" valid norms), but
they owe their analogous character of infinity to the transformation of mankind through philosophy and its idealities. Scientific
culture under the guidance of ideas of infinity means, then, a
revolutionization [Revolutionierung] of the whole culture, a revolutionization of the whole manner in which mankind creates
culture. It also means a revolutionization of [its] historicity,
which is now the history of the cutting-off of finite mankind's
development7 as it becomes mankind with infinite tasks.
Here we encounter an obvious objection: philosophy, the
science of the Greeks, is not something peculiar to them which
came into the world for the first time with them. After all, they
themselves tell of the wise Egyptians, Babylonians, etc., and did
in fact learn much from them. Today we have a plethora of
works about Indian philosophy, Chinese philosophy, etc., in
which these are placed on a plane with Greek philosophy and are
taken as merely different historical forms under one and the
same idea of culture. Naturally, common features are not lacking. Nevertheless, one must not allow the merely morphologi7. Geschichte des Entwerdens des endlichen Menschentums.

280

/

APPENDIX I

cally general features to hide the intentional depths so that one
becomes bund to the most essential differences of principle.
Before everything else the very attitudes of the two sorts of
"philosophers," their universal directions of interest, are fundamentally different. In both cases one may notice a world-encompassing interest that leads on both sides—thus also in Indian,
Chinese, and similar "philosophies"—to universal knowledge of
the world, everywhere working itself out as a vocation-like lifeinterest, leading through understandable motivations to vocational communities in which the general results are propagated
or develop from generation to generation. But only in the Greeks
do we have a universal ("cosmological") life-interest in the essentially new form of a purely "theoretical" attitude, and this as
a communal form in which this interest works itself out for
internal reasons, being the corresponding, essentially new
[community] of philosophers, of scientists (mathematicians, astronomers, etc.). These are the men who, not in isolation but
with one another and for one another, i.e., in interpersonally
bound communal work, strive for and bring about theöria and
nothing but theöria, whose growth and constant perfection, with
the broadening of the circle of coworkers and the succession of
the generations of inquirers, is finally taken up into the will with
the sense of an infinite and common task. The theoretical attitude has its historical origin in the Greeks.
Attitude, generally speaking, means a habitually fixed style
of willing life comprising directions of the will or interests that
are prescribed by this style, comprising the ultimate ends, the
cultural accomplishments whose total style is thereby determined. The individual life determined by it runs its course with
this persisting style as its norm. The concrete contents of culture
change 8 according to a relatively closed historical process. Humanity (or a closed community such as a nation, tribe, etc.), in
its historical situation, always lives under some attitude or other.
Its life always has its norm-style and, in reference to this, a
constant historicity or development.
Thus the theoretical attitude, in its newness, refers back to a
previous attitude, one which was earlier the norm; [with reference to this] it is characterized as a reorientation. 9 Universally
considering the historicity of human existence in all its communal forms and in its historical stages, we now see that a
8. Reading es wechseln for es wechselt.
9. I.e., an Umstellung of the original Einstellung.

The Vienna Lecture /

281

certain attitude is essentially and in itself the first, i.e., that a
certain norm-style of human existence (speaking in formal generality) signifies a first [type of] historicity within which particular factual norm-styles of culture-creating existence remain
formally the same in spite of all rising, falling, or stagnating. We
speak in this connection of the natural primordial attitude, of
the attitude of original natural life, of the first originally natural
form of cultures, whether higher or lower, whether developing
uninhibitedly or stagnating. All other attitudes are accordingly
related back to this natural attitude as reorientations [of it]. To
put it more concretely: in one of the historically factual civilizations of the natural attitude, motives must arise out of its concrete internal and external situation at a particular time which
motivate, first, individual men and groups within it to make
[such] a reorientation.
How is the essentially original attitude, the fundamental
historical mode of human existence, to be characterized? We
answer: men obviously always live, for generative reasons, in
communities, in family, tribe, nation, which are themselves in
turn divided, in varying degrees of complexity, into particular
social groups. Now natural life can be characterized as a life
naively, straightforwardly directed at the world, the world being
always in a certain sense consciously present as a universal
horizon, without, however, being thematic as such. What is
thematic is whatever one is directed toward. Waking life is
always a directedness toward this or that, being directed toward
it as an end or as means, as relevant or irrelevant, toward the
interesting or the indifferent, toward the private or public, toward what is daily required or intrusively new. All this lies
within the world-horizon; but special motives are required when
one who is gripped in this world-life reorients himself and somehow comes to make the world itself thematic, to take up a lasting
interest in it.
But here a more detailed exposition is required. The individual men who reorient themselves, as men within their universal
life-community (their nation), continue to have their natural
interests, each his individual interests; through no reorientation
can they simply lose them; this would mean that each would
cease to be what he has become from birth onward. In any
circumstances, then, the reorientation can only be a periodical
one; it can have habitually enduring validity for one's whole
remaining life only in the form of an unconditional resolve of
the will to take up, at periodic but internally unified points of

282

/

APPENDIX I

time, the same attitude and, through this continuity that intentionally bridges the gaps, to sustain its new sort of interests as
valid and as ongoing projects and to realize them through corresponding cultural structures.
We are familiar with something similar to this in the vocations that arise even in naturally original cultural life with their
periodical vocational times that run through the rest of life and
its concrete temporality (the working hours of the official, etc.).
Now there are two possibilities. One is that the interests of
the new attitude are meant to serve the natural interests of life
or, what is in essence the same thing, natural praxis. In this case
the new attitude is itself a practical one. This can have a sense
similar to that of the practical attitude of the politician, who, as
a natural functionary, is directed toward the general welfare,
i.e., who in his praxis would serve the praxis of all (and thus
mediately also his own). This, of course, still belongs to the
sphere of the natural attitude, which is essentially differentiated
according to the different types of community members and is in
fact one thing for those who govern the community and another
for the "citizens"—these terms being understood, of course, in
the broadest possible sense. But in any case the analogy makes it
understandable that the universality of a practical attitude, now
related to the whole world, by no means need imply an interest
and a concern with all the details or all the particular totalities
within the world, which would of course be unthinkable.
But in addition to the higher-level practical attitude (which
we shall soon meet [again] in the religious-mythical attitude) 10
there exists yet another essential possibility for altering the general natural attitude, namely, the theoretical attitude. To be
sure, it is so named only by anticipation because out of it,
according to a necessary development, philosophical theöria
grows and becomes an end in itself or a field of interest. The
theoretical attitude, though it is again a vocational attitude, is
totally unpractical. In the sphere of its own vocational life, then,
it is based on a voluntary epoche of all natural praxis, including
the higher-level praxis that serves the natural sphere.
Yet it must be said immediately that this is still not a matter
of a definitive "severing" of the theoretical from the practical life
or of a division of the theoretician's concrete life into two lifecontinuities that sustain themselves without any interrelation;
io. I have changed the position of this parenthetical phrase. In
the original its position makes no sense.

The Vienna Lecture /

283

socially speaking, this would signify the emergence of two spiritually unrelated cultural spheres. For yet a third form of universal attitude is possible ( as opposed to both the religious-mythical
attitude, which is founded in the natural attitude, and the theoretical attitude), namely, the synthesis of the two interests accomplished in the transition from the theoretical to the practical
attitude, such that the theöria (universal science), arising
within a closed unity and under the epoche of all praxis, is called
(and in theoretical insight itself exhibits its calling) to serve
mankind in a new way, mankind which, in its concrete existence, lives first and always in the natural sphere. This occurs in
the form of a new sort of praxis, that of the universal critique of
all life and all life-goals, all cultural products and systems that
have already arisen out of the life of man; and thus it also
becomes a critique of mankind itself and of the values which
guide it explicitly or implicitly. Further, it is a praxis whose aim
is to elevate mankind through universal scientific reason, according to norms of truth of all forms, to transform it from the
bottom up into a new humanity made capable of an absolute
self-responsibility on the basis of absolute theoretical insights.
Yet prior to this synthesis of theoretical universality and universally interested praxis there is obviously another synthesis of
theory and praxis, that of the use of the limited results of theory,
of limited sciences which allow the universality of the theoretical
interest to fall into specialization. Here, then, the original natural attitude and the theoretical are bound together through a
process of finitization.
For a deeper understanding of Greek-European science (universally speaking: philosophy) in its fundamental difference
from the oriental "philosophies" judged equal to it, it is now
necessary to consider more closely the practical-universal attitude which created these philosophies prior to European science
and to clarify it as the religious-mythical attitude. It is a known
fact, but also a necessity essentially available to insight, that
religious-mythical motifs and a religious-mythical praxis belong
to every civilization living in the natural sphere—i.e., prior to
the outbreak and the effects of Greek philosophy and thus of a
scientific world-view. The mythical-religious attitude exists when
the world as a totality becomes thematic, but in a practical way;
by "world" we mean here, of course, the world which is concretely, traditionally valid for the civilization in question (a
nation for example), i.e., the world as apperceived mythically.
Here not only men and animals and other subhuman and suban-

284

/

APPENDIX I

imal beings but also superhuman beings belong to the mythicalnatural [world].11 The gaze which encompasses it as a totality is
practical—not that [the individual] man, who in natural
straightforward living is immediately interested only in particular realities, could ever come to a state in which everything
together would suddenly become practically relevant for him in
the same way. But insofar as the whole world is seen as thoroughly dominated by mythical powers, so that man's fate depends mediately or immediately upon the way in which they
hold sway, a universal-mythical world-view is possibly incited by
praxis and then itself becomes a practically interested worldview. Those motivated to adopt this religious-mythical attitude
are understandably priests belonging to a priestly caste which
manages the religious-mythical interests and their tradition in a
unified way. In this priesthood the linguistically structured
"knowledge" of the mythical powers (understood as persons, in
the broadest sense) arises and spreads. Of itself, it takes on the
form of mystical speculation which, appearing as naively convincing interpretation, reconstructs the myth itself. The view is
here always directed also, of course, upon the rest of the world
which is governed by the mythical powers and upon the human
and subhuman beings that belong to it (and which also, incidentally, since they are not firmly fixed in their own essential being,
stand open to the influx of mythical elements), upon the ways in
which mythical powers govern the events of this world, the ways
in which they themselves come together in a unified supreme
order of power, the ways in which they exercise various individual functions, as functionaries, intervening [in the world] by
creating, fulfilling tasks, decreeing fate. But all this speculative
knowledge is meant to serve man in his human purposes so that
he may order his worldly life in the happiest possible way and
shield it from disease, from every sort of evil fate, from disaster
and death. It is understandable that this mythical-practical
world-view and world-knowledge can give rise to much knowledge of the factual world, the world as known through scientific
experience, that can later be used scientifically. But within their
own framework of meaning this world-view and world-knowledge are and remain mythical and practical, and it is a mistake,
a falsification of their sense, for those raised in the scientific
ways of thinking created in Greece and developed in the modem
period to speak of Indian and Chinese philosophy and science
11. Substituting Welt for Einstellung.

The Vienna Lecture /

285

(astronomy, mathematics), i.e., to interpret India, Babylonia,
China, in a European way.
Sharply distinguished from this universal but mythicalpractical attitude is the "theoretical" attitude, which is not practical in any sense used so far, the attitude of Oavpafav, to which
the great figures of the first culminating period of Greek philosophy, Plato and Aristotle, traced the origin of philosophy. Man
becomes gripped by the passion of a world-view and worldknowledge that turns away from all practical interests and,
within the closed sphere of its cognitive activity, in the times devoted to it, strives for and achieves nothing but pure theöria. In
other words, man becomes a nonparticipating spectator, surveyor
of the world; he becomes a philosopher; or rather, from this point
on his life becomes receptive to motivations which are possible
only in this attitude, motivations for new sorts of goals for
thought and methods through which, finally, philosophy comes
to be and he becomes a philosopher.
Naturally the outbreak of the theoretical attitude, like everything that develops historically, has its factual motivation in the
concrete framework of historical occurrence. In this respect one
must clarify, then, how Oavnafav could arise and become habitual,
at first in individuals, out of the manner and the life-horizon of
Greek humanity in the seventh century, with its contact with the
great and already highly cultivated nations of its surrounding
world. We shall not go into this in detail; what is more important
for us is to understand the path of motivation, the path of the
bestowal and creation of meaning which leads from the mere
reorientation, from mere 6avix6.fav, to theoria—a historical fact
that must nevertheless have something essential about it. We
must clarify the transformation from original theoria, the fully
disinterested seeing of the world (following from the epoche of
all practical interests, world-knowledge through pure, universal
seeing) to the theoria of genuine science, the two being mediated
through the contrast of 56£a and kmcrrliw Incipient theoretical
interest, as Savfiafav, is obviously a variant of curiosity, which
has its original place in natural life as an intrusion into the course
of "serious living/' either as a result of originally developed lifeinterests or as a playful looking-about when one's quite immediate
vital needs are satisfied or when working hours are over. Curiosity (here understood not as a habitual "vice") is also a variant,
an interest which has separated itself off from life-interests, has
let them fall.
In this attitude, man views first of all the multiplicity of

286

/

APPENDIX I

nations, his own and others, each with its own surrounding
world which is valid for it, is taken for granted, with its traditions, its gods, its demons, its mythical powers, simply as the
actual world. Through this astonishing contrast there appears
the distinction between world-representation and actual world,
and the new question of truth arises: not tradition-bound, everyday truth, but an identical truth which is valid for all who are no
longer blinded by traditions, a truth-in-itself. Part of the theoretical attitude of the philosopher, then, is his constant and prior
resolve to dedicate his future life always, and in the sense of a
universal life, to the task of theöria, to build theoretical knowledge upon theoretical knowledge in infinitum.
Through isolated personalities like Thales, etc., there arises
thus a new humanity: men who [live] the philosophical life, who
create philosophy in the manner of a vocation as a new sort of
cultural configuration. Understandably a correspondingly new
sort of communalization arises. These ideal structures of theöria
are concurrently lived through and taken over without any difficulty by others who reproduce the process of understanding and
production. Without any difficulty they lead to cooperative work,
mutual help through mutual critique. Even the outsiders, the
nonphilosophers, become aware of this peculiar sort of activity.
Through sympathetic understanding they either become philosophers themselves, or, if they are otherwise vocationally too occupied, they learn from philosophers. Thus philosophy spreads in a
twofold manner, as the broadening vocational community of
philosophers and as a concurrently broadening community
movement of education [Bildung], But this is also the source of
the subsequently so fateful internal division of the folk-unity
into the educated and the uneducated. Clearly, on the other
hand, this tendency to spread is not limited to the home nation.
Unlike all other cultural works, philosophy is not a movement of
interest which is bound to the soil of the national tradition.
Aliens, too, learn to understand it and generally take part in the
immense cultural transformation which radiates out from philosophy. But precisely this needs to be further characterized.
Philosophy, spreading in the form of inquiry and education,
has a twofold spiritual effect. On the one hand, what is most
essential to the theoretical attitude of philosophical man is the
peculiar universality of his critical stance, his resolve not to
accept unquestioningly any pregiven opinion or tradition so that
he can inquire, in respect to the whole traditionally pregiven
universe, after what is true in itself, an ideality. But this is not

The Vienna Lecture /

287

only a new cognitive stance. Because of the requirement to
subject all empirical matters to ideal norms, i.e., those of unconditioned truth, there soon results a far-reaching transformation
of the whole praxis of human existence, i.e., the whole of cultural life: henceforth it must receive its norms not from the
naive experience and tradition of everyday life but from objective truth. Thus ideal truth becomes an absolute value which,
through the movement of education and its constant effects in
the training of children, brings with it a universally transformed
praxis. If we reflect a little more closely on the manner of this
transformation, we immediately understand the unavoidable result: if the general idea of truth-in-itself becomes the universal
norm of all the relative truths that arise in human life, the
actual and supposed situational truths, then this will also affect
all traditional norms, those of right, of beauty, of usefulness,
dominant personal values, values connected with personal characteristics, etc.
There arises, then, a particular humanity and a particular
life-vocation correlative to the accomplishment of a new culture.
Philosophical knowledge of the world creates not only those
particular sorts of results but also a human posture which immediately intervenes in the whole remainder of practical life with
all its demands and ends, the ends of the historical tradition in
which one is brought up and which receive their validity from
this source. A new and intimate community—we could call it a
community of purely ideal interests—develops among men, men
who live for philosophy, bound together in their devotion to
ideas, which not only are useful to all but belong to all identically. Necessarily there develops a communal activity of a particular sort, that of working with one another and for one another,
offering one another helpful criticism, through which there
arises a pure and unconditioned truth-validity as common property. In addition, this interest has a natural tendency to propagate itself through the sympathetic understanding [by others] of
what is sought and accomplished in it; there is a tendency, then,
for more and more still nonphilosophical persons to be drawn
into the community of philosophers. This occurs first within the
home nation. The spread cannot occur exclusively as one of
vocational scientific inquiry; it occurs [rather] 12 as a movement
of education, [reaching] 12 far beyond the vocational sphere.
Now if the movement of education extends over larger and
12. Biemel's interpolations.

288

/

APPENDIX I

larger groups of people, and naturally over the higher or dominant groups, those less exhausted by the cares of life, what are
the results? Clearly this leads not simply to a homogeneous
transformation of the generally satisfactory life of the national
state but probably to great internal schisms in which this life
and the whole national culture suffer an upheaval. Those conservatives who are satisfied with the tradition and the philosophical men will fight each other, and the struggle will surely occur
in the sphere of political power. The persecution begins at the
very beginnings of philosophy. Men who live for these ideas
become objects of contempt. And yet, ideas are stronger than
any empirical powers.
Here we must further take into account the fact that philosophy, which has grown up out of the universal critical attitude
toward anything and everything pregiven in the tradition, is not
inhibited in its spread by any national boundaries. Only the
capacity for a universal critical attitude, which, to be sure, presupposes a certain level of prescientific culture, must be present.
So the upheaval of national culture can proliferate, first of all
when the advancing universal science becomes the common
property of nations that were formerly alien to one another and
the unity of a scientific community and the community of the
educated spreads throughout the multiplicity of nations.
One more important thing must be mentioned concerning the
comportment of philosophy toward the traditions. For there are
two possibilities to be considered here. What is traditionally
valid is either completely discarded, or its content is taken over
philosophically and thereby formed anew in the spirit of philosophical ideality. An outstanding case of this is religion. From
this I would exclude the "polytheistic religions.0 Gods in the
plural, mythical powers of every sort, are objects of the surrounding world having the same reality as animals and men. In
the concept of God the singular is essential. Proper to it, from
the human standpoint, is the fact that God's ontic validity and
his value-validity are experienced as an absolute internal bond.
The next step here is the coalescence of this absoluteness with
that of philosophical ideality. In the general process of idealization, which proceeds from philosophy, God is logicized, so to
speak; indeed he becomes the bearer of the absolute logos. I
would cite as something logical, incidentally, the fact that religion appeals theologically to the evidence of belief as a peculiar
manner, and the deepest manner, of grounding true being. National gods, on the other hand, are [simply] there without ques-

The Vienna Lecture /

289

tion, as real facts in the surrounding world. Prior to philosophy
no one poses questions critical of knowledge, questions of evidence.
In essence, though somewhat schematically, we have now
sketched the historical motivation which makes understandable
how, beginning with a few Greek eccentrics, a transformation of
human existence and its whole cultural life could be initiated, at
first in their own and then in neighboring nations. But we can
also see how, starting from this, a supranationality of a completely new sort could arise. I am referring, of course, to the
spiritual shape of Europe. Now it is no longer a conglomeration
of different nations influencing one another only through commerce and power struggles. Rather, a new spirit, stemming from
philosophy and its particular sciences, a spirit of free critique
and norm-giving aimed at infinite tasks, dominates humanity
through and through, creating new, infinite ideals. They are
such for the individual men in their nations, such for the nations
themselves. But ultimately they are also infinite ideals for the
spreading synthesis of nations in which each nation, precisely by
pursuing its own ideal task in the spirit of infinity, gives its best
to the nations united with it. Through this giving and receiving
the supranational whole, with all its social levels, ascends, filled
with the exuberant spirit of an infinite task, a task which is
divided into various infinite spheres but is still one. Within this
ideally directed total society philosophy retains its guiding function and its particular infinite task: the function of free and
universal theoretical reflection, which encompasses all ideals
and the total ideal, i.e., the universe of all norms. Within European civilization, philosophy has constantly to exercise its function as one which is archontic for the civilization as a whole.

II
BUT NOW WE MUST LISTEN to those certainly very
pressing misunderstandings and objections which, it seems to
me, derive their suggestive force from fashionable prejudices
and their phraseologies.
Is it not the case that what we have presented here is something rather inappropriate to our time, an attempt to rescue the
honor of rationalism, of "enlightenment," of an intellectualism
which loses itself in theories alienated from the world, with its
necessary evil consequences of a superficial lust for erudition
and an intellectualistic snobbism? Does this not mean that we

2gO

/

APPENDIX I

are being led again into the fateful error of believing that science
makes man wise, that it is destined to create a genuine and
contented humanity that is master of its fate? Who would still
take such notions seriously today?
This objection certainly has its relative merit in relation to
the state of the European development from the seventeenth to
the end of the nineteenth centuries. But it does not apply to the
proper sense of my presentation. I would like to think that I, the
supposed reactionary, am far more radical and far more revolutionary than those who in their words proclaim themselves so
radical today.
I too am certain that the European crisis has its roots in a
misguided rationalism. But we must not take this to mean that
rationality as such is evil or that it is of only subordinate significance for mankind's existence as a whole. Rationality, in that
high and genuine sense of which alone we are speaking, the
primordial Greek sense which in the classical period of Greek
philosophy had become an ideal, still requires, to be sure, much
clarification through self-reflection; but it is called in its mature
form to guide [our] development. On the other hand we readily
admit (and German Idealism preceded us long ago in this insight) that the stage of development of ratio represented by the
rationalism of the Age of Enlightenment was a mistake, though
certainly an understandable one.
Reason is a broad title. According to the old familiar definition, man is the rational animal, and in this broad sense even the
Papuan is a man and not a beast. He has his ends and he acts
reflectively, considering the practical possibilities. The works
and methods that grow [out of this] go to make up a tradition,
being understandable again [by others] in virtue of their rationality. But just as man and even the Papuan represent a new
stage of animal nature, i.e., as opposed to the beast, so philosophical reason represents a new stage of human nature and its
reason. But the stage of human existence [under] 13 ideal norms
for infinite tasks, the stage of existence sub specie aeterni, is
possible only through absolute universality, precisely the universality contained from the start in the idea of philosophy. True—
universal philosophy, together with all the special sciences,
makes up only a partial manifestation of European culture.
Inherent in the sense of my whole presentation, however, is that
this part is the functioning brain, so to speak, on whose normal
13. Reading unter for und der.

The Vienna Lecture /

291

function the genuine, healthy European spiritual life depends.
The humanity of higher human nature or reason requires, then,
a genuine philosophy.
But now this is the danger point: "philosophy"; here we must
certainly distinguish between philosophy as a historical fact at a
given time and philosophy as idea, as the idea of an infinite task.
Any philosophy that exists at a given historical time is a more or
less successful attempt to realize the guiding idea of the infinity
and at the same time even the totality of truths. Practical ideals
—namely, ideals discerned as eternal poles of which one cannot
lose sight throughout one's whole life without compunction,
without being untrue to oneself and thus becoming unhappy—
are by no means always clearly and determinately discerned;
they are anticipated in ambiguous generality. Determinateness
results only when one concretely sets to work and succeeds, at
least in a relative way. There is the constant threat of succumbing to one-sidedness and to premature satisfaction, which take
their revenge in subsequent contradictions. Hence the contrast
between the great [common] claims of the philosophical systems
[and the fact that] they are nevertheless incompatible with one
another. Also, there is the necessity—and at the same time the
danger—of specialization.
In this way, a one-sided rationality can certainly become an
evil. One can also say: it belongs to the essence of reason that
the philosophers at first understand and labor at their task in an
absolutely necessary one-sided way. Actually there is nothing
perverse in this; it is not an error; rather, as we said, the straight
and necessary path they must take allows them to see only one
side of the task, at first without noticing that the whole infinite
task of theoretically knowing the totality of what is has other
sides as well. If inadequacy announces itself through obscurities
and contradictions, this motivates the beginning of a universal
reflection. Thus the philosopher must always devote himself to
mastering the true and full sense of philosophy, the totality of its
horizons of infinity. No line of knowledge, no single truth may
be absolutized and isolated. Only through this highest form of
self-consciousness, which itself becomes one of the branches of
the infinite task, can philosophy fulfill its function of putting
itself, and thereby a genuine humanity, on the road [to realization]. [The awareness] that this is the case itself belongs to the
domain of philosophical knowledge at the level of highest self-reflection. Only through this constant reflexivity is a philosophy
universal knowledge.

292

/

APPENDIX I

I said that the way of philosophy passes through naivete.
This is the place for the criticism offered by the irrationalism
that is so highly esteemed [today], or rather the place to unmask
the naivete of that rationalism which is taken for philosophical
rationality as such, which is admittedly characteristic of the
philosophy of the whole modern period since the Renaissance
and which takes itself to be the true, i.e., universal, rationalism.
In this naivete, then, unavoidable as a beginning stage, are
caught all the sciences whose beginnings were already developed
in antiquity. To put it more precisely, the most general title for
this naivete is objectivism, taking the form of the various types
of naturalism, of the naturalization of the spirit. Old and new
philosophies were and remain naively objectivist. In fairness we
must add, though, that the German Idealism proceeding from
Kant was passionately concerned with overcoming this naivety
which had already become very troublesome, though it was unable to attain the higher stage of reflexivity which is decisive for
the new form of philosophy and of European humanity.
I can make what has been said understandable only in rough
outlines. Natural man (let us consider him as man in the prephilosophical period) is directed toward the world in all his concerns and activities. The field of his life and his work is the
surrounding world spread out spatiotemporally around him, of
which he counts himself a part. This remains the case [even] in
the theoretical attitude, which at first can be nothing other than
that of the nonpaxticipating spectator of the world, whereby the
world loses its mythical character. Philosophy sees in the world
the universe of what is, and the world becomes the objective
world as opposed to representations of the world, those which
vary according to nation or individual subject; thus truth becomes objective truth. In this way philosophy begins as cosmology; it is first—as it were, obviously—directed in its theoretical
interest toward corporeal nature, since, after all, everything
given in space-time has in any case, at least at its basis, the
existential formula of corporeity. Men and animals are not
merely bodies, but in the orientation toward the surrounding
world they appear as something with bodily existence and thus
as realities ordered within universal space-time. In this sense all
psychic occurrences, those of the particular ego, such as experiencing, thinking, willing, have a certain objectivity. The life of
the community, that of families, peoples, etc., then seems to be
resolved into that of particular individuals as psychophysical
objects; the spiritual interrelation of psychophysical causality

The Vienna Lecture /

293

lacks a purely spiritual continuity; physical nature is everywhere
involved.
The historical course of development is prefigured in a determined way by this attitude toward the surrounding world. Even
the most fleeting glance at the corporeity to be found in the
surrounding world shows that nature is a homogeneous, totally
interrelated whole, a world by itself, so to speak, encompassed by
homogeneous space-time, divided into particular things, all
being alike as res extensae and determining one another causally. Quite rapidly, a first and great step of discovery is taken,
namely, the overcoming of the finitude of nature already conceived as an objective in-itself, a finitude in spite of its open
endlessness. Infinity is discovered, first in the form of the idealization of magnitudes, of measures, of numbers, figures, straight
lines, poles, surfaces, etc. Nature, space, time, become extendable idealiter to infinity and divisible idealiter to infinity. From the
art of surveying comes geometry, from the art of numbers arithmetic, from everyday mechanics mathematical mechanics, etc.
Now without its being advanced explicitly as a hypothesis, intuitively given nature and world are transformed into a mathematical world, the world of the mathematical natural sciences.
Antiquity led the way: in its mathematics was accomplished the
first discovery of both infinite ideals and infinite tasks. This becomes for all later times the guiding star of the sciences.
What effect did the intoxicating success of this discovery of
physical infinity have on the scientific mastery of the spiritual
sphere? In the attitude directed toward the surrounding world,
the constantly objectivistic attitude, everything spiritual appeared as if it were [simply] spread over [the surface of] physical
bodies.14 Thus the application [to it] of the natural-scientific way
of thinking seemed the obvious thing to do. Hence we find at the
very beginnings [of philosophy] the materialism and determinism of Democritus. But the greatest spirits have recoiled from
this and also from any sort of psychophysics in the more modern
style. Since Socrates, man has become a theme in his specifically
human qualities, as a person, man within the spiritual life of the
community. Man still has a place within the order of the objective world; but for Plato and Aristotle this world becomes a great
theme [in its own right]. Here a remarkable split makes itself
felt; the human belongs to the sphere of objective facts, but as
persons, as egos, men have goals, ends, norms given by the
14. wie der physischen Körperlichkeit auferlegt

2Q4

/

APPENDIX I

tradition, norms of truth—eternal norms. Though the development weakened in antiquity, it was nevertheless not lost. Let us
make the leap to the so-called modern period. With a burning
enthusiasm the infinite task of a mathematical knowledge of
nature and of knowledge of the world in general is taken up. The
immense successes in the knowledge of nature are now supposed
to be shared by the knowledge of the spirit. Reason has demonstrated its force in relation to nature. "Just as the sun is the one
all-illuminating and warming sun, so reason is also the one
reason" (Descartes). The method of natural science must also
disclose the secrets of the spirit. The spirit is real, objectively in
the world, and is founded as such on the living body. Thus the
world-view immediately and dominantly assumes the form of a
dualistic, and specifically a psychophysical, world-view. One causality, simply split into two sectors, encompasses the one world;
the sense of rational explanation is everywhere the same, yet in
such a way that all explanation of the spirit, if it is to be the sole
and thus universal philosophical explanation, leads back to the
physical. There can be no pure and self-enclosed explanatory
inquiry into the spirit, a psychology or theory of spirit turned
inward, extending from the ego, the psychic sphere of self-experience, to the alien psyche; the external path, the path of physics
and chemistry, must be taken. All the beloved expressions about
the community spirit, the will of the people, the ideal and political goals of nations, etc., are so much romanticism and mythology, arising out of a transposition by analogy of concepts that
have a genuine meaning only in the sphere of individual persons. Spiritual being is fragmentary. To the question concerning
the source of all our difficulties we must now reply: this objectivism, or this psychophysical world-view, in spite of its apparent
obviousness, is naively one-sided and has constantly failed to be
understood as such. The reality of the spirit as a supposed real
annex to bodies, its supposed spatiotemporal being within nature, is an absurdity.
What we must do, however, in connection with our problem
of the crisis, is to show how it happens that the "modern age,"
which has been so proud for centuries of its theoretical and
practical successes, finally becomes involved in a growing dissatisfaction, indeed must view its situation as one of distress. In all
the sciences distress is felt, ultimately as a distress concerning
method. But our European distress, though it is not understood,
concerns very many people.
These are, throughout, problems which arise from the na-

The Vienna Lecture /

295

ivete through which objectivist science takes what it calls the
objective world for the universe of all that is, without noticing
that no objective science can do justice to the [very] subjectivity
which accompKshes science. Someone who is raised on natural
science takes it for granted that everything merely subjective
must be excluded and that the natural-scientific method, exhibiting itself in subjective manners of representation, determines
objectively. Thus he seeks what is objectively true even for the
psychic. Here it is immediately assumed that the subjective that
has been excluded by the physicist is to be investigated as the
psychic in psychology, and then naturally in psychophysical
psychology. But the researcher of nature does not make clear to
himself that the constant fundament of his—after all subjective
—work of thought is the surrounding life-world; it is always
presupposed as the ground, as the field of work upon which
alone his questions, his methods of thought, make sense. Where
is that huge piece of method subjected to critique and clarification [—that method] that leads from the intuitively given surrounding world to the idealization of mathematics and to the
interpretation of these idealizations as objective being? Einstein's revolutionary innovations concern the formulae through
which the idealized and naively objectified physis is dealt with.
But how formulae in general, how mathematical objectification
in general, receive meaning on the foundation of life and the
intuitively given surrounding world—of this we learn nothing;
and thus Einstein does not reform the space and time in which
our vital life runs its course.
Mathematical natural science is a wonderful technique for
making inductions with an efficiency, a degree of probability, a
precision, and a computability that were simply unimaginable in
earlier times. As an accomplishment it is a triumph of the
human spirit. As for the rationality of its methods and theories,
however, it is a thoroughly relative one. It even presupposes a
fundamental approach that is itself totally lacking in rationality.
Since the intuitively given surrounding world, this merely
subjective realm, is forgotten in scientific investigation, the
working subject is himself forgotten; the scientist does not become a subject of investigation. (Accordingly, from this standpoint, the rationality of the exact sciences is of a piece with the
rationality of the Egyptian pyramids.)
To be sure, since Kant we have an epistemology in its own
right, and on the other hand there is psychology, which, with its
claims to natural-scientific exactness, seeks to be the universal

296

/

APPENDIX I

fundamental science of the spirit. But our hope for true rationality, i.e., for true insight, is disappointed here as elsewhere. The
psychologists do not notice at all that even they do not approach,
in their subject matter, themselves as accomplishing scientists
and their surrounding life-world. They do not notice that they
necessarily presuppose themselves in advance as communalized
men in their surrounding world and their historical time, even
by the very fact that they seek to attain truth-in-itself, as truth
valid for anyone at all. Because of its objectivism psychology is
completely unable to obtain as its subject matter the soul in its
own essential sense, which is, after all, the ego that acts and
suffers. It may objectify and deal inductively with valuative
experience, willing experience, as connected with bodily life. But
can it do this with ends, values, norms? Can it take reason as its
subject matter, perhaps as a "disposition"? What is completely
overlooked is the fact that objectivism, as the genuine accomplishment of an investigator oriented toward true norms, presupposes precisely those norms and that objectivism thus is not
meant to be based on facts, since facts are thereby already
meant as truths rather than mere opinion. Of course, some sense
the difficulties involved here; and so the battle over psychologism
breaks out. But the repudiation of a psychological grounding of
norms, especially of norms for truth-in-itself, accomplishes nothing. The need for a reform of the whole of modern psychology is
felt more and more on all sides, but it is not yet understood that
it has failed because of its objectivism, that it does not at all
attain the proper essence of the spirit, that its isolation of the
objectively conceived soul and its psychophysical reinterpretation of being-in-community are a mistake. To be sure, it has not
been without results, and it has revealed many, even practically
valuable, empirical rules. But it is not a true psychology, any
more than statistics about morals, with their no less valuable
knowledge, constitute a moral science.
But everywhere, in our time, the burning need for an understanding of the spirit announces itself; and lack of clarity about
the methodical and material relation between the natural
sciences and the humanistic disciplines has become almost unbearable. Dilthey, one of the greatest humanists, devoted the
energies of his whole life to a clarification of the relation between
nature and spirit, to a clarification of the accomplishment of
psychophysical psychology, which, as he thought, needed to be
complemented by a new descriptive, classifying psychology. Efforts by Windelband and Rickert have unfortunately not pro-

The Vienna Lecture / 297
duced the desired insights. like all the others, they remain
caught up in objectivism; and this is especially true of the new
reformers in psychology, who think that the fault lies entirely in
the long-dominant prejudice of atomism and that a new era has
dawned with holistic psychology.15 But the situation can never
improve so long as the objectivism arising out of a natural
attitude toward the surrounding world is not seen through in its
naivete and so long as the recognition has not emerged that the
dualistic view of the world, in which nature and spirit are to
count as realities in a similar sense, though one is built on the
other causally, is a mistake. In all seriousness, I think that an
objective science of the spirit, an objective theory of the soul—
objective in the sense that it attributes to souls, to personal
communities, inexistence in the forms of space-time—has never
existed and will never exist.
The spirit, and indeed only the spirit, exists in itself and for
itself, is self-sufficient; and in its self-sufficiency, and only in this
way, it can be treated truly rationally, truly and from the ground
up scientifically. As for nature, however, in its natural-scientific
truth, it is only apparently self-sufficient and can only apparently be brought by itself to rational knowledge in the natural
sciences. For true nature in the sense of natural science is a
product of the spirit that investigates nature and thus presupposes the science of the spirit. The spirit is by its essence capable
of practicing self-knowledge, and as scientific spirit it is capable
of practicing scientific self-knowledge, and this in an iterative
way. Only in the knowledge belonging purely to the science of
the spirit is the scientist not open to the objection that his own
accomplishment conceals itself. Accordingly, it is a mistake for
the humanistic disciplines to struggle with the natural sciences
for equal rights. As soon as they concede to the latter their
objectivity as self-sufficiency, they themselves fall prey to objectivism. But as they are now developed in their manifold disciplines, they lack the ultimate, true rationality made possible by
the spiritual world-view. Precisely this lack of a genuine rationality on all sides is the source of man's now unbearable lack of
clarity about his own existence and his infinite tasks. These are
inseparably united in one task: Only when the spirit returns
from its naive external orientation to itself, and remains with
itself and purely with itself, can it be sufficient unto itself,
But how did a beginning of such self-reflection occur? A
15. Ganzheitspsychologie, i.e., Gestalt psychology.

298

/

APPENDIX I

beginning was not possible so long as sensationalism, or better,
data-psychologism, the psychology of the tabula rasa, commanded the field. Only when Brentano made the demand for
psychology as a science of intentional experiences was an
impulse given that could lead further, although Brentano himself had not yet overcome objectivism and psychological naturalism. The development of an actual method for grasping the
fundamental essence of the spirit in its intentionalities, and for
constructing from there an analysis of the spirit that is consistent in infvnitum, led to transcendental phenomenology. It overcomes naturalistic objectivism and every sort of objectivism in
the only possible way, namely, through the fact that he who
philosophizes proceeds from his own ego, and this purely as the
performer of all his validities, of which he becomes the purely
theoretical spectator. In this attitude it is possible to construct
an absolutely self-sufficient science of the spirit in the form of
consistently coming to terms with oneself and with the world as
spiritual accomplishment. Here the spirit is not in or alongside
nature; rather, nature is itself drawn into the spiritual sphere.
Also, the ego is then no longer an isolated thing alongside other
such things in a pregiven world; in general, the serious mutual
exteriority of ego-persons, their being alongside one another,
ceases in favor of an inward being-for-one-another and mutual
interpenetr ation.
But of all this we cannot speak here; no lecture could exhaust it. I hope to have shown, however, that the old rationalism,
which was an absurd naturalism incapable of grasping at all the
spiritual problems that immediately concern us, is not being
revived here. The ratio presently under discussion is nothing
other than the spirit's truly universal and truly radical coming to
terms with itself in the form of universal, responsible science, in
which a completely new mode of scientific discipline is set in
motion where all conceivable questions—questions of being and
questions of norm, questions of what is called "existence"
[Existenz]—find their place. It is my conviction that intentional
phenomenology has made of the spirit qua spirit for the first
time a field of systematic experience and science and has thus
brought about the total reorientation of the task of knowledge.
The universality of the absolute spirit surrounds everything that
exists with an absolute historicity, to which nature is subordinated as a spiritual structure. Intentional phenomenology, and
specifically transcendental phenomenology, was first to see the
light through its point of departure and its methods. Only

The Vienna Lecture /

299

through it do we understand, and from the most profound reasons, what naturalistic objectivism is and understand in particular that psychology, because of its naturalism, had to miss entirely
the accomplishment, the radical and genuine problem, of the
life of the spirit.

Ill
LET US CONDENSE the fundamental notions presented
here. The "crisis of European existence," talked about so much
today and documented in innumerable symptoms of the breakdown of life, is not an obscure fate, an impenetrable destiny;
rather, it becomes understandable and transparent against the
background of the teleology of European history that can be
discovered philosophically. The condition for this understanding, however, is that the phenomenon "Europe" be grasped in its
central, essential nucleus. In order to be able to comprehend the
disarray of the present "crisis," we had to work out the concept
of Europe as the historical teleology of the infinite goals of
reason; we had to show how the European "world" was born out
of ideas of reason, i.e., out of the spirit of philosophy. The
"crisis" could then become distinguishable as the apparent failure of rationalism. The reason for the failure of a rational
culture, however, as we said, lies not in the essence of rationalism itself but solely in its being rendered superficial, in its
entanglement in "naturalism" and "objectivism."
There are only two escapes from the crisis of European
existence: the downfall of Europe in its estrangement from its
own rational sense of life, its fall into hostility toward the spirit
and into barbarity; or the rebirth of Europe from the spirit of
philosophy through a heroism of reason that overcomes naturalism once and for all. Europe's greatest danger is weariness. If we
struggle against this greatest of all dangers as "good Europeans"
with the sort of courage that does not fear even an infinite
struggle, then out of the destructive blaze of lack of faith, the
smoldering fire of despair over the West's mission for humanity,
the ashes of great weariness, will rise up the phoenix of a new
life-inwardness and spiritualization as the pledge of a great and
distant future for man: for the spirit alone is immortal.

B.
SUPPLEMENTARY

TEXTS

Appendix II:
Idealization and the Science of Reality—
The Mathematization of Nature1
SCIENCE HAS ITS ORIGIN in Greek philosophy with the
discovery of the idea and of the exact science which determines
by means of ideas. It leads to the development of pure mathematics as pure science of ideas, science of possible objects in
general as objects determined by ideas. Science is confronted
with the problem of that which is, as the real which exists in
itself, existing in itself over against the multiplicity of subjective
manners of givenness belonging to the particular knowing subject; [it is confronted with] the question concerning the flux of
being in becoming and concerning the conditions of the possibility of the identity of being in becoming, of the identical determinability of an existing real [entity] as the determinability of
intuitively given continuity through the mathematization of continua. But this must be independent of accidental subjectivity,
and this means, first of all, independent of the accidental character of the particular sensibility [which apprehends it].
Confronted with the task of resolving these questions, the

i. Biemel's note: "Before 1928." This text is found in the German
edition as the first "Abhandlung," pp. 279-93 (see Translator's Introduction, pp. xx f.). Its date marks it as an early attempt to work out
some of the ideas found in the the Crisis. Also, it represents a link between that work and themes in Formal und transzendentale Logik.
[301]

302

/

APPENDIX II

process leads to the development of the logic of being as the logic
of reality, and first of all of natural reality, and to the development of apophantic logic as the formal logic of predicative determination.
As for the latter, it deals with entities in general as identical
substrates of identical determinations; furthermore, it has to do
with the multiplicity of forms of judgment, with the forms of
substrates as determined, with the forms of determining predicates, and with the possibilities of hypothetical, disjunctive manners of determination, the modal variations, etc., which belong to
determination. Something identical is the correlate of [the act of]
identifying; to determine is to judge, and something determined
is as such the correlate of [the act of] judging.
To this belong also the norms for possible judgments which
are capable of being truths, as norms for possible ways of inferential derivation, of the deduction of truths out of truths (the
mediate production of truths), or the attainment of hypothetical
truths from hypothetical stipulations (stipulated truths, hypotheses); further, there is the consideration of the forms of
thought, the forms of possible productions in thought, of the
possible forms of the ways of production, or of the thoughts
derived from deductive productions, and the critique of thoughts
according to the possible forms of true thoughts; also, there is
the problem of the identity of the "object," the "meant" [das
Vermeinte], being carried over into self-evidence. And through
self-evidence, the necessities belonging to the possible maintenance of identity become generally known; while that which is
identical undergoes only those variations which maintain its
identity. Here one is led to an identity of the forms of thought
which run through all determinations and which do not break
the identity of the determined objects.
Against the first seeds of the development of science there
arose the skeptical critique of science and of all practical norms
which lay claim to objective validity. The Socratic return to
self-evidence represents a reaction; and specifically this is making clear to oneself, by means of example, the fields of pure
possibilities, the free variation which upholds the identity of
meaning, identity of the object as substrate of determination,
and makes it possible to discern this identity. Over against these
alterations are others which break the identity. The variations
are accomplished in the transition to the pure "in general,'' to the
general forms of possibilities and the essential possibilities and
essential impossibilities belonging to them. There arise norm-

Idealization and the Science of Reality /

303

concepts of the good, the beautiful, the truly good statesman, the
genuine judge, true honor, true courage and justice, and the
fundamental concepts of criticism itself: just, unjust, true,
false, etc.
Thus skepticism forces the critique of the skeptical critique,
and since this critique concerns the possibility of truth and of
knowable being in general, it forces a radical consideration of
the conditions of possible truth and possible being; and it forces
the recognition that not vague thinking and talking but only
radical thinking, aimed at the ultimate showing of possible
being, carried out in self-evidence, [indeed] only self-evidence
itself, can help in assuring ourselves of truth and being. I must
not talk vaguely on, must not follow vague traditional concepts
or the sediments of passively accumulated experiential residues,
analogies, etc.; rather, I must create my concepts anew in autonomous thinking through pure intuition; then I shall attain truths
which are destined to be norms. Every truth derived from pure
self-evidence is a genuine truth and is a norm. On the other
hand, it does not need to contain any normative concepts within
itself, i.e., none of the variational forms of "genuine," "correct";
these themselves, when grasped conceptually, result in concepts
and predications about genuineness, truth; such predications
must themselves be derived from self-evidence—they must [be
shown to] be true, and they can be false.2
Science is not naive knowledge in the theoretical interest;
rather, to its essence there belongs from now on a certain critique—a critique based on principle, a critique which justifies
every step of the knowing activity through "principles/' which at
every step involves the consciousness that any step of such a
form is necessarily a correct one, that in this way the path of
cognitive grounding, of the progress of that which grounds and
that which is grounded upon it, is a correct path aimed at the
goal, so that [the resulting] knowledge is a genuine knowledge
and that the being known is not merely supposed [vermeintes]
but known in the pregnant sense, true being itself, exhibiting its
legitimacy in the knowledge itself. Now this is true first of all of
present [aktuelle] knowledge in its progress through thoroughgoing self-evidence. But science makes use of the cognitive results
of earlier knowledge. The norm-consciousness involved in such
2. This harks back to the Logische Untersuchungen (Vol. I:
Prolegomena zu reinen Logik, Chapter II), in which the dependence
of normative disciplines on theoretical disciplines is demonstrated.

304

/

APPENDIX II

knowledge implies [a present] consciousness referring back to
[such] earlier groundings [and having] the real capacity to reestablish the [earlier] grounding, to trace the [present] conviction
of its legitimacy back to its origin, and to justify it anew.
What has antiquity offered us here? What path has it thus
opened up? [It has offered] in part seminal beginnings and
impulses, in part fragments of science actually set upon its way.
The path that it indicates is that of the development of the
principle of self-evidence which is general and based on principle:
Singular experience, experience of individual existence, results in no assertion that can be justified objectively. But then
how can singular judgments of fact be valid at all? How can the
experienced world even be in truth? Being reveals itself to be an
ideal pole for "infinities" of presumptive self-evidences with selfevidently given sense-adumbrations ("sides," appearances)
through which the same being is adumbrated in self-evident
manner but is [merely] presumptive in every finite series [of
adumbrations]—though this is a legitimate presumption.* Real
truth is the correlate of real being, and just as real being is an
infinitely distant idea, the idea of a pole for systematic infinities
of appearances, of "experiences" in constantly legitimate presumption, so real truth is an infinitely distant idea, [that of]
what is identical in the agreement of experiential judgments, in
each of which truth "appears," achieves legitimate subjective
givenness. The infinitely distant idea is determinable a priori in
the pure form of generality which contains all possibilities, and
in accord with this form one can construct, out of the finitely
closed total experience (that is, out of its relatively "closed-off
appearance," out of the realm of determined sensible things, out
of the sensible experiential predicates) an anticipation of an
appropriate idea required by this experience and implied in it.
Included in the form of the idea of something real are
one-sided, partial ideas, just as, in the full truth which determines the entity (the totality of the predicates belonging to it
which determine it as itself), there is a multiplicity of individual
predicable determinations, of individual truths which leave the
being still undetermined in other directions. Insofar as every
* But here it is always merely nature which is in view, and an
idea of reality is thereby presupposed for the world, whose correlate
is the idea of a truth-in-itself, the idea of a mathematically constructible truth, even though it is [given only] in any number of approximations.

Idealization and the Science of Reality / 305
experience can a priori contain elements of discrepancy which
will be separated out in further experience and its synthesis, the
idea-determination which is to be gained from it is capable of
being not only one-sided but also in part false, though required,
for the sake of truth, by this experience up to now.3 To the idea
of the real [entity] itself, and to the idea as a pure form, there
belongs correlatively an infinite system of experiences which set
up a system of pure harmony (through the continued exclusion
of what is experienced as discrepant and the adoption of what
agrees) and which characterize themselves as [possible] experiences.4 And then there belongs a priori to every experience, or
every appropriately delimited experience, an idea which is
proper to it but which is never the last idea but rather a starting
point, in a certain way a representation of the infinitely distant
and unattainable idea, of which only the form, as an absolute
norm for the construction of all starting points, is given.
To make all these things clear and to outline a priori the
form of a possible determination of what is in itself true of
nature, a determination which is relatively true and relatively
necessary for every stage of experience—this is the theory of
natural science; as method: the theory of natural-scientific
method. Yet a twofold distinction must be made:
1. Ontology of nature "in itself: what is necessary for a
nature in general, the necessary form, the ideal essence, of a
nature and the necessary forms of determinations of every individual which idealiter and "in itself can belong to nature. Such
considerations of the pure idea are accomplished by the sciences
of the pure mathematics of nature.
2. A priori methodology of a possible knowledge of nature in
itself, through truths in themselves: if, instead of pure nature as
an idea (as a mathematical, supersensible idea), we think of a
nature as experienced by experiencing beings, or, if we take a
mathematical nature as an ideal in-itself belonging to nature-experiences (ontically: sensibly intuited natures), 5 then we have
another pure idea. We attain then a science of the possibility of
knowledge of a nature in itself through nature-experience, and
this is the a priori science of the possibility of a mathematical
3. I.e., a given experience (e.g., illusory experience) may now
require a certain determination of the object which is later excluded.
4. Reading Erfahrungen for Erfahrenes. Husserl crossed out
-renes from the latter; and if we assume he meant to write Erfahrungen, the clause makes more sense.
5. I.e., views of nature as given in sense-intuition.

306

/

APPENDIX II

natural science, or the science of the method of natural-scientific
determination of nature through the data of experience.
In a more limited sense: we allow only "normal experience"
to count as experience, normal sensibility in relation to normal
"understanding." How can mathematical, true nature be determined through normal appearances? This occurs through the
methods of rendering the continua exact, through the transformation of sensible causalities into mathematical causalities, etc.
Only then must one take the psychophysically abnormal into
account.6
But can one really distinguish in this way between an a priori
ontology of nature and an a priori methodology of a possible
determination of a nature in itself through the experiences of it?
How do I, the knower, attain the a priori ontological knowledge
of nature? I live then in possible experiences, in possible perceptions and possible perceptual judgments. What belongs to the
identical itself, throughout all the alteration of the sensible manners of appearance, when it is precisely the latter which, whatever else they may do, are supposed to be able to go together into
identity-agreement and to make identical determinations possible?
Not every change in the sensible stock of characteristics
disturbs identity, and not every one maintains it under the title
of a "change in the object." Anomalous changes of appearance
are not apperceived or need not be apperceived as "changes [in
the object]." If they are so apperceived, they are later suspended
under the title of "illusions." If I am living in experience (in its
apperceptions, through which I have experience as [being that
of] sensibly intuited reality), and if I hold the lines of agreement
secure, all anomalies are separated out, and every intuitively
given change is a real change 7 for me in the framework of the
synthesis of my own experiences. If I now enter into relation
with another, I may find that he (in his normality—but he is
color-blind) differs from me in his judgments about samenesses,
differences, etc., while we are experiencing the same thing. (He
can also have a finer sense than I—he has good eyes, I bad, etc.
—and the relation changes with each different human being.)
Here, in terms of possibility, very many and, ideally, infinitely
many differences—and also contradictions—are open. What
can help us here?
6. I.e., illusions, etc., caused by psychophysical occurrences involving the perceiver.
7. reale Veränderung, i.e., a change in the object.

Idealization and the Science of Reality / 307
If we look to developed natural science, the answer is: Every
sensible difference experienced by the single subject is an index
of a true difference, and what is true is determined by measurement in the sphere of the KOIVL. Hand in hand with the qualitative
differences, in a certain rough way, go quantitative differences.
In the quantitative sphere, in the realm of extension, everything
true expresses itself.
On the other hand, not everything that can be established
quantitatively, by way of magnitudes and dependencies of magnitudes, is "noticeable" to me or to anyone in the same way.
Through measuring methods, I can convince myself that certain
quantitative relations and laws are valid, relations and laws that
I know about as persistently obtaining and as valid only through
the method, whereas before using the method I am dependent
upon sensibility and "perceptual judgments."
Could natural science arrive at such a view any other way
than through general reflections about a method—reflections
about how, in the face of the relativity of the appearances,
something true which appears in them is to be determined, and
first of all through reflections about how, in the alteration of the
appearances, true being is able to announce itself, manifest
itself? But clearly such reflections, carried out purely eidetically,
lead to an ontology of nature.
Thus we can also say: How could I arrive at an a priori
ontology other than by rendering self-evident [the following]:
1. If I have nature as harmoniously experienced, and if I
remain within the framework of this harmony and specifically
within the framework of certain harmoniously experienced
things or processes; and if in any number of other cases I have
experienced the same things, etc., or if another has experienced
them (as I become convinced through understanding 8 h i m ) :
the possibility of the knowledge of the same [thing or process]
through the experiences on the two sides necessarily presupposes
the res extensa, the spatiotemporal skeleton of the qualities
perceived on the two sides, the identity of the shape-distribution
through communal time, identity of the temporal sequences
and thus also of the causal dependency of the corresponding configurations. By contrast, the alteration of the qualities perceived
and of the judgments about these qualities is "accidental." In this
sense, that is, even if contradictions arise from them, they do not
damage the identity. (Even in solitary experience, the identity of
8. Einverständnis, here, rather than the usual term, Einfühlung.

3o8

/

APPENDIX n

what is experienced in different modalities of sense is necessarily the identity of the "spatiotemporar skeleton. It is the latter
that is necessarily identical, a necessarily identical content of
determination throughout all differences of sensible "manner of
appearance.") The first separating-out of what essentially—i.e.,
of necessity—belongs to the identical [object] leads to geometry,
phoronomy, and could also have led to a priori mechanics, to
disciplines of the possible forms of functional dependences
among changes or to a discipline of the forms of possible quantitative causality and its possible causal laws. The real is in itself
determined if it is lawfully fixed not only in respect to its geometrical form but also in respect to its possible changes in form.
Something real has real properties, its empirically causal properties. In order to be identical in itself, it must have empirically
knowable quantitative-causal properties.
Thus, the new natural science is distinguished by the fact
that it first of all elevated to the central point of concern what is
in a determined sense necessary by contrast to the alteration of
(legitimate) sensible appearance, and [it] recognized that quantitative causal laws belong to this necessary element.
A second element [in the development of an a priori ontology] was made up of such observations as: I hear a tone and see
a vibrating motion [of a string], and the tone is qualitatively the
same, independently of color, of the sensibly qualitative, but it is
dependent on the strength of tension, the thickness [of the
string]—and the latter are all measurable factors. The quantitative is not merely [what is found] in the appearing extensional
processes [as such]; the quantitative is also something indicated
by what is merely qualitative. And it is possible that the quantitative [in the latter sense] be subsequently exhibited sensibly
through sensible manners of appearance (somehow "clothed"
qualitatively).
Conversely: every qualitative change, every qualitative
being-such [Sosein], should, if the quality belongs to a normal
appearance, be a property of the real itself. But quality (secondary quality) cannot belong to the object in itself; possibly it is a
subjectively altering quality, [differing among] subjects, each of
whom, for himself, experiences harmoniously the reality in
question. If every experienced quality shall have its right to objectivity, this is possible only if it is an index for something mathematical and indicates the mathematical for one person as well
as another only in differing degrees of perfection: methodically,
everyone must be able to attain the quantitative on the basis of

Idealization and the Science of Reality /

309

the indications, perhaps with the help of another; whereas he
can determine the qualitative himself. Thus every "in-itself" is a
mathematical in-itself, and all causal laws must be mathematical laws. Real properties are causal properties which are determined on the basis of causal laws.
Yet we would have to make a twofold distinction here:
1. The recognition, discussed in detail above, that in harmonious experience (as sensible manner of appearance) one must
distinguish between the accidental and the necessary, i.e., between primary characteristics, which necessarily run through all
sensible experience, and the specifically sensible, the secondary
characteristics; the recognition, that is, that the "common"
sense-characteristics are not accidentally but necessarily common.
2. The perceived, the experienced as such, is thoroughly
"vague"; it always stands, taken in harmonious experience,
under the essential law of a certain gradation of perfection
which always exists as an ideal possibility. Accordingly I can
have the same characteristic given more or less "clearly"; and, no
matter how clear it is, yet another gradation is still thinkable. It
is always thinkable that what I clearly find to be undifferentiated
will, given greater clarity, exhibit differentiations, both for me
and intersubjectively. Belonging correlatively to the differentiations of perfection are free "can"-possibilities of approximation
to the absolutely perfect, the true self [of the object]—though, to
be sure, the latter is forever receding. Our talk of the "manners
of appearance" of the same thing also applies thus in respect to
the graduality of clarity. But behind this lies the idea of an
identical self, the in-itself. The true characteristics are the limitpoints of possible gradation. But since only mathematical characteristics are "true" ones, the true mathematical characteristics
are mathematical limits,
Explicated more distinctly: in the continuing synthesis of
experience the primary as well as the secondary characteristics
have their differentiations of perfection. Corresponding to this in
the case of the primary characteristics is the graduality of the
perfection of measurement and of approximation through measurement, and what proceeds from this, or is carried out in
connection with it, namely, quantification through geometrical
and similar concepts. This leads to the limit-idealization of the
exact mathematics of nature with its determinations of thought.
Whereas the primary characteristics are intersubjective as long
as harmonious identification can take place at all, and have only

3IO

/

APPENDIX II

[the above-mentioned] relativity of perfection and approximation
(and also the relativity of interreal causality), 9 the secondary
characteristics are relative in another way, namely, relative to
the normality and abnormality of experience and thus "accidentally" to the subjects, and can change with the subjects.* In
addition, the perfection-limit of the secondary qualities is not
measurable; it is only "intuitable." But it is intersubjectively
determined and determinable through relation to the mathematical limits of the primary characteristics.
3. To determine is to predicate; to determine originally and
self-evidently is to form perceptual judgments, and to determine
mediately is to form empirically general judgments (inductive,
experiential judgments) and empirically causal judgments, etc.
Determininative thinking, judging, inferring, generalizing, particularizing, which are accomplished in the actual sphere of experience, take the appearing things, characteristics, regularities
as the true ones; but this truth is a relative and "subjectively conditioned" truth. A new sort of thinking, or a peculiar method, is
required in order to relate what results here (which suffices for
lower-level practical ends) to its "objectivity," f to extract from
it, by technique, truth in itself and true reality in itself. The
consideration of the conditions in principle of the possibility of
something identical that gives itself (harmoniously) in flowing
and subjectively changing manners of appearance J leads to the
mathematization of the appearances as a necessity which is
immanent in them, or to the necessity of a constructive method,
in order to construct out of the appearances the identical and its
identical determinations^
But can appearances of different senses contain something
identical? And in what sense can they? Manifolds of appearances which harmoniously belong together and which constitute
something identical must correspond to the conditions of the
possibility of the identical (true) object [Gegenständlichkeit],
and all the laws of mathematics as applied to the real [reale
Mathematik] must be particularizations of the laws of formal
* We have two kinds of normality: (1) The presupposition of
comunication, [i.e., that there is a] communal nature, and the necessary here is the quantitative; (2) as opposed to this, the accidental—
that is, agreement on secondary qualities is "accidental."
t This objectivity is the idea of a "nonrelative" truth in itself.
X But also which in principle gives itself only in this way.
§ This identical is necessarily a substruction.
9. I.e., they are "relative" to (dependent on) their real causal
circumstances.

Idealization and the Science of Reality /

311

ontology, of formal mathematics (theory of manifolds). They
are particularizations because formal mathematics teaches us
how to construct and constructively determine the infinitely
many forms, indeed all possible forms of objects and infinities of
objects; and every given system of appearances, every unity of
experiences, outlines an objective totality or nature: in respect
to its form.
In ancient philosophy the focus of interest is first of all upon
the compelling necessity of reason, whose denial is absurdity.
This necessity first entered the scene purely in the mathematical
sphere as geometrical and arithmetical necessity. In this sphere
of magnitudes, and initially of spatial magnitudes—first of all in
classes of privileged cases (straight lines, limited plane figures,
and the corresponding cases of spatial magnitudes), first of all
in the empirical intuition that magnitudes divide into equal parts
and are composed again of equal parts—or of aggregates
[Mengen] of like elements which decompose into partial aggregates and can be expanded into new aggregates through the
addition of elements or of aggregates of such elements—in this
sphere, there arose the "exact" comparisons of magnitudes
which led back to the comparison of numbers. Upon the vague
"greater," "smaller," "more," 'less," and the vague "equal" one
could determinately superimpose the exact "so much" greater or
less, or "how many times" greater or less, and the exact "equal."
Every such exact consideration presupposed the possibility of
stipulating an equality which excluded the greater and the
smaller and of stipulating units of magnitude which were
strictly substitutable for one another, were identical as magnitudes, i.e., which stood under an identical concept or essence of
magnitude. Belonging to [the essence of] the spatial magnitudes,
as objects of empirical intuition, is the fact that one can come
nearer to them, can look at them with more "exactness." In
practical life the "exact" is determined by the [particular] end in
view; the "equal" is that which counts equally for this end, for
which there can also be irrelevant differences which do not
count. Here, with the exclusion of all practical limitation, the
idea of the absolutely equal, the mathematically exactly equal,
could be developed.
Here, then, first began the thought process of the idealizing
development of concepts, that logicization which makes possible
"rigorous" truths, logical truths, and makes it possible, in this
logical sphere, to think with the rigorous necessity and universal
validity which was able to mark every negation, and insightfully

312

/

APPENDIX II

so, with the sign of absurdity. The naturally developing significations of words are vague and flowing, such that it is not
determinately fixed what comes under the "concept," the general
sense. Logical signification is exact. The logically general, the
concept, is absolutely identical with itself, and subsumption is
absolutely unambiguous. But logical concepts are not concepts
taken from what is simply intuitive; they arise through a rational activity proper to them, the development of ideas, exact
development of concepts, e.g., through that sort of idealization
which produces, out of the empirically straight and curved, the
geometrical straight line and circle,
The practical needs of field-measurement force one at first
only vaguely, i.e., in the realm of the sensibly typical, to distinguish what typically counts as equal (for the particular practical
needs) from what typically counts as not equal. What counted
as being equal for certain sorts of practical ends was posited as
being equal, and differences of characteristics within the equality were "indifferent" differences, i.e., they were regarded as not
disturbing the equal validity and could be ignored. Thus it was
possible to establish measurement and calculation, to express
and even prove "geometrical" propositions—with certain reservations, to be sure. For when a thousand "equal" lengths were
laid in a row, each of which differed from the following only by a
finger's breadth (an indifferent difference), the measurement
could give the result that iooo yards = I O O I . That is, different
measurements with the same standard could give different results, i.e., not indifferently different. It was only the conception
of pure mathematical "ideas" as ideal norms and the development of approximative methods of application that led to a pure
material mathematics 10 and a mathematical technique. It was of
the nature of spatial experience that one had to recognize, in
comparing things in experience, possible differences of perfection in equality: for example, what was seen from a certain
distance to be fully "equal" could be seen, when approached
more closely, to be different after all; what remained equal could
be looked at even more closely, etc.
Thus it was possible to conceive of processes converging
idealiter through which an absolute equal could be constructed
ideally as the limit of the constant approach to equality, provided
that one member [of the system] was thought of as absolutely
fixed, as absolutely identical with itself in magnitude. In this
10. eine reine sachhaltige Mathematik.

Idealization and the Science of Reality /

313

exact thinking with ideas one operated with ideal concepts of the
unchanging, of rest, of lack of qualitative change, with ideal
concepts of equality and of the general (magnitude, shape) that
gives absolute equalities in any number of ideally unchanged
and thus qualitatively identical instances; every change was
constructed out of phases which were looked upon as momentary, exact, and unchanging, having exact magnitudes, etc.
Platonic idealism, through the fully conscious discovery of
the "idea" and of approximation, opened up the path of logical
thinking, "logical* science, rational science. Ideas were taken as
archetypes, in which everything singular participates more or
less "ideally," which everything approaches, which everything
realizes more or less fully; the ideal truths belonging to the ideas
were taken as the absolute norms for all empirical truths. If we
designate as rationalism the conviction that all reasonable knowing must be rational u —whether purely rationally, in the thinking that investigates the essential relations between the purely
rational concepts (or rather, the thinking that investigates, in
terms of laws, everything that is possible, insofar as it stands
under purely rational ideas, or is thought in an exactly determinate way) or else in such a way that it measures the empirical
against the pure ideals through methods of approximation and
other norms for judging the empirical according to corresponding pure ideas—then the whole modern conviction is rationalistic.
A true object in the sense of logic is an object which is
absolutely identical "with itself," that is, which is, absolutely
identically, what it is; or, to express it in another way: an object
is through its determinations, its quiddities [Weisheiten], its
predicates, and it is identical if these quiddities are identical as
belonging to it or when their belonging absolutely excludes their
not belonging. But only ideals have a rigorous identity; the consequence would be that an individual is truly something identical—i.e., an entity—if it is the ideally identical substrate for
general absolute ideas. But how can something individual participate in the general, not only approximately but exactly? How
can the subsumption-relation be exact?
Purely mathematical thinking is related to possible objects
which are thought determinately through ideal-"exact" mathematical (limit-) concepts, e.g., spatial shapes of natural objects
which, as experienced, stand in a vague way under shape-con11. dass alles vernünftige Erkennen rational sein muss.

314

/

APPENDIX II

cepts and [thus] have their shape-determinations; but it is of the
nature of these experiential data that one can and by rights must
posit, beneath the identical object which exhibits itself in harmonious experience as existing, an ideally identical object which is
ideal in all its determinations; all [its] determinations are exact
—that is, whatever [instances] fall under their generality are
equal—and this equality excludes inequality; or, what is the
same thing, an exact determination, in belonging to an object,
excludes the possibility that this determination not belong to the
same object. And for every particular [kind of] determination, as
delimited by the "general nature'' of the object—within the
[particular] domain, that is; e.g., spatial shape in the case of
natural objects—one [such determination] belongs [to the object], and every other [such determination] does not belong.
(Principle of the excluded middle.)
An object has spatial shape generally. Empirically experienced spatial shapes have their different empirical types. But it
can happen that an object has a (lowest) type—that is, I experience that it has this particular shape—and that it does not have
it—that is, I see upon further experience that it does not have it
(without [its] having changed). (In the empirical sphere the
principle of the excluded middle does not hold.) I can take no
empirical determination as actually belonging to the object; I
can only say that it is experienced under this determination.
Even in thought I cannot hold fast to the determination in an
absolutely identical way; I can never, in approaching the experienced object, say that the determination I experience now is
absolutely the same as the one I have experienced»
But I can posit, beneath every spatial shape I experience, the
idea of a pure spatial shape in which the seen shape "participates"; and spatial shape in general becomes an empirical genus
which has behind it a pure genus of purely exact spatial shapes.
Every empirical object is empirically shaped (is necessarily experienceable and is equipped in experience with an intuited
shape), but it also has a true shape, the exact shape. Exact ideas
of shapes are absolutely distinguished; if an object has a particularization of one [such shape], then every other, different one is
excluded. Of two exact shapes (lowest differences of spatial
shapes), to any object there belongs one and not the other.
(Principle of the excluded middle.)

Appendix III:
The Attitude of Natural Science and the Attitude
of Humanistic Science. Naturalism, Dualism,
and Psychophysical Psychology1
NATURALISTIC ATTITUDE.* The world as the universe of
realities in the form of mutual exteriority. Nature as the realm
of the pure res extensae. Everything real is a body or has a body,
but only the body has actual and true coextensio, understood at
once temporally and spatially. Unity of an unchanging (but
changeable) or a changing shape in the unity of a duration, the
shape-extensional form, filled out with qualitative determinations. Every body [stands] 2 under rules of general causality,
universal nature under an a priori of causality so as to be
determinable, constructible through truths in themselves according to determined causal laws which can be discovered inductively.
Corporeal being is thus extensional-coexisting being, and in
its circumstances—i.e., the bodies existing together, coexisting
in the unity of nature—it is unambiguously determined being—
if nature is a self-sufficient nature. Naturalism looks at man as
filled-out extension and thus considers the world in general only
as nature in a broader sense. The duration of a man's spirit is
taken as an objective duration, and the soul is taken at every
phase of the duration as being, though not actually spatially

* The "naturalistic attitude" is not a constitutively prescribed universal direction of the gaze, belonging to the natural world-view, but
is the naturalistic prejudice.
i. Biemel's note: "Before 1930." This text is found in the German
edition as the second "Abhandlung," pp. 294-313 (see Translator's
Introduction, pp. xx f.). Another early attempt at subjects dealt with
in the Crisis. The theme is also treated in Ideen, Vol. II.
2. Biemel's interpolation.
[315]

3l6

/

APPENDIX III

shaped in a way parallel to the shape of the body, nevertheless a
coexistence of psychic data, a being-simultaneously which can
somehow be coordinated to simultaneity in the form of what
coexists in spatial extension and what coexists spatially in general.
Now it is, to be sure, naturally correct that human psychic
life proceeds in the form of an immanent time and that we find
every momentary present to be a unity of coexistence of manifold "data." But fundamentally essential insights must first be
attained here about the structure of this immanent time and, on
the other hand, about how "objective time" receives constitutive
meaning as the form of transcendent natural being, in which
form the immanent times of souls are made objectively temporal
and with them the souls [themselves].
Naturalism simply assumes that essentially the whole world
can be thought on the analogy of its [concept of] nature and,
accordingly, that the being-in-itself of the world can be thought
as the correlate of truths-in-themselves, indeed constructible
truths-in-themselves, exactly as in the case of (self-sufficient)
nature.* The world [is the] subject matter of a universal inductive world-science, empirical induction being the ground for an
idealizing, mathematical method of finding exact world-laws (including natural laws) or of arriving at laws for human beings
and animals as psychophysical beings, for their souls, their personal being and activity, as well as for their bodies. Thus, expressed in an extreme way, God has a universal mathematics of
the world, God knows the world-laws that are valid for everything in the world in all its determinations; thus [these are]
exact laws of the coexistence of whatever is, and is such spatiotemporally; these are causal laws but are simply more complicated, more manifold, being extended to the spiritual sphere.
The problem of psychophysics, with its indubitable empirical
discoveries, is: What can be subsumed under a psychophysical
order?
The scientific attitude which aims at objective knowledge (as
practiced by natural science), and this universally, as objective
knowledge of the world, the universe of realities existing in
* Nature, as idealized, is constructible, and thereby it is factual
actuality in ontological, indeed mathematical, unconditioned generality; also it is idealization of the empirical coordination of empirical
qualities with empirical quantities. But if the concrete factual world,
that of experience, is to be idealizable and constructible, this requires
that it have its world-encompassing mathematics.

Natural Science and Humanistic Science /

317

themselves, would be the attitude with the intent of knowing
being-in-itself through truths in themselves. But is this not the
task of science in general? What does the in-itself mean in the
case of nature, of an animal, of a human being, of a human
community, of cultural objects and the universal culture of a
human civilization?
And can one distinguish between the thematic attitude directed at the "objective" world (as scientific theme) and the
thematic attitude directed toward universal subjectivity, understood as subjectivity and everything subjective through which
the world is experienced, appears, is judged about, valued, etc.?
But is that not the personal attitude?
What is that, the personal attitude? Human beings, like
animals, are in space; the world of realities is always pregiven
with human beings in it. Interest is directed toward human
beings as persons who, in personal actions and passions, are
related to "the" world, who, in the community of life, of personal
interrelations, of activities and other ways of being determined
by and comporting oneself toward worldly things, have one and
the same surrounding world, a world of which they are conscious [that it is] one and the same.
The world toward which they comport themselves, which
motivates them, with which they constantly have to deal, is of
course precisely the world, the one existing world; but, in the
personal attitude, interest is directed toward the persons and
their comportment toward the world, toward the ways in which
the thematic persons have consciousness of whatever they are
conscious of as existing for them, and also toward the particular
objective sense the latter has in their consciousness of it. In this
sense what is in question is not the world as it actually is but the
particular world which is valid for the persons, the world appearing to them with the particular properties it has in appearing to
them; the question is how they, as persons, comport themselves
in action and passion—how they are motivated to their specifically personal acts of perception, of remembering, of thinking,
of valuing, of making plans, of being frightened and automatically starting, of defending themselves, of attacking, etc. Persons are motivated only by what they are conscious of and in
virtue of the way in which this [object of consciousness] exists
for them in their consciousness of it, in virtue of its sense—how
it is valid or not valid for them, etc.
Interest in persons is naturally not the mere interest in their
modes of behavior and their motives, but [also] interest in what

3l8

/

APPENDIX III

makes them identical persons. One will say: interest in personal
habitualities and characters. But these point first of all to the
modes of behavior in which they manifest themselves (first of
all immediately as the same ego-subjects) and from which they
spring.*
How are the thematics of the humanistic sciences—and
those of a general humanistic science which might someday be
grounded—related to anthropology, zoology (in the sense of the
science of human beings and animals as "objective" realities, as
nature), and psychology, as the science of those objective, real
component elements of real human beings and animals which
are otherwise called soul, psychic life, psychic characteristics?
Humanistic science is the science of human subjectivity in
its conscious relation to the world as appearing to it and motivating it in action and passion; and, conversely, [it is] the science of
the world as the surrounding world of persons, or as the world
appearing to them, having validity for them. In the alteration of
the manners of appearance, in the alteration of the apperceptions that human beings go through in their "inner life/' both
individually and in common through mutual understanding,
they are conscious of "the" things, the relations, likewise the
persons and groups of persons that motivate them and are thematic for them in the surrounding world; and they are conscious
of them as the same but as appearing now one way, now another, to them and different persons, as being valid for them,
possibly being valid once as existing in certainty, etc.
But in general, in personal life, these same things are not
objects of thematic, scientific interest; personal life is generally
not theoretical, things are not generally scientifically thematic
for persons in terms of how they are "in objective truth," "in
themselves"; rather, [they are present] just as they happen to be
valid for them, just as the things which otherwise motivate
them, determine them in their extrascientific action and passion.
If we make into a scientific theme the things, nature, the animal
and human worlds, living bodies and souls as they are in and for
"themselves" (objectively), then we are natural scientists, zoologists, anthropologists, and, specifically, psychologists (here in
the sense of the parallel to natural-scientific zoology).
* But what is scientific in the personal sciences applies also, correlatively, to the surrounding world which motivates the persons, i.e.,
of which they are conscious, the surrounding world which is actually
present, actually experienced and experienceable for them in its style
of manners of appearance.

Natural Science and Humanistic Science

/

319

Here we do, of course, have the realities in question given to
us again and again as appearing realities; but our objective
interest in them, as the theoretical reality-interest understood
ultimately in full universality, is directed toward their
[determinations] which appear through the appearances,
through the subjective manners of givenness, and can be determined in their exact, objectively true being through absolutely,
universally valid scientific judgments—in the true being which
is the being of these realities themselves and not just their being
for us or for this or that group of persons which they motivate in
various ways.*
Here a particular kind of motivation is privileged, which is
designated by the expression "theoretical interest in objectively
real being/' Objective nature, or its objectively true being-in-itself, as a subject matter for science, is of course also a personal
accomplishment—or rather the idea of such an accomplishment, the accomplishment of a method which bears within itself
the infinite idea, the idea of an infinite process of perfection—
namely, as the real in-itself of nature which is idealiter continually determined, or more and more perfectly determined,
through the natural-scientific method. But it is [also] the correlate of an infinite accomplishment, a particular accomplishment-correlate of that personal community which is called the
community of scientists. Insofar as humanistic science, as the
all-encompassing science of the spiritual world, has as its subject
matter all persons, all sorts of persons and personal accomplishments, personal structures that are called cultural structures, it
also encompasses natural science and natural-scientific nature
in itself, nature as reality. [Now] 3 the experience of nature, with
its thoroughgoing, consciously produced identity of what is experienced, runs constantly through each personal life. But the
interest which determines personal life (which is only in exceptional cases the life of a natural scientist) does not concern
nature "existing in itself and separated out (or to be separated
out) by natural science but concerns nature free from all theory,
as it appears and is meant in this way or that, just as it enters
into the personal life of mankind and determines this life in
particular forms of praxis. For all human beings, the nature
about which they talk, the world in which they live and know
* This is the general sense of science—though of course beginning
naively, it does not attain the full world but at first remains caught,
unbeknown to itself, in the bonds of tradition.
3. Striking aber.

320

/

APPENDIX III

themselves to be living together, is the nature or world which
determines them, the one world which is identified and corrected
in social interaction; and it is identified as the same world that
the objective scientist, in his particular style of personal activity,
has as his subject matter. In this sense the personal world is not
other than the "objective" world. But the world pregiven in every
person, valid for every human culture at every time and for
every individual human being in his particular praxis, the world
posited as actual, is a world through a particular "manner of appearance," a particular apperception, open for further reshaping
variations which may transform being into nonbeing (illusion);
yet through these variations, though with certain corrections,
there is established the unity of a world having enduring
validity as existing, always open to further determinations—including the determination of reality for scientific theory. It persists in this openness. And humanistic science, which has as its
subject matter factual persons, peoples, and [historical] times,
and the things supposed by them to exist in their supposed
worlds, which appear to them concretely, intuitively, in such and
such a way, which are apperceived as such mythologically or in
some other way, the natures experienced by them, the cultures
which exist for them and motivate them—[this humanistic science] has its thematic focus necessarily and exclusively upon the
world in the "subjective" how of [its appearance to] the persons
which make up its subject matter. This world cannot be broken
down into merely individual-subjective and temporally constantly changing aspects. Through such aspects a communal
surrounding world is constituted for the historical community.
In the community of its life, the community, or the life of its
persons, is related to the surrounding world which is communal
for them (the personal "world"), and this surrounding world has
relative actuality for them—and a changing actuality for different personal communities and their personal times; but this
[fact] does not exclude the possibility that personal communities, each of which has its personal surrounding world, can, by
entering into or already being in relation with one another, have
or attain an overlapping, common surrounding world or that
they know themselves in their interrelations to be related to the
same "real" world, only finding that each community views the
world in quite a different way, accords it a completely different
kind of actuality. But this common "reality," which necessarily
extends as far as any possible kind of communalization, while it
is an object of consciousness in its identity, is such only as an

Natural Science and Humanistic Science /

321

interpersonally emerging unity of identification, of verification
to be constated in communal life. Only through science does it
become determined as reality in terms of "objective" (i.e., scientific) truth, as it is in itself, when the science of reality determines it through its particular personal actions and lasting
accomplishments. *
For the attitude of the humanistic sciences the point of
departure is the "natural attitude," in which everyone, and thus
also the beginning humanist, is situated in waking life prior to
all scientific intent and activity and through which he can find
himself to be such. He finds himself in a world which surrounds
him, which appears now in one way, now in another, motivates
him now in one way, now in another, into which he gazes and
listens; generally speaking, he is practically determined in different ways by this world, and through his praxis he is always
giving it a new face. And he himself belongs to this world, as do
his fellow men; depending on the circumstances, they are either
objects of praxis for him or cosubjects of it, acting together with
him and at the same time seeing with him, hearing with him, the
same things in the surrounding world, especially those involved
in praxis which are "in question" for them in their communal
practical direction [of interest]. In the natural attitude, the
world, as being the same throughout the alteration of actual and
possible, subjective and intersubjectively interrelated appearances, opinions, interests, is generally speaking not a scientific
subject matter; rather, the human being's subject matter, in a
broader sense, is everything that momentarily affects him or
that concerns him enduringly, possibly becoming a fixed habituality (as in a vocation): in "seriousness" or in play, in effecting
or creating things of value or things without value, temporary or
lasting things, accomplishing things in egoistic or in the communal interest, as an individual or as a functionary of the
community in communal work; his own and the generative
memory leads him to the communal life of the past.
What has just been said is itself a universal reflection with
which the humanistic scientist can and must begin; he can do it
* The goal of "objectivity," i.e., [that of] science, is: that which
is, not as experienced and verified by particular persons and civililizations, as it is experienced and can be validated through experience by them, but rather: that which is—for all conceivable
civilizations (including Papuans), [for all] experiences, [all] surrounding worlds, which are assumed to be experiencing the same
things.

322

/

APPENDIX III

because, as a European, he is already acquainted with science,
already knows the universal theoretical attitude, has been raised
in it, and can now arrive at his subject matter through this
survey. Man, then, men in community, the communities themselves in their life and undertakings, are the scientific subject
matter of humanistic science, in correlation with the [human]
accomplishments themselves in accomplishing activity and the
accomplished structures; but also passive man in the periods of
his indolence, the temporarily sleeping and then awakening
man, the whole man in the unity of his life as a personal life, as
"I,'9 as "we" in action and passion.
What the person does and suffers, what happens within him,
how he stands in relation to his surrounding world, what angers
him, what depresses him, what makes him cheerful or upset—
these are questions relating to persons; and so are questions of a
similar sort relating to communities of every level: marriages,
friendships, clubs, civic communities, communities of peoples,
etc.—first in historical factualness and then in generality.* Is it
then not the case that the general science that must arise here is
psychophysical psychology—"individual psychology" and social
psychology?
Is the human being, as person, not the psychophysical
human being? Indeed, he is, after all, the human being who
knows himself to be in the world with living body and soul, who
moves in space and works with his hands, as a manual worker,
or in some other way with his living body, who, in battle, also
fights with his living body, is naturally always coconscious of his
living body, acting through it upon his external world or experiencing through it a touch, a push, a wound. The human being is
naturally the same in the science of persons as in natural-scientific biological anthropology. In the transition from the one to
the other science, the identification is accomplished as a matter
of course. And yet the thematic direction is fundamentally and
* There is some question as to how generality is meant here—in
terms of "natural history," morphology, or as unconditioned generality analogous to that of exact natural science. The only objectivity
that belongs to exact natural science is based upon "geometrization,"
an idealization which is able to encompass theoretically, by idealizing
them, all the possibilities of experience as experience of what is
identical in infinitum; it does this by means of ideal concepts—concepts of what is in itself and of ideal truths as truths in themselves.
Is there a method for encompassing the realm of the "spirit," of history, in all its essential possibilities, so that one can arrive at "exact"
truths through exact concepts for this realm?

Natural Science and Humanistic Science /

323

essentially a different one. Man, in humanistic science, is not the
subject matter as an identical reality whose being~in-itself can be
determined objectively; rather it is historical man insofar as he
acts and holds sway subjectively in his surrounding world.
The opposition between "natural-scientific"-psychological
and humanistic inquiry, as I said earlier, consists in the fact that
natural science and humanistic science take the spiritual, as
soul, as their subject matter from different points of view,
namely, in natural science as localized subject, as an annex * to
the body existing "there," as existing with it and unified with it
inductively—psychophysically (in the sense of Cartesian dualism); whereas the humanistic attitude is the personal attitude,
directed purely at the person; it is pure in a sense similar to that
in which natural science is pure—apparently through "abstraction." For the person, the living body is the privileged object in
the surrounding world, over which it holds sway immediately,
etc. But this is apperceived inductively, and the apperception is
an objective one.
Naturally the person is localized, and this through his physical living body in natural space and in natural time. If one
stands within exact space, this is concrete localization. Obviously one can direct one's thematic interest purely toward
nature, and within it the physical living bodies, and then find the
subjects, the souls, to be in nature (empirical or exact nature)
with them, or rather at the corresponding spatiotemporal positions. But there is first some question as to what one can expect
from this "being-together-with," as to what makes up the unified
sense of this real unity "man" or "animal," as to the extent to
which one can and may speak of the "combination" of living
body and soul and even look upon this combination as a causal
one of a sort similar to that of natural causality. Belonging from
* One should not say "annex." The annex-view is already a falsification. Subjectively, in experience, the experienced living body of
another points, through the experienced complexes of bodily data
(i.e., this experienced thing as such), to the psychic and to the ego;
here there is "association/' then, but just as there is in every apperception.
In the pregiven world, nature is, in terms of constitution, a "causal" unity of mutual exteriority. [When we speak of] "the spirit in
nature," "localization" is easily misconstrued as a spatial beingtogether and actually as a spatiotemporal coexistence, i.e., in the same
sense in which things, real elements of things, coexist. But in what
way is the spirit together with the body? We must ask this question.
As holding sway—this enters in only with the apperception.

324

/

APPENDIX III

the start to the constitution of the world, as the pure world of
experience, i.e., as my and our surrounding world, is the fact
that, within it, here mere things, there men, here animals, works
of art, tools, there manual workers, soldiers, etc., are experienced, pregiven in this way, apperceived; and this in a changing
manner which nevertheless has a most general set of structural
types, to which set the appearing of human beings (including
myself as a human being) necessarily belongs. Everywhere, one
can put inductive questions to this world: wherever there is
coexistence with regularity, there is also a set of inductive problems. In every simple apperception, coexistence with regularity
is involved and can be uncovered; that is, such coexistence
belongs to every apperceptive type, but also to the universal
apperception, that of the world, and to the apperception of a
near world or domestic world and [that of] a distant world as
well as to the apperception of a single near thing or distant
thing. One can and will, then, find implicitly indicated inductive
regularities which relate "data" concerning the physical living
body to psychic "data"; but this is far from implying anything
about a natural causality or about a combination into a whole
analogous to [such a combination in] nature. To be sure, this
distinction characterizes a type of psychophysics which traditionally counts as anthropology, grounded in traditional sensationalism.
The spirit (the soul, concrete personal being) is there in
space-time where his living body is; and from there he lives into
and acts upon the world, the universe of what exists in spacetime. He is spirit, person, ego of his surrounding world (and
thus of a world [as such]) in having consciousness of it; the
possibility of his acting [on the world] is based on the fact that,
in a definite, ordered way, he has experience of the world, or can
be with the world in an experiencing way, can be nearer and
farther [from things], etc. And to this belongs the fact that he
constantly has a privileged experiential consciousness of "his"
living body, that is, he has the consciousness of being with this
object in a quite immediate way and of always 'living" and
"being able to do" things through it as the affected ego and the
ego holding sway. This relation, and any manner in which personal experience occurs, through which the surrounding world is
intuitively "there," etc., is, as relating to persons, a fact for
humanistic science.
Humanistic science has to do with the spirit; and here first of
all natural science in the narrower sense is separated from

Natural Science and Humanistic Science /

325

humanistic science: on the one hand science of physical things
and on the other hand science of human beings as persons, as
having their living bodies in wielding them, being related to all
other realities through the living body as perceptual body, etc.*
But now we must note that nature is also in the surrounding
world—our surrounding world of today, the hypothetical surrounding world of the Indians, of the Stone Age, etc.—as long as
humanistic science is our subject and not "objective" natural
science, as long as our subject matter is precisely not objective
nature, as long as nature remains tied to the surrounding world
as it is in natural history in the old sense (even if this subject-relatedness is not explicitly expressed or is even unnoticed by the
scientist and remains extrathematic). Only when our aim is
objectivity, nature's being-in-itself in the ontological and then
mathematical sense, rather than its being as it exhibits itself to
us empirically, etc., do we have natural-scientific biology t
rather than natural history (which belongs together with the
general history of mankind as [dealing with] a historical surrounding world).
But if this is the case, then the question arises whether one
ought not to make the same distinction in regard to the psychic,
in regard to the spirit, the person, or rather whether an objective
humanistic science ought not to be distinguished from a historical one. More precisely, in the attitude focused upon the world as
an empirical universe of realities [there are two possibilities]:
(1) exact nature, through ontological-mathematical construction, and then an exact psychophysics as opposed to the empirical
togetherness of physical body and soul (dealing with persons);
(2) the spiritual attitude from the start—the historical attitude.
Everything becomes perfectly clear when we say to ourselves, or each of us says to himself: the world of which I speak,
the world of which the Chinese speaks, of which the Greek of
Solon's time, the Papuan speaks, is always a world having
subjective validity, even the world of the scientist, who as such is
a Greek-European man.
* Then humanistic science must be understood as twofold: (1)
spirit as spatiotemporally existing together with bodies, together in
space, in space-time, as the subject matter of a universal inductive
world-science—with the large question of whether this prescribes the
scientific goal of an exact natural science in a broadened sense, a
dualistic, exact psychophysics, as meaningful, as possible. [2] Otherwise, humanistic science as purely personal science.
t This contains the hypothesis of idealization.

326

/

APPENDIX III

In practical life I have the world as a traditional world, no
matter where the tradition comes from; it may even come from
second-hand scientific acquisitions, even false ones, which I get
from the newspaper or from school and which I may transform
in one way or another in my own motivations or [through] those
of my fellows who accidentally influence me. I can now look
around and take up a theoretical interest in the world which is
valid for me precisely through tradition, or I can put myself in
the place of the ancient Greeks prior to science, etc. The first
universal theoretical interest, at the very beginning, was of this
sort—to wish to know the objective world is to wish to know the
world as such. It is a world through tradition, but the fact that it
is this is hidden and in any case can be completely left aside. For
now let us not understand objective science in the sense of the
naturalistic ways of thinking, etc. Objective science means
straightforwardly taking the world as one's subject matter; humanistic science means taking the world as one's subject matter
as the world of the subjectivity which functions for it, the world
insofar as it is subject-related. (Only the subjects are thematic
and, within them, the "represented" world with its spatiotemporality.) It is possible to make not only nature but also human
beings, human civilizations, peoples, etc., one's subject matter
"straightforwardly," objectively; and, on the other hand, one can
make human beings, human civilizations, and nature one's subject matter in a subjectively relative manner. The correlation is
iterated. Everything that exists exists in subjective manners of
givenness, everything can be a subject matter either straightforwardly or subjectively-relatively. Here "subjectively" means:
taking the subjects straightforwardly as one's subject matter,
without inquiring into objective nature; one will say: making
them one's subject matter by abstraction. From the beginning, in
the theoretical attitude, the world is the universe of what is; and
everything that is, including what belongs to humanistic science
at one level of reflection, takes its place again in the order of the
world, and so in infinitum. But now I turn around, through the
transcendental reduction, and there now arises a humanistic
science which does not have the world in advance and does not
constantly hold onto the world.
When we seek natural-historical truth for living beings, it is
already presupposed that the latter are observed through harmonious experience (according to their bodily and their psychic
being, both of which are given in unified experience) and are
described, in accord with this experience, through adequately

Natural Science and Humanistic Science

/

327

suited experiential (descriptive) concepts. Thus I may make
mistakes about others and perhaps even about myself; but as
long as experience verifies itself and as long as I follow its
harmoniousness, I attain empirical truth, I get to know the
person. As it is for the physical living bodies as natural objects,
so it is (and to this extent we have an analogy) with souls: that
experience in relation to them has no end. But do they have an
essential structure (which can be established purely) which
prescribes to the souls an objective (exact-ontological) in-itself
similar in meaning to that of natural things? Now it is clear
from the start that an essential form of a spirit can be extracted
and known, although it is just as clear that there is an immense
difference between the essence of psychic subjectivity and the essence of a thing. From the start one must strictly avoid all the
false analogizing which does violence [to this difference]. On the
other hand, is it not obviously a good and necessary guiding
notion that one seek to ground an investigation of factual spirits
in their historicity upon an essential knowledge of the spirit
(and of the community in which spirits live) and that one
proceed from these to create "exact concepts" and exact, unconditionally valid truths as ideal poles for all spiritual factuality? *
Attitude toward nature, which is not naturalistic: 4 If we
now speak of different experiential attitudes on the ground of
the natural world, we must distinguish: (1) the attitude focused
upon nature, in this case experienced nature, upon mere things,
or abstractly upon animals' bodies or cultural objects as mere
things; (2) personalistic attitude: attitude focused upon persons
or upon human beings as persons.
What belongs to this? What persons are as persisting unities,
what characters they have, what makes up their "life," what they
do and suffer as persons, how they "behave" in different life-situations in respect to their surrounding world, how they are personally affected by this world and how they react to it in a
personal way; and finally their "surrounding world" itself, which
exists for them, is valid for them, determines them. Here the
question will also be: how their surrounding world is transformed, what types of objects belong to it; thus, in generality:
what essential structure does a personal surrounding world
have, and, in particular, what general structure does it have
* But what does essential knowledge of historical knowledge look
like?
4. Naturale Einstellung, die nicht naturalistisch ist. This is a
marginal note inserted by Biemel into the text.

328

/

APPENDIX III

specifically as a surrounding world which has taken shape, and
continues to take on new shapes, through the personal world-life
itself? What types of cultural objects does it have?
The structure of the personal surrounding world stands in
essential relation to the structure of personal life (with personal
habituality) which, as world-life, is a comporting of oneself
toward objects appearing in the surrounding world and their
properties belonging to the surrounding world.
A particularly privileged position in the surrounding world is
occupied by its persons. An important role, however, is played by
the following distinction, which is a thematic one: [on the one
hand] persons (not only other persons but also possibly I myself) are thematic as objects—as objects belonging to the surrounding world which is already pregiven to the practical ego,
practical in the broadest sense, i.e., concrete, living wakefuUy
into the world—and are thus thematic as being of the surrounding world in the full sense, as objects to which something happens, objects which one finds existing in the surrounding world,
which one sees but has nothing to do with, nothing in common
with: they are here and over there like mere things; perhaps
what is especially in question here is the external seeing and
understanding of the other without becoming intimately familiar with him, living with him. On the other hand, [there are] the
other subjects as cosubjects, with whom one forms a community
in experiencing, in thinking, in acting, with whom one has
common praxis in the surrounding world even though each one
still also has his own. We already have a certain "community" in
being mutually "there" for one another in the surrounding world
(the other in my surrounding world)—and this always means
being physically, bodily "there." We experience one another as
seeing the same objects—or in part the same—in the same
world, which is a world for us. For the most part, as regards this
common seeing, this is inauthentic experience, the empty understanding of the others and their experiential situation. But the
community of persons, as a community of personal life and
possibly as a lasting personal interrelation, is something special.
A first step is explicitly to be vitally at one with the other person
in the intuitive understanding of his experiencing, his life-situation, his activity, etc. From there one proceeds to communication
through expression and language, which is already an interrelation of egos. Every sort of communication naturally presupposes
the commonality of the surrounding world, which is established
as soon as we are persons for one another at all—though this

Natural Science and Humanistic Science /

329

can be completely empty, inactive. But it is something else to
have them as fellows in communal life, to talk with them, to
share their concerns and strivings, to be bound to them in
friendship and enmity, love and hate. It is only here that we
enter the sphere of the "social-historical" world.
When we live in the natural—the nontranscendental—attitude, different thematic directions, and thus different directions
of theoretical interest, open themselves to us in accord with the
structure of the pregiven world—the latter being given to us as
our communal surrounding world and, through this, as objective
world. "Through this" means that the surrounding world is
something changeable, that we progress, in life, from one surrounding world to another, whereas throughout this alteration
the same world is yet continuously experienced, the surrounding
world becoming a manner of appearance of this world. In 5 the
attitude oriented toward essences we can, beginning with the
factual, common world, investigate the essential form of a
human surrounding world and [investigate] the essential form of
a surrounding world which, in the alteration of surrounding
worlds through penetration into alien human civilizations, is
ever constituting itself anew; and, assuming the possibility that
this process could go on infinitely, we can sketch out the structure of an existing world as world of possible experience, i.e., as
emerging through an ongoing process of correction throughout
possible transitional surrounding worlds. This could be the idea
of an ontology of the experiential world purely as such. The
theoretical attitude can be directed toward nature alone, in
which case we have a "natural" attitude which is nevertheless
not "naturalistic." On the other hand, we can orient our attitude
toward persons and personal communities; we can orient our
attitude toward possible concrete surrounding worlds and the
"true" world which is outlined within them.
The attitude oriented toward nature can have a different
sense. In general, in the natural attitude it is we who are the
persons carrying out the investigation; and thus, already in advance, it is we who live alongside one another and with one
another. But here, as subjects for the world, we and our life are
anonymous—as long as we have not made ourselves thematic
for ourselves. Thus the attitude oriented toward nature is pre5. The passage beginning here and ending "ontology of the experiential world purely as such" is a later insert and refers to a much
higher level of reflection than what is described in the rest of the
paragraph.

330

/

APPENDIX III

cisely: making nature thematic and nothing else; to make thematic is thus in a certain sense at the same time to "abstract,"
although this must [not] 6 at first (and thus not necessarily) be
understood as an active abstracting-from-something but rather,
as is usual, only [as] 6 an exclusive looking-at-something which
consequently notices nothing else. Of course, underlying a scientific attitude oriented toward nature is ultimately a willful making of nature into one's subject matter—in fact, pure nature,
with the conscious exclusion, or will to exclude, everything that
is merely subjective.
Now the nature that becomes thematic thereby can be the
nature of the surrounding world, just as it is pregiven, just as it
gives itself in actual and possible experiential perception and
establishes itself as actually existing in the course of our experiential life through the harmony of experiences (though with
occasional corrections). [Nature's] being thematic means experiential knowledge, the fixing 7 [of nature] through consistent experience—one's own and that of others, supplemented by the
experiential anticipations of mediate inductions—and through
description, striving toward descriptive science, the universal
descriptive science of nature, encompassing the universe of possible experiences of nature—sense-perception, memory, the induction which is actually verifiable through these—for all time.
Underlying this, though not actually developed, is the ontology
of the "world of possible experience." From this 8 one can already
distinguish the inductive broadening [of experience] through
making what is too distant to be experienced homogeneous with
what is near, and this leads to the idealization of infinities.
The goal of "exact" natural science is a different one, i.e.,
that of going beyond the relativity of intuited nature, nature
relative to the surrounding world, to determine nature "in itself,"
as the in-itself which is identical throughout all relativities,
through "truths in themselves." Descriptive nature is relative in
the personal, human sense, namely, relative to us, to our nation,
to our European civilization, to us earthly men in our historical
time; but we ourselves are not thematic here, nor is this relation;
the latter needs no thematization insofar as we are, after all, the
same earthly human civilization from generation to generation
in this unitary historical time or sphere of time; thus, scientific
6. Biemel's interpolations.
7. Reading das (das Festlegen) for die.
8. Reading davon for da.

Natural Science and Humanistic Science

/

331

conclusions understandably continue to have validity for us
from generation to generation.*
We need only direct our thematic gaze toward this relativity
in order to recognize that this natural science belongs to the
broader content of the personal science of earthly humanity in
general, the latter being understood as "we men," i.e., humanity
acquiring its temporal horizon and its relative and (in a broad
sense) historical temporality from us who are the investigators.
Penetrating more deeply here, we see that European man, arising out of the philosophizing Greeks, was the first to take up the
theoretical attitude oriented toward the outermost attainable
surrounding world—and that only he could do this. The surrounding world is relative to a subjectivity which functions for it
—the typology of functioning subjectivities is itself historical:
human beings are necessarily members of generative communities and thus necessarily live in every communal surrounding
world as their own surrounding world, in which, in this respect,
a universal historicity holds sway. This is not to say, however,
that there belongs to every such community a possible theoretical
attitude; for this too, and first of all the "descriptive" scientific
attitude, is essentially historical. If this attitude has established
itself, however, then the development is prescribed, for the
further progress of history, from the pure description of nature
to psychophysical description.
Thus the attitude which is oriented toward men and animals
is a new one—toward men and animals not as bodies to be
investigated consistently and descriptively in the attitude oriented toward nature but as men (or animals) who have their
bodies as living bodies, who have their personal surrounding
world, oriented around their living bodies as the near-far world
and, at the same time, in the manners of appearing of right-left,
up-down—all these manners of appearing standing in a successive relation of dependence to subjective manners of "I move my
living body" in a system of kinestheses which can be realized
* Descriptive universal science, as the science of the pregiven
world in its universality, remains within the realm of actual and
possible, direct and indirect, experience; thus it necessarily advances,
starting from the world pregiven in the manner of a horizon as present, through opening up the copresent, developing itself as descriptive science of the open, universal present, but then also as the science
of the past (paleontology), through continual opening-up of past
times and then also of future times. It is naturally directed toward
typical generalities, typical ways in which the types change, and then
[toward] the explanation of individual facts according to such rules.

332

/

APPENDIX III

even voluntarily. The thematics of the human being includes
what is valid for him as surrounding world, what is valid for him
within this surrounding world, both his individual and also the
communal surrounding world; the "how" of the appearance of
this surrounding world which can be grasped reflectively, not
only for him but also for the community; how the manners of
appearance belonging to the communicating individuals correspond to one another; how each individual gives his being-human a position in the space of the surrounding world as the
zero-point object of the oriented surrounding world in experiential apperception; how, when persons change position, e.g.,
when two persons exchange positions, the orientations, the same
objects, must change or, rather, the manners of appearance
must be exchanged.
Whereas descriptive nature belongs to the personal surrounding world of all men, or to the surrounding world of all
"European" men—and thus belongs within anthropology—exact
scientific nature obviously does not belong to this but only to the
surrounding world of those men who are exact natural scientists
(or who understand natural science). Of course, scientific natural history also does not belong to the surrounding world of every
man, insofar as it has taken his general surrounding world
under investigation and brought to light what a possible surrounding world might have been like but was not present and is
not present, except again for scientists. Natural science is a
culture, [and] it belongs only within the cultural world of that
human civilization which has developed this culture and within
which, for the individual, possible ways of understanding this
culture are present.
What can become thematic in addition is the universal unity
of a "civilization," extending as far as communal life, both immediate and mediate, extends; and correlative to this is the
community of the surrounding world (in the "how" of its manners of appearing and being conceived), in particular the community of culture. It can become thematic in the unity of its
temporal life, in the unity of that temporality which is the form
of this life itself—not the temporality of exact, natural-scientific
nature, which, according to its meaning, is the identical time of
an absolutely identical nature beyond all the natures making up
the surrounding worlds of whatever particular civilizations there
may be; natural-scientific time is not a relative time, essentially
belonging to a particular communally living and existing civilization, with all its past periods and open future which, from the

Natural Science and Humanistic Science /

333

pclr*t of view of the man of the present, has meaning as his
future, that of his civilization.
Also, civilizations that have only loose contacts with one
another can become thematic, as can the ways in which civilizations enter into community with one another and historically
become or have become one civilization; a major part of this
would be the history of one's own civilization, as well as its
historical becoming out of earlier civilizations and cultures, etc.
Here we have left natural-scientific descriptive inquiry behind
and have entered into problems of the humanistic sciences; or
rather, we have placed descriptive nature within the humanistic
science of history.
AU this is still superficial; no account has yet been taken of
the normative ideas of civilizations and their culture or rather of
those ideas which, as the "oughts" functioning in life-decisions,
[determine] 9 the life of man, both as individual and as variously
organized into communities; but these also occasionally function
in universal decisions and already-made resolves of the will
which regulate once and for all one's own life and the communal
life. This leads, then, to the "meaning" which is immanent in
history, to the problems of developmental teleology, to the problems of the development of universal ideas which give direction
to a new sort of civilization: thus, for example, the ideas of the
infinite and true world as correlate of the idea of world-science;
ideas of the true and genuine individual personal life and of a
genuine community; and finally those of a genuine civilization
and the "ethical" ideas belonging to it, ideas of a universal
science not merely of the world but of everything that is at all, be
it an idea, an ideal norm, etc.*
In the end, the universal personal science itself seems to
transform itself into the all-encompassing science, to resolve
itself into a universal philosophy, and eidetically into a universal
ontology. For everything proceeds from us, the living human
beings who pose theoretical questions; and we ourselves are
persons and have, in our common world, the subject matter of
all possible subject matters, for all possible posings of questions,
and thus also for the highest and most ultimate questions of
man.
The regression from this universal, personally oriented view
of the world, which is historical in its fashion, which moves
* But this is the consistent execution of humanistic science—in
the natural attitude.
9. Biemel's interpolation.

334

/

APPENDIX III

upon the ground of the pregiven world, back to the absolute
ground, that of transcendental subjectivity.
Here the point of departure is: we, who carry out the universal consideration of persons, drawing into it the universal consideration of the surrounding world, etc., are ourselves men,
European men; we ourselves have developed historically; as historians we ourselves create world history and world science in
every sense, a historical cultural structure within the motivation
of the European history in which we are situated. The world
which is for us is itself a historical structure belonging to us,
who are ourselves in our being a historical structure. What does
all this relativity itself presuppose as being nonrelative? Subjectivity as transcendental subjectivity. Another point of departure:
eidetically general personal science—psychology. Universal psychology, fallback into transcendental philosophy.

Appendix IV:
Philosophy as Mankind's Self-Reflection;
the Self-Realization of Reasoni
T H E TASK WHICH the philosopher puts to himself, his
life-goal as a philosopher: universal science of the world, universal, definitive knowledge, the universe of truths in themselves
about the world, the world in itself. What about this goal and its
attainability? Can I begin with a truth, a definitive truth? A
definitive truth, a truth through which I can assert something
about something that is in itself and be indubitably certain of its
definitiveness? If I already had such "immediately self-evident"
truths, then I could perhaps mediately derive new ones from
them. But where do I have them? Is any entity in itself so indubitably certain to me through immediate experience that I could, in
accord with this experience, with descriptive concepts which
immediately fit this experience or the content of this experience,
express immediate truths in themselves? But what about any
and every experience of what is in the world, experience of what
I am immediately certain of as existing spatiotemporally? It is
certain; but this certainty can modalize itself, it can become
doubtful, it can dissolve in the course of experience into illusion:
no immediate experiential assertion gives me an entity as what it
is in itself but only something meant with certainty that must
verify itself in the course of my experiencing life. But the verification which lies merely in the harmonious character of actual
experience does not prevent the possibility of illusion.
Experiencing—in general, living as an ego (thinking, valuing, acting)—I am necessarily an "I" that has its "thou," its "we,"

i. This is the manuscript that Biemel places at the end of the
Crisis text as "§ 73—Schlusswort," pp. 269-76. My reasons for placing it among the supplementary texts are given in the Translator's
Introduction, p. xx.
[335]

336

/

APPENDIX IV

its "you"—the T of the personal pronouns. And equally necessarily, I am and we are, in the community of egos, correlates of
everything to which we address ourselves as existing in the
world, which we always presuppose as being commonly experienceable in addressing ourselves to it, naming it, speaking about
it, grounding our knowledge, and which as such is there for us, is
actual, is valid for us in the community of conscious life as a life
which is not individually isolable but is internally communalized. But this is always such that the world is our common world,
necessarily having ontic validity; yet in particular matters I can
enter into contradiction with others, into doubt and negation of
being, similarly to the way I do this with myself. Now where and
how do I have something that exists definitively in itself?
[Corrected] experience—either as communal experience and reciprocal correction or as one's own personal experience and
self-correction—does not change the relativity of experience;
even as communal experience it is relative, and thus all descriptive assertions are necessarily relative, and all conceivable inferences, deductive or inductive, are relative. How can thinking
achieve anything but relative truths? The man of everyday life is
after all not without reason; he is a thinking being, he has the
tcaOoXov, unlike the animal, hence he has language, description,
he makes inferences, he asks questions of truth, he verifies,
argues, and decides in a rational way—but does the whole idea
of "truth in itself have a meaning for him? Is this [idea],
together with its correlate, what exists in itself, not a philosophical invention? But it is not a fiction, not a dispensable invention
without significance, but one which raises—or is called to raise
—man to a new level in a new historical development
[Historizität] of human life, a historical development whose entelechy is this new idea and the philosophical or scientific praxis
belonging to it, the method of a new sort of scientific thinking.
"In-itself" means as much as "objective," at least in the way
that the objective is opposed in the exact sciences to the merely
subjective, the latter being understood as that which merely
indicates something objective or that in which something objective is supposed merely to appear. It is merely a phenomenon of
something objective; to come to know the objective by recognizing it within the phenomena and to determine it through objective concepts and truths, this is the task.
But the sense of the task thus posed and of its presuppositions, that is, the presuppositions of all method, has never been
seriously considered and itself investigated in a scientific man-

Philosophy as Mankind's Self-Reflection /

337

ner, in an ultimately responsible manner, so that one has not
even become clear on the fact that the sense of natural-scientific
objectivity, or of the task and method of natural science, is
fundamentally and essentially different from the sense of objectivity, task, and method in the humanistic disciplines. This is as
true of psychology as it is of the so-called concrete humanistic
disciplines. One has expected the same objectivity from psychology as from physics, and because of this a psychology in the full
and actual sense has been quite impossible; for an objectivity
after the fashion of natural science is downright absurd when
applied to the soul, to subjectivity, whether as individual subjectivity, individual person, and individual life or as communally
historical subjectivity, as social subjectivity in the broadest
sense.
This is the ultimate sense of the objection that one must
make to the philosophies of all times—with the exception of the
philosophy of idealism, which of course failed in its method:
that it was not able to overcome the naturalistic objectivism
which was from the beginning and always remained a very
natural temptation. As I said, only idealism, in all its forms,
attempts to lay hold of subjectivity as subjectivity and to do
justice to the fact that the world is never given to the subject and
the communities of subjects in any other way than as the subjectively relative valid world with particular experiential content
and as a world which, in and through subjectivity, takes on ever
new transformations of meaning; and that even the apodictically
persisting conviction of one and the same world, exhibiting itself
subjectively in changing ways, is a conviction motivated purely
within subjectivity, a conviction whose sense—the world itself,
the actually existing world—never surpasses the subjectivity
that brings it about. But idealism was always too quick with its
theories and for the most part could not free itself from hidden
objectivistic presuppositions; or else, as speculative idealism, it
passed over the task of interrogating, concretely and analytically, actual subjectivity, i.e., subjectivity as having the actual
phenomenal world in intuitive validity—which, properly understood, is nothing other than carrying out the phenomenological
reduction and putting transcendental phenomenology into action. This explains, by the way, why I call the phenomenology I
have developed transcendental and why I speak in it of transcendental subjectivity. For when Kant gives the old word a new
meaning through his critique of reason, one can easily convince
oneself that the quite different idealism of Berkeley and Hume,

338

/

APPENDIX IV

indeed any idealism, looked at more closely, has the same thematic field and poses questions within this field which are only
differently formulated.
Reason is the specific characteristic of man, as a being living
in personal activities and habitualities. This life, as personal life,
is a constant becoming through a constant intentionality of
development. What becomes, in this life, is the person himself.
His being is forever becoming; and in the correlation of individual-personal and communal-personal being this is true of both,
i.e., of the [individual] man and of unified human civilizations.
Human personal life proceeds in stages of self-reflection and
self-responsibility from isolated occasional acts of this form to
the stage of universal self-reflection and self-responsibility, up to
the point of seizing in consciousness the idea of autonomy, the
idea of a resolve of the will to shape one's whole personal life
into the synthetic unity of a life of universal self-responsibility
and, correlatively, to shape oneself into the true "I," the free,
autonomous T which seeks to realize his innate reason, the
striving to be true to himself, to be able to remain identical with
himself as a reasonable "F; but there is an inseparable correlation here between individual persons and communities by virtue
of their inner immediate and mediate interrelatedness in all
their interests—interrelated in both harmony and conflict—and
also in the necessity of allowing individual-personal reason to
come to ever more perfect realization only as communal-personal reason and vice versa.
The universally, apodictically grounded and grounding science arises now as the necessarily highest function of mankind,
as I said, namely, as making possible mankind's development
into a personal autonomy and into an all-encompassing autonomy for mankind—the idea which represents the driving force
of life for the highest stage of mankind.
Thus philosophy is nothing other than [rationalism],2
through and through, but it is rationalism differentiated within
itself according to the different stages of the movement of intention and fulfillment; it is ratio in the constant movement of
self-elucidation, begun with the first breakthrough of philosophy
into mankind, whose innate reason was previously in a state of
concealment, of nocturnal obscurity.
The image of the dawn characterizes Greek philosophy in its
beginning stage, the first elucidation through the first cognitive
2. Biemel's interpolation.

Philosophy as Mankind's Self-Reflection /

339

conception of "what is" as universe, as world of what is; following soon after this, in a subjective direction of gaze, is the
correlative discovery of long-familiar man as the subject of the
world, this subject being conceived, however, as man within
mankind, who is related through his reason to the totality of
being and to himself. From the viewpoint of merely external
historical scholarship, with its focus upon men existing in the
world and upon the philosophies as theoretical constructs (systems of propositions), the history of philosophy is [merely] one
cultural configuration among others and, in its external, faded
sequence (which the historical point of view—lucus a non lucendo—calls a development), a causal process occurring in the
world, in the world's space-time.
Seen from the inside, however, it is a struggle of the generations of philosophers, who are the bearers of this spiritual development, living and surviving in spiritual community, in the
constant struggle of "awakened" reason to come to itself, to an
understanding of itself, to a reason which concretely understands itself in understanding the existing world, existing in its
whole universal truth. [To say that] philosophy, science in all its
forms, is rational—that is a tautology. But in all its forms it is on
its way to a higher rationahty; it is rationality which, discovering
again and again its unsatisfying relativity, is driven on in its
toils, in its will to attain the true and full rationahty. But finally
it discovers that this rationality is an idea residing in the infinite
and is de facto necessarily [only] on the way; but [it discovers]
also that there is a final form here which is at the same time the
beginning form of a new sort of infinity and relativity—this,
however, in a double sense of discovery which signifies, historically, two epochs of beginning and advance.
The first is the epoch in which the demand of apodicticity is
discovered and for the first time lucidly taken up into the will by
a historically individualized philosophical personality: that is,
Descartes, as the initiator of the historical epoch of the modern
period. The discovery is submerged for a time, lapsing into
misinterpretation; [but] it is relatively fruitful even under this
misinterpretation, taking effect in the sciences of rationalism, its
a priori and empirical sciences. The consciousness of the inadequacy of this philosophy arouses reaction: apart from the sensationalistic and finally skeptical philosophy (Hume) there is the
Kantian and subsequent transcendental philosophy—in which
the transcendental primal motive, however, the motive which
arises out of the demand for apodicticity, is still not aroused.

340

/

APPENDIX IV

The up-and-down of the historical movements—newly
strengthened empiricist sensationalism and skepticism, newly
strengthened rationalism in the older scientific style, German
Idealism and the reaction against it—all this together characterizes the first epoch, that of the whole "modern period." The
second period is the renewed beginning, as the reappropriation
of the Cartesian discovery, the fundamental demand of apodicticity; and in this beginning, through the changed historical
situation (to which all the fateful developments and philosophies of the first epoch belong), there arise forces of motivation,
a radical thinking-through of the genuine and imperishable
sense of apodicticity (apodicticity as a fundamental problem),
the exhibiting of the true method of an apodictically grounded
and apodictically progressing philosophy; and included within
this is the discovery of the radical contrast between what is
usually called apodictic knowledge and what, in the transcendental understanding, outlines the primal ground and the primal
method of all philosophy. It is precisely with this that there
begins a philosophy with the deepest and most universal self-understanding of the philosophizing ego as the bearer of absolute
reason coming to itself, of the same ego as implicating, in his
apodictic being-for-himself, his fellow subjects and all possible
fellow philosophers; [this is] the discovery of absolute intersubjectivity (objectified in the world as the whole of mankind), as
that in which reason, in obscurity, in elucidation, in the movement of lucid self-understanding, is in infinite progress; the
discovery of the necessary concrete manner of being of absolute
(in the ultimate sense, transcendental) subjectivity in a transcendental life of constant "world-constitution"; the new discovery, correlative to this, of the "existing world," whose ontic
meaning, as transcendentally constituted, results in a new
meaning for what, in the earlier stages, was called world, worldtruth, world-knowledge; but within this a new meaning is also
given to human existence: [man's] existence in the spatiotemporally pregiven world as the self-objectification of transcendental subjectivity and its being, its constituting life; what follows
this is the ultimate self-understanding of man as being responsible for his own human being: his self-understanding as being in
being called to a life of apodicticity, not only in abstractly practicing apodictic science in the usual sense but [as being mankind]
which realizes its whole concrete being in apodictic freedom by
becoming apodictic mankind in the whole active life of its reason
—through which it is human; as I said, mankind understanding

Philosophy as Mankinds Self-Reflection /

341

itself as rational, understanding that it is rational in seeking to
be rational; that this signifies an infinity of living and striving
toward reason; that reason is precisely that which man qua man,
in his innermost being, is aiming for, that which alone can
satisfy him, make him "blessed"; that reason allows for no differentiation into "theoretical/' "practical/' "aesthetic," or whatever;
that being human is teleological being and an ought-to-be, and
that this teleology holds sway in each and every activity and
project of an ego; that through self-understanding in all this it
can know the apodictic telos; and that this knowing, the ultimate
self-understanding, has no other form than self-understanding
according to a priori principles as self-understanding in the form
of philosophy.

Appendix V:
[Objectivity and the World of Experience]x
I N PRESCIENTIFIC experiential life we stand within the
Heraclitean flux of the changing data of sensible things; and
throughout the alteration of these data we do have, with naive
experiential self-evidence, the certainty of coming to know,
through seeing, touching, feeling, hearing, etc., the same thing
through its properties and of confirming it, through "repetition"
of the experiences, as something which objectively and actually
is, and is such-and-such; yet clearly what we gain hereby as
knowledge of the thing is, in all its identifiable determinations,
something that remains unwaveringly approximate, suspended
in vague differentiations of greater or less perfection. What
becomes well known through repeated experience is always still
only relatively known in regard to everything known about it,
and it thus has in all respects a peculiar horizon of open unfamiliarity. There is, then, belonging modally to the experiencing
itself, always something like coming nearer to the thing, getting
to know it more exactly; and this involves, under the title of
"more exact determination," a continually possible process of
correction, for example, finding what was seen as smooth and
even, as purely red, and the like, to be "in truth" a bit rough,
uneven, spotted, etc. And this is especially so in the communalization of our experiential life with that of our fellow men. Each
of us has his own experiential representations, but with the
normal certainty that everyone present experiences the same
things and in the possible course of his experiences can come to
know the same things through similar properties. This applies,
then, to the everyday common world in which the whole of our

i. Biemel: "From 1936 (?)" This text appears in the German
edition as "Beilage II," pp. 357-64. Titles in brackets have been added
by the translator to manuscripts which bear no title in the original.
[343]

344

/

APPENDIX V

normal practical life runs its course. Everything that is valid for
us as actually existing there is always already understood as
existing for all, precisely through common experience. And it is
not only that every determination which is identifiably valid here
stands within a horizon of open, possibly closer determination;
every [object] stands within another open horizon extending
beyond what is coperceived and already cof amiliar in the way of
experiential objects, extending into the infinity of unknown
things, things of possible experiential knowledge. To these also
correspond, as belonging to the vague things, horizons of causalities which are also only vague; these, insofar as they have
become known determinately through experience, are related to
the circumstances and changes in circumstances which are experienced with approximate determinateness and have, in addition, their horizon of as yet fully undetermined causalities,
related to the horizon of unfamiliar external things.
This style of the experiential world, a manner of being which
is in suspension in regard to more or less perfect determination
within open, undetermined horizons, does not disturb the course
of normal practical life, the everyday world which is that of
normal men; their life is related to a sphere of normal things
which become known to them in common through a set of
normal types of experience; all their life reckons with such
things only in regard to what is identifiable in vague types.
Whatever remains in suspension over and above this is practically irrelevant; hence there is here a practically perfect sort of
exactness and a practically perfect acquaintance with the things
as they really are and [as they] can be exhibited [to be] again and
again in their true being—in the only truth which normal, practical life knows and needs.
But given this inalterable style of our experiential world—
the world we constantly have in life as the world of actual
experience, which gives to the word "world" its sole original
sense—how is scientific knowledge of the world, "philosophy" in
the language of the ancients, possible? Indeed, how can it even
be motivated as a task, and specifically with that sense of scientific objectivity which has come to be taken completely for
granted by us, a sense that had first to be formed in the development and transformation of the original world-concept? This
sense has come to be taken so much for granted by us that we
have difficulty even making clear to ourselves that we are confronted here with the product of a development into whose
original motives and original self-evidence we must inquire.

Objectivity and the World of Experience /

345

With the first breakthrough of a universal theoretical interest,
through which philosophy enters history with its universal subject matter of everything that is at all, a totality and an allencompassing unity of what is, the most general and invariant
characteristics of the world, as the world of original experience,
are also noticed, and correlatively the invariant properties of the
experience of them itself; thus in particular the universal causal
style of this world, as well as the universal structure, on the other
side, of the always vague and undetermined way of knowing the
experienced things. A deeper inspection of this knowledge soon
gives rise also to the recognition of its relativity to those who
experience, individually and together, those who cognitively
identify the same things throughout the alteration of wavering,
subjective, sensible manners of givenness. But how, from this
point, did the idea arise of an absolute, exact determinateness of
things, and not only those actually experienced and actually experienceable but also the things of the universal, open, infinite
world-horizon which can never be traversed by actual experience
with its finite progress? How did the idea arise of an exact universal causality and, as opposed to all empirical induction in the
realm of what is factually experienceable, the idea of an exact
universal inducibility of everything that is undetermined and
open ad infinitum in virtue of the experiential structure of the
original world? Thus, as we can also say: how did the leap occur
from S6& to kmcTTrjiiTj and, under the latter heading, to the idea of
a rationally knowable in-itself which exhibits itself merely subjectively and relatively as mere appearance in the things of senseexperience?
Exact objectivity is the accomplishment of method, practiced
by men generally in the world of experience (the "sense-world")
—practiced not as a commercial praxis, as a technique of shaping and reshaping things pregiven in experience, but as a praxis
in which those imperfectly determining thing-representations
make up the material; and it involves a general attitude of
thought such that, taking an exemplary individual thing as an
example of "any given thing at all," the open, endless multiplicity of its imperfect but perfectible subjective representations is
thought of as having been run through, and this in the exercise
of the capacity of proceeding from each [representation] 2 along
the lines of its possible perfection. The capacity of carrying out
the series of gradations is limited, not only in the case of experi2. Biemel's interpolation.

346

/

APPENDIX V

ences (of fact), but also in that of intuitive fiction; both, considered as actual intuitions of the exemplary thing that one would
come to know experientially in a more and more perfect way,
soon break off. True, an empty anticipation of something "more
perfect" is necessarily given at the same time, but not in such a
way that the practical intuition aimed at the plus ultra could
ever be fulfilled, any more than the continuation of the perfection-series, now prefigured in an empty way, [could be fulfilled]
as a series to be continued. Here the idealizing accomplishment
begins: the conception of the "again and again"—in the direction of the empty prior design of the series, the empty thought of
its fulfillment conceived of as possible, whereby a new series
would attain a prior design, again conceived with a possible
fulfillment, and so on again and again—in infinitum.
What arises first is the idea of continuation which is repeatable with unconditional generality, with its own self-evidence, as
a freely thinkable and self-evident possible infinity, rather than
the open endlessness [described above]: rather than finite iteration, this is iteration within the sphere of the unconditional
"again-and-again," of what can be renewed with ideal freedom.
With this the properties of the examplary thing as such are
idealized, as an example for thought which becomes self-evident
thereby of a thing as such in unconditional generality. There
arises the ideal property, as the unity of the conceived infinity of
thinkable and exact, relatively perfect exhibitings, through
which, idealiter, harmonious identification would proceed. The
thing itself is idealized as something existing through its properties—all its properties, and these in all their exhibitings,
which, in running through the conceived, infinite totality, the
all-encompassing unity, exhaust the identity of all the properties
and of the thing itself—perfectly. In the ideal running-through
of this infinite totality there would then arise an ideal knowledge
of the thing itself, as a thing with its not merely actual but also
ideally possible experiences. Accordingly, such an idealization
overcomes even the limits of our finite capacity for coming to
know the open world-horizon which continuously accompanies
all actual, experiential knowing. Even externally, in the progress
of experience from relatively known toward unknown things and
spheres of things, idealizing thinking conquers the infinity of the
experiential world, as a world-knowledge to be attained idealiter
through the thought and conceivably thought continuation and
infinite perfection of external experience, knowledge based on a

Objectivity and the World of Experience /

347

conceivable renewal "again and again" of the enrichment of
experience.
The idealized world, then, is an ideal infinity of things, each
of which is itself an index for an ideal infinity of relative exhibitings whose harmonious unity of identity—idealiter—the thing
is.
This idealization of the world—which, as can be seen, is very
complicated—prescribes to each of the things of factual worldexperience an ideal, the ideal of a knowledge [of it] which is
thinkable idealiter, can be perfected in infinitum, and can come
to absolute perfection in the traversing of the conceived infinity.
But this is not yet the accomplishment which creates, for each
pregiven thing, its individual ideal being and thus builds the
bridge to the utilization of the attained ideal multiplicity of ideas
in application to the particular pregiven world of actual experience. And indeed, seen from the standpoint of this accomplishment's already having occurred (insofar as it is actually to be
found as exact science), exact objectivity is a cognitive accomplishment which ( 1 ) presupposes a method of systematic and
determined idealization creating a world of ideals which can be
produced determinately and constructed systematically in infinitum and ( 2 ) makes self-evident the applicability of these constructible idealities to the world of experience.
The problem which is thus formulated in general terms is
the radical problem of the historical possibility of "objective"
science, objectively scientific philosophy—the science which,
after all, has long been present, in its way, as a historical fact,
which developed through the appropriation of the above idea of
its task, and which has attained, at least in one branch, a supremely fruitful realization, namely, as exact mathematics and
mathematical natural science. It is a matter not merely of establishing science's historical, factual point of origin in terms of
place, time, and actual circumstances, of tracing philosophy
back to its founders, to the ancient physicists, to Ionia, etc.;
rather, it must be understood through its original spiritual motives, i.e., in its most original meaningfulness
[Sinnhaftigkeit]
and in the original forward development of this meaningfulness.
Belonging to this, constantly cofunctioning as meaning-fundament, is the world which gives itself, and just as it gives itself, in
actual experience, the "world of sensibility." This world is historically changing in its particular styles but [is] invariant in its
invariant structure of generality.

348

/

APPENDIX V

As to how the other problem of the possibility of knowledge
—as the [problem of the] possibility of objective-scientific knowledge (here one would speak of the purely "epistemological" problem)—is related to that of the historical possibility [of such
knowledge], this can find clarification only in the further course
of our reflections. Also, because of the historical place in which
we find ourselves, the first origin is not immediately accessible to
the historical regressive inquiry. Our first concern is to look back
to the origins of a successful rational objectification within a
fundamental stratum of the world; and by this I naturally mean
the objectification which has been accomplished as geometry, as
pure mathematics.
Objectification is a matter of method, founded upon prescientific data of experience. Mathematical method "constructs,"
out of intuitive representation, ideal objects and teaches how to
deal with them operatively and systematically.* It does not produce things out of other things in the manner of handwork; it
produces ideas. Ideas arise through a peculiar sort of mental
accomplishment: idealization.
First comes the idealizing accomplishment together with the
exactly identifiable ideas it can produce, as mental structures
based on the multiplicities of appearance which are suspended
in relativity. Second, there is the operative construction of ideastructures out of pregiven ideas. The interconnection of both
makes up the objective-scientific mind which [encompasses]3
both infinities, that of the multiplicities of appearance, in which
one and the same thing exhibits itself, and that of the things
[themselves].
The idealizing mental accomplishment has its material in
the "thing-appearances," the "thing-representations." In perceiving, with its flow of appearances having vital ontic validity, these
appearances are found in the mode of performance and are not
appearances as "material." I am there, performing ontic validity,
performing its horizon. In the "synthetic" progression [of perception] I do not put the horizon together, "joining" something to
* It conceives an ideal of perfection on the basis of a conception
of the infinity of imperfection, motivated by a graduality belonging
to its own essence. It idealizes the properties of things. With this it
idealizes, correlatively, their identifiability; and, on the other side, it
also idealizes the imperfect experienceability according to which our
direct experience proceeds from known to unknown things; thus, for
a course of iterative perfectings a strict infinity of iteration is substructed—as an ideal.
3. Biemel's interpolation.

Objectivity and the World of Experience

/

349

something else, dealing with it as material; in "act," in the course
[of perceiving], I am directed toward the ontically valid unity,
directed toward the mobile, continual overlapping of the horizons, which is concretely the whole intentionality of appearances and horizons of appearances; concrete intentionality is in
the mobility of fulfillment by becoming intuitive through appearances. But in idealizing thinking the manner of performance is
changed: first there is the process of continually making intuitive the undetermined, coming appearances; then there is the
exemplary, then the conception of infinity, etc.
The two parts of exact objectification, which exhibits itself in
the finished accomplishment as physics, are represented, on the
one hand, by the accomplishment of pure mathematics, science
through "pure thinking"—that is, the science which idealizes, in
the sense more precisely given above, and which remains purely
within the realm of the ideals. Its full accomplishment is in fact
designated by its method of determined idealization and of a
systematic operative construction of ideal objects out of pregiven
objects, which ultimately makes it possible to master the totality.
This world [the totality of such objects] is already objective
insofar as the knowledge it affords, the ideals formed of it, are
absolutely identical for anyone who practices the method, no
matter how much his empirically intuitive representation may
differ from what serves others in their intuition-based idealization.
The mathematical accomplishment was of course limited to
the mere spatiotemporal shapes or to the structure of space-time
belonging universally to the world. It can be seen that such an
accomplishment was possible only through the essence of this
structure and that, accordingly, exact objectification could have
significance for the world, at least at first, only as a world of
bodies, whereby everything about the things that was itself noncorporeal was abstracted.
Here a peculiar question arises. When we methodically and
systematically bring to recognition the a priori of history, is this
itself a facticity of history? Does it not then presuppose the a
priori of history? The a priori is related to the being of mankind
and the surrounding world that is valid for it in experience,
thinking, and acting. But the a priori is something ideal and
general, which on the one hand refers to men themselves as
objects and on the other hand is a structure within men, in us
who form it. And what of the objectivity of these ideal struc-

350

/

APPENDIX V

tures? What of the objectivity of this a priori? Here we come
again to the presuppositions of the possibility of the uninterrupted tradition. What secures, then, the objectivity of this a
priori as being precisely a priori the being of mankind and its
cultural world, which always bears its a priori within itself, is
always valid, is identifiable in all periods of time? Does this not
presuppose ascending culture and, within it, men, motivated in
such a way that they have an interest in essential history
[Wesenshistorie], enter into scientific contact with one another,
and continually attain and hand down a priori acquisitions?
Would this not be an infinite fact?
But we come back again to the fact that historical facts
(including the present fact that we are) are objective only on the
basis of the a priori. Yet the a priori presupposes historical
being?
What would be the status of the a priori of geometry and
other a priori sciences if men were to become quite incapable in
principle of carrying out the horizon-exposition through free
variation and thus of discovering the invariant essential structure of the historical world? Could one then know whether a
science is a priori? Or, if for accidental, factual reasons a science's access to its a priori sources were blocked, how could the
kind of thinking we have attempted here ever begin, such that
the blocked sources could again be opened up?
It must be shown, then, indeed as something belonging to
the individual essence of man and thus to the world, that in
mankind this capacity can never cease, can never be completely
absent, even if it remains undeveloped for factual reasons. This
leads to the most general and deepest problems of reason.
Let us now consider the fact that geometry and the other
sciences related to it are ultimately all either actual or still to be
accomplished branches of the one philosophy, which is supposed
to be an accomplishment of theoretical mankind, philosophizing
mankind, and that their goal is truth—not everyday finite truth,
whose limitedness, whose finitude, whose relativity consists in
''* the fact that it is historical but keeps the historical horizon in the
dark. There is to be an unconditioned, absolute truth, encompassing the world, including man who lives in it, with his practical interests, his relative knowledge, and the valuations and
projects based on it; and also philosophizing man, with his
philosophical truth-structures.
Does this not then apply to all science, no matter how different its peculiar characteristics may be, and thus to all truth in

Objectivity and the World of Experience /

351

the scientific sense, as science's guiding ideal? Does it not derive
from an idealizatic n which is itself in the historical sphere, and
does it not presuppose the a priori of history, which itself derives
from an idealization?
For the first time in this work, its historical path requires
that we pose questions in this manner and that we undertake
new investigations with their own direction. Out of these—not
in these investigations themselves but in their interweaving with
further ones, and resulting from further historical paths—there
will gradually arise a style of philosophical questioning which is
new in principle, and a new method of philosophical work.
Even the problem-analyses of this section offer troublesome
difficulties; and because of pathways that diverge considerably
from the old familiar ones in philosophy and science, pathways
whose pinnacles cannot be discerned in advance, they probably
first appeared to the reader as excursuses of little interest which
interrupt the coherent style of the treatise. Here I must ask the
reader for a little restraining patience. Later it will be understood that none of the expositions in this work are dispensable to
it and its task of leading up to transcendental phenomenology.
To this, its over-all meaning, belongs the interweaving of historical investigations and the systematic investigations they motivate, arranged from the start according to that peculiar sort of
reflexivity through which alone the self-reflection of the philosopher can function—the philosopher, who is in the position of not
being able to presuppose any pregiven philosophy, his own or
another, since the possibility of a philosophy as such, as the sole
philosophy, is to be his problem.

Appendix VI:
[The Origin of Geometry]1
T H E INTEREST THAT propels us in this work makes it
necessary to engage first of all in reflections which surely never
occurred to Galileo. We must focus our gaze not merely upon the
ready-made, handed-down geometry and upon the manner of
being which its meaning had in his thinking; it was no different
in his thinking from what it was in that of all the late inheritors
of the older geometric wisdom, whenever they were at work,
either as pure geometers or as making practical applications of
geometry. Rather, indeed above all, we must also inquire back
into the original meaning of the handed-down geometry, which
continued to be valid with this very same meaning—continued
and at the same time was developed further, remaining simply
"geometry" in all its new forms. Our considerations will necessarily lead to the deepest problems of meaning, problems of
science and of the history of science in general, and indeed in
the end to problems of a universal history in general; so that our
problems and expositions concerning Galilean geometry take on
an exemplary significance.
Let it be noted in advance that, in the midst of our historical
meditations on modern philosophy, there appears here for the
first time with Galileo, through the disclosure of the depth-problems of the meaning-origin of geometry and, founded on this, of
the meaning-origin of his new physics, a clarifying light for our
whole undertaking: namely, [the idea of] seeking to carry out, in

i. This manuscript was written in 1936 and was edited and published (beginning with the third paragraph) by Eugen Fink in the
Revue internationale de philosophie, Vol. I, No. 2 (1939) under the
title "Der Ursprung der Geometrie als intentional-historisches Problem." It appears in Biemel's edition of the Crisis as "Beilage III," pp.
365-86. The first paragraphs suggest it was meant for inclusion in
the Crisis.
[353]

354

/

APPENDIX VI

the form of historical meditations, self-reflections about our own
present philosophical situation in the hope that in this way we
can finally take possession of the meaning, method, and beginning of philosophy, the one philosophy to which our life seeks to
be and ought to be devoted. For, as will become evident here, at
first in connection with one example, our investigations are
historical in an unusual sense, namely, in virtue of a thematic
direction which opens up depth-problems quite unknown to ordinary history, problems which, [however,] in their own way, are
undoubtedly historical problems. Where a consistent pursuit of
these depth-problems leads can naturally not yet be seen at the
beginning.
The question of the origin of geometry (under which title
here, for the sake of brevity, we include all disciplines that deal
with shapes existing mathematically in pure space-time) shall
not be considered here as the philological-historical question,
i.e., as the search for the first geometers who actually uttered
pure geometrical propositions, proofs, theories, or for the particular propositions they discovered, or the like. Rather than this,
our interest shall be the inquiry back into the most original sense
in which geometry once arose, was present as the tradition of
millennia, is still present for us, and is still being worked on in a
lively forward development; * we inquire into that sense in
which it appeared in history for the first time—in which it had to
appear, even though we know nothing of the first creators and
are not even asking after them. Starting from what we know,
from our geometry, or rather from the older handed-down forms
(such as Euclidean geometry), there is an inquiry back into the
submerged original beginnings of geometry as they necessarily
must have been in their "primally establishing" function. This
regressive inquiry unavoidably remains within the sphere of
generalities, but, as we shall soon see, these are generalities
which can be richly explicated, with prescribed possibilities of
arriving at particular questions and self-evident claims as answers. The geometry which is ready-made, so to speak, from
which the regressive inquiry begins, is a tradition. Our human
existence moves within innumerable traditions. The whole cultural world, in all its forms, exists through tradition. These
forms have arisen as such not merely causally; we also know
* So also for Galileo and all the periods following the Renaissance,
continually being worked on in a lively forward development, and yet
at the same time a tradition.

The Origin of Geometry /

355

already that tradition is precisely tradition, having arisen within
our human space through human activity, i.e., spiritually, even
though we generally know nothing, or as good as nothing, of the
particular provenance and of the spiritual source that brought it
about. And yet there lies in this lack of knowledge, everywhere
and essentially, an implicit knowledge, which can thus also be
made explicit, a knowledge of unassailable self-evidence. It begins with superficial commonplaces, such as: that everything
traditional has arisen out of human activity, that accordingly
past men and human civilizations existed, and among them their
first inventors, who shaped the new out of materials at hand,
whether raw or already spiritually shaped. From the superficial,
however, one is led into the depths. Tradition is open in this
general way to continued inquiry; and, if one consistently maintains the direction of inquiry, an infinity of questions opens up,
questions which lead to definite answers in accord with their
sense. Their form of generality—indeed, as one can see, of
unconditioned general validity—naturally allows for application
to individually determined particular cases, though it determines
only that in the individual that can be grasped through subsumption.
Let us begin, then, in connection with geometry, with the
most obvious commonplaces that we have already expressed
above in order to indicate the sense of our regressive inquiry. We
understand our geometry, available to us through tradition (we
have learned it, and so have our teachers), to be a total acquisition of spiritual accomplishments which grows through the continued work of new spiritual acts into new acquisitions. We
know of its handed-down, earlier forms, as those from which it
has arisen; but with every form the reference to an earlier one is
repeated. Clearly, then, geometry must have arisen out of a first
acquisition, out of first creative activities. We understand its
persisting manner of being: it is not only a mobile forward
process from one set of acquisitions to another but a continuous
synthesis in which all acquisitions maintain their validity, all
make up a totality such that, at every present stage, the total
acquisition is, so to speak, the total premise for the acquisitions
of the new level. Geometry necessarily has this mobility and has
a horizon of geometrical future in precisely this style; this is its
meaning for every geometer who has the consciousness (the
constant implicit knowledge) of existing within a forward development understood as the progress of knowledge being built into
the horizon. The same thing is true of every science. Also, every

356

/

APPENDIX VI

science is related to an open chain of the generations of those
who work for and with one another, researchers either known or
unknown to one another who axe the accomplishing subjectivity
of the whole living science. Science, and in particular geometry,
with this ontic meaning, must have had a historical beginning;
this meaning itself must have an origin in an accomplishment:
first as a project and then in successful execution.
Obviously it is the same here as with every other invention.
Every spiritual accomplishment proceeding from its first project
to its execution is present for the first time in the self-evidence of
actual success. But when we note that mathematics has the
manner of being of a lively forward movement from acquisitions
as premises to new acquisitions, in whose ontic meaning that of
the premises is included (the process continuing in this manner), then it is clear that the total meaning of geometry (as a
developed science, as in the case of every science) could not
have been present as a project and then as mobile fulfillment at
the beginning. A more primitive formation of meaning necessarily went before it as a preliminary stage, undoubtedly in such a
way that it appeared for the first time in the self-evidence of
successful realization. But this way of expressing it is actually
overblown. Self-evidence means nothing more than grasping an
entity with the consciousness of its original being-itself-there
[Selbst-da], Successful realization of a project is, for the acting
subject, self-evidence; in this self-evidence, what has been realized is there, originaliter, as itself.
But now questions arise. This process of projecting and successfully realizing occurs, after all, purely within the subject of
the inventor, and thus the meaning, as present originaliter with
its whole content, lies exclusively, so to speak, within his mental
space. But geometrical existence is not psychic existence; it does
not exist as something personal within the personal sphere of
consciousness; it is the existence of what is objectively there for
"everyone" (for actual and possible geometers, or those who
understand geometry). Indeed, it has, from its primal establish- ment, an existence which is peculiarly supertemporal and which
—of this we are certain—is accessible to all men, first of all to
the actual and possible mathematicians of all peoples, all ages;
and this is true of all its particular forms. And all forms newly
produced by someone on the basis of pregiven forms immediately take on the same objectivity. This is, we note, an "ideal"
objectivity. It is proper to a whole class of spiritual products of
the cultural world, to which not only all scientific constructions

The Origin of Geometry

/

357

and the sciences themselves belong but also, for example, the
constructions of fine literature.* Works of this class do not, like
tools (hammers, pliers) or like architectural and other such
products, have a repeatability in many like exemplars. The Pythagorean theorem, [indeed] all of geometry, exists only once, no
matter how often or even in what language it may be expressed.
It is identically the same in the "original language" of Euclid and
in all "translations"; and within each language it is again the
same, no matter how many times it has been sensibly uttered,
from the original expression and writing-down to the innumerable oral utterances or written and other documentations. The
sensible utterances have spatiotemporal individuation in the
world like all corporeal occurrences, like everything embodied in
bodies as such; but this is not true of the spiritual form itself,
which is called an "ideal object" [ideale Gegenständlichkeit], In a
certain way ideal objects do exist objectively in the world, but it
is only in virtue of these two-leveled repetitions and ultimately in
virtue of sensibly embodying repetitions. For language itself, in
all its particularizations (words, sentences, speeches), is, as can
easily be seen from the grammatical point of view, thoroughly
made up of ideal objects; for example, the word Löwe occurs
only once in the German language; it is identical throughout its
innumerable utterances by any given persons. But the idealities
of geometrical words, sentences, theories—considered purely as
linguistic structures—are not the idealities that make up what is
expressed and brought to validity as truth in geometry; the latter
are ideal geometrical objects, states of affairs, etc. Wherever
something is asserted, one can distinguish what is thematic, that
about which it is said (its meaning), from the assertion, which
itself, during the asserting, is never and can never be thematic.
And what is thematic here is precisely ideal objects, and quite
different ones from those coming under the concept of language.
Our problem now concerns precisely the ideal objects which are
thematic in geometry: how does geometrical ideality (just like
that of all sciences) proceed from its primary intrapersonal
* But the broadest concept of literature encompasses them all;
that is, it belongs to their objective being that they be linguistically
expressed and can be expressed again and again; or, more precisely,
they have their objectivity, their existence-for-e very one, only as
signification, as the meaning of speech. This is true in a peculiar
fashion in the case of the objective sciences: for them the difference
between the original language of the work and its translation into
other languages does not remove its identical accessibility or change
it into an inauthentic, indirect accessibility.

358

/

APPENDIX VI

origin, where it is a structure within the conscious space of the
first inventor's soul, to its ideal objectivity? In advance we see
that it occurs by means of language, through which it receives,
so to speak, its linguistic living body [Sprachleib]. But how does
linguistic embodiment make out of the merely intrasubjective
structure the objective structure which, e.g., as geometrical concept or state of affairs, is in fact present as understandable by all
and is valid, already in its linguistic expression as geometrical
speech, as geometrical proposition, for all the future in its geometrical sense?
x
Naturally, we shall not go into the general problem which
also arises here of the origin of language in its ideal existence
and its existence in the real world grounded in utterance and
documentation; but we must say a few words here about the
relation between language, as a function of man within human
civilization, and the world as the horizon of human existence.
Living wakefully in the world we are constantly conscious of
the world, whether we pay attention to it or not, conscious of it
as the horizon of our life, as a horizon of "things" (real objects),
of our actual and possible interests and activities. Always standing out against the world-horizon is the horizon of our fellow
men, whether there are any of them present or not. Before even
taking notice of it at all, we are conscious of the open horizon of
our fellow men with its limited nucleus of our neighbors, those
known to us. We are thereby coconscious of the men on our
external horizon in each case as "others"; in each case T am
conscious of them as "my" others, as those with whom I can
enter into actual and potential, immediate and mediate relations
of empathy; [this involves] a reciprocal "getting along" with
others; and on the basis of these relations I can deal with them,
enter into particular modes of community with them, and then
know, in a habitual way, of my being so related. like me, every
human being—and this is how he is understood by me and
everyone else—has his fellow men and, always counting himself, civilization in general, in which he knows himself to be
living.
It is precisely to this horizon of civilization that common
language belongs. One is conscious of civilization from the start
as an immediate and mediate linguistic community. Clearly it is
only through language and its far-reaching documentations, as
possible communications, that the horizon of civilization can
be an open and endless one, as it always is for men. What is
privileged in consciousness as the horizon of civilization and as

The Origin of Geometry

/

359

the linguistic community is mature normal civilization (taking
away the abnormal and the world of children). In this sense
civilization is, for every man whose we-horizon it is, a community of those who can reciprocally express themselves, normally,
in a fully understandable fashion; and within this community
everyone can talk about what is within the surrounding world of
his civilization as objectively existing. Everything has its name,
or is namable in the broadest sense, i.e., linguistically expressible. The objective world is from the start the world for all, the
world which "everyone" has as world-horizon. Its objective being
presupposes men, understood as men with a common language.
Language, for its part, as function and exercised capacity, is
related correlatively to the world, the universe of objects which
is linguistically expressible in its being and its being-such. Thus
men as men, fellow men, world—the world of which men, of
which we, always talk and can talk—and, on the other hand,
language, are inseparably intertwined; and one is always certain
of their inseparable relational unity, though usually only implicitly, in the manner of a horizon.
This being presupposed, the primally establishing geometer
can obviously also express his internal structure. But the question arises again: How does the latter, in its "ideality," thereby
become objective? To be sure, something psychic which can be
understood by others [nachverstehbar] and is communicable, as
something psychic belonging to this man, is eo ipso objective,
just as he himself, as concrete man, is experienceable and namable by everyone as a real thing in the world of things in general.
People can agree about such things, can make common verifiable assertions on the basis of common experience, etc. But how
does the intrapsychically constituted structure arrive at an intersubjective being of its own as an ideal object which, as "geometrical," is anything but a real psychic object, even though it has
arisen psychically? Let us reflect. The original being-itself-there,
in the immediacy [Aktualität] of its first production, i.e.,.in
original "self-evidence," results in no persisting acquisition at all
that could have objective existence. Vivid self-evidence passes-—
though in such a way that the activity immediately turns into the
passivity of the flowingly fading consciousness of what-has-justnow-been. Finally this "retention" disappears, but the "disappeared" passing and being past has not become nothing for the
subject in question: it can be reawakened. To the passivity of
what is at first obscurely awakened and what perhaps emerges
with greater and greater clarity there belongs the possible active

360

/

APPENDIX VI

ity of a recollection in which the past experiencing [Erleben]
is lived through in a quasi-new and quasi-active way. Now if the
originally self-evident production, as the pure fulfillment of its
intention, is what is renewed (recollected), there necessarily
occurs, accompanying the active recollection of what is past, an
activity of concurrent actual production, and there arises
thereby, in original "coincidence," the self-evidence of identity:
what has now been realized in original fashion is the same as
what was previously self-evident. Also coestablished is the capacity for repetition at will with the self-evidence of the identity
(coincidence of identity) of the structure throughout the chain
of repetitions. Yet even with this, we have still not gone beyond
the subject and his subjective, evident capacities; that is, we still
have no "objectivity" given. It does arise, however—in a preliminary stage—in understandable fashion as soon as we take into
consideration the function of empathy and fellow mankind as a
community of empathy and of language. In the contact of reciprocal linguistic understanding, the original production and the
product of one subject can be actively understood by the others.
In this full understanding of what is produced by the other, as in
the case of recollection, a present coaccomplishment on one's
own part of the presentified activity necessarily takes place; but
at the same time there is also the self-evident consciousness of
the identity of the mental structure in the productions of both
the receiver of the communication and the communicator; and
this occurs reciprocally. The productions can reproduce their
likenesses from person to person, and in the chain of the understanding of these repetitions what is self-evident turns up as the
same in the consciousness of the other. In the unity of the
community of communication among several persons the repeatedly produced structure becomes an object of consciousness, not
as a likeness, but as the one structure common to all.
Now we must note that the objectivity of the ideal structure
has not yet been fully constituted through such actual transferring of what has been originally produced in one to others who
originally reproduce it. What is lacking is the persisting existence of the "ideal objects" even during periods in which the
inventor and his fellows are no longer wakefully so related or
even are no longer alive. What is lacking is their continuing-to-be
even when no one has [consciously] realized them in self-evidence.
The important function of written, documenting linguistic
expression is that it makes communications possible without

The Origin of Geometry

/

361

immediate or mediate personal address; it is, so to speak, communication become virtual. Through this, the communalization
of man is lifted to a new level. Written signs are, when considered from a purely corporeal point of view, straightforwardly,
sensibly experienceable; and it is always possible that they be
intersubjectively experienceable in common. But as linguistic
signs they awaken, as do linguistic sounds, their familiar significations. The awakening is something passive; the awakened
signification is thus given passively, similarly to the way in
which any other activity which has sunk into obscurity, once
associatively awakened, emerges at first passively as a more or
less clear memory. In the passivity in question here, as in the
case of memory, what is passively awakened can be transformed
back,* so to speak, into the corresponding activity: this is the
capacity for reactivation that belongs originally to every human
being as a speaking being. Accordingly, then, the writing-down
effects a transformation of the original mode of being of the
meaning-structure, [e.g.,] within the geometrical sphere of selfevidence, of the geometrical structure which is put into words. It
becomes sedimented, so to speak. But the reader can make it
self-evident again, can reactivate the self-evidence.f
There is a distinction, then, between passively understanding the expression and making it self-evident by reactivating its
meaning. But there also exist possibilities of a kind of activity, a
thinking in terms of things that have been taken up merely
receptively, passively, which deals with significations only passively understood and taken over, without any of the self-evidence of original activity. Passivity in general is the realm of
things that are bound together and melt into one another associatively, where all meaning that arises is put together passively.
What often happens here is that a meaning arises which is
apparently possible as a unity—i.e., can apparently be made
self-evidence through a possible reactivation—whereas the attempt at actual reactivation can reactivate only the individual
members of the combination, while the intention to unify them
into a whole, instead of being fulfilled, comes to nothing; that is,
* This is a transformation of which one is conscious as being in
itself patterned after [what is passively awakened].
t But this is by no means necessary or even factually normal.
Even without this he can understand;
he can concur "as a matter of
course" in the validity of v7hat is understood without any activity of
his own. In this case he comports himself purely passively and receptively.

362

/

APPENDIX VI

the ontic validity is destroyed through the original consciousness
of nullity.
It is easy to see that even in [ordinary] human life, and first
of all in every individual life from childhood up to maturity, the
originally intuitive life which creates its originally self-evident
structures through activities on the basis of sense-experience
very quickly and in increasing measure falls victim to the seduction of language. Greater and greater segments of this life lapse
into a kind of talking and reading that is dominated purely by
association; and often enough, in respect to the validities arrived
at in this way, it is disappointed by subsequent experience.
Now one will say that in the sphere that interests us here—
that of science, of thinking directed toward the attainment of
truths and the avoidance of falsehood—one is obviously greatly
concerned from the start to put a stop to the free play of associative constructions. In view of the unavoidable sedimentation of
mental products in the form of persisting linguistic acquisitions,
which can be taken up again at first merely passively and be
taken over by anyone else, such constructions remain a constant
danger. This danger is avoided if one not merely convinces
oneself ex post facto that the particular construction can be
reactivated but assures oneself from the start, after the self-evident primal establishment, of its capacity to be reactivated and
enduringly maintained. This occurs when one has a view to the
univocity of linguistic expression and to securing, by means of
the most painstaking formation of the relevant words, propositions, and complexes of propositions, the results which are to be
univocally expressed. This must be done by the individual scientist, and not only by the inventor but by every scientist as a
member of the scientific community after he has taken over
from the others what is to be taken over. This belongs, then, to
the particulars of the scientific tradition within the corresponding community of scientists as a community of knowledge living
in the unity of a common responsibility. In accord with the
essence of science, then, its functionaries maintain the constant
claim, the personal certainty, that everything they put into scientific assertions has been said "once and for all," that it "stands
fast," forever identically repeatable with self-evidence and usable
for further theoretical or practical ends—as indubitably reactivatable with the identity of its actual meaning.*
* At first, of course, it is a matter of a firm direction of the will,
which the scientist establishes in himself, aimed at the certain capacity for reactivation. If the goal of reactivatability can be only

The Origin of Geometry /

363

However, two more things are important here. First: we
have not yet taken into account the fact that scientific thinking
attains new results on the basis of those already attained, that
the new ones serve as the foundation for still others, etc.—in the
unity of a propagative process of transferred meaning.
In the finally immense proliferation of a science like geometry, what has become of the claim and the capacity for reactivation? When every researcher works on his part of the building,
what of the vocational interruptions and time out for rest, which
cannot be overlooked here? When he returns to the actual continuation of work, must he first run through the whole immense
chain of groundings back to the original premises and actually
reactivate the whole thing? If so, a science like our modern
geometry would obviously not be possible at all. And yet it is of
the essence of the results of each stage not only that their ideal
ontic meaning in fact comes later [than that of earlier results]
but that, since meaning is grounded upon meaning, the earlier
meaning gives something of its validity to the later one, indeed
becomes part of it to a certain extent. Thus no building block
within the mental structure is self-sufficient; and none, then, can
be immediately reactivated [by itself].
This is especially true of sciences which, like geometry, have
their thematic sphere in ideal products, in idealities from which
more and more idealities at higher levels are produced. It is quite
different in the so-called descriptive sciences, where the theoretical interest, classifying and describing, remains within the
sphere of sense-intuition, which for it represents self-evidence.
Here, at least in general, every new proposition can by itself be
"cashed in" for self-evidence.
How, by contrast, is a science like geometry possible? How,
as a systematic, endlessly growing stratified structure of idealities, can it maintain its original meaningfulness through living
reactivatability if its cognitive thinking is supposed to produce
something new without being able to reactivate the previous
levels of knowledge back to the first? Even if this could have
succeeded at a more primitive stage of geometry, its energy
would ultimately have been too much spent in the effort of
procuring self-evidence and would not have been available for a
higher productivity.
relatively fulfilled, then the claim which stems from the consciousness
of being able to acquire something also has its relativity; and this
relativity also makes itself noticeable and is driven out. Ultimately,
objective, absolutely firm knowledge of truth is an infinite idea.

364

/

APPENDIX VI

Here we must take into consideration the peculiar "logical"
activity which is tied specifically to language, as well as to the
ideal cognitive structures that arise specifically within it. To any
sentence structures that emerge within a merely passive understanding there belongs essentially a peculiar sort of activity best
described by the word "explication." 2 A passively emerging sentence (e.g., in memory), or one heard and passively understood,
is at first merely received with a passive ego-participation, taken
up as valid; and in this form it is already our meaning. From this
we distinguish the peculiar and important activity of explicating
our meaning. Whereas in its first form it was a straightforwardly
valid meaning, taken up as unitary and undifferentiated—concretely speaking, a straightforwardly valid declarative sentence
—now what in itself is vague and undifferentiated is actively
explicated. Consider, for example, the way in which we understand, when superficially reading the newspaper, and simply
receive the "news"; here there is a passive taking-over of ontic
validity such that what is read straightway becomes our opinion.
But it is something special, as we have said, to have the
intention to explicate, to engage in the activity which articulates
what has been read (or an interesting sentence from it), extracting one by one, in separation from what has been vaguely,
passively received as a unity, the elements of meaning, thus
bringing the total validity to active performance in a new way on
the basis of the individual validities. What was a passive meaning-pattern has now become one constructed through active production. This activity, then, is a peculiar sort of self-evidence;
the structure arising out of it is in the mode of having been
originally produced. And in connection with this self-evidence,
too, there is communalization. The explicated judgment becomes an ideal object capable of being passed on. It is this object
exclusively that is meant by logic when it speaks of sentences or
judgments. And thus the domain of logic is universally designated; this is universally the sphere of being to which logic
pertains insofar as it is the theory of the sentences [or propositions] in general.
Through this activity, now, further activities become possible
—self-evident constructions of new judgments on the basis of
those already valid for us. This is the peculiar feature of logical
thinking and of its purely logical self-evidences. All this remains
intact even when judgments are transformed into assumptions,
2. Verdeutlichung, i.e., making explicit.

The Origin of Geometry

/

365

where, instead of ourselves asserting or judging, we think ourselves into the position of asserting or judging.
Here we shall concentrate on the sentences of language as
they come to us passively and are merely received. In this
connection it must also be noted that sentences give themselves
in consciousness as reproductive transformations of an original
meaning produced out of an actual, original activity; that is, in
themselves they refer to such a genesis. In the sphere of logical
self-evidence, deduction, or inference in forms of consequence,
plays a constant and essential role. On the other hand, one must
also take note of the constructive activities that operate with
geometrical idealities which have been explicated but not
brought to original self-evidence. (Original self-evidence must
not be confused with the self-evidence of "axioms"; for axioms
are in principle already the results of original meaning-construction and always have this behind them.)
Now what about the possibility of complete and genuine
reactivation in full originality, through going back to the primal
self-evidences, in the case of geometry and the so-called "deductive" sciences (so called, although they by no means merely
deduce)? Here the fundamental law, with unconditionally general self-evidence, is: if the premises can actually be reactivated
back to the most original self-evidence, then their self-evident
consequences can be also. Accordingly it appears that, beginning
with the primal self-evidences, the original genuineness must
propagate itself through the chain of logical inference, no matter
how long it is. However, if we consider the obvious finitude of
the individual and even the social capacity to transform the
logical chains of centuries, truly in the unity of one accomplishment, into originally genuine chains of self-evidence, we notice
that the [above] law contains within itself an idealization:
namely, the removal of limits from our capacity, in a certain
sense its infinitization. The peculiar sort of self-evidence belonging to such idealizations will concern us later.
These are, then, the general essential insights which elucidate the whole methodical development of the "deductive" sciences and with it the manner of being which is essential to them.
These sciences are not handed down ready-made in the form
of documented sentences; they involve a lively, productively
advancing formation of meaning, which always has the documented, as a sediment of earlier production, at its disposal in
that it deals with it logically. But out of sentences with sedimented signification, logical "dealing" can produce only other

^66

/

APPENDIX VI

sentences of the same character. That all new acquisitions express an actual geometrical truth is certain a priori under the
presupposition that the foundations of the deductive structure
have truly been produced and objectified in original self-evidence, i.e., have become universally accessible acquisitions. A
continuity from one person to another, from one time to another, must have been capable of being carried out. It is clear
that the method of producing original idealities out of what is
prescientifically given in the cultural world must have been
written down and fixed in firm sentences prior to the existence
of geometry; furthermore, the capacity for translating these sentences from vague linguistic understanding into the clarity of
the reactivation of their self-evident meaning must have been, in
its own way, handed down and ever capable of being handed
down.
Only as long as this condition was satisfied, or only when the
possibility of its fulfillment was perfectly secured for all time,
could geometry preserve its genuine, original meaning as a deductive science throughout the progression of logical constructions. In other words, only in this case could every geometer be
capable of bringing to mediate self-evidence the meaning borne
by every sentence, not merely as its sedimented (logical) sentence-meaning but as its actual meaning, its truth-meaning. And
so for all of geometry.
The progress of deduction follows formal-logical self-evidence;
but without the actually developed capacity for reactivating
the original activities contained within its fundamental concepts, i.e., without the "what" and the "how" of its prescientific
materials, geometry would be a tradition empty of meaning; and
if we ourselves did not have this capacity, we could never even
know whether geometry had or ever did have a genuine meaning, one that could really be "cashed in."
Unfortunately, however, this is our situation, and that of the
whole modern age.
The "presupposition" mentioned above has in fact never been
fulfilled. How the living tradition of the meaning-formation of
elementary concepts is actually carried on can be seen in elementary geometrical instruction and its textbooks; what we actually learn there is how to deal with ready-made concepts and
sentences in a rigorously methodical way. Rendering the concepts sensibly intuitable by means of drawn figures is substituted
for the actual production of the primal idealities. And the rest is
done by success—not the success of actual insight extending

The Origin of Geometry /

367

beyond the logical method's own self-evidence, but the practical
successes of applied geometry, its immense, though not understood, practical usefulness. To this we must add something that
will become visible further on in the treatment of historical
mathematics, namely, the dangers of a scientific life that is
completely given over to logical activities. These dangers lie in
certain progressive transformations of meaning * to which this
sort of scientific treatment drives one.
By exhibiting the essential presuppositions upon which rests
the historical possibility of a genuine tradition, true to its origins, of sciences like geometry, we can understand how such
sciences can vitally develop throughout the centuries and still
not be genuine. The inheritance of propositions and of the
method of logically constructing new propositions and idealities
can continue without interruption from one period to the next,
while the capacity for reactivating the primal beginnings, i.e.,
the sources of meaning for everything that comes later, has not
been handed down with it. What is lacking is thus precisely what
had given and had to give meaning to all propositions and
theories, a meaning arising from the primal sources which can
be made self-evident again and again.
Of course, grammatically coherent propositions and concatenations of propositions, no matter how they have arisen and
have achieved validity—even if it is through mere association—
have in all circumstances their own logical meaning, i.e., their
meaning that can be made self-evident through explication; this
can then be identified again and again as the same proposition,
which is either logically coherent or incoherent, where in the
latter case it cannot be executed in the unity of an actual judgment. In propositions which belong together in one domain and
in the deductive systems that can be made out of them we have a
realm of ideal identities; and for these there exist easily understandable possibilities of lasting traditionalization. But propositions, like other cultural structures, appear on the scene in the
form of tradition; they claim, so to speak, to be sedimentations
of a truth-meaning that can be made originally self-evident;
whereas it is by no means necessary that they [actually] have
such a meaning, as in the case of associatively derived falsifications. Thus the whole pregiven deductive science, the total sys* These work to the benefit of logical method, but they remove
one further and further from the origins and make one insensitive to
the problem of origin and thus to the actual ontic and truth-meaning
of all these sciences.

368

/

APPENDIX VI

tern of propositions in the unity of their validities, is first only a
claim which can be justified as an expression of the alleged
truth-meaning only through the actual capacity for reactivation.
Through this state of affairs we can understand the deeper
reason for the demand, which has spread throughout the modern
period and has finally been generally accepted, for a so-called
"epistemological grounding" of the sciences, though clarity has
never been achieved about what the much-admired sciences are
actually lacking.*
As for further details on the uprooting of an originally genuine tradition, i.e., one which involved original self-evidence at its
actual first beginning, one can point to possible and easily understandable reasons. In the first oral cooperation of the beginning
geometers, the need was understandably lacking for an exact
fixing of descriptions of the prescientific primal material and of
the ways in which, in relation to this material, geometrical
idealities arose together with the first "axiomatic" propositions.
Further, the logical superstructures did not yet rise so high that
one could not return again and again to the original meaning.
On the other hand, the possibility of the practical application of
the derived laws, which was actually obvious in connection with
the original developments, understandably led quickly, in the
realm of praxis, to a habitually practiced method of using mathematics, if need be, to bring about useful things. This method
could naturally be handed down even without the ability for
original self-evidence. Thus mathematics, emptied of meaning,
could generally propagate itself, constantly being added to logically, as could the methodics of technical application on the
other side. The extraordinarily far-reaching practical usefulness
became of itself a major motive for the advancement and appreciation of these sciences. Thus also it is understandable that the
lost original truth-meaning made itself felt so little, indeed, that
the need for the corresponding regressive inquiry had to be
reawakened. More than this: the true sense of such an inquiry
had to be discovered.
Our results based on principle are of a generality that extends" over all the so-called deductive sciences and even indicates
similar problems and investigations for all sciences. For all of
them have the mobility of sedimented traditions that are worked
upon, again and again, by an activity of producing new struc* What does Hume do but endeavor to inquire back into the
primal impressions of developed ideas and, in general, scientific
ideas?

The Origin of Geometry /

369

tures of meaning and handing them down. Existing in this way,
they extend enduringly through time, since all new acquisitions
are in turn sedimented and become working materials. Everywhere the problems, the clarifying investigations, the insights of
principle are historical We stand within the horizon of human
civilization, the one in which we ourselves now live. We are
constantly, vitally conscious of this horizon, and specifically as a
temporal horizon implied in our given present horizon. To the
one human civilization there corresponds essentially the one
cultural world as the surrounding life-world with its [peculiar]
manner of being; this world, for every historical period and
civilization, has its particular features and is precisely the tradition. We stand, then, within the historical horizon in which
everything is historical, even though we may know very little
about it in a definite way. But it has its essential structure that
can be revealed through methodical inquiry. This inquiry prescribes all the possible specialized questions, thus including, for
the sciences, the inquiries back into origin which are peculiar to
them in virtue of their historical manner of being. Here we are
led back to the primal materials of the first formation of meaning, the primal premises, so to speak, which lie in the prescientific cultural world. Of course, this cultural world has in turn its
own questions of origin, which at first remain unasked.
Naturally, problems of this particular sort immediately
awaken the total problem of the universal historicity of the
correlative manners of being of humanity and the cultural world
and the a priori structure contained in this historicity. Still,
questions like that of the clarification of the origin of geometry
have a closed character, such that one need not inquire beyond
those prescientific materials.
Further clarifications will be made in connection with two
objections which are familiar to our own philosophical-historical
situation.
In the first place, what sort of strange obstinacy is this,
seeking to take the question of the origin of geometry back to
some undiscoverable Thales of geometry, someone not even
known to legend? Geometry is available to us in its propositions,
its theories. Of course we must and we can answer for this
logical edifice to the last detail in terms of self-evidence. Here, to
be sure, we arrive at first axioms, and from them we proceed to
the original self-evidence which the fundamental concepts make
possible. What is this, if not the "theory of knowledge," in this

370

/

APPENDIX VI

case specifically the theory of geometrical knowledge? No one
would think of tracing the epistemological problem back to such
a supposed Thales. This is quite superfluous. The presently available concepts and propositions themselves contain their own
meaning, first as nonself-evident opinion, but nevertheless as
true propositions with a meant but still hidden truth which we
can obviously bring to light by rendering the propositions themselves self-evident.
Our answer is as follows. Certainly the historical backward
reference has not occurred to anyone; certainly theory of knowledge has never been seen as a peculiarly historical task. But this
is precisely what we object to in the past. The ruling dogma of
the separation in principle between epistemological elucidation
and historical, even humanistic-psychological explanation, between epistemological and genetic origin, is fundamentally mistaken, unless one inadmissibly limits, in the usual way, the
concepts of "history," "historical explanation," and "genesis." Or
rather, what is fundamentally mistaken is the limitation through
which precisely the deepest and most genuine problems of history are concealed. If one thinks over our expositions (which are
of course still rough and will later of necessity lead us into new
depth-dimensions), what they make obvious is precisely that
what we know—namely, that the presently vital cultural configuration "geometry" is a tradition and is still being handed down
—is not knowledge concerning an external causality which effects the succession of historical configurations, as if it were
knowledge based on induction, the presupposition of which
would amount to an absurdity here; rather, to understand geometry or any given cultural fact is to be conscious of its historicity,
albeit "implicitly." This, however, is not an empty claim; for
quite generally it is true for every fact given under the heading
of "culture," whether it is a matter of the lowliest culture of
necessities or the highest culture (science, state, church, economic organization, etc.), that every straightforward understanding of it as an experiential fact involves the "coconsciousness"
that it as something constructed through human activity. No
matter how hidden, no matter how merely "implicitly" coimplied
this meaning is, there belongs to it the self-evident possibility of
explication, of "making it explicit" and clarifying it. Every explication and every transition from making explicit to making selfevident (even perhaps in cases .where one stops much too soon)
is nothing other than historical disclosure; in itself, essentially, it
is something historical, and as such it bears, with essential

The Origin of Geometry /

371

necessity, the horizon of its history within itself. This is of
course also to say that the whole of the cultural present, understood as a totality, "implies" the whole of the cultural past
in an undetermined but structurally determined generality. To
put it more precisely, it implies a continuity of pasts which
imply one another, each in itself being a past cultural present.
And this whole continuity is a unity of traditionalization up
to the present, which is our present as [a process of] traditionalizing itself in flowing-static vitality. This is, as has been
said, an undetermined generality, but it has in principle a
structure which can be much more widely explicated by proceeding from these indications, a structure which also grounds, "implies/' the possibilities for every search for and determination of
concrete, factual states of affairs.
Making geometry self-evident, then, whether one is clear
about this or not, is the disclosure of its historical tradition. But
this knowledge, if it is not to remain empty talk or undifferentiated generality, requires the methodical production, proceeding
from the present and carried out as research in the present, of
differentiated self-evidences of the type discovered above (in
several fragmentary investigations of what belongs to such
knowledge superficially, as it were). Carried out systematically,
such self-evidences result in nothing other and nothing less than
the universal a priori of history with all its highly abundant
component elements.
We can also say now that history is from the start nothing
other than the vital movement of the coexistence and the interweaving of original formations and sedimentations of meaning.
Anything that is shown to be a historical fact, either in the
present through experience or by a historian as a fact in the
past, necessarily has its inner structure of meaning; but especially the motivational interconnections established about it in
terms of everyday understanding have deep, further and further-reaching implications which must be interrogated, disclosed. All [merely] factual history remains incomprehensible
because, always merely drawing its conclusions naively and
straightforwardly from facts, it never makes thematic the general ground of meaning upon which all such conclusions rest,
has never investigated the immense structural a priori which is
proper to it. Only the disclosure of the essentially general
structure * lying in our present and then in every past or future
* The superficial structure of the externally "ready-made" men
within the social-historical, essential structure of humanity, but also

372

/

APPENDIX VI

historical present as such, and, in totality, only the disclosure of
the concrete, historical time in which we live, in which our total
humanity lives in respect to its total, essentially general structure—only this disclosure can make possible historical inquiry
[Historie] which is truly understanding, insightful, and in the
genuine sense scientific. This is the concrete, historical a priori
which encompasses everything that exists as historical becoming
and having-become or exists in its essential being as tradition
and handing-down. What has been said was related to the total
form "historical present in general," historical time generally.
But the particular configurations of culture, which find their
place within its coherent historical being as tradition and as
vitally handing themselves down, have within this totality only
relatively self-sufficient being in traditionally, only the being of
nonself-sufficient components. Correlatively, now, account
would have to be taken of the subjects of historicity, the persons
who create cultural formations, functioning in totality: creative
personal civilization.*
In respect to geometry one recognizes, now that we have
pointed out the hiddenness of its fundamental concepts, which
have become inaccessible, and have made them understandable
as such in first basic outlines, that only the consciously set task
of [discovering] the historical origin of geometry (within the
total problem of the a priori of historicity in general) can provide the method for a geometry which is true to its origins and at
the same time is to be understood in a universal-historical way;
and the same is true for all sciences, for philosophy. In principle,
then, a history of philosophy, a history of the particular sciences
in the style of the usual factual history, can actually render
nothing of their subject matter comprehensible. For a genuine
history of philosophy, a genuine history of the particular sciences, is nothing other than the tracing of the historical meaning-structures given in the present, or their self-evidences, along
the documented chain of historical back-references into the hidden dimension of the primal self-evidences which underlie
the deeper [structures] which disclose the inner historicities of the
persons taking part. ["Structures" is Biemel's interpolation.]
* The historical world is, to be sure, first pregiven as a socialhistorical world. But it is historical only through the inner historicity
of the individuals, who are individuals in their inner historicity, together with that of other communalized persons. Recall what was
said in a few meager beginning expositions about memories and the
constant historicity to be found in them [pp. 359 f., above],

The Origin of Geometry /

373

them.* Even the very problem here can be made understandable
only through recourse to the historical a priori as the universal
source of all conceivable problems of understanding. The problem of genuine historical explanation comes together, in the case
of the sciences, with "epistemological" grounding or clarification.
We must expect yet a second and very weighty objection.
From the historicism which prevails extensively in different
forms [today] I expect little receptivity for a depth-inquiry which
goes beyond the usual factual history, as does the one outlined in
this work, especially since, as the expression "a priori" indicates,
it lays claim to a strictly unconditioned and truly apodictic selfevidence extending beyond all historical facticities. One will
object: what naivete, to seek to display, and to claim to have
displayed, a historical a priori, an absolute, supertemporal validity, after we have obtained such abundant testimony for the
relativity of everything historical, of all historically developed
world-apperceptions, right back to those of the "primitive" tribes.
Every people, large or small, has its world in which, for that
people, everything fits well together, whether in mythical-magical or in European-rational terms, and in which everything can
be explained perfectly. Every people has its "logic" and, accordingly, if this logic is explicated in propositions, "its" a priori.
However, let us consider the methodology of establishing
historical facts in general, thus including that of the facts supporting the objection; and let us do this in regard to what such
methodology presupposes. Does not the undertaking of a humanistic science of "how it really was" contain a presupposition
taken for granted, a validity-ground never observed, never made
thematic, of a strictly unassailable [type of] self-evidence, without which historical inquiry would be a meaningless enterprise?
AU questioning and demonstrating which is in the usual sense
historical presupposes history [Geschichte] as the universal horizon of questioning, not explicitly, But still as a horizon of implicit
certainty, which, in spite of all vague background-indeterminacy,
is the presupposition of all determinability, or of all intention
to seek and to establish determined facts.
What is historically primary in itself is our present. We
always already know of our present world and that we live in it,
* But what counts as primal self-evidence for the sciences is determined by an educated person or a sphere of such persons who pose
new questions, new historical questions, questions concerning the
inner depth-dimension as well as those concerning an external historicity in the social-historical world.

374

/

APPENDIX VI

always surrounded by an openly endless horizon of unknown
actualities. This knowing, as horizon-certainty, is not something
learned, not knowledge which was once actual and has merely
sunk back to become part of the background; the horizon-certainty had to be already there in order to be capable of being laid
out thematically; it is already presupposed in order that we can
seek to know what we do not know. All not-knowing concerns
the unknown world, which yet exists in advance for us as world,
as the horizon of all questions of the present and thus also all
questions which are specifically historical. These are the questions which concern men, as those who act and create in their
communalized coexistence in the world and transform the constant cultural face of the world. Do we not know further—we
have already had occasion to speak of this—that this historical
present has its historical pasts behind it, that it has developed
out of them, that historical past is a continuity of pasts which
proceed from one another, each, as a past present, being a
tradition producing tradition out of itself? Do we not know that
the present and the whole of historical time implied in it is that
of a historically coherent and unified civilization, coherent
through its generative bond and constant communalization in
cultivating what has already been cultivated before, whether in
cooperative work or in reciprocal interaction, etc.? Does all this
not announce a universal "knowing" of the horizon, an implicit
knowing that can be made explicit systematically in its essential
structure? Is not the resulting great problem here the horizon
toward which all questions tend, and thus the horizon which is
presupposed in all of them? Accordingly, we need not first enter
into some kind of critical discussion of the facts set out by
historicism; it is enough that even the claim of their f actualness
presupposes the historical a priori if this claim is to have a
meaning.
But a doubt arises all the same. The horizon-exposition to
which we recurred must not bog down in vague, superficial talk;
it must itself arrive at its own sort of scientific discipline. The
sentences in which it is expressed must be fixed and capable of
being,made self-evident again and again. Through what method
do we obtain a universal and also fixed a priori of the historical
world which is always originally genuine? Whenever we consider it, we find ourselves with the self-evident capacity to reflect
—to turn to the horizon and to penetrate it in an expository way.
But we also have, and know that we have, the capacity of
complete freedom to transform, in thought and phantasy, our

The Origin of Geometry /

375

human historical existence and what is there exposed as its
life-world. And precisely in this activity of free variation, and in
running through the conceivable possibilities for the life-world,
there arises, with apodictic self-evidence, an essentially general
set of elements going through all the variants; and of this we can
convince ourselves with truly apodictic certainty. Thereby we
have removed every bond to the factually valid historical world
and have regarded this world itself [merely] as one of the conceptual possibilities. This freedom, and the direction of our gaze
upon the apodictically invariant, results in the latter again and
again—with the self-evidence of being able to repeat the invariant structure at will—as what is identical, what can be made
self-evident originaliter at any time, can be fixed in univocal
language as the essence constantly implied in the flowing, vital
horizon.
Through this method, going beyond the formal generalities
we exhibited earlier, we can also make thematic that apodictic
[aspect] of the prescientific world that the original founder of
geometry had at his disposal, that which must have served as the
material for his idealizations.
Geometry and the sciences most closely related to it have to
do with space-time and the shapes, figures, also shapes of motion, alterations of deformation, etc., that are possible within
space-time, particularly as measurable magnitudes. It is now
clear that even if we know almost nothing about the historical
surrounding world of the first geometers, this much is certain as
an invariant, essential structure: that it was a world of "things"
(including the human beings themselves as subjects of this
world); that all things necessarily had to have a bodily character
—although not all things could be mere bodies, since the necessarily coexisting human beings are not thinkable as mere bodies
and, like even the cultural objects which belong with them structurally, are not exhausted in corporeal being. What is also clear,
and can be secured at least in its essential nucleus through
careful a priori explication, is that these pure bodies had spatiotemporal shapes and "material" [stoffliche] qualities (color,
warmth, weight, hardness, etc.) related to them. Further, it is
dear that in the life of practical needs certain particularizations
3f shape stood out and that a technical praxis always [aimed a t ] 3
Jie production of particular preferred shapes and the improvenent of them according to certain directions of gradualness.
3. Biemel's interpolation.

376

/

APPENDIX VI

First to be singled out from the thing-shapes are surfaces—
more or less "smooth," more or less perfect surfaces; edges, more
or less rough or fairly "even"; in other words, more or less pure
lines, angles, more or less perfect points; then, again, among the
lines, for example, straight lines are especially preferred, and
among the surfaces the even surfaces; for example, for practical
purposes boards limited by even surfaces, straight lines, and
points are preferred, whereas totally or partially curved surfaces are undesirable for many kinds of practical interests.
Thus the production of even surfaces and their perfection (polishing) always plays its role in praxis. So also in cases where
just distribution is intended. Here the rough estimate of magnitudes is transformed into the measurement of magnitudes by
counting the equal parts. (Here, too, proceeding from the factual, an essential form becomes recognizable through a method
of variation.) Measuring belongs to every culture, varying only
according to stages from primitive to higher perfections. We can
always presuppose some measuring technique, whether of a
lower or higher type, in the essential forward development of
culture, [as well as] the growth of such a technique, thus also
including the art of design for buildings, of surveying fields,
pathways, etc.; 4 such a technique is always already there, already abundantly developed and pregiven to the philosopher who
did not yet know geometry but who should be conceivable as its
inventor. As a philosopher proceeding from the practical, finite
surrounding world (of the room, the city, the landscape, etc.,
and temporally the world of periodical occurrences: day, month,
etc.) to the theoretical world-view and world-knowledge, he has
the finitely known and unknown spaces and times as finite
elements within the horizon of an open infinity. But with this he
does not yet have geometrical space, mathematical time, and
whatever else is to become a novel spiritual product out of these
finite elements which serve as material; and with his manifold
finite shapes in their space-time he does not yet have geometrical
shapes, the phoronomic shapes; [his shapes, as] formations developed out of praxis and thought of in terms of [gradual] perfection, clearly serve only as bases for a new sort of praxis out of
which similarly named new constructions grow.
It is evident in advance that this new sort of construction
4. I have reverted to the original version of this sentence as given
in the critical apparatus; I can make no sense of the emended version
given in the text.

The Origin of Geometry /

377

will be a product arising out of an idealizing, spiritual act, one of
"pure" thinking, which has its materials in the designated general pregivens of this factual humanity and human surrounding
world and creates "ideal objects" out of them.
Now the problem would be to discover, through recourse to
what is essential to history [Historie], the historical original
meaning which necessarily was able to give and did give to the
whole becoming of geometry its persisting truth-meaning.
It is of particular importance now to bring into focus and
establish the following insight: Only if the apodictically general
content, invariant throughout all conceivable variation, of the
spätiotemporal sphere of shapes is taken into account in the
idealization can an ideal construction arise which can be understood for all future time and by all coming generations of men
and thus be capable of being handed down and reproduced with
the identical intersubjective meaning. This condition is valid far
beyond geometry for all spiritual structures which are to be
unconditionally and generally capable of being handed down.
Were the thinking activity of a scientist to introduce something
"time-bound" in his thinking, i.e., something bound to what is
merely factual about his present or something valid for him as
a merely factual tradition, his construction would likewise have a
merely time-bound ontic meaning; this meaning would be understandable only by those men who shared the same merely factual presuppositions of understanding.
It is a general conviction that geometry, with all its truths, is
valid with unconditioned generality for all men, all times, all
peoples, and not merely for all historically factual ones but for
all conceivable ones. The presuppositions of principle for this
conviction have never been explored because they have never
been seriously made a problem. But it has also become clear to
us that every establishment of a historical fact which lays claim
to unconditioned objectivity likewise presupposes this invariant
or absolute a priori.
Only [through the disclosure of this a priori] 5 can there be an
a priori science extending beyond all historical facticities, all
historical surrounding worlds, peoples, times, civilizations; only
in this way can a science as aeterna veritas appear. Only on this
fundament is based the secured capacity of inquiring back from
the temporarily depleted self-evidence of a science to the primal
self-evidences.
5. Biemel's interpolation.

378

/

APPENDIX VI

Do we not stand here before the great and profound problem-horizon of reason, the same reason that functions in every
man, the animal rationale, no matter how primitive he is?
This is not the place to penetrate into those depths themselves.
In any case, we can now recognize from all this that historicism, which wishes to clarify the historical or epistemological
essence of mathematics from the standpoint of the magical
circumstances or other manners of apperception of a time-bound
civilization, is mistaken in principle. For romantic spirits the
mythical-magical elements of the historical and prehistorical
aspects of mathematics may be particularly attractive; but to
cling to this merely historically factual aspect of mathematics is
precisely to lose oneself to a sort of romanticism and to overlook
the genuine problem, the internal-historical problem, the epistemological problem. Also, one's gaze obviously cannot then become free to recognize that facticities of every type, including
those involved in the [historicist] objection, have a root in the
essential structure of what is generally human, through which a
teleological reason running throughout all historicity announces
itself. With this is revealed a set of problems in its own right
related to the totality of history and to the full meaning which
ultimately gives it its unity.
If the usual factual study of history in general, and in particular the history which in most recent times has achieved true
universal extension over all humanity, is to have any meaning at
all, such a meaning can only be grounded upon what we can
here call internal history, and as such upon the foundations of
the universal historical a priori. Such a meaning necessarily
leads further to the indicated highest question of a universal
teleology of reason.
If, after these expositions, which have illuminated very general and many-sided problem-horizons, we lay down the following as something completely secured, namely, that the human
surrounding world is the same today and always, and thus also
in respect to what is relevant to primal establishment and lasting
tradition, then we can show in several steps, only in an exploratory way, in connection with our own surrounding world, what
should be considered in more detail for the problem of the
idealizing primal establishment of the meaning-structure "geometry"

Appendix VII:
[The Life-World and the World of Science]1
CONSCIOUSLY WE ALWAYS live in the life-world; normally there is no reason for making it explicitly thematic for
ourselves universally as world. Conscious of the world as a
horizon, we live for our particular ends, whether as momentary
and changing ones or as an enduring goal that guides us. [The
latter] can be a goal that we have elected for ourselves as a
life-vocation, to be the dominant one in our active life, or it can
be one that we have somehow drifted into through our upbringing. In this case a self-enclosed "world"-horizon is constituted.
Thus as men with a vocation we may permit ourselves to be
indifferent to everything else, and we have an eye only for this
horizon as our world and for its own actualities and possibilities
—those that exist in this "world"—i.e., we have an eye only to
what is "reality" here (what is correct, true in relation to this
goal) or "unreality" (the incorrect, the mistaken, the false).
That this whole effective life and this whole work-world is
held within the always obviously existing world in the most
universal and full sense of the life-world, that the particular
activity and works presuppose its "truth and falsity" in terms of
what exists and does not exist, of what is right and wrong in the
broader and broadest sphere of being—this lies outside our interest, although in the hfe of particular interests we make use
according to our particular needs of what exists in the broader
sphere. Thus when we are living thematically only in the particular world (under the rule of the highest end that "makes" it),
the life-world is unthematic for us; and as long as it remains
such, we have our particular world, the only world that is thematic as such, as our horizon of interest. It may be, here, that

i. Biemel's note: "winter 1936-37 (?)" This manuscript appears
in the German edition as "Beilage XVII," pp. 459-62.
[379]

380

/

APPENDIX Vn

this ruling end is ultimately a communal end, i.e., a personal
life-task which is a partial task (if one can speak of a "part" in
such a case) within a communal task, so that the individual
personal undertaking of work functions concurrently, and consciously so for each of the "participants/' in a communal undertaking.
The goal-directed life which is that of the scientists' life-vocation clearly falls under the generality of the characterization just
made, together with the "world" that is awakened therein in the
communalization of scientists (running through the successive
generations of researchers) as the horizon of scientific works.
[But] scientific works have a typical peculiarity which does not
necessarily belong to all such worlds and ends. All the works
belonging to this scientific world, with their specific communal
sense of being (actual and true being and, on the other hand,
incorrect, false being for all persons of the community), do not
merely make up a multiplicity belonging together according to
their [mode of] being; rather, the particular works—the particular scientific results—become premises, building stones for
works of a higher level, and this of necessity and in infinitum
and, at the same time, in such a way that all the works of science
[come together] 2 in a coherent total work, the theoretical system
(the theory contained in an ideal textbook). The scientific world,
the scientists' horizon of being, has the character of a single
work or edifice growing in infinitum, upon which the generations
of scientists, belonging to it correlatively, are unendingly at
work. The theoretical system here, however, is a work of predicative truth in which there is awakened correlatively, as a thoroughgoing universal substrate, the [idea of its] theoretically
being true in that "domain"—under the highest end-idea, the
truly all-determining one, of working through to an unconditionally true being (an infinitely distant idea). In the theoretical
system of assertions, this "being-in-truth" is the identical subject
matter [of such assertions], contained in their theoretical sense
as the ideal "concept" of the domain and its entities.
Now the scientific world—[the subject matter of] systematic
theory—and what is contained in it as existing in scientific truth
(in natural science, in the universal theory, [this is] its nature,
nature which counts as the substrate of the propositions, the
formal ones), like all other worlds [determined by particular]
ends, itself "belongs" to the life-world, just as all men and all
2. Biemel's interpolation.

The Life-World and the World of Science /

381

human communities generally, and their human ends both individual and communal, with all their corresponding working
structures, belong to it. But this is also true of philosophy in the
old sense, which we have particular reason to mention last,
whose theoretical "universe" is the world in the fullest sense.
Each of these "worlds" has its particular universality determined
by the end of the vocation; each has the infinite horizon of a
certain "totality." But all these totalities take their place within
the world, which encompasses all that exists and all existing
totalities, as well as all their ends and all purposeful men and
civilizations. All these take their place within it, and all presuppose it. What does this mean? And what does it mean for the
world of "philosophy"? Does there not arise here a necessary and
at the same time dangerous double meaning of "world," of the
domain of philosophy, which is after all supposed to have the
full and complete world, together with all the particular worlds
mentioned above, as its subject matter? And the universal theory
sought by philosophy, after all, should also be the theory of
mankind's existence and of its ends and works and should even
encompass itself, since philosophy itself is a purposeful structure of men.
One must not allow oneself to be confused. One must distinguish [on the one hand] the "domain" that precedes all ends,
[even] the unitary end-idea that guides at the highest level, [the
latter being] that domain in terms of which this end is sought,
the domain that it deals with, that it has in view in a coherent
way in advance in order to act in a purposeful way and create
structured works for it, in relation to it; and, on the other hand,
the domain of goals, the domain of what has already been
purposefully attained and what is yet to be attained in its own
universality, the horizon of actualities conceived of earlier or
later as awakened and to be awakened in particularity for the
sciences. Pregiven nature—the domain of the life-world—corporeal nature, [is that] which is familiar to the ordinary man in
everyday life and which he can get to know "in more detail" but
which he simply has no reason to single out and consider in a
coherent way in its abstract unitary character, as natural science
proposes to do. For [the scientist] it is the pregiven sphere of
being for which he wishes to accomplish something new: theory
for nature, theoretically true being, predicative determination—
under the idea of unconditionally, universally valid truth. This is
the "domain" of the natural scientist oriented purely toward the
ends of his vocation, and within this domain in turn are distin-

382

/

APPENDIX VII

guished: [on the one hand] that which has already been theoretically established and in a certain sense the whole horizon of the
science to which it belongs, but in such a way that this [in
particular] has been established within it; and on the other hand
what must be set in the way of new tasks for the science, since
what has been taken care of is always at the same time, after all,
a foundation on which more must be built theoretically; namely,
new questions must be posed and answered.
Finally, in the case of "philosophy" (in the old sense), we
must likewise distinguish [on the one hand] the world simply,
the always taken-for-granted, known-unknown life-world, as the
universal domain for which a universal goal—theory, science for
this world—is set; and [on the other hand] the scientists' life
that is appropriate to the setting of this goal, their horizon of
interests and horizon of "actualities," of results, not only those
under the title of "nature existing in scientific truth" but also that
of "world in general." This truth is a theoretical, purposeful structure related to the world that exists in prescientific life without
question, in ontic certainty and in taken-for-granted actuality;
but it is not this world itself.
It is clear what makes for the radical distinction here. The
life-world is the world that is constantly pregiven, valid constantly and in advance as existing, but not valid because of some
purpose of investigation, according to some universal end. Every
end presupposes it; even the universal end of knowing it in
scientific truth presupposes it, and in advance; and in the course
of [scientific] work it presupposes it ever anew, as a world existing, in its own way [to be sure], but existing nevertheless. The
scientific world (nature in the sense of natural science, world in
the sense of philosophy as universal positive science) is a purposeful structure extending to infinity—a structure [made by]
men who are presupposed, for the presupposed life-world. Now
though we must [further] make evident the fact that the lifeworld itself is a "structure," it is nevertheless not a "purposeful
structure," even though to its being, which precedes all purpose,
belong men, just as we encounter them and become acquainted
with them as a matter of course with all their purposes and their
works, which, as developed by men, henceforth also belong as a
matter of course to the life-world.
Here is again something confusing: every practical world,
every science, presupposes the life-world; as purposeful structures they are contrasted with the life-world, which was always
and continues to be "of its own accord." Yet, on the other hand,

The Life-World and the World of Science /

383

everything developing and developed by mankind (individually
and in community) is itself a piece of the life-world; thus the
contrast is suspended. But this is only confusing because the
scientists, like all who live communahzed under a vocational end
("life-purpose"), have eyes for nothing but their ends and horizons of work. No matter how much the life-world is the world in
which they live, to which even all their "theoretical works" belong, and no matter how much they make use of elements of the
life-world, which is precisely the "foundation" of theoretical
treatment as that which is treated, the life-world [itself] is just
not their subject matter, not as it is pregiven to them in each
case and as it afterwards takes over their work; and thus [their
subject matter] is not, in a full survey, the universe of what is,
which is ever in unceasing movement of relativity for us and is
the ground for all particular projects, ends, [and] end- and workhorizons for ends of a higher level.
Whenever the scientist speaks as a scientist, he is in the
scientific attitude, thinking within the horizon of his theoretical
end, thinking into it, so to speak, and at the same time having it
as horizon in a privileged universal validity as the immediate
horizon of his vocational interest. The rest of the world, the
world-totality which eo ipso takes all human purposeful structures up into itself as world-totality, lies outside his interest. The
full universal being of the life-world—especially in its [function
of making possible] 3 his theoretical world and what is pregiven
as belonging to it in particular—is completely unconsidered.
But now the paradoxical question: Can one not [turn to] the
life-world, the world of which we are all conscious in life as the
world of us all, without in any way making it into a subject of
universal investigation, being always given over, rather, to our
everyday momentary individual or universal vocational ends and
interests—can one not survey it universally in a changed attitude, and can one not seek to get to know it, as what it is and
how it is in its own mobility and relativity, make it the subject
matter of a universal science, but one which has by no means
the goal of universal theory in the sense in which this was
sought by historical philosophy and the sciences?
3. Biemel's interpolation.

Appendix VIII:
Fink's Appendix on the Problem of the
"Unconscious"1
T H E ORDERING PRINCIPLE which lies in the essence of
intentionality or of intentional references (for example, the reference of the analysis of memory to a prior analysis of perception) also marks off the whole total sphere of "wakefulness" as
the unavoidable field of first approach in the analytic explication
of subjectivity. The genuine problem-character of the problems
announcing themselves under the title of the "unconscious" can
be grasped and adequately expounded upon in a methodical way
only after the prior analysis of "being conscious" [Bewusstheit].
Since our first task here is to make thematic the elementary
essence of the always overlooked universal-subjective givenness
of the world, to loosen the rigid fundamental posture of our
naive-natural life-world attitude (living straightforwardly toward things), to grasp things and the world itself in the alteration of subjective relativities as unity-constructions through
subjective syntheses—in short, since it is a matter of the ABC's
of intentional analysis, not even the basic features of the long
methodical path from the intentional elementary analyses to the
intentional theory of the "unconscious" can be sketched here.
One will bo quick to raise the objection that setting up the
problematics of the "unconscious" as intentional problematics is
a questionable methodical prejudice right from the start, representing, as it were, the attempt to interpret the "un-conscious"
according to the methodical means for understanding consciousness. Has one not thus made a prior decision that the unconscious is somehow obscured consciousness, consciousness that
i. Biemel's note: "The following appendix was written by Eugen
Fink in 1936 for the Crisis and is published with his permission." The
text appears in the German version as "Beilage XXI," pp. 473-75.

[385]

386

/

APPENDIX VIII

can be awakened, a preliminary form or after-image of consciousness, i.e., something that can ultimately be traced back to
consciousness? Does one not thus have, in respect to the life of
subjectivity, the preconceived opinion that life and consciousness are the same? But is it not the ever growing tendency of
"depth psychology," modern biology, etc. (and also of the realistic and irrationalistic philosophies of the present) to conceive of
consciousness as a [mere] stratum of the concrete man and to
oppose to it other dimensions of life not traceable to consciousness? Is it not a typical preconceived opinion of all "idealism"
that the "spirit," the "soul," "consciousness," makes up the full
being of man; whereas we are gradually progressing more and
more, through a "depth psychology" that is certified by its therapeutic successes, through the results of modern biology, etc.,
toward the insight that the sphere of consciousness, the domain
of idealistic philosophy, ultimately represents a derivative
[fundierte] dimension of "life"?
This objection, which is raised in many variations against
the so-called "consciousness-idealism of phenomenology," is
based on a fundamental philosophical naivete. This is not the
place to criticize the "mythical" theories set up on the basis of an
obscure empirical procedure about the true essence of life (announcing itself in the phenomena of the "unconscious"), be it
the naturalistic mechanism of the 'libido" or some other "dynamics" of drives and instincts. The naivete we refer to consists,
before all theory-construction about the unconscious, in an omission. One thinks one is already acquainted with what the "conscious," or consciousness, is and dismisses the task of first
making into a prior subject matter the concept against which any
science of the unconscious must demarcate its subject matter,
i.e., precisely that of consciousness. But because one does not
know what consciousness is, one misses in principle the point of
departure of a science of the "unconscious." Naturally, when we
are awake, we always know and are acquainted with what is
commonly meant by "consciousness." It is in a certain sense
what is^ closest to us: we see things, think about something,
desire something, judge, etc. Just this typical familiarity and
pregivenness of "consciousness" in its rough articulation (which
suffices for everyday life) as acts, actions, experiences [Akte,
Handlungen, Erlebnisse], etc.—just this familiarity gives rise to
the illusion that consciousness is something immediately given.
The intentional analytics of phenomenology, however, destroys
the illusion of the "immediate givenness of consciousness" and

On the Problem of the Unconscious /

387

leads one into a science of a new sort that is difficult to sustain,
where one gradually learns to see and to grasp for the first time
what consciousness is. And if one has worked one's way through
the long paths of intentional analytics to an understanding of
"consciousness," one can never again wish to expound on the
problematics of the "unconscious" from the naive point of view,
dealing as it does with consciousness and the unconscious as if
they were familiar everyday things. For the unconscious, too, as
well as for consciousness, there exists the illusion of everyday,
given immediacy: we are all familiar, after all, with the phenomena of sleep, of fainting, of being overtaken by obscure driving
forces, creative states, and the like. The naivete of the current
theory of the "unconscious" consists in the fact that it engrosses
itself in these interesting phenomena which are pregiven in
everyday life, undertakes an inductive empirical inquiry, proposes constructive "explanations," and is tacitly guided all along
by a naive and dogmatic implicit theory about consciousness of
which it always makes use in spite of its demarcation [of these
phenomena] from phenomena of consciousness, which are also
taken in their everyday familiarity.
As long as the exposition of the problem of the unconscious
is determined by such an implicit theory of consciousness, it is
in principle philosophically naive. Only after an explicit analysis
of consciousness can the problem of the unconscious be posed at
all. But only in the working mastery of this problem will it be
revealed whether or not the "unconscious" can be treated according to the methodical means of the intentional analysis.

Appendix IX:
Denial of Scientific Philosophy. Necessity
of Reflection. The Reflection [Must Be]
Historical. How Is History Required?l
PHILOSOPHY AS SCIENCE, as serious, rigorous, indeed
apodictically rigorous, science—the dream is over. To be sure,
the man who has once tasted of the fruits of philosophy, has
become acquainted with its systems, and has then unhesitatingly
admired these as among the highest goods of culture can no
longer let philosophy and philosophizing alone. Some regard the
philosophies as art works of great artistic spirits and consider
philosophy "as such" to have the unity of an art. Others oppose
philosophy to the sciences in another way, such that it stands on
a plane with religion, into which we have grown historically.
What religious faith, as long as it is still a living faith, renders
certain, as God and divinely revealed truth, is something metaphysically transcendent; it transcends the world, which is the
subject matter of scientific knowledge, as its ultimate ground of
being, and this ultimate ground contains the absolute norms
under which we place our human existence in the world. Philosophy once thought of itself as the science of the totality of what
is. Thus even if philosophy itself drew the distinction between
the world, as the totality of what exists finitely, and God, as the
principle uniting the infinity of finite things (and then as an
infinite superpersonality), it thought itself capable of knowing
scientifically the metaphysical principle and the world through
this principle. Whatever it later substituted in the way of worldtranscending, metaphysical [principles], however it conceived of
the unity of the absolute, it thought ail too long that scientific

i. Biemers note: "Summer 1935." The text appears in the German edition as "Beilage XXVIII," pp. 508-13.
[389]

390

/

APPENDIX IX

paths could lead to the transcendent, the absolute, the metaphysical. According to this, an alliance of science and religion was
also possible, as in medieval [philosophy, which claimed] 2 to be
able to bring religious faith and scientific reason into complete
harmony. But these times are over—such is the generally reigning opinion of such people. A powerful and constantly growing
current of philosophy which renounces scientific discipline, like
the current of religious disbelief, is inundating European humanity.
The conviction has certainly become dominant that philosophy is a task for man as struggling for his existence [Existenz],
man who has raised himself to autonomy in the European cultural development and sees himself as standing, thanks to the
sciences, within the horizon of the infinities—and of the destinies these involve. The world-reflection of autonomous man
necessarily leads to the transcendent as something which is unknowable and cannot be practically mastered. Man is capable
only of arriving, by starting from his own position, from his
horizons of knowledge and feeling, at certain conjectures and
thereby of forming for himself certain ways of believing which,
as his world-view, offer him a personal evidence for conjectures
and for norms of action under the guidance of the conjecturally
believed absolute. Such a posture also provides groups of men
who bear within themselves a similar original direction with
something like common understanding and mutual advancement.
A world-view is thus essentially an individual accomplishment, a sort of personal religious faith; but it is distinguished
from traditional faith, that of revealed religion, through the fact
that it makes no claim to an unconditioned truth binding for all
men and communicable to all men: just as scientific truth about
the absolute is not possible, so it is impossible to establish a
world-view truth which is totally valid for each human being.
Any such claim would mean that knowledge upon rational—i.e.,
scientific—grounds was possible about the absolute and its relation to man.
Philosophy is in danger, i.e., its future is endangered; should
this not give a special sense to the question of the present task of
philosophy, as a question posed in such a time [as was described
above]?
Throughout the millennia, or rather in the repeatedly re2. Biemel's interpolation.

Denial of Scientific Philosophy /

391

newed epochs of living and again reviving philosophy, the beliei
was sustained—therein, after all, consisted its existence
[Existenz]—in the possibility and sometimes the successful realization of philosophy—in the form of systems and their
"schools." What sustained the belief, however, when the systems
changed, when the schools could not be unified through the
unification of convictions? Therein lay a failure which could not
remain concealed. What sustained the consciousness of a necessary task which was taken up personally and existentially because it had to be taken up, [understood] at the same time as one
consciousness of fulfilling, in taking over its realization as a
personal necessity, a superpersonal necessity, a task for humanity intentionally implied in one's own life-task?
What can bind us to our goal? Is it only the foolhardiness of
striving toward a goal which is beautiful but only vaguely possible, one which is not definitely impossible but still, in the end,
imaginary, one which gradually, after the experience of millennia, finally begins to bear a very great inductive probability of
being unattainable? Or does what appears from the outside to be
a failure, and on the whole actually is one, bring with it a certain
evidence of practical possibility and necessity, as the evidence of
an imperfect, one-sided, partial success, but still a success in this
failure?
However, if such an evidence ever was alive, in our time at
any rate it has become weak, has lost its vitality. Surely, if
philosophy has a unified sense involving a legitimate, necessary
task, such evidence must exist as the evident consciousness of a
project, even if imperfectly clear, which is on the way [toward
fulfillment] in all the attempts of the great systems, at least in
individual directions, whereas in other directions criticism is
justified. Only by engrossing ourselves in the revitalized content
of the traditional systems can we feel this evidence; and if we
penetrate them, interrogate them, the sense of the task of philosophy can become clear.
There is no doubt, then, that we must engross ourselves in
historical considerations if we are to be able to understand ourselves as philosophers and understand what philosophy is to
become through us. It is no longer sufficient to grasp, in the
midst of the naive pressure of life and activity, so to speak,
though out of the existential depths of personality, at certain
working problems we have run up against in our na'ive development, to treat of them with our working partners, with those
who, in the same course of a living tradition, have run up

392

/

APPENDIX IX

against the same problems. This suffices no longer in the dangerous situation in which today's philosophy knows itself to be—
must know, must admit to itself, in order to secure a future
threatened by the suggestive force of the "spirit of the time."
To the philosopher and to a generation of philosophers, acting responsibly in a human and cultural space, there accrue, also
deriving from this cultural space, responsibilities and corresponding actions. It is the same here as it is generally for men in
times of danger. For the sake of the life-task that has been taken
up, in times of danger one must first let these very tasks alone
and do what will make a normal life possible again in the future.
The effect will generally be such that the total life-situation, and
with it the original life-tasks, has been changed or in the end has
even become fully without an object. Thus reflection is required
in every sense in order to right ourselves.
The historical reflection we have in mind here concerns our
existence [Existenz] as philosophers and, correlatively, the existence of philosophy, which, for its part, is through our philosophical existence.*
The situation is complicated. Every philosopher "takes something from the history" of past philosophers, from past philosophical writings—just as he has at his disposal, from the present
philosophical environment, the works that have most recently
been added and put in circulation, takes up those that have just
appeared, and, what is possible only in the case [of the present],
makes more or less use of the possibility of entering into a
personal exchange of ideas with still living fellow philosophers.
The philosopher "takes something from history": Now history is after all not before us like a warehouse containing its
assembled wares, such that everyone can convince himself of the
existence of these wares as being not dreamed-up, not illusory,
but actually tangible and secure in their being and being-such.
Even the documents themselves, the works of the philosophers
or the reports about them as literary facts, are not simply
* Here we can also say more simply and, at the same time, in
preliminarily generalizing way: The reflection in question is a particular case of that self-reflection in which man as a person seeks to
reflect upon the ultimate sense of his existence [Dasein], We must
distinguish between a broader and a narrower concept of selfreflection [Selbstbesinnung]: pure ego-reflection [Ichreflexion] and
reflection upon the whole life of the ego as ego; and reflection [Besinnung] in the pregnant sense of inquiring back into the sense or teleological essence of the ego.

Denial of Scientific Philosophy /

393

themselves there [before us] as if they were present and always
perceivable things. That is, what is thinglike about them is not
yet the document that a given reader understands as a philosophical work or as a report, since what is present in a thinglike
way is a bearer of significations for him. But this is the way he
accepts it; and right away it can become questionable whether
this is really a matter of a literary transmission or whether it is
false, whether it is a poetic transformation containing a kernel
of historical actuality, etc. The reader, the philosophical one who
thinks for himself, is not moved by a concern for scientific
history (for whole epochs this was completely excluded); he
takes up uncritically what is offered to him as a fact of transmission and lets himself be motivated by what he reads into it
theoretically, by "the" Platonic, Aristotelian philosophy, etc. One
takes hold of this set, another of that set, of literary documents
that are available to him or to his time generally; and if he
receives from Plato, for example, even quite decisive impulses,
so that one later counts him among the Platonists, perhaps he
has never, in the crowded course of his philosophical life-work,
had the time, the possibility, or the desire to study all the Platonic or supposedly Platonic writings, not to speak of the reports
or critiques of other thinkers which have an indirect relation to
the Platonic philosophy and elucidate it.
He reads as one who has gone through a philosophical education in his time, who has himself become a philosopher and has
perhaps already made a literary appearance; he reads and naturally understands what he reads from the standpoint of his own
thoughts; he apperceives Plato in his own way, on the basis of
the "perception" of his already developed concepts, methods,
convictions. Through this apperception he gains something new,
further developing himself as a philosopher; and, in an analogous way, taking up and interpreting other philosophical writings, he becomes a different philosopher. If he reads Plato again
after a time, Plato takes on a new face for him, and the new
Plato, and other authors newly understood by him, motivate him
anew, etc.
Now in our epoch everyone has in h i s 3 surrounding world, in
the practical realm of general availability, a science of history,
and in particular a scientific history of philosophy; or rather,
belonging as a preliminary stage to general history itself and to
every sort of special history is a scientific preliminary interpreta3. Reading in seiner for seine»

394

/

APPENDIX IX

tion and critique of the literary and other documentation of the
historical past—which is our past and that of the historian who
belongs within our "we." Once again: What is, what must be, the
significance of this for the philosopher who thinks for himself?
Is the work lost that he, unconcerned about scientific historical
study, has done under the guidance of, through the use of, his
"unhistorical," untrue Plato, etc.?
What kind of "poetic invention" [Dichtung], what kind of
historical interpretation is this? What kind is appropriate, and to
what extent, to help us? How must we carry it on, even beyond
our philosophizing life, in order to clarify our unclear consciousness of our telos?
Never was this clarification more urgently needed than in
our time; for millennia philosophy could advance in na'ive theorization; through naively developed concepts it could pose naive
problems, develop, define, and pursue them with naive methodology. The naive, but in itself unclear, certainty concerning its
goal was questioned skeptically from the beginning, to be sure;
but no matter how much even skepticism intervened in a motivating way in the course of philosophy, the validity of the sense
of philosophy's end remained continuously unbroken; theoretical
results attained had in each case the force of serious and confirmed accomplishment even if they later succumbed to the
criticism of successors.
Let us be more precise. I know, of course, what I am striving
for under the title of philosophy, as the goal and field of my
work. And yet I do not know. What autonomous thinker has ever
been satisfied with this, his "knowledge"? For what autonomous
thinker, in his philosophizing life, has "philosophy" ever ceased
to be an enigma? Everyone has the sense of philosophy's end, to
whose realization his life is devoted; everyone has certain formulae, expressed in definitions; but only secondary thinkers,
who in truth should not be called philosophers, are consoled by
their definitions, beating to death with their word-concepts the
problematic telos of philosophizing. In that obscure "knowledge,"
and in the word-concepts of the formulae, the historical is concealed; it is, according to its own proper sense, the spiritual
inheritance of him who philosophizes; and in the same way,
obviously, he understands the others in whose company, in critical friendship and enmity, he philosophizes. And in philosophizing he is also in company with himself as he earlier understood
and did philosophy; and he knows that, in the process, historical
tradition, as he understood it and used it, entered into him in a

Denial of Scientific Philosophy /

395

motivating way and as a spiritual sediment. His historical picture, in part made by himself and in part taken over, his "poetic
invention of the history of philosophy/' has not and does not
remain fixed—that he knows; and yet every "invention" serves
him and can serve him in understanding himself and his aim,
and his own aim in relation to that of others and their "inventions/' their aims, and finally what it is that is common to all,
which makes up philosophy "as such" as a unitary telos and
makes the systems attempts at its fulfillment for us all, for us
[who are] at the same time in company with the philosophers of
the past (in the various ways we have been able to invent them
for ourselves).

Appendix X:
Fink's Outline for the Continuation
of the Crisis1
i. The genuine universality of the psychological
epoche
T H E MISUNDERSTANDING of [this] universality has already been cleared up. Thus now, before the transition from
psychology to transcendental philosophy, the genuine universal
epoche of psychology must be brought out. It is nothing other
than an epoche in respect to woWd-validity. Thus once again,
analysis of world-consciousness and its manner of implying individual consciousness as subject matter. But the psychologist
cannot universally bracket the horizon-validity of world-consciousness at will in connection with persons that interest him
psychologically; rather, there is an order which belongs to the
consistency of the world-epoche. He can only begin with himself,
with his conscious life (under the epoche of its world-validity);
only from his own point of view does he have others in the
genuine psychological attitude. Thus a psychology that has come
to a self-understanding of the attitude which makes it possible
(of the universal epoche in the genuine sense) can begin in no
other way than by being first a psychology of the psychologist.
The illusion disappears that one can begin at will with any
person at all. The genuinely universal epoche of psychology destroys the illusion of the mutual externality of souls: the mutual

i. Biemers note: 'This appendix comprises the proposal Fink
gave to Husserl before Easter 1936 (?)" It should be noted that the
train of thought in the first parts of this sketch is already incorporated
into the last sections of the Crisis text. The text appears in the German edition as "Beilage XXIX," pp. 514-16.
[397]

398

/

APPENDIX X

internality which extends out from the psychologist determines
the course of the psychological investigation.

2. The paradox of psychology
The genuine universal epoche as epoche of world-consciousness is the clarified final form of the sought-after psychological
'abstraction" (as complement to the natural abstraction). But is
it still an "abstraction"? Is the soul a complementary (though
independent) aspect of the concrete human being? What is the
ontic meaning of the "soul" that is laid bare by the genuine
universal epoche? Psychology begins as a special science alongside others on the ground of the pregiven world. In the clarification of the method peculiar to it, however, i.e., in the explicit
performance of the genuine universal epoche, it suspends the
presupposition of the world-ground that was posited in its understanding of its own beginning; it divests itself of the ground on
which it established itself; it becomes groundless by its own
efforts. But this "groundlessness" exhibits the paradox of psychology. What kind of "inwardness" is that of world-meaning
life? Where does it belong, actually? When the psychologist
works, he has no world-ground; but when he reflects, he falls
back into the situation of his first approach: psychology counts
for him as a science of a definite region of what is. In this
tension between the working situation of the psychologist and
his falling-back through self-interpretation based on the horizon
of understanding connected with his "first approach," in the
antinomy between psychology establishing itself on the worldground and psychology divesting itself of the world-ground, lies
the "crux."

3. The resolution of the paradox
When psychology not only "brackets," through the genuine
universal epoche, the world-consciousness that bears psychology
itself in its first approach, but also makes this a subject of
analysis in its own right, and this in such a way that it traces all
pregiven "crude" articulations of the meaning life—the act-intentionalities and the easily demonstrable horizon-intentionalities—back to constituting functions that lie deeper: then it also
becomes involved in an analysis of the constitutive function of
world-consciousness. In other words, it not only practices the

Outline for the Continuation of the Crisis /

399

epoche in respect to world-consciousness, but in this posture of
epoche it also investigates its constitutive origin. World-consciousness can then never again be an "opaque ground"; psychology sees through its own first approach "upon the world-ground"
in its meaning-bestowing origins. With this, psychology suspends itself: it leads into transcendental phenomenology.

4. Characterization of the relation between psychology and phenomenology (the relation of the two
"attitudes" to each other)
Basically there is no psychology that could remain psychology. Once the method of disclosing intentionality has been
found, then, "consistent with the matter itself," the analytic way
from the pregiven unities to the truly constituting depths of
intentional life and thus to the transcendental dimension will be
further pursued. Psychology must flow into transcendental philosophy.
In spite of this there always exists a difference between
psychology and phenomenology, even after traversing the way
from psychology to transcendental philosophy. Psychology is not
a "mere preliminary stage" of phenomenology, caught in a reflection on its first approach: it is that as a stage of the way to
phenomenology. But when it has traversed this way, when it has
"flowed out," even then there is a difference between the two.
The interplay between the two attitudes
The problem-area is characterized by the problematics of
self-apperception. All transcendental "self-constitution is a placing of the constituting life into the thematic context of the
constituted structures. Even after the transcendental reduction,
subjectivity does not cease objectifying itself as man among
fellow men and things; it is just that this continuing self-constitution is now a transcendentally elucidated process.
The horizon of constituted self-objectification (even when
transcendentally "transparent") determines the legitimate
problem-sphere of psychology after its self-dissolution into
phenomenology: it now becomes a thematically limited phenomenological sphere of problems but one in which, in turn, everything nevertheless "belongs" (the problem of "flowing in").
Transcendental philosophy has, as opposed to the limited horizon

400

/

APPENDIX X

of psychology that is bound to the scope of self-objectification
(after the reduction), the truly absolute horizon.

Fourth part of the treatise
The idea of all sciences being taken back into the unity of
transcendental philosophy.
i. Psychology and psychophysics or biology as illustrations
of the relation between legitimately limited mundane problematics and phenomenology.
2. The descriptive sciences of nature (their a priori as "ontology of the life-world") and the phenomenology of idealization.
3. The "unity" of science as the unity of a universal correlative-system.
The phenomenological concept of metaphysics.

Fifth part
The indispensable task of philosophy: humanity's responsibility for itself.

Index

Agriculture, 277
Algebra, 44
Analysis, in mathematics, 45, 47
Animals, 187, 227
Anthropology, 318
Apperception, transcendental, in
Kant, 104
A priori: of correlation, 159-60; of
history, 349-50; in Kant, 115; of
life-world, 139-41; objectivelogical, 137-39
Aquinas, Thomas, 132, 181
Aristotle, 132» 181, 285, 293, 393;
logic of, 21
Arithmetic, 293
Arithmetization: and fNormalization,
45; of geometry, 44
Artifacts, 277
Avenarius, Richard, 195
Axiomatic systems, 45
Babylonia, 279, 285
Behaviorism, 24771
Berkeley, George, 67, 83, 86-87, 89,
90, 96, 192, 196, 199, 208, 231,
337
Biology, 63, 243, 386, 400; and
natural history, 325
Biophysical disciplines, 4
Birth, and death, 188
Bolzano, Bernard, 130
Brentano, Franz, 222, 233-35, 245,
298
Cartesian way, in phenomenology,
155

Cartesianism, in phenomenology,
188
Causal regularity, 31
Causality: law of, 53; of soul and
body, 215-19
Chemistry, 269
Children, 187
Chinese philosophy, 279, 280, 284
Cogitatum, 171-72
Cogito, 171-72, 233; in Descartes,
75-83, 114
Communalization, 361; of experience, 163-64
Constitution: intersubjective, 168;
transcendental, 168
"Copernican turn," in Kant, 199
Correlation: a priori of, 159-60;
subjective-objective, 165-67
Cosmology, 292
Critique of knowledge, in Descartes,
76
Cultural forms, 277
Culture: crisis of, 5; extrascientific,
279; world of, 187
Death. See Birth
Democritus, 293
Depth psychology, 237, 386
Descartes, Rene, 8, 15, 21, 58, 6 0 62, 63, 73-83, 89, 90, 93, 97,
116, 171, 192, 194, 214, 229,
233» 294, 339-40; Meditations,
74-75, 81, 84-85, 91, 155, 192,
199
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 222, 245, 296
Discovery, in physics, 40

[401]

402

/

INDEX

Disinterested spectator, 157, 239
Domestic arts, 277
Doubt, method of, in Descartes, 76
Doxa (&6Za), 125; and episteme
(eirurnfo«7)> 12—13, 6 5 ,
155-56, 285, 345

Dualism, 60-65, 229, 234, 235;
Cartesian, 212, 221, 229, 323
Ego, 171-72; bodily, 106-8; in
Descartes, 77, 82; primal, 185-88
Egyptians, 279
Eidetic method, 178
Einstein, Albert, 4, 125-26, 295
Empathy, 231, 243, 249, 255, 258,
358, 360
Empiricism: logical (Vienna
Circle), 62; and rationalism, 62,

83-84
Enlightenment, Age of, 192, 197»
201, 290

Episteme (bcurHuni) and doxa
(S6|a). See Doxa
Epoche (kToxO- critical, 240; in
Descartes, 76-84, 155; phenomenological-psychological, 248;
phenomenological-psychological
and transcendental, 256-57;
psychological, 397; skeptical,
240; transcendental, i35~37>
148-52; vocational, 137
Euclid, 357
Europe: concept of, 299; crisis of,
269; history of, 299; spiritual
shape of, 274, 289
European civilization, entelechy of,
275
Exactness, 27-28, 34, 42
Experience, outer and inner, 2 1 9 20, 230, 235
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 202; Wissenschaftslehre, 201
Formalizafcion, in mathematics, 45
Formulae, in science, 40, 41, 43-46
Galileo, 23-59, 60, 62, 73, 117,
353-54
Geology, 239
Geometry, 293, 308; analytic, 22,
38; applied, 28; applied, vs. ideal,
33; arithmetization of, 44; Eu-

clidean, 21, 354; origin of, 3 5 3 78; and physics, 24-28
German Idealism, 99, 19a, 194-95»
292, 340
Gestalt psychology, 297
God, 55, 62, 64, 66, 75, 81, 90, 93,
180, 288, 389
Gorgias, 76
Greece, 276-77, 284
Greek philosophy, 15, 279, 311,
338; and origin of science, 3or
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich,
132, 192, 194, 198; Phänomenologie des Geistes, 201
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 119
Heraclitean flux, 156, 177, 343
Heraclitus, 170
Historians, epoche of, 147
Historical: method, of Crisis, 7 0 73; reflection, 392
Historicism, 373-74, 378
Historicity, 369; transcendental,
188
History, 209, 272, 393~94; a priori
of, 349-50, 371-73
Hobbes, Thomas, 54, 62-63, 83,
2 0 4 , 231

Horizon, 158; consciousness, 237;
internal, vs. external, 162; intersubjective, 243, 358-59; temporal, 168; vital, 149
Humanistic sciences (Geisteswissenschaften), 6, 209, 270-73;
vs. natural science, 315-34;
scientific rigor of, 4
Hume, David, n , 67, 83, 87-90,
9 i , 93, 95-96, 115, 117, 147,
192-93, 195-96, 199, 231, 262,
265, 337, 339, 368; Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
88; Treatise of Human Nature,
87, 88, 93, 96, 207-8
Husserl, Edmund: Formale und
transzendentale Logik, 46?^;
Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen
Philosophie, 46-ra, 155, 16771, 242;
Logische Untersuchungen, 461t,
165, 234, 243
Hypothesis, 31; of science, 41-42

Index
Idealization, 346-48; and science,
301-14
Illusion, 162
Indian philosophy, 279-80, 284
Individuation, of soul and body,
215-19
Induction, 31, 50—51, 66
Inner: experience, in psychology,
214; sense, in Kant, 114
Insanity, 187
Instincts, 52
Intentional object, 241
Intentionality, 85, 168, 171, 233,
236, 243; in Descartes, 82-83
Intersubjectivity, 108-10, 163-64,
166, 168, 172, 252-55, 358-59;
constitution of, 182-86; human,
vs. transcendental, 178-86;
transcendental, 262
Irrationalism, 3, 16, 136, 197,
292, 386; in Hume, 88
James, William, 264
Kant, Immanuel, n , 55-56, 81,
83, 91-104, 111-21, 132, 147,
192,194-96, 198, 199, 202,
207-8, 211, 262, 292, 295, 337,
339; critique of method of, 11416; Critique of Pure Reason,
104
Kinesthesis, 106-8, 161, 217, 222,
331
Language, 357, 362, 364-65;
written, 360-62
La Place, Pierre Simon, Marquis
de, 265
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von,
45, 55, 64, 74, 83, 91, 92, 97, 265
Libido, 386
Life-world, 103-89, 295; a priori
of, 139-41; as fundament of
science, 48-53; general structures of, 142-43; in Kant, 1 0 3 4; and objective science, 121—23;
ontology of, 142, 173-74, 400;
science of, 123-35; vs. scientific
world, 127-29; as spatiotemporal, 168; and world of
science, 379-83

/

403

Limit-shapes
(Limesgestalten),
26,35
Literature, 357
Living body (Leib), 106, 161,
217-18, 324, 331; vs. physical
body, 107
Locke, John, 30, 63, 83-86, 87,
91, 117, 201, 204, 207, 231-32,

261
Logic, 302; domain of, 364;
mathematical, 141; as technology, 92
Malebranche, Nicolas, 83
Manifold, Euclidean, 56
Manifolds, theory of (Mannigfaltigkeitstheorie), 45, 56, 311
Mathematics, 3, 32, 347, 349;
algebra, 22, 44; analysis in, 45,
47; analytic geometry, 22; and
art of measurement, 41; of
continua, 22; formalization in,
45; Greek, 21; in Kant, 94
Mathematization: indirect, 35, 38;
of nature (Galileo's), 23-59
Mathesis universalis: in Leibniz,
45, 74, 92; in Logische
Untersuchungen, 4671
Measurement: art of, 27, 32, 36,
49; of secondary qualities, 34
Mechanics, 293
Medicine, 269
Menghin, Oswald, Weltgeschichte
der Steinzeit, 274
Metaphysics, 64, 133, 199, 400;
failure of, 10; possibility of, n ;
questions of, 9-1 o; realization
of, 15
Michelson, Albert A., 125-26
Mill, John Stuart, 195
Models, sensible, in mathematics,
26-29
Mysticism, 3
Natural attitude, 145, 150, 329
Nature, ontology of, 305
Neo-Friesianism, 196
Newton, Isaac, 4, 42, 117
Normative concepts, 303
Objectivism vs. transcendentalism,
68-70

404

/

INDEX

Objects, intentional, 241
Ontology: formal, 310-11; of lifeworld, 142, 173-74, 400; of
nature, 305
Paleontology, 239
Perception, 127-28, 157-64, 249,
385; inner, 248
Perceptual field, 162
Philology, 242
Philosophia perennis, 10, 197
Phoronomy, 308
Physics, 269; classical, 4; discovery
in, 40; experimental vs. theoretical, 47; Galilean, 29, 38
Planck, Max, 4
Plants, 227
Plato, 285, 293, 393; doctrine of
Ideas of, 21
Platonism, 59, 313
Plenum, sensible, 30; mathematizability of, 33-37
Positivism, 5-7, 9
Praxis, theoretical, 111
Prediction, 3 1 , 50-51
Pre-Socratic philosophy, 165
Primary and secondary qualities,
309-10
Protagoras, 76
Protention and retention, 168
Psychologism, 84, 201, 202, 207,
296
Psychology, 115, 116-17, 126-27,
295, 318, 397-400; in ancient
philosophy, 60; crisis of, 3, 5;
depth, 237, 386; descriptive,
250; failure of, 211-13; naturalistic, 63, 67-68; and phenomenology, 191-265, 397-400; as
positive science, 257-58; scientific rigor of, 4; subject matter
and method of, 5; and transcendental philosophy, 203-8
Pythagoreans, 37
Rationalism, 65-67, 73, 89, 197,
289-90, 292, 299, 313, 338,
339-40; eighteenth-century, 16;
vs. empiricism, 62; and Kant,
103
Realism and phenomenology, 187

Reason, 290-91, 294, 338; hidden
(instinct), 52; in Hume, 87;
problems of, 9, 11; and unreason, 6
Recollection, 168, 360
Reduction: phenomenologicalpsychological, 236, 244; phenomenological-phychological and
transcendental, 256-57; transcendental, 151-53, 326
Religion, 288, 389; positive, 180
Religious-mythical attitude, 282-84
Renaissance, 33, 38, 197, 213, 354;
and revival of philosophy, 8
Retention, 160, 359; and protention, 168
Rickert, Heinrich, 296
Scholasticism, 64
Schuppe, 195
Science: crisis of, 3; descriptive,
270; descriptive, vs. explanatory,
177, 222-24, 234; Galilean, 221;
natural, 3; natural, Greek, 2 1 ;
natural and humanistic, 2 7 0 73, 315-34; natural, mathematical, 47; natural, origin of, 56-57;
objective, historical possibility
of, 347; vs. objective science,
123-25; objective, as subjective
construct, 129-32
Sciences: as cultural facts, 104;
positive, 3, 7, 122; success of,
104-11

Scientific thinking, and intuition,
134
Sedimentation, 52, 361
Sensationalism, in Locke, 85
Sense-data, 3072, 94, 125; in Locke,
85
Sense-experience, 23, 106; phenomenology of, 157-64
Skepticism, 3, 13-14, 68, 89, 262,
302-3, 340; ancient, 69, 86,
165, 16771; in Hume, 67, 88, 9 1 ,
99, U S
Socrates, 293, 302
Solipsism, 262; in Hume, 88
Sophists, 165
Spatiotemporality: of life-world,
168; and pure geometry, 26; of
soul and body, 215-19

Index /

405

Specialization, in science, 62
Spinoza, Baruch, 64, 83, 232;
Ethica, 65
Subjectivity: empirical, vs. transcendental, 202; human, vs.
transcendental, 178-86; transcendental, and mankind, 153;
transcendental, vs. the soul, 11617

Transcendental deduction in
Critique of Pure Reason, 104
Transcendental philosophy, 9 7 100, 339; and psychology, 203-8,
257-58
Transcendentalism: Kantian, 99;
vs. objectivism, 68-70
Truth, scientific and prescientific,
124-25

Technization (Technisierung), in
science, 46-48
Technology, 28; logic as, 92
Teleology, 70-73; of European
history, 299
Teleological-historical reflection, 3
Temporality, 168-69
Thales, 286
Thaumazein (eavfi&fav), 285
Theoretical attitude, 282
Theory, in physics, 41
Things-in-themselves (in Kant), 95
Time-consciousness, 168-69
Tradition, 354
Traditionahzation, 52

Unconscious, the, 188, 237, 385-87
Value, 152
Vienna Circle, 6371
Vieta, 44
Vocation, 135-36
Windelband, Wilhelm, 296
Wolff, Christian, 64, 83, 91, 97
World: as horizon, 143; social,
164; as totality and as unity, 31
Wundt, Wilhelm, 232
Zoology, 318

